THE BVCKLER OF BODILY HEALTH, Whereby Health may be defended, and sickness
repelled; consecrate by the Au(...) the use of his Cou(...) (...)shing from his
heart (though it were to his hurt) to see the fruits of his labor on the
constant welfare of all his Countrie-men.

By Mr. JOHN MAKLUIRE, Doctor in Medicine.



EDINBVRGH Printed by John Wreittoun 1630.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, WORTHY, AND GENEROUS LORDS, MY L. CHANCELLER, PRESIDENT,
and the rest of the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
MY LORDS,
THE Philosophers, who have seriously by contemplation considered the nature of
man, have learned into the school of verity, that he is the chief of all
creatures under the Sun, seeing all things in this theater to be made for his
use, the Heaven, the elements, and all that does depend of them appointed for
his service: Moreover they found such perfection in his fabric, so great
miracles in his works, that they could not find any thing in all this universe,
to whom they should licken him well except the world it self, so they have
called him Microcosme, or little world, being (as Plutarch says) the
abridgment of the whole globe: For it is certain that GOD in the creation made
all things before man, and when he was going about to make him, he made an
reflection of his divinity, and took a view of all his works, that he might
print in this his last work the quintessence all other, with the beams of his
own image: as man surpasses the rest of the creatures in dignity; so the
Magistrates private men: but amongst the Magistrates of this Kingdom, your LL.
keep the first rank both by place and worth: for in maintaining of peace and
banishing of troubles, in advancing and approving of the good, and suppressing
the evil, your LL. have given an clear manifestation of both prudencie and
vigilancie. I knowing how your LL. did affect these who study to the well of
the public have made bold to publish this small work with your L names in the
frontispice of it, as most due to you: nam vestri interest ne quid detrimenti
respublica capiat. Truly if the smyling brightness of your LL. sweetly
shinning countenance had not glansed on my dazzled eyes, should have been
forced with Diogenes in the day light with a candle to look for a man festered
with the milk of letters, and now become a father and favourer of all such,
whose emolument depends from the advancement of virtuous studies Your LL.
presence at the entry, Will preserve it from the virulent biting of viperous
invyers, and so shall encourage me to employ the small talent the Lord has
imparted to me to your LL. service, and the use of the public as

your LL. Most humble servant I. Macluire D. M.

TO THE TRVELY NOBILITATE HONORABLE, AND GENEROUS GENTLEMAN, JAMES MONTGOMERY
ESQVIER, SON TO MY LORD VISCOUNT OF the Airds, in the Kingdom of IRELAND:
Health.
Right Honorable, and worthy Sir:
HAving after a long calculation found out time of my conception, almost
doubting of the father, (as few honest women do) I knew in end the child
belonged by right to you, which (yet honest woman like) I present to you,
willing it should carry your name in the forefront: Reject it not Sir, either
by reason of the vnlawfuluesse of the time, being now eleven years past since
my first conception, where others take but eleven months at the most: the first
lineaments being drawn, and carefully: ye, fatherly, under the cover of your
wings by heat till it took life, hatched in the University of St. Androws
eleven years since: or because of the unlikeness of the birth, which does not
resemble you the father, (yet it is no wonder Sir) it being (babe like)
toothlesse, tonguelesse, sightlesse, noselesse: yea, wholly senseless, and so
unable to bite again the backbytter, or make answer to the Critic babbler, to
flee the Viper in the way, ^r smell a far of the sclanderous Censurer, whose
throat is become an open sepulcher: You Sir the father, having with the
proportion of the members the sharpness of the senses, and sweet harmony of
these outward decorments, that inward ornament of all, to wit, these eminent
faculties of the soul, which kithes in your conception, grave and
solideratiocination, and memory furnished from former observations, with a
copious matter to all sort of wholesome discourse, so that inbred natural
wisdom, and painful acquired learning, has made you Sir (absit verbo
invidia) justly to be thought by me (who scarcely sees any thing clearly)
(...), a just dimension of all things, required in a noble generous mind, and a
properly proportioned person. Receive therefore this silly babe Sir, and let
the perfections which are in you, supply the defects that are in it maintain
it by your authority from the unchristian: yea, uncharitable railing tongues
and ryving hands of all Waspe-like searchers of poysoun amongst honey flowers,
divel-like by invy hinderers never authors or furtherers of any good
enterprise, aiming at the well of the public, but them I regard not: laugh
you Sir, and let them lightly it; receive you it, let them reject it: to you
Sir only being consecrate, I do offer it as a sure badge of my constant desire
out of ardent affection Sir to live and die,

Your most affectioned servant, JOHN Makluire,
Doctor in Medicine.
TO THE READER.
Receive gentle Reader this little treatile with that mind it is presented,
which is humble without alleged pride, and sincere without affected fard: only
desirous to serve GOD, for which end I was formed, and the country to which
end I was called: least now I should be idle, while the Sun of knowledge is
eclipsed by the clouds of ignorance, which has bred such an apprehension of
supposed weakness in the mynds of many, when this science is enclosed in the
person of a young professor: that old ignorant ruffians, practiced Man-slayers,
are repute only worthy Physicians, whose best cure has been upon their own
purse, if they have been but a bystander in some desperate recoverie, they are
sclandered with it, though guiltless, and this has bred their reputation, to
whom if once ye send your urine, ye must resolve to be sick howsoever, for
they will never leave examining of it, till they have shaked it in a disease.
Of such our country and city is filled, for none from the Preacher to the
cobbler, or the Lady to the landres, but all doctorate deceavers: by this the
sorcerer venteth his divelrie: the seminary Priest his Popery. To you be it
said my Lords of his Majesty's Counsel and Session, and on you be laid the
blood of th^se poor ignorant innocents, daily precipitate to their grave. By
this neglect GOD is bereft of his servants, and the King of his subjects: help
this my Lords, and let not this old science, commanded of GOD, followed by
Kings and Princes, embraced of all, and renowned by all, over all, secund to
none, (divinity except) decay amongst you, and restrain pantodidactos
extravagant spirit, (more ignorant than the Ox or Ass, while he knows not
his own cribbe) within the borders of his profession, showing whatsoever his
vocation be, Mr. Perkins superscription of his books, Minister verbies, hoc
vnum age, that medicine flourishing in this Kingdom, not only my old Lord
Doctor, but also young Master Doctor may live by the labor of his hands,
destitute of other lands.

In IO AN. MAKLVIREVM (sieve lyradem) (...).
AOnidum pater est, idem est Asclepii, Apollo;
Illius inventum est ars metrica and medica.
Verum Asclepiadis citharamque and Paeonis artem,
Musarum vt famulis tradidit Aoniam.
^ieridum nato simul atque Epidaurii alumno
Phoebus avus Lyradae donat vtramque lyram.
Macte lyra vtravis, canones dignate modosque
Tradere Paeonios, ludere and Aonios.
Ludebat G. Sibbaldus
(...).
In Authoris nomen, Make. hoc est filius. Lure, id est esca.
PErge salutiferam sic impertirier escam,
Iure salutiferae diceris filius escae.
In Libri inscriptionem
MIlitia est quicquid mortales degimus aevi:
Quam fit opus clypci nemo negabit open.
Mysticus est Mystae; Medicae hic Maklurius artis
Porrigit, ingenii nobile deig na sui,
Qnisquis amas sanam, quoque sano in corpore mentem,
Sanus si es, sanum qui tueatur habes.
In Zoilum.
TEntas Maklurii incassum discerpere nomen,
Livide, praeclarum iam super astra volat.
Pat. Sandaeus.

Author ad Censorem.
CVM tua non edas carpismea dogmata Censor,
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
Candidus imperti meliora vel vtere nostris:
Aut alios nostro mitte labor frui.
The Contents of this Book.
THE natural causes of death. Page 1 The use of meat, drink, sleep, etc. 3
Of phlebotomie, or drawing of blood. 6 A remedy for drunken cummers. 8 Of
Lochleaches Blood-suckers, and wicked men Blood-drinkers. 9 Of purges for the
body. 10 Of purges for the purse. 18 Of vomiting. 19 The inconvenients of long
sleeping. 23 Means for expelling the whole excrements of the body. 24 The
time, term, and other circumstances of exercising. 26 TOBACCO. 30 Dinner time,
and meats in general, 38 A remedy for grown greasy bellyes. 39 Of bread,
41. Of flesh, 42. Fowls. 45 Of Eggs and milk. 46 Herbs for eating. 51 Drink
in general. 53. Wine, 54 Beer, 55. Water. 46 What should be done after
dinner. 57 Passions of the mind. 59 Supper time. 62 The Cooks good parts. 63
After supper what, and the Air. 64 The praises of night drunkards and vain
Rorers. Page 6^ Bed time, and sleep. 6^ Procreation with the circumstances. 7^
Complexions 7^ Sanguineans and their diet 7^ Cholericks diet. 7^ Melancholicks
diet. 7^ Flegmaticks diet. 8^ Age in general. 8^ Bairnes meat. 8^ Youths
meat. 8^ Middle-age diet. 8^ Old men's meat. 8^ The careless care of a young
less for old man. 8^ The seasons. 9^ The diet of the spring. 9^ Of the summer.
9^ Of the harvest. 9^ Of the winter. 10^ A regiment for women with child. 10^
For women brought to bed. 10^ For the child. 11^ For the Nurse. 11^ Of waining
the babe. 12^ Greedy misers, godless heirs. 12^ Bairnes diseases. 12^ The
marks of both true and false conception. 12^
FINIS.
THE BVCKLER OF HEALTH.
GOD the Creator made man with a soul immortal, and a body subject to death,
being composed of four elements, of contrary quali(...)s, which does combat
still amongst (...)emselues, the stronger stryving to sub(...)e the weaker,
hence comes many (...)eases, and in end destruction: Moreo(...)r our life is
sustained by two pillars, (...) wit, by the natural heat, (which is (...)
chief instrument of the soul) and the (...)bred moist, or sap of the body,
which (...) the nurishment, or food of this heat, (...) is the oil in the
lamp, of the light, (...)ich humor failing, the heat must needs (...)rish:
but so it is this humor can not still last, because the natural heat: does
daily destroy it, and although there be daily reparation made by the heat, and
the blood that proceeds from the heart by the arters to all the members of the
body, yet the sappie or humide substance that is dissolved is much purer than
that which by reparation does succeed to it: for our natural heat being
daily weakened, is not able to make up her losses, by as good as it has lost:
as wine the more water be mixed is the weaker, so our natural heat, and
inbred sappie substance is daily weakened by the apposition of new aliment or
food, having still some thing unlike the former: Add to these that the
dissolution of the body is continual the reparation, but by little and little,
after many alterations: here ye see, that the natural heat devouring this
our natural inbred sap does destroy the self in end.

And although that these things do impose a necessity of death to man,
nevertheless he may not only prolong his life (considering here the second
causes only) but also preveene sickness, and keep^ himself in health, and
that by the righ^ and moderate use of these outward circumstances in themselves
indifferent, and ^o good, if rightly and circumspectly used, ^ut evil, if not:
These are the air, meat, ^rink, sleeping, waking, motion, and rest: ^he
excretion of the excrements of the ^ody, and the passions of the mind, all
which are so necessary to the life of man, that it can not last long without
the use of ^he same, for the continual dissolution of the ^ody requires a
reparation by meat. Then ^eepe is needful for the disgestion and ^estitution
of the spirits, waking for the ^xercises and functions of the spirits, and ^he
stirring up of the natural heat: and ^est is necessare for the refreshing of
both ^ody and spirits wearied: and seeing nature can not turn all her meat in
good ^ubstance, the excretion of the superflui^es was needful. The passions of
the ^ynde by reason of the objects that are ^ffered, good or evil, can not
also be ^shewed: for the moderation then of these ^ircumstances remarke these
few Canons ^ollowing.

Canon 1.
It is expedient for the preserving of ^ealth, and preveening of diseases, that
every one whose age and force does permite, should every year draw blood and
purge, and that in the spring, because the body replenished with humors does
readily at that time fall in diverse diseases, while as the natural heat
revived, by the approaching of the sun toward (...) does attempt the
expulsion of these humors out of the body, from the which enterprise of nature
arises a conflict, if nature have the victory, man escapes: but if she
succumbe, man dies: that nature does thus attempt the expulsion of these
humors, it is known by these intercutanean diseases, as are itch, pustuls,
byles, ulcers, and such like, which we see commonly in the Spring to fall out.

The body in the winter by two means is replenished with humors, the one is by
that extraordinary appetite whereby men are carried: yea, rather forced to
eat more meat in that season than in the Summer: this appetite proceeds
from the greater heat of the stomach then, than at any other time. The other
mean whereby the body is replenished, is the envyroning cold, whereby
dissipation of these three substances (to wit, the airy, humide and solid is
hindered, as also the excretion of the vapors by the small holes, or pores of
the body. It is therefore need^ull to help nature, and light her of this
burhen, by drawing of blood, or phlebotomy and purging: And because the reward
of Physicians in this country being frequently, My Lord, GOD reward you, has
made Physicians to be scarce, and no wonder, for how shall his L. live upon
this rent, is it not to content my Lord with the poor folks alms, who get
often GOD help you, they differ in form, but not in matter: this scarsitie
constrains the Gentlemen to commit themselves to be handled by ignorants,
who least they should deal with them as that Surgeon of Iedburgh dealt with
his patients, who forced all them of whom he drew blood, their wound
vnder-cotting, to return to have it healed, and being asked the reason of this
of his little boy, he answered, that for making of the wound by opening of the
vein, he got a Weather, but for curing of the same a Kow, that every one may
understand for his own well, I will insist a little on phlebotomie and purging.

Of Phlebotomie.
PHLEBOTOMIE then is an evacua^ion of the vicious humors abounding in the body,
mixed with the blood, by the opening of a vein.

This is either urged by the present disease, which admittes no delay, or it is
voluntare for the preveening of the imminent, when the present danger does
press, it may be at any time of the year, or any hour in the day or night
without exception, and that in diverse places of the body, as the nature of
the disease shall require: when it is by election, or voluntary for preveennig
of future diseases, the most fit time of the year, is the Spring, in the
latter end of March, or the beginning of Aprile, and the most proper hour in
the day is the morning: an hour or more after you are awake, having made a
clean Ship, fore and est, (as the Seamen say:) the most accommodate place is
the vein basilike, or lever vein, the Chirurgian having rubbed it with his
hand, or a dry cloth before, for the gathering of the blood thither, then
having tied it, let him make the incision beneath the place, where it meets
with the vein Cephalicke, about two fingers breadth, having marked the place
before, and anointed it with a little oil, holding the vein fast, lest it
should slide with the thumb of the left hand if the incision be made with the
right hand, and leaning the hand wherewith he opens the vein on the arm of
the patient, that it may be stable, and giving him who is bled a battoun in
his hand, for to stir his fingers, to that effect the blood may issue the
better, and having drawn such a measure as the nature force and age of the
person may well suffer, slacking the band, let him lay upon the wound a little
piece of linen cloth dipped in water and tied softly by a band of linen till
all danger of new bleeding be past, keeping still the arm all that day free
from all motion.

Blood may be taken in greater measure of sanguineans and bilious, than of
melancholious, and phlegmaticks, of young men than of old, and of men than
women. Except it be of such who by often sacrificing to Bacchus, their head
takes now and then a giddie startling, their tongue a tedious tratling, their
tail a vile wavering. These monsters of nature, shame of their sex, cross of
their husband, and disgrace of kin, friend and alliance should be bledde in
both the legs and arms, and in the croppe of the tongue, by a cross sneck to
that end, it may be made slower for talking, and stiffer for drinking, least
continuing in this wicked mood, they make their husbands Cuckolds, their
bairnes bastards and beggars, themselves whoores and thieves. Justly many are
molested with such beasts, who glames at the turde for the twelfe pence sticken
in it: the corruption of our time being such that Tome the tinklers son
metamorphosed in a Gentlman, suits mistress Marie my Lords daughter, and Sir
John my Lords second, spears out for Sandy the Souters forty thousand mark
Iennie. This Tom aiming at vanity rather than virtue, comes to honors or
horns by his wife, and Sir John looking to gear more than to grace, is often
perplexed, while the trash is wasted, by a Masie Fae or a Maly Dae. I wonder
that their unequal conjunctions do not fill the country with monsters like
Muiets which is begotten betuixt a Mare and an Ass.

Of Loch-leachs.
Some use Loch-leaches when they cannot have the use of drawing of blood. These
little beasts are not to be applied presently, after they come out of the
water, but they must be keept four and twenty hours in a vessel, full of
fair water, that they may spue out this, while the filthy mudde and dross is
within them. They should be gripped with a white ^innen cloth, for the bare
hand cankers them. The place to the which they are to be applied, should be
smeered over with blood, to that end they may enter the sooner: and when ye
would have them to fall, sprinkle a little Aloes or salt on them, if ye would
them to draw more then they are able to contain, cut off their tail while
they are yet hanging, and if the bleeding' stanch not after they are fallen,
apply with a band, of cloth or wool brunt and beatten to powder.

There be other Loch-leaches or bloodsuckers not spoken of here, such be gold
greedy, inventors of new impositions, faith less victual forestallers, and
treacherous quarrels, and process hatchers, who bereauing by these means his
innocent brother of his goods the entertainers of his life, may be termed
rather man slayars than blood suckers. These unlike to the former, does suck
the best blood but like the former in others, for they never of them selves
fall from that sucking till they be not able to contain any more; if ye
sprinkle them with the sharp powder of Aloes, (that is with justice) then they
fall, and if you continue to pursue them by the same, you shall find them as
the former by salt, so they by it are forced to spue out the undigested blood
of the poor, and cut me the tail from them that is, make them quyte of wife
and barnes, in whose person they fear the curse of the great judge. These
grinders of the face of the poor, shall never make an end of sucking. These as
unworthy to be thought or spoken of by any good Christian, I leave to be
handled, yea, justly to be hanged by the Justice heir, and if they amend not,
to be tormented by the great Justice prison-keeper hereafter.

Of purging.
And because our country Leeches, considering the disposition of the people
amongst whom they live (who esteem well of no meat but that which rakketh the
belly, though it were draffe and satlings: so they think of no physike, but
that which sends them three or four score times to the midding) does carry
about with them commonly for this end (to use their terms) colocinthida,
stibium, and diagirdium, violent fiery remedies, whereby the body is mightily
endomaged: it shall not be a-misse to consider what purging is, and the nature
of the remedies proper for the same.

Purging then (as commonly it is taken) is a cleansing of the body of the
superfluous humors by use of medicine working downward, the purgatiues are
diverse, according to the diverse nature of the humors that is to be purged.

The humors are three, bile, phlegm, and Melancholy: the purgatiues are either
gentle, mediocre, or violent.

The gentle purgatiues of bile, are Casse, manna, the juice of Roses,
Tamarinds, sweet prunes.

Casse being of temper hot and humid, being corrected because it is wind^e,
with anyse or finckle seed, it may be given to all sort of persons, to bairnes
half an vn^^, to aged an once and an half, or two (...) the most.

Manna being temperate in qualities may be given the weight of an ounce to
bairnes, and two or three ounces for men, for some men correct the slownesse of
it, by three or four grain weights of diagridium.

The juice of roses is hot and dry in the first degree, the dose is from an
ounce and an half to two ounces, the syrope of rose solutiue made of this juice
is from an ounce and an half to four.

The dose of Tamarinds is from half an ounce to a whole.

Sweet prunes are given in number from twelve to four and twenty.

The mediocre purgatives of bile, are Aloes, Rheubarb, Myrabolans, Citrins.

The dose of Aloe hot in the second, and dry in the third degree, according to
Galen, is from a dragme to one and an half, or two at the most, it is most
used in pilluls; because it is sharp and biting, it is corrected with mastix,
and being slow of operation it is hastened by the juice of roses.

Rheubarbe hot and dry in the second is given from a dragme and an half to
two, and because it is slow in operation, there is adjoined to it cynamome or
spice.

The Myrabolans citrins are almost of the same faculty with Rheubarbe, but
that they bind more: their dose of old was from two dragm. to half an ounce,
Mesue gives them to the weight of five dragm. they are rubbed with the oil of
sweet almonds for their dryness cause.

The violent purgatives; are Diagrid: Azarum and Centaurie the less.

Diagrid: being hot and dry in the third degree, is given to the weight of
ten grains, it is corrected because it byteth sore with the juice of quinces,
and gum, tragacantha, and with mastix, for the keeping of the stomach from
hurt by it.

As for Azarum and Centaurie the less, because they are out of use I pass
them over.

The composed remedies purging bile, are syrupes, opiates, electuaries, or
pilules.

Syrupes, as the sir. of rose: whose dose is from an ounce and an half to four.

The sir. of Cichorie with Rheubarb, given according to the same quantity, but
of less force.

The opiates, are Catholicum, Diacassia, Diaprunum simplex: their dose is from
half an ounce, to one and an halse. Triphera persica, and Diaprunum solutivum,
are much more violent: their dose is from three dragm. to six, or an ounce at
the most.

The Electuares, are the electuare of Roses that is of great force: his dose is
from two dragm. to six, or an ounce at the most: the electuarie de Psillio is
after the same manner.

The pilules are pilulae sine quibus Aureae, de Rheu. their dose is from a
scruple to four: Remarke here that pilules are seldom used to purge bile.

The simples that purge Melancholy are Senne: polypod. as gentle purgatives.

Senne is hot in the first degree. and dry in the second: his dose given in
substance, is two or three dragm. in infusione: from three to six, in
decoctione, an ounce; his wind is corrected by anise, and his slownesse by
cinamome, and ginger.

Polypode is hot in the second, dry in the third, his dose is from two dragm.
to half an ounce, his dryness is corrected by glycyrize.

The mediocre purgatiues of melancholy, are; Epithimus, Myrabolam Indi.

Epithimus is hot, and dry in the second, his dose is from a dragme to half
an ounce; Mesue did give the weight of half an ounce, his dryness is corrected
by rasins of the sun.

Myrobolani indi are of the same nature, that the myraboline citrons are.

The Ancients had by these, fumaria, alias, earth-smoake, cuscula, and the bark
of capres.

The violent purgatiues, are, black ellebore: lapis armenius and lapis Lazuli,
black hellebor hot and dry in the third degree, his dose prepared is from 15
grains to half a dragme, it is prepared when they stick an aple with little
pieces of it, and with clowes, and so rosteth both under the ashes, the which
apple is used, the pieces of ellebore being casten away, it is infused in
hidromel or barley water, from the weight of a dragme to half an ounce.

Lapis armenius is in the first, hot and dry in the second, his dose unwashed
is from half a dragme to a whole, but washen to a dragme and an half, it is
corrected by frequent washing, without the which it procures vomit, lapis
lazuli is lyk it every way.

The composed purgatiues of melancholy, are, opiates, confections, pilluls.

Opiates, as Catholicon, Diasenna, their dose is from an ounce to one and an
half.

Confections, as confectio hamech, his dose is from three dragme to six.

Pilluls, are pilulae de fumaria, which are seldom used in melancholy.

The simple purgatiues of phlegm gentilly, are, Carthamus, Myrabolani,
Chebulae, Sarcocolla.

Carthamus hot in the first, dry in the second, his dose is from 2 dragmes to
an ounce, it is corrected by cynamone and anyse.

Myrabolani chebulae are like in all to the cittrins.

Sarcocolla, hot in the first, dry in the second, his dose is from a dragme to
two, his slownesse is corrected by gingiber.

The Mediocre, are Agaricus hot in the second degree, and dry in the first:
^is dose is from a scruple to two dragm. (...) slownesse is corrected by
ginger, or pica Nardi.

The violent purgatives of phlegm, are Turbith, Hermodactes, Colocinthis:
Me^oacham; Ialap and of old, Sagapenum, ^poponax.

Turbit is hot and dry in the se^ond degree: his dose is from three
scru^les, to four, it is corrected with ginger.

Hermodactes, hot and dry in the se^ond: the dose and correction of the same
^s that of Turbit.

Colocinthis, hot and dry in the ^hird: his dose corrected, that is, the
Trochiscks of Alhandal, is from six grains ^o fifteeene, and to the weight of
a scruple ^or the strongest.

Maechoacham, hot in the first dry in ^he second, a remedy fit for all sort
of people, his dose infused in white wine ^s from two scruples to a dragme.

Ialap root is to be taken after the same manner, and in the same quantity.

The remeedies composed, are, opiates, ^lectuaries, pilluls, trochisks opiates,
as ca^holicum, diaphenicum, whose dose is from ^alfe an ounce to a whole for the
strongest.

Electuaries, are electuarium de citro, his dose is from half an ounce to six
drames

Diacarthanium, his dose is from half an ounce to a whole.

Pilluls, as of Agarice, Stomachiae, and sine quibus, their dose is from half
a dragme to four scrupuls, pilulae cocciae, faetidae, lucis majores,
arthriticae, de hermodactilis, their dose is from two scrupuls to a dragme

Trocises are de agarico, their dose is from two scrupuls to a dragme:
trochiscis of alhandall, their dose is from six grains to a scruple.

Their be other sort of purgatiues, which men call purse purgations, and these
are of three sort as the former, gentle, mediocre, or violent.

The gentle comprehend the modest, and moderate charges of an honest house.

The mediocre are the just reward of the physician, the due of the
scholemaster, and the fitting of the conscientious merchand compts.

The violent conteane the gorgeous depursements to the Goldsmith for lace,
cups, and such like, the persuing by law some tedious process by the fiery
violence of these two, the poor purse which ^ften takes an irremediable
flux, and ^yeth of the skitter: His Majesty with ^is most honorable and wise
Counsel, by an act of parliament (evil kept) ^ath found out a remedy for
the former: would GOD the wisdom and concord of his subjects would admit an
other for ^he latter, for then the Nobility and Gen^rie should not be so
lukken-handed to other professions.

Of Vomitores.
Because some (as bilious constitutions) are sooner and better purged by
vomiting then purging: and seeing it is much used, consider with me the
remedies of it.

Vomitores then as the purgatiues are of three sorts, to wit, gentle,
mediocre, and violent, the gentle are such as do procure it in burdening the
stomach by their quantity, as warm water, fat broth, butter, oil, and the
like taken to the measure of ten or twelve ounce.

The mediocre are the seed and flower of Anyse, the seed and root of orage,
the Latin term is atriplex, the root of ^azarum, given from a dragme to four
and agarick, his dose a dragme.

The vehements are, the se^de and flower of broom, to the quantity of two
dragmes, gratiola from a dragme to one and one half.

Some of the Ancients thought it to be expedient for the health to vomit
every month, and that after a great carrouse, but this counsel needs not
to be given to the soukespikkets of our age, who asthey drink like Suiczers,
yea rather like swine, they cast as Duchess, yea rather like dogs, it were
little fault for punishment to pinch so these intemperate and vntymous abusers
of GODS creatures, until they were glad with the dogs to return to the
vomit, And this much to you Drunkards.

It is here to be remarked that grown fat men should not be purged by
vomiting, for by the prease, ye will easily break some vein in their body:
nor melancholicks, for they hardly purge upward; nor asthmaticks, or such as
has any impediment in their breath, through the infirmity of their lights,
for by it they are much more weakened, yea sometimes torn: nor hectiks, for
their body being already worn, is wholly casten down, nether they who are of
a weak ^eade, tender eyes, of a long neck and (...) narrow breast, only
cholericks, being of strong firm constitution, not burdened with flesh, and
much subject to the vomiting of bile, yallow, green, or sea colored: as also
phlegmaticks of a rude robust nature, whose stomach is full of phlegm, should
be purged upward by vomit, and that with great caution follow^ng in it, the advice of some understanding man, for no less danger flows from ^he
extraordinary dose of vomitores and the malegovernement of the patient both
after, and while it works then by purgative medicines.

I have only here for breveties cause touched the qualities of the
medicaments, and their dose, living the form of exhibition, and preparation to
the giuers, that takes upon them to minister physic in the country.

It is to be remarked, that except the body be so full of blood and humors,
that the physic cannot pearce through them, purging ought to precead
phlebotomie, howsoever the belly should always be empty and clean of the
excrements.

The patient should keep himself warm while the medicine is working helping
the operation by a gentle motion as also by a little thin warm broth after
the taking of it about a little space.

And because that the not working o^ medicine does affraight many, it is to b^
understood, that some will not move the body any way, and yet do little or no
harm to it, such are gentle and mediocre medicines, the gentle purgatiues,
when they purge not, are turned by nature into the blood, the mediocre into the
nature o^ the humor, which they purge whithe^ bile, pituite, or melancholy,
but the violent cast the body in a fever readily, and become venomous, while
as nature overcome has not force to expel them, but the other two being
overcome by nature, are retained within the body, so that the stay of them is
from a weakness in them, but the stop of the last is from a weakness in
the body.

Gentlemen therefore seeing you know both the names and varieties of the
purgatiues spare not to ask at your Leeches what they be ere ye take them.

Bairnes before they be eighteen or ^wentie year of age, and old men after
^ourtie, (except they be of a strong complexion) does not stand in need of
this yearly purging.

Canon. 2.
The body being thus made clean, take head least by overcharging of it ye
file it a new, for being in some fashion, weakened by the former remeadies, it
does not shortly admit that measure of nutriture that it did before, it is
expedient therefore to come to your accustomed diet by degrees, least a new
file require a new cleanse, and too often scowring of the pot although it were
of brass wears it.

Canon. 3.
Flee mornings sleep, and lazy lying in winter after six, and summer after
seven, for long lying to the health is hurtsome.

Because it hinders the cleansing of the body from the excrements, (and judge
you give it be either handsome or wholesome to see the midding at the fire-end)
while it stops the passage of the spirits animale, the causes of motion for
their expulsion. (...) it sharpeneth, or by the haemorroides o^ some other way,
it procures melancholy hypochondriake, sometimes the fever quartan, sometimes
other diseases, for this is good, the bark of the root of Tamarisk, and of
capres with the foresaid herbs.

The retention of the sweat causes the itch. scabbe, pustuls, and such like,
therefore it is to be procured by frictions baines and exercise.

Of exercise.
Because that frictions, and baines are not much used, leaving them we shall
speak a little of exercise.

Exercise should be much regarded an^ moderatlie used, by those who has (...)
care of their health, this Galen, testifiet^ in his book of good and evil
meat i^ these words, For the keeping of healt^ a continual rest is a great
hinder: as i^ the contrare, moderate motion is a gre^ help. By exercise the
members of the body are hardened, and so made fit t^ sustain any labor, the
natural heat i^ quickened, and so prompter for his functions, and the body is
made more agil^ and nimble in his actions. Here by exercise I understand
honest games and p^stimes, not these debosht lose-tymes, cards, dyce, tables,
and such like fathers, and fosterers of jarres and mischief, books furnishing
lies, oaths, blasphemy, hurtsome to the health of the body, troublesome to
the good of the estate, and hinderance to the rest and peace of the soul: I
leave such devyces of Satan entysing to sin to be thought or treated of by
ragged ribaulds, and lousy licentious limmers, the fittest penmen of such a
process, discharging by the right of a physician, and the charity of a
Christian, all generous honest spirits, who tends the health of their body, the
wealth of their estate; and aeternall welfare of their soul of such hel-bred
conceats.

The time most proper for these honest exercises is the morning, when the
stomach has made an end of his digestion, and the belly of his expulsion, so
that both ^ee lightened of their burden. Hence we may see how our daily custom
of exer^ising after meat is not good: first, ^hen by this our motion the
digestion is hindered by a catching of our meat to and fro, as the Plough-man
does with his ^aill in his coge, when he would have them feign cooled, this
catching suffers it not to settle it self in the ground of the stomach, the
place of digestion: secondly, because the body by exercise being made hot,
draws from the stomach and the lever by the means of this heat, the meat
before it be well prepared, which breeds obstructions in the veins within,
and scabbes without, our scabbed scholars, that keeps no fit time, nor just
term of their pastimes, may suffice to instance this alleagance.

The term or end of exercising, should be when the face becomes red and
swelled and the sweat issues forth through the whole body, leaving it before
reddnesse, turn to palenesse, and swelling to swampnesse, and sweat to be
like weet: otherwise in stead to be refreshed ye shall be wearyed, and for
dissipating of the humores by the pores of the body, ye shall dissolve the
spirits by the passages of the same. Some exercises employ some particular
members of the body, as the Tailor his hands and head, the Webster his legs
and arms, the Tobacco man his mouth and nose, the Beggar the nails of his
thumbes, and tongue, Coupers, Trumpeters, and Pipers, their ^heekes, hands, and
mouth: the most fiery and wicked scolds their tongue, and the ^icentious
whoores their tail: these I pass ^y, not having many particular exercises ^o
treat of used amongst us worthy of consideration, or special delineation,
and very few universal, except the foote-ball, which often does more good to
the Chi^urgians, than evil to the Physicians by a^y help the body gets:
the gooffe and ^rcherie, from the which exercises they come ofter hungry than
sweating, and the ^innice or ketch the best of all, if it be moderately and
orderly used.

In all exercises whereby men sweates, (...) except these that are under the
sheets) ^hese things are to be remarked: first, that in your gaming your
mind be free ^f all fear, the gadges being little or none, otherwise the
mind shall be in a con^inuall vexation, and neither body nor mind shall
receive any recreation: Secondly, if (...) time of game you thirst, let your
drink ^ee small aile, taken in a little quanti^ie, not water, for it by the
open passages going straight to the liver, will cool ^t too much, on the which
insueth often hydropsie, nor wine, for by it the lyver already heat is set on
a fire, on the which follows frequently a fever: Thirdly, after your exercise
have a care to cause rub away the sweat in a warm chamber with dry warm
linnings see that the body rubbed be straight, least the wrinkels of the
skin do hinder the issuing of the sweat, see the rubbers be many and
nimble, and that they rub not over hard, for this does stop the passages,
nor too soft, for it goes not half far in, but a mediocritie in all things
is good.

The excrements of the head in the morning ought to be purged by
sternutatories or sneezngs of betonie, leafes, or marjoline leaves, and by
masticatores chawed, which because they are little in use, I will pass over
them, and speak of that which supplyeth their place which is Tobacco.

Of Tobacco.
Tobacco is an herb fetched from the West Indies to us, some calls it
Nicotiana, from Master John Nicote, that brought it first to France out of
Portugal, he being Ambassador for the time there. The Portugalles brought
it first in Europe, out of the Island Trinada, and (...)om Peru in the continent
of America, ^ome term it petoun or tobacco.

Tobacco is of a temper hot and dry, ^s appears first from the effects
thereof, ^s to purge cold and moist humors, as (...)egme, or pituite: hence it
is that it does ^arme to fyrie hot bilious persons, except it be taken in
little quantity, and that for the cleansing of the head from ^hese cold
superfluous humors, which a ^old stomach has sent to it; commonly these men
have cold stomachs, hot ^ivers, and weak heads, (for these three ^eadily
follow one another:) so the cold stomach fills the head with cold va^ours,
and the mouth with cold humors ^s do appear by their continual spitting.

It hurts also melancholiens (if it be (...)ot for the foresaid reasons) by
drying of their body too much, but aggrieth best with the pituous ^^^gmatick,
as daily experience does approve. Secondly, from ^he biting quality that is in
it, by the which it moves vomit. Thirdly, from ^he purging faculty downward.
Fourthly, from the penetrative subtle faculty outward, as appears by the
issuing of sweat, after the use of it in some. Fifthly, from the thirst and
drouth it moves, which is taken away by the use of drink. Sixthly, from the
wind it dryveth forth and that both upward and downward.

Lastly, from the giddiness of the head, which proceeds from a melting of
the phlegm through the head, which being melted, it stops the passages of
the spirits: so the stronger the Tobacco be, the sooner it melts it and more
of it, and therefore strong Tobacco moves this giddiness most and soonest:
this giddiness is stopped by a drink of ale, or any cooling drink, which
sends up gross thick vapors, the which do hinder the further operation of
it: and condenseth, or congealeth the ^^egme melted by it.

This giddiness of the head is a reason that some allege to prove the
coldness of it, which might be alleged as well o^ of wine or strong drink,
that does no less procure the same dissinesse of the head but they will have
it to proceed from a narcotick, or stupefactive quality in it, as the
chesbow, and suchlike cold things by their coldness do produce such effects,
I wonder how dare they that say so, be bold to use it, seeing it is of such
stupefactive cold, and do not rather abstain from it, and hinder others also,
but I think they do jest, for if it were true that it were so as they say,
some had ^lyed by it long ago, specially after so great taking of it: I knew
two Gentlemen that after supper took soure-score pipes, if it had been
narcotick, they had never drunken any more. The fittest time of year for
taking it, is, first, the Winter: next the Harvest: last the Spring: and no
ways in Summer. The most proper time of the day is the morning and evening
before meat, no ways after it, except it be they to whom of long it has
proved helpful for the expelling of the wind, and digestion of their meat.

The seasons wherewith it aggrieth best are the cold and moistie: these
circumstances remarked taken in a reasonable quantity, that is, a pipe for
two: I think it shall do no harm, yea, rather freeing the head of the great
burden of ^^egme: it preveneeth the diseases that may flow from the abundance
of it: such as apoplexy, epilepsie, paralysie, lethargy and others, but me
thinks the Tobacco man barking as a dog at the Moon, at these courious
observations and idle restrictions of tobacco, (for so he terms them) and
crying that all men at all time when their appetite inordinate bids them,
and their purse serves them may take of it, and it is no wonder he so do,
for it is meat, drink and clothes to him: his Shop is the randevouse of
spitting, where men dialogue with their noses, and their communications are
smoke: in it he play eth the Ape in counterfaiting the honest Merchant man
with his diverse rolls of Tobacco, new come up out of the cellar, where they
lay well wrapped in a dogs skin and soussed: he knows himself how, and
yet swears that they are new landed from Verinus, Virginia, or S.
Christophers. If he be not content with this, he shall have more when I come
again, as he well deserves: for his wares are both dear and evil; dear,
while he takes a penny for a pipe, and his welcome Gentlemen: and evil, for
h^ seedeth his guests neither on roasted, no^ sodden meat; but on white, or
blackeburnt meat, without drink, grace, table, plate, truncheour, or
serviture, yea, scarce a stool to sit on, and is not this (...) brave Innes
my Masters?

The excrements of the lights are gross (...)egmes, which are expelled by the
mouth ^^ter the use of some incisive and deter(...)e things, as are sugar
candy, glycyrize, (...)soap, tussilage, and their syrupes pre^ared.

There be some excrements which are (...) termed, when they abound and so
^armes rather by their quantity, then (...)eir quality, there are semen, and
sanguis (...)enstruus, that is, man's seed, and woman's (...)owres. Either of the
which being cor^upted, breeds diverse diseases: means therefore ought to be
used by the which ^hey may be expelled.

The means for expelling of the seed, (...) that natural conjunction of man
and woman, whereby the members are made ^ore agile, the spirit more joyous,
(licet ^ulgo dici soleat omne animal post coitum (...)iste: sed hoc statum a
coitu fit) shagring and (...)oller is banished from betuixt man and wife: peace
is made in the house, and fill(...)ie polluted dreams, in the night are
(...)revened, but who may not lawfully en(...)y these mids, let them hold
down nature by the use of others, such as are phlebotomy, fasting sobriety,
and the use of cooling meats.

Woman's flowers are moved by the decoction of hysope, Mugwort, Marjoline, and
other aperitiue herbs prepared in white wine, with the use of stoues, and
frequent frictions of the thighs.

Exercise being ended, and the body thereafter having reposed about the
eleventh hour, or sooner in the summer, when as the appetite does require, let
it be answered by meat, which because it is of greater importance than any of
the rest of the circumstances, and more inconveniences do follow upon the
inordinate or immoderate use of it, plures enim occidit gula quam gladius, we
shall insist a little in it, first in general, and next in particulare.

Of meats in general.
As good meat engendereth good blood, so evil produces vicious humors, which
causes diseases.

Let us therefore make choice of the meat, of good substance, of easy
digestion, and that has no abundance of excrements.

The qualities of meat are known by their temperament, or by their
consistance: meats should not be neither over hot or cold, over dry or
moist by nature, nor over fat nor lean, but keeping the mids.

Gross and viscuous meat causes obstruction (to these that have narrow
passages) in the liver, milt, neares, and stops the pores of the whole body
by a gross blood, but these who are of a good constitution, and has the
passages larger may use of them boldly without hurt, for gross and viscuous
meat nourishes much, if it be well digested in the stomach, it agrees well
with laborers whose natural heat is stirred up by their exercise, as also
these who have suffered long hunger.

Light meat and of subtle substance are not meet to lean people, and of a
hot complexion, because being quickly digested, they intertaine not the body
half well, but they are sitting for grown, and gross bodies, whose passages
through the body being strait, are not well aired, also for flegmaticks, and
for these who are of a weak stomach.

The reparation of the body ought to be according to the dissipation of the
same, wherefore they who are of hot complexion, and works much, must eat
more than cold dispositions and idle bellyes, whosoever by over-charging of the
stomach gives their natural heat much to do, (which is the instrument of
nature for nourishing the body) they praecipitate themselves willingly in many
diseases, wherefore every one should rise from the table with appetite.

All variety of dishes is noisome to the stomach, because that by variety,
corruption of meat in the stomach is procured, while as easy digestable meats
are mixed with difficile, also men by variety, which gives contentment to the
taste, are induced to surfeit: but this seems vnsavor^ to the taste, and
unpleasant to the ear of these spycie jacks, who have no use all the day over
for ten fingers but to fill six puddings, (and yet a poor wife will fill six
score in an hour) whose belly is become like the Britones, who because of his
wives insolency, (that would needs mount her time about) and of his own big
belly did apprehend he was with child.

I would have such greasy barrells for their healths sake to take a quarter of
an hours course between the Castle-hill and Arthurs seat twice in the
morning, coming thereafter (if they be hungry) to their dinner made up of an
half penny loa^e, two eggs, and a cup of small Beer: and after meat, for
digestions cause returning to their walk; going to bed without supper: if
this pyning of the panch does not make them light, I will have no money for my
medicinal receipt. Let these whose God is their belly, and guide is their
taste (for they inquire still to John Good-Ales house) and who are no less
nose-wise than a browsters Sow, in smelling a dish of good meat a far off.
Diminish both of the quantity, and quality of their dishes, and imparte of
the superplus to their needy brother, who is come of Adam according to the
flesh, as well as they, and may be of ABRAHAM according to grace, Christians by
profession, and who knows but Sanctes by election. Did the Master prefer
thee over his house, and goods for the satisfying of thine inordinarie
appetite, and thy childrens only? or to give the bread of the children to
dogs or horse, as our great men do, rather than to the poor: and shall not
thou expect: yea, when the Master comes, get the reward of the unjust
steward, amend, or look for it.

The supper must be longer than the dinner, (if the body be not subject to
distillations) because the time is longer between supper and dinner, than
between dinner and supper: meat should be well chawed, or if it be let
over, for evil chawed meat troubles the stomach, hence it is, that they who
has many teeth live long, because they chaw well their meat: light, liquide,
and meat easy of digestion, should be taken before gross meat, and hard of
digestion, nevertheless when the stomach is louse and very hungry, you may
do the contrary.

It is expedient that every one should keep a certain hour for taking of
meat, and this hour should be when the stomach requires refreshment, the
former ingestion being digested, and the stomach empty: this rule is evil
kept by our morning drink, (which sometime makes drunk, and so not fit
for dinner) our four hours penny, (that often buyeth a pynt of wyne-seck, I
had it never so cheap) our collation after supper made in a three pynt tubbe,
(I can not call it a dish) of wine, milk, suggar, and some spyces, I would
content me with it all the day long.

This much in general, follows in particulare to speak of meat, and first
of bread.

Of Bread.
Bread keeps the first rank amongst all other meat, as the ground of
others, for all other meat (though never so good) are without it unpleasant,
yea unwholesome.

The best bread is that which is made of wheat, good wheat is gross, full,
thick, weighty, firm, of color yallow, clean, and that has great
quantity of flower.

Bread made of pure flower, well boulted, nourishes much in little quantity,
but it is of slow digestion.

Bread made of the bran or clattes nourishes little, and fills the body with
excrements, and because the bran has an detersile faculty, it goes quickly
through.

Bread made of both nourishes well, and keeps an open belly.

Ry bread is black, heavy, engendring melancholious blood, more proper for
rusticks than burgesses.

Barley bread is very dry, of little nourishment, and louseth the belly: bear
meal is better mixed with ry meal, that the viscuositie of the one may be
corrected by the brtitlenesse of the other.

As for oate bread it is more used amongst us than the goodness of it does
require.

Bread unleavened nourishes much, but it engendereth gross blood, it is of an
evil digestion, breeds obstructions, and louseth the belly.

Evil wrought bread is viscuous, of evil digestion, as also that which is made
of grumly or troubled watter, when it has not gotten eneugh of the fire, it is
heavy and of hard digestion, that which is hardened in the oven is better than
that which is hardened on the ashes.

Hot bread by reason of the viscositie is hard to digest, procures an
inflation in the stomach, obstruction in liver, and other parts within the body.

Old bread of three or four days losseth all the taste, becomes dry and
withered, evil to digest, of slow passage, binds the belly, and engenders a
melancholious blood.

The crust of bread breeds bile, fit only for these whose stomach is moist and
humid: Tairtes, flammes, pyes; and all other sort of baken meat, are more to
the satisfying of the taste than for health of the body, for they are heavy in
the stomach, and burdeneth it, and stops easily the passages of the veins
in the liver.

Of Flesh.
Beasts according to the variety of their kind, age, manner of living,
constitution of body, and of the place where they feade, are different in the
temperature and virtue of their flesh.

The flesh of fat beasts is better than that of lean, and of libbed than
vnlibbed, because they are fatter, and not so hot, except it be for these who
has been in the battle where the uppermost got the worst, where stricking
at their nighbour with over great force, and too good will, has hurt
themselves with their own spear, for such some say, that a kind of vnlibbed
beasts are good: yea, the stones themselves.

The flesh of young beasts, because tender, moist, soft and easy to digest,
and of great nourishment, is better than that of old beasts, which is dry,
hard, of litie meat, and hard to digest.

The wild beasts that keep the hills are dry, and have fewer excrements, and
leanner then others: Galen. prefers the flesh of porks, of a midde age to
other beasts, because it draws near to man's flesh than others do, and also
because it nourishes well, and breeds good blood, but because it is
viscuous, it is hard to digest to these that has the stomach moist, and
humide: Moreover, as experience has taught, the great use of this flesh
causes leprosy: hence it was forbidden to the Jews, because they were
subject to this malady.

Beef nouisheth much, but it engendereth a gross melancholic blood: young
beef is better than old: Hearts flesh is of a difficile digestion, and as the
beef ingendereth gross blood.

The goats flesh is better than the bucks and the kiddes than the goats.

Lambs flesh is better than Yewes, and Wedders than Lambs, because as
nourishing, and not so humide and slubbrye, the Rams is the worst of all.

Old hairs flesh causes melancholious blood: young hairs is better and more
pleasant: the Coney is better than either of them.

Of Fowls.
Amongst the Fowls that are about the house, the Hen and Capons keeps the
first rank, they engender a blood of a mediocre substance, because they are
neither too hot nor too cold: Chickins are more delicate than they.

The Brissell-fowles are heavy and hard to digest, wherefore in France they are
both larded and spyced.

The Gouse abounds in superfluous excrements, is of harder digestion than
other sowles, except the wings.

The Duckes, and all other water ^oules is humide, viscuous, phlegmatic,
excrementitious, and of adure digestion, wherefore they are not so wholesome,
as these of the land. Amongst the birds of the field the Partridge bears the
bell, being of easy digestion, and causing good blood, and the younger are
better than the elder.

Next the Partridge is the phesane almost of the same qualities that it is, the
Quallies are not less praised, except in the countries where there is
abundance of hellebore, whereon they commonly feade, they are best in harvest.

The Doves are hot of nature, they set the blood on fire: and readily of Venus
games moves a desire, unfit for these who readily do fall into a fever: The
Pigeons are better than the doves, the doves are best in the spring, for they
eat much corn. The Coushins flesh is hard to digest, yet it is not evil in
the winter, if it be suffered to hang a while, so that it may become tender.

The Turd or Cuzell is delicious ingendring good blood, but some thing hard to
digest: Martial extolleth it highly in these words, Inter aeves Turdus si
quis me judice certet,
Inter quadrupedes gloria prima lepus.


Pluvers, mearls, turturelles, are not to be rejected, for the former laudable
qualities, which are to be found in them.

Of Eggs and Milk.
The eggs of hens and phasanes excels the eggs of other beasts, gouse eggs
are worst of all, except swynes eggs.

New laid are better than old, and sodden than fried, and roasted than sodden,
and potched than roasted, the soft than the hard.

Milk has three diverse substances, a serious or watrie, whereof is the whey
a thick and gross whereof is the cheese, and a fat and creamie, whereof is
the butter: but of our Edinburgh milk where the two part is water, and the
third part milk, there would be little cheese and no butter.

Milk if the stomach be clean the body whole, and no other meat mixed with
it, nourishes much, otherwise it corrupts easily and quickly.

Yew milk has more of the gross and thick substance, whereof the cheese is
made, then of the other, and by this means it is nourishing, but heavy to the
stomach. Asses milk is of contrare consistance, kyne milk is thicker and
fatter then yew milk, and so fitter to make butter, it is nourishing and makes
an open belly.

Goat milk is neither too thick nor too thin, neither over fat nor over
lean, and so it keeps the middle betuixt extremities, nevertheless it
should not be used, either without suggar or honey, water or salt least it
lapper in the stomach.

Women's milk is fittest for bairnes or hectickes, because of the resemblance
of nature.

New milked milk is best, because milk changes quickly.

Sodden milk nourishes more than raw, but it is binding because thicker.

Milk of fat and lusty beasts is better than of lean and hungered.

Fresh butter is a little hot, with time it becomes hotter, it is not very
nourishing, but it softeneth and louseth the belly, it is good for the lights
and breast.

Cheese is not to be much used, for it ingendereth gross humors, breeds
obstructions, binds the belly, and is hard to digest, the new is better then
the old, the soft then the hard, and that which is made of vnrained milk is
better than of rained.

Over viscous cheese, as also over brittle, is not good, mediocritie is best,
cheese without any evil or strong taste is better than other.

New, soft, and sweet cheese, is of a cold and humide temper, but the old,
hard, salt cheese, is hot and dry, too great use of it ingenders the stone in
the neares.

This curious sifting of the nature of cheese, and improbation of the great use
of it, will seem first ridiculous and then odious to the mourish men of Kyle
and Galloway, the quintessence of whose meat (that is milk) is cheese, the
which the goodman has kept for his own mouth as a desert, (being
nevertheless at breakfast, supper and dinner, the first, last, and only dish)
and for the Lairds, or the wise black men, the Ministers, when they come
abroad: the bairnes contented with froth, crap-whey, or lapperd milk, I think
that if the bodies of these bodies, were chymicallie dissolved: the princips to
wit: sal. sulphur. and mercurius, should savor of cheese, milk, and yet they
are as daft as if they were made of Wine and Wastels, which they often speak
of, as the rarest dainties they either saw or hard of.

Of Fish.
Fish are of complexion cold and humide, for being still in the water they must
needs keep the nature of the water, the ^ouritute they give is more light,
slub^rie, and sooner dissipate, than the reparation, which is made by the use
of the beasts of the land. The fish that are of a solid and firm substance
are most nourishing and wholesome, because less phlegmatic, for this cause
seafish because fi^mer are better than fresh-water-fish, amongst the fishes of
the sea, these that uses about rocks are best.

Amongst the fresh water fishes these that haunt the rivers are better than
these that haunt the stancks or loches: and fish of a running river, and
craggie, with clear^ water, is to be preferred to them that are taken in a
dead running poole, or in a troubled muddie water.

Fish as milk would be eaten, when the stomach is clean of filthy humors,
and they would not be mixed with other meat, least they corrupt, as quickly
they will.

The drowners of meal with malt, to whom the bone of a herring, or a thread of
salt beef will serve to be kitchen to a quarte of ale, says, that fish
should swim, I answer, in water: but if thou take more of aile, beer, or
wine, or any other strong drink then serves to wash it down, it will come
above the broth, and so not boil well.

I will not insist in the particulare enumeration, least it should reduce the
Lector to a tedious calculation: the generals may suffice, if they be well
remarked: It may be thought a praeposterous order this, to put the flesh before
the kaill, but here I keep ordinem dignitatis, non methodum sanitatis.

Of herbs fit for eating.
Herbs in regard of other meat are of little nurishment, yet they serve some
for cooling, others for heating, being prepared in broth, sallads, sauce, or
other ways.

Amongst the herbs that are commonly used, the lactuce is the first, being of
more wholesome sap than all the rest, it cools the body, procures sleep,
and hinders dreams.

The garden Cicorie is of the same qualities, but it is not so pleasant to the
taste, nor of such good sap.

The Souroke is good for eating, because of the sowrnesse, it quenches thirst,
procures appetite, and mitigateth the heat of the stomach and liver.

Purpie cools much, quenches thirst, holds down Venus, tempereth the
teeth, being out of style, by the use of sour things.

Kaill ingendereth evil blood, troubles the stomach, and the sight, and
moves strange dreams.

Spinards ^ouseth the belly, and moisteth the body, but they are windy.

Bourrage and buglosse purifieth the blood and keeps the belly open, their
^^owrs are good in a sallad, for to refresh the spirits, and rejoice the heart.

Artichocks heateth the blood, and provokes Venus to battle, they are good
for the stomach, and gives appetite.

Cresson is of quality hot and dry, provokes urine, and is eaten ordinarily
raw in sallads. Menth fortifieth the stomach, and helps the appetite.

Cerefole and Finkle is good for the sight, augmenteth the seed, and
ingendereth milk to Nurses. Parsley is agreeable to the stomach, and profitable
to the neares, because it is diuretic. Sauge helps appetite, and digesteth
crudities out of the stomach. Hysope purges the lights from the phlegm, by the
subtilitie of it: thyme does the same. Rayfords taken after meat helps
digestion, but before meat they lift up the meat in the stomach,

Neeps are windy, of little nurishment, and engenders worms in little
bairnes, little, are better than the great, they should be eaten with pepper.
Carrets, are worse than they, Sybouse, Onyons, Leeks are agreeable to pituitous
and phlegmatic persons, but noisome to cholerians, and to these who are subject
to a sore head.

But I think we have eaten long enengh without a drink, let us now go to it.

Of drink in general.
Drink, as I think (and so thinks the drunkard) is no less worthy of
consideration for the health than meat. There be sundry sorts of drink used
among us. as wine, ale, and beer, for no man drinks water with his will.

Drink should be answerable in proportion to our meat, for if we drink
more than serves to syne down the meat, and mix it there down, the meat will
swim above, and so shall not digest: drink may be taken more larglie with
dry solid meat, than with liquid humide.

They who have a hot liver, and a weak head, subject to distillations should
abstain from strong drink, chiefly after their meat, but these whose liver is
temperate, and head strong may take a lick of the best, quale Deus creavit,
after their fruit, quia post crudum merum.

It is not good to drink with a naked stomach, for presently it runs through
the body to the nerves, whom it debilitateth, and makes the body the more
subject to cold diseases, as the gout, paralyse, trembling, and such like: It
is also troublesome to the digestion to drink between mealles, for it
hinders the same, as water in a pot, stays the boiling of it: because while
the concoction is making in the stomach, the mouth of it is closed: hence is it
that men much subject to companionry, and so to extraordinary drinking, finds
their meat still rowing up and down, some for their ease are forced to cast
it: It is not good to drink when bedtime draws near, for readily it moves
the theume to fall down, except it were of water after too much wine, eiat
supper, or before, and that to hinder distillations. It follows to speak in
particulare of drink, and first of wine, as best.

Of Wine.
Wine is very profitable for the use of man, it stirs up the natural heat
and fortifyeth it, and so procures the appetite, helps the digestion,
ingenders good blood, purifies the troubled, opens the passages, gives good
color, cleanses the brain, sharpeneth the wit, makes the spirits subtle,
and rejoices the heart of man, as says the Psalmist, if so be it be taken
moderatly.

Wine is of five fold difference, the first is taken from the color, so it is
either white or red, yallow or tannie, and black: the second from the taste, as
it is either sweet, sour, or of any austere taste: the third of the smell
being of a sweet, heavy, or no smell: the fourth from the consistance, being
either subtle or gross: the fifth, from the age, as it is old or new: Of all
wine the red and thick wine is meetest for the ingendring of blood; next
blackish, gross, and sweet wine, to them succeeds white and thick, or gross
wine in substance and austere in taste, last of all white thin small wine: Wine
as it is agreeable to phlegmaticks, so it is hurtful to bilious hot natures,
over old, and too new wine should be eshewed, the one because too hot, the
other because no heat at all.

The second drink is beer, which as it nourishes more, so is of a grosser
substance and harder digestion, than the wine, if it be but new made or
troubled, it causes obstructions, and swellings, it troubles the head, moves
the colic, gravel, and difficulty of pissing, specially if it be biting, if
it be too old and very sharp it hurts the stomach, and nerves, and ingenders
evil blood, wherefore it is best that is well sodden, purified, and clear and
of a middle age.

Of Water.
Although that water be the most simple sort of drink, and the most common,
yet because of least worth it is put behind.

Galen. proves good water by three senses, by the sight, being clear and
clean, by the mouth, that has no strange taste, and so not bitter nor sour
nor salt, but almost without taste, and by the nose that it has no smell,
adding thereto that it must be light in the belly, suddenly changed, that is,
soon hot soon cold, and that it does not pass through sulphurous mines or
suchlyke.

There be five sorts of water, to wit of rain, fountain, river, well, and
stank.

Rain water although according to the weight it be lightest, yet it is not
the best, being made of the vapors which does proceed from the earth, whereof
some be of the rivers, others of loches, stanks, gutters, standing waters, and
of the sea, as also of the exhalations of pestilent places and of dead bodies.

Fountain water is best of all, next river water, last Well water, the worst
of all, is stank water, river water is the better it stand till it settle,
fountain water the better it look to the East, and Well water that the Well
be not too often covered, but that it get the air sometimes.

Canon. 6.
After meat abstain from all vehement motion or exercise, all curious disputs
or careful meditations, discoursing of some good purpose, procuring laughter,
joy, and mirth, whereby the spirit may be revived, and the digestion helped. If
the great men of the country knew what good these sort of discourses did for
the health of the body, and the recreating of the spirit, they would with
greater avidity drink in, in their young and tender years letters, for the
better fashioning of their manners and forming of their mind. And also carry a
greater respect to Scholars then they do: and not study only to be well
versed in Arcadia, for the intertaining of Ladies, or in the rowting of the
tolbuith, for commoning with Lawers. So that they esteem more of a Page of the
one, or a pok-bearer of the other, then of any Sholer whatsoever, except my
Lord Bishop, or Mr. Parson: this frowning of our Greats has moved many poor
souls flee first to Dowy, and then to Rome, and from thence post to hell:
having received the mark of the beast that is a bull of his holiness to pass
Scot-free at Purgatory, not being able to procure the favorable presence, or
gracious asistance of any noble for his furtherance in studyes and advancement
in degrees, in the country wherein he was borne.

O what a shame it is to see a great Man without Letters! He is like a fair
house without plenishing, a goodly ship without furnishing to pursue or
defend: a Herauldry without honor, being less real than his title. His
virtue is, that he was his fathers son, and all the expectation of him, is
to get an other. No man is kept in ignorarance more, both of himself and men,
for he hears nothing but flattery, and understands nothing but folly;
thus he lives till his Tomb be made ready, and then is a grave statue to
posterity. Thus it is expedient to pass two or three hours after dinner, for
the well both of the body and mind: that you may know this the better and so
believe it the rather: Consider with me alittle the passions of the mind,
such as joye, sadness, choler, and fear.

Of the Passions of the mind.
Although we be often deceived in the decerning of good and evil, following
ofter the applause of the sense, than the judgment of reason, nevertheless we
seek always that which we think be good, and flees that which we apprehend
to be evil. Hence it is, that we are moved by diverse passions unruled,
according to the apprehension of good, or evil, either present or absent; the
which passions according to the consideration of the object either enlarges or
draws in the heart, in the moving thereof, they move also the spirits and
natural heat, so that the color of the face is suddenly changed.

From the opinion of present good arises joye, and of the good to come,
desire, unto the which choler does adjoyne the self, which is a desire of
revenge, from the apprehension of present evil comes sadness, and of the
evil future, fear.

Joy comes of the heart enlarging the self sweetly, for to embrace the object
that is agreeable to it, in the which dilatation, it sends forth abundance
of the natural heat with the blood, and the spirits, a great portion whereof
comes to the face when one laugheth, by the which the face swells up, in such
sort, that the brow becomes tight and clear, the eyes bright, the cheecks red.
An other part is sent through the members of the body.

Cupiditie or desire, and choler, does dilate or enlarge the heart also, that,
through the desire of the thing it loves, this, for to se^d quickly, the
spirits with the blood from the center of the body within, to the habit of the
same without: for the fortifying of the members that they may reveng the wrong
we have received.

Sadness, grief, or melancholy, in the contrare does in such sort, shoot up
or draw together the heart, that it fades and fails: This hinders the great
generation of the spirits, as also the distribution of these few, that are
engendered, whereby the vital faculty is weakened and also the rest of the
whole body shirps.

Fear causes retire on a suddaintie the spirits to the heart from the rest of
the body, hence the face becomes pale, the extremities grow cold with a
trembling through all, the voice is stopped, the heart leapeth as it were, and
that by reason of the great multitude of the blood and spirits, whereby it is
almost smothered, so that it cannot move freely.

Amongst all the passions of the mind ^oy is the most wholesome, because it
gives such contentment to the spirit, that the body is participant by a
simpathy.

The reasonable passions are called affections, but the sensual are termed
perturbations: the passions ought to be moderated, for Plato writes in his
dialogue, called Carmides, that the most dangerous diseases proceed from the
perturbation of the spirit, because the mind having an absolute authority over
the body, does move, change, and alter it in a moment, as it pleases.

We should then affection the objects in so far as reason will permite: for
excessible joys do so disperse the blood, with the spirits through the whole
body, from the center to the extremities, that the heart is wholly destitute of
his natural heat, from whence comes first a sounding, and by and by death,
of excessible joy, the Poet Phillippides, the wise Chilon, Diagoras of Rhode
suddenly dyed: And sudden fear chassing the blood and spirits to the heart
their fortress, frequently causes death, by the suffocation of the natural
heat.

Canon 8.
About the sixth hour the stomach requiring, return to meat, let your supper
consist rather of roast meat than sodden, because it nurisheth more, in less
bounds, it is lighter, and has fewer excrements: it should neither be too sore
roasted, (for then it is saplesse,) nor yet half roasted, for the superfluous
humiditie is not driven out by the force of the fire.

Here I can not pass by a great uncleanness of Noble men's cooks, who after
that they have sweeped the pot with the one end of their aprone, and the plat
with the other, they draw off my Lords meat with the whole, dirtie as it is:
and for to make place to a new speet, places the same under the droppings of
the vnrosted meat, interlarding their own grease amongst these droppings: and
yet the cook dare not be reproved, for he in his kitchen is like the devil
in hell, curses is the very dialect of his calling, he is never good Christian
until a hizzing pot of aile has slaicked him, like water cast on a
firebrand, and for that time he is silent: his best faculty is at the
dresser, where he seems to have great skill in military discipline, while
he places in the forefront meats more strong and hardy, and the more cold
and cowardly in the rear, as quaking tarts, and quivering custards, and such
milk-sope dishes, which escape many times the fury of encounter, and when the
second course is gone up, down he goes unto the celler, where he drinks and
sleeps till four of the clock in the afternoon, and then returns again
to his regiment.

Canon 9.
After supper it is expedient to walk a little softly, for the procuring of
the descent of the meat to the ground of the stomach: this walk ought to be
in pleasant fields, free of all unwholesome vapor, which may procure vomit by
the virulencie, or the filthiness of the smell: and seeing this after supper
does permit me to visit the fields, and take the air, come forth ye also
who love your health, and consider the same with me.

Of the Air.
Such as the air is such are our spirits, our humors, our blood, and our
members: for by, that it furnishes matter and nouriture to our spirits, it
passes so quickly through the body, that it printeth presently the qualities
wherewith it is endued in the parts of the same, and therefore there is nothing
able to change more shortly the body than it; so that from the constitution of
the air, the good or evil disposition of the spirits, humors, and members
almost do depend, we should therefore have a special respect of the same. For
to understand the goodness of the air, we would not only consider the first
qualities of it, whereof two are active, to wit, heat and cold: and two
passive, humiditie, and dryness; but also the second qualities, taken from the
substance, as gross, or subtle, pure or mistie, clear or dark: we may add
to these the qualities that flow from the state of it, as constancy, and
mutabilitie, equality and inequality.

A good air then has no excess in the qualities, that is, neither too hot
nor cold, moist nor dry: if it exceed this measure, it is better to decline to
drouth than to waknesse, for drouth is still more wholesome than rain: It is
also of a mediocre substance between gross and subtle, being pure and neat,
clear and light, constant and equal: such an air reviues the spirits,
purifieth the blood, procures appetite, helps the digestion, banisheth the
excrements forth of the body in good time, colors the face, rejoices the
heart, quickneth the senses, sharpneth the wit, and fortifieth the members, so
that all the actions of the body animals, vitals, and naturals are made better
by it.

A sudden change in the air is evil, but especially if it changes from
great humiditie and waknesse, to great heat or cold, for the rain having
filled the body with humores, the following heat does putrify them, or the
cold hindering their exhalation does procure their corruption.

A contaminate air with filthy exhalations, arysing from standing waters, dead
carcases, middings, gutters, closets, and the filth of the streets, (all which
if any where are to be found here, which argues a great oversight of the
magistrates, brings a great hurt to the inhabitants, and a great good to the
Physicians, Apothecaries, and bel-man) corrupts the spirits, and humors, and
engedereth often a deadly contagion or pest.

High places (as hills) are fittest for the morning-walke, because the sun
beating on them, first does dry up the vapors thereof; but low wallyes in
midowes and about fountains are most proper for the evening.

If Gallants! the health and welfare of your body, and the care of the
felicity eternal of your soul does not work in thee a detest irreconcilable
of drinking this time, which would be spent in wholesome walks, and holy
conferences, let shame deter you: For what I pray you is a drunken man, he
is one that has let go himself from the hold and stay of reason, and lies
open to the mercy of all tentations, no lust but finds him disarmed, and
fencelesse, and with the least assault enters, every man sees him, as Cham
saw his father, the first of this sin, an uncovered man: and though his
garment be on, yet he is uncovered, the secreetest parts of his soul lying
in the nakedest manner visible, all his passions come out, all his vanities,
and these shamefuller humors, which discretion clotheth, his body becomes at
last like a myrie way, where the spirits are clogged, and can not pass: he is
a blind man with eyes, and creeple with legs: Tobacco serves to air him
after a washing, and is his only breath: in a word, he is a man to
morrow-morning, but is now what ye will make him. And should our gallants be
drunk? the chief burden of whose brain is the carriage of their body, and
setting of their face in a good frame, which they perform the better, because
they are not distracted with other meditations, whose outside when ye have
seen, you have looked through them, yet they are something more than the shape
of a man, for they have length, breadth, and color, their pick-tooth bears a
great part of their discourse, so does their body; the upper parts whereof are
as starcht as their linen: they are never serious but with the Tailor, when
they are in conspiracy for the next device: they are furnished with jests, as
some wanderer with sermons, some three for all congregations, one especially
against the Scholar, whom these ignorant ruffians know by no other definition
but silly fellow in black, they have stayed in the world as ciphers to fill up
the number, and when they are gone, there lacks none, and there is an end.

Canon 10.
When the stomach is lightened of the burden of meat about three or four
hours after supper, go to rest, and sleep: and because a great part of our
life is spended in sleeping and lying, we shall make a little digression for
its cause.

Of Sleep.
Sleep gives rest to the faculty animal, and vigor to the natural: for
when the spirits animales are dissipate by labor, then sleep seaseth on us,
through the means of the natural heat, which in the digestion of the meat,
sends up vapors to the head, the which being condensed, and turned in a
grosser substance by the coldness of the brain, does stop incontinent the
passages of the spirits whereby the body is moved. Sleep ought to be quiet,
profound, and of moderate length: for sleep troubled with dreams, or so
light, that little stir does awake, or hinder it, is not good, long sleep is
worst of all, for it hinders the evacuation of the excrements, gathers
abundance of superfluities, makes the head, and the whole body heavy and
drowsy, the spirits dull, senses stupide, and the members lazy.

Sleep should be continued while the digestion be absolved, which in some is
sooner, in others latter: nevertheless it is commonly ended in six, seven, or
eight hours, when the digestion is perfect, then the belly does the duty,
the water is golden colored, the stomach is not bended with wind nor troubled
with evil smelling rifts, the body is nimble and quick.

Choleriks should sleep more than phlegmaticks, that their body by sleep may
be made moist: bairnes and old men, theu young men or of middle age, the one to
hinder thee to fast dissipation of their fluxile and humide body, through the
open pores, the other for the helping of his digestion: after great variety,
and much meat, sleep should be longer than at other times, as also after
heavy labor, and long travel. In your lying, the head, shoulders, and the
upper part of the body should be higher than the rest, that the meat regorge
not to the mouth of the stomach: It is not good to ly on the back, for by that
posture the neires are made too apt to the making of gravel or stones: the
vein cave, and the great artery, which do lean on the loins, made warm,
sends up many vapors to the head, and the excrements of the head, that should
be evacuate by the nose and the mouth falls down the back, it will do no
harm^ to ly sometimes on the belly, for helping the digestion, if the eyes be
not sor^ or weak: The first sleep should be on the right side, that your
meat may go down to the ground of the stomach, that the liver, lying as it
were under it, may serve for a chouffer to it, to help the concoction, then
turn to the left sid^ that the vapors gathered in the stomach may exhale, and
in end return to the right side, that the digestion being made, the chile may
be the more easily send to the liver, and so distribute through the whole
body. The members, the time of sleep, should not be straight, but some thing
drawn in, for the rest of all the muscules consists in a moderate contraction.
It is not good to sleep with an empty stomach, or after any heavy, or sore
work for the body is thereby dried, and becomes lean.

And because procreation is a thing most necessary for the preserving of
mankind, I cannot pass by here, but I must speak of it, seeing things
remarkable in it.

Of Generation.
Nature careful of the own conservation, so it perish not, has given unto
every creature for this end a certain desire of eternity, the which not
being able to be attained to, in the person of singular things, it does
obtain it by propagation. Therefore the elements are preserved by the mutual
change of one in an other: the mettalles by addition or opposition, the living
creatures by generation: The generation of living creatures is by the seed of
both male and female, united in the matrix of the female, fostered and made
fertile in some kind, by the good disposition of the same: so that for
procreation there is required the seed of both, at one time ejaculat, or soon
after: A matrix of a moderate temper, neither too hot, nor too cold; too
moist, nor too dry: As also a convenient time of copulation, the which is,
after the three concoctions are ended, and this time is about the latter end of
the second sleep, so that thereafter the body be refreshed by a little
slumber, and that for the reparation of the spirits dissipate: The immoderate
use of this natural exercise does weaken the body, and hinder all generation,
and the inordinate does procreate weak and unable birth, by reason of the
seed which is not eneugh fined, or elaborate: this appears clearly in the
remarke of Burges, and Countrey-mens bairnes: the one, to wit, the burges being
begotten in the fore-night, while the father his spirits was lifted up, and
moved to such work, by the use of strong wine, spyceries, and other hot meat
being weakly: The other to wit, the Countrey-mans child being of a strong
constitution, while as the father wearyed by his daily labor, does delay his
dallying till the morning, ^t vbi aliquamdiu indulsit Veneri, vxor ne ingrata
videretur, ait Deus benedicat relliquijs.

Now as the CREATOR did finish his work after man's creation, so here I at
man's generation, beseeching thee, my Lord and my GOD, who made all things
perfect in the beginning, and man the most perfect of all: casting all under
his feet, to teach him his perfection by creation, and his dignity by high
vocation, that he may carry himself conform to the one, perfitly, shunning
all base deboshing of that divine impression of the Majesty supreme, And for
the other, thankefully in serving thee his Lord with all, whereof thou made him
Lord, and honoring thee in the ordinate taking, and moderate using of all
these thy creatures,

AMEN.
A PARTICVLARE REGIMENT ACCORDING TO THE COMPLEXION, AGE, AND REASON.
NOT having thought it sufficient for the preserving of health, to have spoken
in general, least any thing should seem deficient, I have particularized some
generals diversified according to the variety of the temperature age and
season, and first of the temperature.

Of temperature or complexion in general.
Complexion is a proportion of the first four elementarie qualities, made fit
for the natural functions: the which is either temperate or intemperate: A
temperature temperate, is a harmony of the four first elementarie qualities
justly mixed for the perfect acting of all the functions of the body: An
intemperate is, where there is always some quality or other surpassing, the
rest, of the which there be eight sorts four simple; where only one
quality exceeds the rest, as heat, or cold, and four composed where there
be two qualities excessiues, as heat and dryness, cold and waknesse
together: These are either naturail, as when they hinder not manifestly the
actions of the body: or vicious, when as they exceed so, that they hinder the
same.

A temperate complexion should be kept by the like, and the intemperate
corrected by the contrare, as the hot, by cold: the dry, by moist.

Of sanguineans.
From the variety of the complexions, flows the variety of humors, for the
temperament makes humors like to the self, so if it be very temperate, it
produces perfect temperate blood, and so it subjects all the rest of the
humors to the same, if the complexion be hot and humide, it fills the body
with blood, too hot and humide, so being hot and dry, it bredeth bile, cold
and wake, phlegm, and when it is cold and dry, melancholy.

A temperate sanguinean body is of a ^ediocre grosnesse, moderate in heat and
^umiditie, neither too hard, nor yet too soft, ^f good color, mixed of red and
white, ^he hair somewhat yallow and curling, ^ll the members proportionable,
the spirit is gentle, judgment good, manners ^weete, disposition merry,
carriage modest, ^ill, free and liberal, so that they are brave ^n person,
discreet, wise, peaceable, honest, ^overs of knowledge, courteous, gracious,
^ffectioners of dames, mirth, pastime, and good cheer: and because they keep
(as (...) were) the mids between the ex^reames, they are not readily sick.

Sanguineans then of a temperate complexion should flee all excess in any
thing, and every thing that is of an excessive quality.

Sanguineans intemperate are fleshy, rud(...)ie, have great veins and
arteries, of difficile respiration, the body is heavy and often weary with
little labor, the spirit simple, given rather to sottish follies than to
serious affairs, they are subject to many diseases, proceeding from the
inflammation of the blood, as fevers, flegmones, flux of blood, and such like:
they should keep a very strait diet, use cold and dry things, for the
correcting the intemperancie of the body, as in their broth, sicorie, surocks
lactuces, and the like, drinking of water aile, or beer, little wine, moderate
exercise, much sleep hurts, to preveene diseases phlebotomie is expedient.

Of Cholericks.
Cholericks has a lean body, thin and hoarie, dry and hard, the veins and
arters great, the color yallow, pale, or brown, the hair red or blackish, the
spirit quick, subtle, hasty: the judgment light, variable; the carriage
inconstant, the courage martial, so they be nimble in body, prompt in spirit,
hasty in all their actions, vehement in their affections, impatient, soon
angry, and soon pleased, ingenious in invention; but proud, bold, impudent,
vanters, scorners, crastie, vindictiues, quarrelous, rash, and vndescreete,
unfit to bear charge eithe in state or war, as unable to endure heat,
hunger, travel, watching, and other incommodities of war, their sleep is
short and troubled.

They should keep themselves out of the sun in an air cold and humide,
using cold refreshing meats, as by the forenamed herbs, fruits cold or
sodden, barley, prunes, melons, cucumbers, and to sause their meat, either
boyld, or roasted with ^he juce of grenads, oranges, and cytrons, ^r verjus,
they ought to eat much, and ^ften, to use little wine, moderate exer^ise,
eshewing the excess of Venus, anger ^r wrath, and all deep meditation.

Of Melancholicks.
The predominant humors in the body, gives still the name to the complexion,
^o they in whom through their cold and dry temperature, melancholy abounds,
are called melancholicks: such are of a body, cold, dry, rude, without hair,
having strait veins and arteres, the color is brown or blackish, the
countenance sad or trist.

Among all the complexions that are intemperate, there is none to be preferred
to the melancholic, provyding it contain it self within the terms of
health: for of all men the melancholicks are fittest to carry charge, the
sanguineans are given to their pleasure: The bilious having their head full of
quick silver, they lack judgment and deliberation: The pituitous are so
lumpish, that they care for nothing but to have their back at the fire: and the
belly at the table: so melancholicks are of all most fit: First, because they
do their bussinesse with due deliberation: Secondly: because they are quiet
and not babblers or talkatiues, doing their affairs without dinne: 3. because
solitary and retired, so that their spirits not being distracted, they may
think on their affairs the better, taking greater pleasure in the profound
meditation of serious business, than in idle toys. 4. Because they seem sad
in company, not taking pleasure in gaming, laughing, fooling or in idle
spending of the time, and yet they live very contented, when they are where
they may recreat their spirits, not having any thing, affords them greater
contentment, than to moderate their meditations, and to be employed in serious
matters, (it is agreeable to all men in authority, to have a grave countenance
and somewhat severe) 5. Because they are fearful when they see any danger,
not willing rashly either to hazard their life, honor, or estate, so they
interprise nothing lightly. 6. Because constant in their opinions, words, and
deads, for having past any thing through the alembick of reason they cannot be
brangled 7. Because slow to wrath as also to be appeased, except it be those
who has been first bilious, and now are melancholicks, they will have some
short fittes, smelling of their former disposition. 8. Because they are
commonly good husbands, and does not spend their goods idly. 9. Because they
are courageous, respecting their honor above all things.

They should flee the air that is gross and thick, choising the subtle and
clear, shunning also meats that are viscuous, windy, gross, melancholic,
and of hard digestion, choosing the flesh of Veilles, muttons, kiddes, capons,
partridges, and of young beasts, rejecting the old, using boylled meat often,
with burrage, buglosse, endive cichorie, but no cabbage, beattes, neippes,
oynions, sybouse, and no bitter, or sharp biting herbs, as also no beans and
pease: their drink should be white wine, or clear fine bear, moderat
exercise, and pleasant games: long watching is noisome, sound sleeping
wholesome, their belly still should be kept open.

Of Flegmaticks.
Flegmaticks are of color white or grayish, their face bowden or swelled in
some kind, the body grown, soft, and cold to the touch, without hair, the
veins and arteres strait, the hair white, the spirit lumpish, and stupide,
so they are slow, sweere, heavy, cowards, sluggish, sleepie, subject to
destillations, vomiting or spiting of phlegm, colic, hydropsie, and other
sickness proceeding from phlegm.

They must make choice of hot, and dry things which may correct their
intemperate complexion, as the air hot and dry, such like meats of the same
qualities, their bread of good flower, well hardened, mixed with a little salt
and annise, their flesh rather roast than boyld, being of easy digestion, and
few excrements, as capons, pigeons, partridgs, young conies, and kiddes, and
birds of the field, fleeing these of the river, as also swyne flesh, lamb
flesh, and Veilles, with all boyld meat, all fish, all sort of milk. Herbs,
hot, as sauge, menth, marjoline, hysope, thym, rosmarie, and the like are to
be used, but cold as lattuces, and pourpie to be refused, they should comb
well their head in the morning, rubbing it with their neck, striving to purge
the head of a(...) the excrements: too long sleep is naugh^ for them, and
always while they sleep, look they keep the head and feet warm.

The change of diet according to the age.
It is a thing most sure, that although man should do all that is required for
the keeping of his temperament natural, yet he cannot stay always in one
estate without alteration; he is first by nature hot and humide, yet with
time the heat and natural moist is so diminished, that in end he becomes
cold and dry: so that by process of time, the body of it self does change.
The Physicians looking to the most sensible changes, has divided the life of
man in five parts: infancy, bairnly age, youth, middle age, and old age.

The infancy is hot and humide of complexion, but the humiditie surpasses
the heat, and keeps it so in subjection that it can not kyth, it continues
from the birth to the fourteenth year: Bairnely age or adolescencie is also
hot and humide, but the heat in it begins to appear: so the voice in male
children becomes austere and grosser, all the passages of the body are
enlarged: in women the pappes hardneth; and grows greater, and they begin to
have their natural flowrs: It is from 14 to 25, which is the term and end of
grouth: Youth is hot and dry, full of fire, agilitie, and force, it is the
flower of the age, and is from 25 to 35, in it cholere or bile does reign, as
in the former blood: Midde age follows, which keeping the mids between the
extremities, is the most temperate of all, in it the force begins to
declyne, but it is recompensed by the gifts of the mind, which are in greater
measure than before, as discretion, wisdom and judgment, lasting from 35, to
49: And old age beginning there, contains all the rest of the life until the
end: It is the most cold and dry time of the life, by reason of the destruction
of the natural moist by the inbred heat, abounding nevertheless in humide
pituitous excrements: hence their eyes are still watring, their nose dripping,
and their mouth being full of water, they are still spitting.

The division of ages must not always be taken from the time: for some
sooner, others latter, according to their complexion, runs through all these
spaces, so the sangineans bear their age better than the rest who become
sooner old.

Seeing then the body does change the temper according to the course of the
years: It is needful to diversifie the diet: and because I am to speak of
infancy hereafter, passing it, I will first treat of the bairnly age.

Of bairnly age.
Bairnes are of a very good temperature: hence it is, that they agree better
with the spring than any other season, because of the temperate air; as also
with temperate meats: and seeing their body by the softness and raritie of it
is much subject to dissolution, they have need of much food, otherwise their
bodies in place of growing shall decrease and diminish, as witnesses Hipp.
they should not sleep so much as infants, but being stronger, they ought to
use exercise more than they: this is the time wherein they should be
instructed both in liberal and mechanic arts, that thereby both the body and
mind being coupled, Cupids darts get no entry, for they should flee all
violent exercise, and Venus games, because they hinder the grouth of the body,
and being subject to bleeding, they ought to eshew every excess, whereby the
body is made hot, stryving to keep a mediocrisie in all things. This is evil
kept by these who pamper their bairnes bellye with spiceries and strong
drink, which so dries, that some of them can never be quenched.

Of Youth.
Young men being of complexion hot and dry, should use a diet cold and moist:
for this cause we see they are most wholesome in the winter, because it is
contrare to their bilious temper: they should shun all heat either in the air
or meat, as garlic oynions, mustard, pepper, ginger, and all other suchlike:
also all strong drink, as wine, aquavitie, rosa solis, and the like: or violent
exercises, because they procure a fever, soreness of the head, and troubles
the spirit: in this age men are meetest for any charge in public or warfare.

This is the time most proper for marriage, for bairnes procreate of bairnes,
or old men are commonly infirm, either of body or of mind, but begotten in
the flower of the age, when the body and spirit are at the best, are found to
be most able for any business: for Venus if it be moderate, does not hurt
the^ as other ages, by reason of the force of their members: yea, they are by
it made more gallant, and lusty.

Of middle age.
Men of middle age ought to keep a more temperate diet than the former, not
declining so much to cooling things, because the heat of youth is past: so a
temperate air, temperate meat taken in less quantity than before, because
the body has left growing, also moderate in exercise, employing better the
spirit than body, flying all grief and sadness, because that age is most
subject to melancholy: they fall readily in agues, phrenesies, pripnenmonies,
pleurisies, cholere, dysenterie, and other such like diseases bilious, through
abundance of bile, gathered in the youth: and according as their natural force
diminishes, and old age approaches, they begin to find a shortness in the
breath to press them: for the preveening of these, they should keep a
mediocrisie in their diet between youth and age.

Of old age.
Old men should strive to correct their cold and dry complexion by hot and
humide diet: and therefore flying all coldness in the air, keeping them by a
fireside, hot meats of good and easy digestion are best, as capons, hens,
pigeons, partridges, veill, and muttoun, soft new laid eggs, and such like
cheer: fishes are not for them: spices, as ginger, cannell, mustard should be
much used by them: they must beware of overcharging their stomach with much
meat, for they may readily by this means chock their natural heat, being
now but small: it is better to eat often and little, especially they who are
decreeped: for they are like lamps, in the which the light is almost
extinguished, which must be interteined by a gentle effusion of oil, because
much at once will suffocate it, and too long withholding will procure the
evanishing of it: strong wine, rather old than new is fittest for such, and
therefore it is called their milk: it is granted to them to sleep alittle
after meat, chiefly in the summer, because they are commonly troubled with
night-watching, by reason of some biting vapors, arysing from one abundance of
a salt phlegm in them: they should keep themselves free of all the violent
passions of the mind, chiefly of chagrin and melancholy, living, joyful and
mirry, rejoicing all their senses with pleasant objects, their eyes with the
variety of pleasant flowers, and diverse colors, carrying still some precious
jewels in their ringes, and among others the saphere, the emrode because the
green or violat does conserve the sight best of any: Their ear with the
music of voices and instruments, intertaining them also with pleasant
discourses, flattering them in all, and contradicting in nothing: the smell
with muskue, sweet waters, and musk bals, and the taste with some dainty
dishes: But this too curious caring for a Carrion, will seem tedious to the
view, and troublesome to the ear of our young wenches, who looking to the
Mammon rather than the Man: and the wealthy estate more then healthful body,
has tied themselves to be helpers, and vpholders of the chivering and shaking
bones of an old man, but pleasantly pulling them down: the poor man
consenting: yea, assisting to his fall, these wagges hungry for young fresh
meat, long to laufe under a mourning weed, in beholding the piafing carriage,
and hearing the intysing; yea, rather ravishing discourse of a young Bravado,
of whose words they reap greater contentment, than ever they did of the old
man's deeds: A just reward for dotting Love.

Of the seasons.
As the vicissitude of the night and the day proceeds from the motion of the
Sun, from the East to the West, in 24. hours space, even so the change of
the seasons comes from his course, from the West to the East, about the
twelve signs of the Zodiac, making thereby the days longer or shorter. By
this approaching or retiring of himself in his coming and going, the Air
receives many diverse alterations being subject to receive the impressions and
influences of the heavenly bodies: for the Sun heateth and dries by his
heat: the Moon in the contrare cools, and humecteth, or makes moist; so
when the day is long the Air is hot and dry, and when it is short it is cold
and moistie, but when they are of equal length, the Air is temperate by the
equal force of both alike communicate to it.

The Ancients from the course of the Sun in the Zodiac did remarke sour
special changes in the Air, which are made by the quality and inequality of
the nights and days: therefore they have divided ^he year in four seasons;
The Spring, the Summer, the Harvest, and Winter, the which are divyded by two
equinoxes, the one falling in the Summer, the other in ^he Harvest, and two
solstice; one in Summer, and an other in Winter, equinox is an equality in
length of the night and day, which befalls to all the world alyke, when the
Sun is under the equinoctial line; the first is in March, the other in
September. Solstice is, when the Sun coming to such a point, stands and
cannot go forward, but from thence turns his course backward, the first in
lune, the other in December: This change in the air causes a change in our
bodies, from the which, according to the diverse season, diverse humors do
abound, requyring the changing of the diet, for this cause we shall insist in
every one in particulare, and first.

Of the Spring.
The Spring begins at the equinox, when the sun first enters into Aries,
and ends at the solstice of the summer, when he enters in Cancer, containing a
part of March and June, and all Apryle and May: from the equinox in the spring
till the solstice in summer, the day still grows longer, the night shorter,
for in March the night has twelve hours, the day as many; but from thence
till the end the day grows longer, but the night shorter.

The first sign of the spring is called Aries, that is, Ram, because he
punsheth (as it were) with his horns the borders of the new year: the sun
then in the mids of March beginning to recover his force, and display lively
his beams. Taurus is so termed, because the time makes for the coupling of
the bulls or oxen, for laboring the ground being fred from the rigor of the
winter, and moistened with the drops of pleasant rain: Gemini has the name
from the duplication: yea, rather multiplication of the grouth of the ground:
Pleiades or 7 stars are at the back of Taurus, and Hyades (so called, because
rainie) at his head. The Poets feinzie that they were the Nymphs of Bacchus:
they cut short often the hope of the labourer: for when they rise, the Sun
being opposite to them; and the Moon recountering also, if none of the other
Pla^ets do not interveene in hot signs, here follows many heavy raines,
which ^poileth the corns and fruits of the ground, (...) from time to time
some dangerous ^ayes, at the end of the spring, which are ^urtfull to the good
of the earth, has ^eene remarked, The spring is of temper ^ote and moist: yea,
these qualities are so ^empered in it, that it appears no ways ^xcessiue,
neither in the one nor other.

Amongst the signs of the spring Aries is more moist and humide, than hot,
yet ^emperately, but in Gemini the heat go^th beyond the humiditie.

The spring keeps a midde temper bewixt the great heat of the summer, and ^he
extreme cold of the Winter, two ex^remities, wherefore it is more wholesome and
less dangerous, than the rest of the ^easons, although sickness be frequent
in (...), yet that proceeds from the multitude ^f humors, which the winter
has gather^d in the body: and now are melted by the heat of the season,
nature stryving to ex^ell them, such are melancholy, epilepsie, the quinance,
but they proceed from melan^holicke humors, which the Harvest before had
gathered in the body, such are distillations, cough, and other cold diseases
flowing from the abundance of phlegm, gathered by the Winter: The proper
diseases of the spring are scabbes, pu^^uls, tumors, and gout, but these are
all without danger, and cause health to the body, being cleansed from all
vicious humors by such means: so the spring is the most wholesome of all the
seasons, for if it get a body with good humors it keeps it so in health. Yet
if it does surpass the limits of the own temperature, it is no less fertile
of sickness than the other seasons, so Hipp. says, if the winter be dry and
cold, and the spring hot and humide, the summer is accompanied of necessity
with many fevers, ophthalmies, and dysenteries. And if the winter be gentle,
warm, and rainie, and the spring dry and cold, women with children, who should
be brought to bed in the spring, do with light occasion part with child: and
if they bring forth without danger, their birth commonly is weak and subject
to sickness: for the bodies by the clemency of the air made soft, moist, and
open, receaues easily within the cold of the circumsisting air, so that the
children ^ong accustomed with the heat, bestrickken powerfully by the
coldness of the ^ire, dies in the belly of the mother, or after the birth not
dying, lives unarmed by nature, against all danger. For preveening sickness:
It is good to purge in this ^yme, and to draw blood: This season requires a
diet conform to it self in temper, so if cold in the beginning, it should
have the diet of the winter, and if very hot at the end, the diet of the
summer: ^he meats agreeable for this season are Veilles and Kiddes, fish
haunting about ^ockes, soft roasted eggs: fowls are not good ^hen, because
they are about their procre^tion: boylled meat is better than roasted, and more
drink, and less meat, than in winter.

Of Summer.
Although the sun be the father of ^ll the rest of the four seasons, yet
he carries greatest respect to the summer of any, it receaueth greater force
from his beams, and is made more like his father than the spring his elder
brother, or the rest that are younger: It is he that makes the love of the
spring, and of Dame Flora, to be faecund and fertile, in receiving the sweet
drops sprinkled by the spring in the bosom of the earth, Ceres does present
him with Corns, Bacchus with wines and Pomon with fruits.

Summer beginning at the solstice, when the sun enters in Cancer the 11 of
June, and ends at the equinox of the Harvest, the sun being in Libra, the
13 of September, from his solstice in summer, till the equinox in Harvest, the
days shortneth still and the night grows longer, and then they are of equal
length. Among the signs, Cancer is more hot than dry, Leo extreme hot and
dry, in Virgo the drouth surpasses the heat, Cancer takes the name from the
back going of the sun, being at the hight as a partane does, and Leo is so
called, because the sun is red and burning then as a Lion: Virgo by reason of
the earths infertilitie, in that season, the earth being dried by the heat of
the sun: The sun entering in Leo, the little dog begins to kyth, and
so soon as he enters in the first degree, the great dog is perceived: which
has eighteen stars, the little dog is called by the Greeks Syrios,
because of his great heat and drouth, the little dog appears a day before
the great, the first the 16 the latter the 17 of Iulie, while the dog does
make his course, the space of six weeks in the caniculare days, he augmenteth
the heat of the sun by his presence, ingendring many diseases from extreme
heat, for the moderating of this heat, the LORD has appointed certain North
winds, very gentle, called Etesias, that is yearly, because they appear
ordinarily about the rising of the dog, and continue from three hours in the
morning till night daily.

The heat of the summer is so great, that it not only dries the body, but
also pearcing through the skin, it dissolveth not only the humor between the
hide and the flesh; but also the spirits: so it weakneth the body, and
ingendereth much bilious blood, from the which flows vomiting of bile upward,
and dysenterie from bile downward: This time would be enterteined by
refreshing things, as a cooling air, and cold meats, using much purpie,
^actuces, endive, sourocks, and other herbs, both in broth and sallad, eating
rather boiled than roasted, having for sause vinegar, the juice of sydrons, or
oranges, flying all spyceries: and because the weakness of the body does not
admit much meat at once, and the great dissolution of the same does require
great reparation, to eat little and often is best for this time: drink would
be taken in greater quantity, but weak in quality: exercise should be
little and that in the morning, and they that can not sleep, the night may
repose a little after dinner.

Of Harvest or Autumn.
Although Autumn has just reason to be sad, seeing his father the Sun to
leave him, and take his journey toward a strange country, and his mother the
earth to be sorrowful by reason of her golden locks which are daily fading,
and her pleasant laughing countenance that is changing to be unpleasant and
shaggring. Yet she may rejoice with her husband Bacchus, having through their
lovely conjunction brought forth wine, and by the help of Pomon many fruits.

The Autumn begins at the Equinox, and ends at the solstice in the
winter, conteaning a part of September and December, and whole October, and
November, from the beginning the day still shortneth, and the night grows
long, for in September the day and the night has each of them twelve hours,
but from thence the day diminishes, and the night grows longer. Amongst the
signs Libra is more hot than cold: Scorpion is very hot and dry: Sagittarius
is more cold than dry. Libra is so called, because the night and day are in
equal balance: and Scorpion by reason of the biting of the cold subtle air,
as a scorpion, making the earth dry and cold. And Sagittarius, while by the
shooting of his arrows, he makes as it were the ground and all things dead.
In Libra, Boots a sign with 22 stars, whereof the ehiefe is Arcturus, is
remarked: The Harvest is cold, in regard of the Summer, and dry in respect of
the Winter: it is not absolutely hot or dry, cold or humide, and so not
temperate, as is the spring: for there is not only found an inequality in the
whole season, but also in one day, which is now warm now cold, as at noone it
is hot, at night it is cold: This inconstancy causes diverse diseases
inconstant and dangerous, by the production of humors of inequall temper,
through the cold it hinders the dissipation of the cholere, engendered in the
summer, by the which it causes a change of the same bile in melancholy, which
is not absolutely cold and and dry, but of inequall temper, being more dry than
cold: so we see sundry diseases of the summer to be revived by it, and many
severs, quartanes, and erratiques, inflation of the ratte, hydropsies,
lienteries, sciatiques, passions, ashmatiques, epiplespies, and others, the
quartanes, proceeds from a black melancholious blood which then abounds: the
erratique ^evers of the inequall temperature of the air, the swelling of the
melt, of the abundance of the melancholic humor: for the preveening of their
maladies, it is good to purge this season: we ought to shun the cold air of
the morning and evening: meats of moderate temper should be used, taking more
meat in summer, but less drink and stronger.

The Winter.
It is no wonder to see the winter still weeping because of his far distance
from the Sun his father, regrating still his mother Vestas case, droupping
for her husband Titans long absence, who carries on her head a white veil in
place of her dainty coffe, flowred with roses, and winter with his tears does
pavie the ground with pleasant cristall, but seeing the same tramped under
foot, renewing his tears, he turns all into mire and clay. The winter
begins at the solstice, which is in it, when the sun enters in
Capricorn, and finisheth at the equinox in the spring, when the sun
begins to enter into Aries, it contains three signs, Capricornus,
Aquarius, and Pisces, a part of December and March, but whole Ianuar, and
Februar, from the beginning of winter to the end the days grow longer, the
night shorter, at the end they are of equal length, being the equinox:
Capricorn is more cold than humide: Aquarius is both cold and moist extreme:
Pisces is more wakthan cold. Orion kytheth his whole force in the beginning of
winter, who affraighteth much the Seamen, moving still storms at his rising.
The most frequent diseases of the winter, according to Hipp. are the pleurisy,
and peripneumonie, because the instruments of respiration are hurt by the
coldness of the air, it moves also destillations by the nose, rheumes,
cough, pain of the breast, side, loins, head, dissiues and apoplexies, when
the head is full: for to preveene these we ought to cover well the body, but
especially the head, breast, and feet, and use hot meats and dry: Salt meat
and venison is better now than in any other season: roasted meat is better than
boiled, spices now are good, and hot herbs; more meat may be taken now than
in summer, but not so often, and less drink than meat, but strong, because
the humiditie of the season, and long sleep does moysten the body much.



A REGIMENT FOR WOMEN WITH CHILD, BAIRNES, AND NOVRSES.
THE good Gardner has not only a care of the impe and tree; but also of the
seed which kyths by his careful choosing, and laboring of the ground for
this end. At whose example, (that this my work should not be manck in any
thing) I have made digression containing the safe keeping, and right governing
of the ground, wherein man his seed is sown.

Women with child are likned to one bearing a weighty burden, by a small
thread tied to their hands, who going, softly, and warily may happily bring
their burden to the purposed place: but if they be agitate by any inordinate
or violent motion, easily their burden partly by the weight, and partly by
reason of the small string will fall to the ground: so it sareth with them, for
if they move violently, or suffer agitation either in a Coach or chariot, or by
any other sort of ryding, or if they be troubled suddenly by the passions of
the mind, or use evil food, smell evil savoured things, behold things
fearful, a sudden impression of these being first in the spirits, next in
the blood and last by these in the tender body of the child, the knittings
breaking, they readily are brought to bed before time.

For this end let them have a care to keep a moderat diet in all things, using
good and nourishing meats, being more sparing in the first month then
afterward, because the menstruous blood does then abound, not employed either
for grouth, or nourishing of their birth as yet; it is better to take often and
little rather than too much at once: they should flee, all meats of a bytting
faculty, also all windy, all procuring either the flux of their water, or of
their flowers, as capirs, oynions, garlik, safrane, and strong wine: they
should use little drink, least the ligaments become, sl^brie, shunning
darkness, solitariness and melancholy. The first month should be quyetly
past over without motion. The second a soft gentle walking is good. The third a
little quicker. The fourth, fifth, and sixth admit greater exercise, and
stronger motion. The seventh, eight, and till half of the nynth, requires some
greater rest and quietness than the former, among these the eight as most
dangerous, would be quyetest and most carefully kept, from the middle of
the nynth till their birth, a more quick motion, and frequent, exercise is
properest for the furthering of the same. They should shun the company of men
the first month, for fear of a new conception, afterward they may be more
bold: also all passions of the mind, because by chasing the blood inward, they
choke the child, which often falls out in great wrath, or sadness. Too long
sleep is not evil, from the which they should awake quietly. They should
keep themselves from excessive cold or heat, and from the North and South
wind, for both the one and the other do move a distillation, from whence a
cough, the which hastneth their birth before, the time flying always the noise
of thunder, and guns of great belles, and the like: and because that women with
child, either has lost all appetite, or are troubled with an inordinate, as a
desire to eat strange things, as also with a pain in the stomach, gnawof the
heart, great spitting, short breath, sore head, swelling in the legs, and an
universal heaviness through the whole body, proceeding from the suppression of
their flowers, (yet there be some so full of blood, who has them, the first
months, others all the time) least these and the like by weakening of the
mother, do precipitate both mother and bairne in hazard of death: it is better
to purge these vicious humors, than to suffer such manifest dangers. The
properest time for purging, according to Hipp. is from the fourth month to the
seveneh; for the child (says Galen.) is tied to the matrix of the mother, as
the fruits are to the trees, the fruits new budded out have the stalk so
tender that little shaking will make them fall, but being with time more
firmly tied to, they are not so shortly broken, till the time of their
maturitie, where they fall off themself without help; so women with child are
in less danger the fourth, fifth, and six months, then the first and the last.

Women with child should not be bled, except in a great necessity, least the
bairne by bleeding, frustrate of his food, be forced to break forth before
the time to look for meat; yet there be some women who are so full of blood,
that except you draw blood of them, they will chocke the child in their belly,
of such blood may be taken once or twice.

Women with child should cast away their buistes, which they use, to keep them
small about the middle, and that so soon as they find their belly to swell:
for they hinder the grouth of the child, and constrains it often to come
forth before the time. Whosoever has of custom to part with child, through
the moistness of their bairne-bed, let them wear about their neck the Eagle
stone, called by the Greeks Aetites, applying this plaster over the belly and
the loins.

R. Gallarum nucum cupress. sanguin. drac. balaust. myrtill. rosar. an drag. 1
ss. mastic. myrrh. an drag. 11 thuris hypocistid. acaciae. gummi arab. bol.
armen. an drag. 1. camphor. scrup. ss. ladan. vnc. ss. terebinth. venet. 11
picis navalis. vuc. 11 cerae. q. s. fiat emplastrum secundum artem extendatur
super alutam ad praefatum vsum: If the passage of the belly be stopped (as
often it falls out) the last months, the trypes being straitted by the
matrix, let them use broth of barley, malves, beetes, and mircurial.

Of their government, the time of their birth, and after the same.
There be three things required to a natural birth, the first a-like
fordwardnesse both in the mother and the child: so the child requiring more
meat than the mother can afford, and greater liberty to take the air, he
tares with his hands and feet his thin membranous sheettes: the matrix
again wearied of its burden, does contract the self, for the expelling of it:
Now if any of these be inlacking, their birth is not without danger: for if
the whole action be imposed on the mother, as it falls when the child is
dead, or very weak, it is with great pain, which sometimes brings death:
and if the child get all the business to do, by reason of the mothers
weakness, it is of no less hazard. The second is a due form, which Hipp.
describes in his first book de morbis mulierum, and in his book de natura
pueri, in these words: A child (says he) if the birth be natural comes
forth headlong, and he gives the reason in an other place of this, because
the parts above the middle are heavier than beneath it: Moreover if the feet
come first forth, they in stretching of themselves should stop the passage
to the rest of the body: so the custom of the Ancients was, (as reports
Plinius in seven books of his natural history,) and is now also to carry the
dead with their feet formest, because that death is contrary to life. The
third thing required, is, that it be quick, easy, and without great pain or
many symptoms.

The time of birth.
Nature (says Arist.) has set down a certaime term and time of birth almost
to all the creatures, only man has diverse times: so the dove has her mouthly
birth: the bitch keeps still four month: the mare nine month, the Elephant
two year: only woman changes, having for term the 7 8. 9. or 10 months: the
first is the seventh, before which no child can be lively: the next is the
eight, in the which, according to Hipp. and other Physicians are not lively:
the nynth is the mostnaturall, and best of all: the tenth and eleventh in the
first days are lively also, although that birth does not fall often forth in
them.

Now that women be not troubled before the time, remarke here the signs of
birth approaching, these are, a pain from the navell to the secret parts going
about to the loins or small of the back; a descent of the bairn-bed causing a
swelling about the privy members, a redness of the face: the mouth of the
matrix open and straight, and in the entry of it there is found a lump about
the greatness of an egg a shivering through the whole body, and in end a
certain liquor issues forth: first in little quantity then more larglie:
and lastly there flows a watrie blood if it be a femall child, but pure, if
a man child.

There are three things to be remarked about the time of the birth. The first,
that the traveling woman be not burdened with too much meat, for thereby the
natural heat is drawn from the matrix to the stomach. Secondly that the
Mid-wyfe do not handle roughly, the bairn-bed of these who are long in
traveling, but gently their hands being oynted with oil: Thirdly that the
woman be not troubled, till the foresaid signs appear, especialy the
straightness of the mouth of the matrix, and the eshuing of these humidities.
These appearing, let her so be placed that her loins be free, le^ning most on
her back and shoulders, her heeeles be bowed inward toward her buttoks being
lifted up, and that her thighs be so far asunder as possible they can. Thus
let her lean rather than sit, holden up behind by a chair, or the bedside.
Others standing do bring forth their birth leaning to their hands, fastened to
an hold. This time if the air of the chamber be too warm, it must be
refreshed by opening of the windows, least they faint. And when the pain
returns, the mouth of the matrix being open, let her who is traveling
contain her breath, keeping her mouth and nose fast, and press downe-ward
with all her power, the Midd-wyfe softly with her hands helping her by pressing
also from the navell downward, desisting when the matrix begins to close,
least they travel in vain.

The child should be received by the midwife in a soft small and warm
linen cloth, and that quyetly, least any of the members should be hurt. This
done, the woman should be laid in her bed, in a dark chamber, with her
thighs asunder, least the issuing of the blood should be stopped, which ought
to be dried up by the often changing of warm clothes, least either by the
sharp biting, or the unwholesome stinking, it grieve the delyvered. It were
not amiss to ty a band of two hand-breadth about her navell, both for the
furthering of her purgation, as also from hindering of inflations from cold
wind, which readily then enters through the emptiness of the matrix, which
thereafter breeds a suffocation of the same: after her delyverie a drink of
the best in little quantity will do no harm: let her absteane two days from
flesh, using the while caddels, aleberries; and such like easy digestable
meats, and nourishing, for the repairing of her forces, eshewing all sudden
charging of the stomach, either by the great quantity, or diverse quality of
the meat: for her weak force does not admit that, rather come by degrees to
the former diet, shunning all sudden repletion after such an evacuation, it
is better to give them often and little, eight days being past they may eat
more largely, espec^ally if they nourish their child. They should absteane from
all kind of herbs, fruits, and legums, that is pease, beans, and the like.

If after her deliverie her pain continue, the Mid-wyfe shall search the
bairne-bed if there be any congealed blood in it, (as sometimes there is,
which being taken away the pain cea^eth) or any lump of flesh: applying also
to her navell the secundines or after birth yet warm, the skin of a Ram
hot from the sheep alive.

When they come to nourish the child, they should cause suck the milk of their
breast the first two or three days, by some old woman, that the old unwholesome
milk may be drawn forth, and better supply the place of it, twenty days
is the term of purgation after a man child, and forty after a f^mell, the
which space they should keep themselves free of the society of man, yet these
that are of strong constitution, will purge sufficiently in eight or ten days.

Of the government of the Child.
So soon as the child is brought forth, his navell should be cut about three
finger broad from his body, and then tied in the love part, and sprinkles in
the uppermost part, where the incision was made with the powder of bol. armen.
sanguinis. draconis. sarcocolle. myrrh. and cumini and then covered: bound up
with a little wool dipped in the oil of Olives, afterward see it be washen
in warm water by the Nurse, and oynt again with the foresaid oil, his
nostrils should be softly opened and his prick looked if the passage be open:
his eyes tenderly wiped, his fundament rubbed and handled, for the procuring of
the passage, to the clensing of the stomach from a part of the menstruous blood
lurking in it, drawn in while he was in his mothers belly, the which staying,
and not cast out, presently after his birth, or at the farthest the first day
does cause either death, or the epilepsie: It is remarked, that this issuing
before the birth does foretell a parting with child. For the purging of the
child from this black blood, it is good before he suck any to give him of
honey half an ounce, of fresh butter two dragmes, with half a scruple of
myrrh, and when the half part of the navell falls away, it should be
sprinkled again with the powder of burnt lead, and afterward wrapped in warm
clothes. The member are to be stretched forth, and made straight by the warm
hand of the Nurse, for now they are ready to receive any crook or hurt: The
child should be washen twyse a day, in the winter with hot water, and in the
summer with warm: neither must he be long kept in the water, then the
body becomes hot and red. Keeping his nose and ears free from the drops:
being washen and dried, let him be laid straight with his arms, close to his
sides, and his feet together in warm fine linen, then put in his craddle,
with his head, and upper parts highest, that the humiditie may fall from the
head to his lower parts, laid on his back, for that is the surer, then on
either of the sides, least his soft bones, and lightly tied, by weak bindings,
under the burden of the whole body do bow, or be disjoynted: but so soon as
his teeth do come forth, he may be accustomed to ly now on the one side,
now on the other: above his head in the craddell their should be placed small
twigges, or wands bowed, covered with clothes, or in place of these a little
canopie, whereby the wavering, and inconstant motion of the child's eyes may be
restrained and corrected, least by long looking too earnestly to any thing
a-side, he become glyed, or by inconstant wavering to and fro: of still winking
and moving, ringle sight, for a frequent turning of the tender eyes, turns in
end to a habit, which can not be forborne: so a child by often looking to his
g^yed Nourse, will become so in end, having imprinted by long custom a
habitude in the muscels, moving the eye toward the nose, which are stronger
than the opposite muscles, suchlike bairnes by often use of the left hand,
becomes more perfect of it than of the right.

Of the Nurse.
There is no milk so proper for the child as the mothers, being accustomed in
his mothers belly to feed on it while it was as yet blood, and now turned by
the pappes into milk: but when the mother can not, being either sickly or
weak, or lacking milk sufficient, or pappes competent. Let them make choice of
a Nurse, with these conditions following: first, that she be of a temperate
complexion, not subject to diseases, of good color, and proportion of body,
neither too fat nor too lean, but proper and handsome, with pappes of mediocre
consistance, that is neither too little nor too big, nor long and hanging,
neither over soft or hard, with the ends long eneugh, that the child be not
troubled in gripping them, with the breast large and great: Secondly, let her
be in the flower of her age, that is, between 25 and 35: one younger
abounds in superfluous excrements, and older is too dry, by lack of the
natural moist, and heat daily decressing: Thirdly, see she be diligent,
lusty, merry, sober, chaste, meek, not sluggish nor sad, no gluttoun, nor
delicate of her mouth, no drunkard or unclean, not choleric, or envyous, but
gentle and courteous: for the child does not follow so much the nature of any,
(except the parents) as the Nurses: Fourthly, that she be not of a long time
delyvered, for when they pass two month without causing suck their pappes,
nature becomes forgetful to furnish them matter for milk: Fifthly, that she
be not with child, otherwise the best part of the blood will be employed for
the intertaining the child in her belly: Sixthly, that her last birth be a man
child, because her blood is purer, and the excrements are fewer, and so the
milk must be better: Seventhly, that she has been brought to bed at the
time, for they who are before the time, are commonly sickly, or infirm:
Eighthly, that their milk be of an mediocre substance between gross and
subtle, thick and clear, of color white, of taste sweet, in smell pleasant,
and in sufficient quantity.

The Nurse should use much nourishing meat (except she abound in milk) and
of easy digestion, as wheat bread of two days, the flesh of vealles, kiddes,
fowls and birds of the field, pearches, trouts, solles, pykes, and soft roasted
eggs, flying all spyceries, all sour or bitter things, and mustard. Fruits
are not good, except prune-damase, and ^igges: nor wine, or strong drink,
neither the company of man. First, because dallying with Venus troubles the
blood, and consequently the milk: secondly, because it diminishes the
quantity of the milk, by turning the course of the blood downe-ward from the
breast to the matrix: thirdly, because it gives the milk an evil smell by the
corruption of its qualities: and lastly, because it lifts the Nurses apron,
and puts a kidde in her kilting.

Milk is deficient to the Nurse, either from lack of meat; great care, too
much grief and pain, or from any in disposition of the whole body, or of the
pappes only, if lack of victuals cause it, cause help her dishes both in
quantity and quality: if care, grief, or pain, cause banish them. Goats
pappes or yewes boiled with their own milk have a peculiar faculty for
restoring of the milk lost, as also wheat bread baken with kynes milk,
decoctions made with the leaves and seed of green finkle, or of anise and
milk.

The Nurse should have care to keep the child in a place of temperate air,
shunning the Sun, the night, rain, and all sort of intemperate season. The
quantity of the milk is to be taken from the age, complexion, and the desire
the child has to suck. The first month less, by reason of his inabiltie to
digest much: afis better for him: so he that is of a complexion humide sooner
than he who is dry: also one that is wholesome, than he who is infirm and
sicklye. Diseases also according to their diverse nature will change the term,
causing waine him sooner or later: suchlike the season, for in Summer it is
not good to waine him, for to give him solid meat in place of his milk,
which are not so easily digested: in like manner the region, for in a country
very cold he may be wained in the midst of summer, and in a very hot, in the
heart of winter. Also the sex for the males may be sooner wained than the
femals: because they have their teeth sooner, and have greater heat and force
to digest their meat.

He should be wained by little and little, by giving more seldom the pape
and ofter of other meat. And if he be not willing to quyte it, you must
cause rub the head of it with wormwood or Aloes or any bitter thing.

Being wained, Veilles, mutton, capons, henns, partridges, and birds of the
field are fittest for them: boiled meat is better than roasted; soft eggs are
never evil, so prunes boiled with suggar: they must abstain from oynions,
leekes, sybouse, garli^, mustard, salt meat, or spyced, old chief, baken
meat. Their drink should be small aile or watter, no ways wine, because it
easily hurts their brain and nerves, being as yet weak and tender, as also
adds heat to heat, whereby their natural moisture or humiditie is dried up.
The child should sleep much because he is of a moist complexion, and sleep
moisteneth more by hindering the dissipation of his natural humide substance:
he should ly on his back, till his members be strong, and he begin to use
stronger meat than milk: and easy rocking is best, for by it the natural heat
retires the self within, and the spirits become drowsy: but a toylsome
catching, tosseth the milk to and fro in the stomach, hinders the disgestion,
troubles the spirits and brain.

So soon as he awakes in the morning, you must have a care that his body be
made clean, from all the excrements, by the seidge below, and by purging the
head above at the nose, washing his mouth, ears and eyes, and combing of his
head, both for the lightning of the same and making of the hair pleasant and
fair.

And having attained to the age of five years, send him to the School, where
he may with the elements of knowledge, be informed in the rudiments of
piety, that is, taught to know love, fear, and serve his GOD The neglect of
this makes them first disobedient to their parents, next shamelessly debosht
thirdly, spectacles of misery through their tragical end, or objects of
pity, having nothing to spend: our thriftie yea rather theifie parents now a
days, stryving per fas and nefas, by hook and crook to big a hedge of earth
about their children, either they live within this hedge a fiery devil, or a
silly fool. The frenetick fool (when old miser is gone to hell to bear
Dives company, who living, would not bestow a penny on the poor, or dying,
leave any of his goods for any public work, as planting of Seminaries of
learning, building of Kirks and Hospitals:) not able to suffer the heat the
hedge does make, presently makes a breach, in turn^ng his fathers cape (as old
as the King) in a silk bever, his two penny band in a thirty pound ruff,
his coat and cloak of the wyfes making, in some ris^ing silks and his doubled
with pan drop de sean cloak. His course pricks, in stoc^kings, garters,
roses, russet walking boots, and gingling long necked spurs, his prentise in
a page. Thus breach being made, where through the Gallant has past his body,
next the tempestuous wind of the vengeance of GOD, which the father had
scraped together with the goods, seaseth on the hedge, and enters the better
of the breach: this wind is, some mischeife befallen this Gallant in his
intemperat over night drinking as murder, or by his immoderate gaming at cards
and dyce, (the devils two special factors) as losing of a great part of his
goods: the murder takes his head, losing, takes his wit, so that thereafter,
as a mad man, desparing of recoverie, with both his hands he throws down
the hedge, and scatters the same abroad to every one passing by: thus my
Gentleman the last year, by the means of his gear, supposed a Lords peer,
this year being poor is a beggars brother, and yet these gentills are very
frequent amongst us: so for one lawfully begotten, and truly nobilitate, by
virtue there be twenty earth borne bastards, new startvps, by the excrements
of their mother the earth: if I were a noble, I should be ashamed of such a
mother.

The silly fool sits within his hedge, like a gouse on eggs, then
presently a cunning catching Lawyer marries his sister, who finds out some
clause in his evidents, by the which he alleges a part of the hedge to
belong to him, so my block-head gets up to hold up his hedge. The while he
is a struggling with his party, there comes one behind him, (a pirate by sea,
or a thief by land,) and he pulls down a part of it: next his wife at
home tied to him a duarfe, or an impotent, either of body or of mind, sometimes
of both, (forced by her parents) allured by his goods to match with him: yea,
(if without offense I may say it) holden like a Kow to the Bull, (not enjoying,
though a reasonable soul, the liberty of the pretty birds, unreasonable
beasts, who does make choice of their own mates,) makes of a silly ass a
horned sheep: Thus the Lawers chyding, the Pirates or thieves robbing, the
wifes whooring abateth the poor sottes little courage, and not prevailing for
all his toyling, he returns gouse-like to his nest again, where wringing
his hands, and hanging his head, his gear he sees spent, while he has
neither meat, drink, nor clothes of it.

Of the diseases befalls Children, and their cure.
Although that children be best provided in natural heat and moisture, from
the which the life of man depends, yet they are subject to many diseases.
Children that are all over scabbed, also that cast much phlegm and pituite at
mouth and nose, suchlyke these whose belly is very louse, if it do not
proceed from too great abundance of meat, prognostics a more constant health
to follow. The infirmities of babes, are pustuls in the roof of the mouth,
called the water canker, vomiting, cough, watching the night, fear in the
sleep, waknesse of the ears, and inflammation of the navell. And when their
teeth breaks forth, they are troubled with a itch in the gumes, fevers,
convulsions, flux, and when they become older and greater, an inflammation in
the wax kirnels disjoynting of the vertebres or links of the back, a
shortness of the breath, the gravel, worms, cruells, and other tumors in
diverse parts of the body. The pustuls of the mouth, according to Galen.
comes of the sharpness, and serositie of the milk which easily exulcerateth
that place, being as yet tender: Vomiting is from the abundance of the milk,
over-charging the weak stomach: the cogh is from the humiditie of the brain
distilling on the lights. night watching, of the sharpness of the vapors
that arises from the stomach to the head Fear in the sleep, is of the meat
corrupted in the stomach, which sends evil vapors to the head, from the
which aryseth dreams, procuring fear. The running of the ears is, from the
humiditie of the brain: the inflammation of the navell proceeds of the evil
cutting and binding of the same: The icth of the gumes, from the pricking of
the teeth preasing forth. The fever flows from the pain the teeth makes,
from the night watching, and from the inflammation of the gingives. Convulsions
are from the former causes, as also from the cruditie of the nurishment, which
hurts the nervous parts, which are not as yet strong.

The flux comes of the indigestion of the stomach. The inflammation of the
wax kirneles, and likewise the dislocation of the linkes of the back, are
from defluxion from the head, as also the shortness of breath called Asthma.
The gravel takes the origin from abundance of raw humors engendered of the
gluttony of the child, the which going to the bladder, furnishes matter to
the heat, to work on for the production either of a stone, or of gravel.
Worms breeds of the corruption of the superfluities of the body, and of the
great heat of the same. Tumors, Cruels, and the like, of the abundance of the
foresaid supperfluities.

Hence it appears that bairnes are subject to many sicknesses, which arises
either from the coming forth of the teeth, or from the evil nourishment they
have gotten in their mothers belly, or of the evil milk of the Nurse, or from
their evil guiding, by their mother and Nurse, or from their own gluttony,
or immomoderacie in soucking, drinking, eating, moving, or sleeping. For to
make the teeth come forth easily, and so to preveene the sickness that may
flow from thence, as fevers, convulsion and the rest: the Nurse must rub the
gumes gently with her finger, both for to open the passages and also to draw
forth the water that is within, bowing the child's head that the rheum may
power out, afterward oynt the same with oil of camomile, or sweat almonds, or
dukes, or hens grease, or with honey, or fresh butter. During this time, he
should souck less then before, also abstain from all chawing meat, not using
any thing that is actually cold, for fear it ding back the humor sent thither
to prepare the passage to the teeth that are coming forth, for the eshewing
of the rest of the diseases, let the mother, the child, and the Nurse keep
the diet that has been set down to them, and so I leave them.

Of conception according to the diverse sorts of it.
As conception does cause joy when it is found to be true; so being false, the
hopes frustrate, moves grief. For preveening these sudden changes, I have
thought it expedient to annexe here the marks of both the one, and the other.

The signs of true conception.
There be diverse signs of it which are commoun to it, with a false
conception: passing these, I will here make mention of the chiefest: as are,
the retention of the seed by the femell sex, after the lawful and natural
imbreacings of both the sexes. Next a contraction of the matrix, which breeds
a shivering through the whole body, and a coldness a-longst the back. Then
within a little space a smalnesse of the belly, especially about the nevell,
where it appears to be somewhat hollow, and when the time of her flowers
draws near, in place of them she finds her papes become hard and hot, at
the end of three or four month the child does move.

Of false conception.
There be diverse sorts of it, arysing either from a lump of flesh, in the
matrix, called mola, or from a wind or a watter: A mola is a lump of flesh
without shape, bred in the matrix, which either sooner or later is cast forth.
It is caused of a little portion of seed i^vironed, and almost chokked by a
too great abundance of menstruous blood, and so the spirits are not able to
sorme any thing: The marks are one in the beginning with a true conception, as
a stopping of the flowers loosing of appetite, loathing, vomiting, swelling of
the belly, and growing of the papes. But after they differ, for with a true
conception a woman daily after the first month grows lustier, with a mola
daily worse, after the third or fourth month a child moves, but a mola never
except, when the woman turns in her bed, and then like a stone it falls
from one side to an other: it moves often by this falling the pains of her
birth, without effect. It has moreover a certain pricking and grinding in the
belly; also being pressed by the hand, it gives place or way to the presser,
returning again to the own room, which a child or true conception will not
do. Such like the belly is much harder with a mola than with a child. In a
mola the monthly courses rusheth often forth like little pieces of flesh in
great quantity, and then the woman daily becomes extenuate, in end all the
body shirping, and the belly growing, it resembles an hydropsie, yet it is
different from it by the hardness of the belly by it, and in not receaving any
impression made by the finger or hand: it brings an universal lasinesse of the
whole body, with a softness of the members and trembling; sometimes a swelling
of the eyes and lips, a dissinesse of the head. A mola is cast forth
sometime after forty days, sometimes after three month: others keep it
two, three, four, or five years, yea all their life.

A false conception from wind or water.
Such sort of false conceptions befalls when the monthly courses are
stopped to a woman using the company of man, and her belly rises, the rest of
the marks of a true conception concurring, she not having for all this
conceaved any lively thing, but something correspondent in substance to some of
the elements, as wind or water: the cause of these is the seed of both the
sex infirm and weak, received by a matrix of the same indisposition, by the
which means the spirits contained in the seed, does evanish: it may proceed
also from a small skin, closing the mouth of the matrix, and so stopping the
issuing of woman's monthly courses, whereby the belly swells, and is bended,
upon the which there follows often the fittes of a woman travailling: this is
known to be the cause, when that the skin is cut, and the blood gusheth
forth, and she is fred of her pain: To try these sorts of conceptions, we
should try if the woman has been troubled before by corrupt, or unnatural
courses, (as commonly they do preceede) upon the which has followed
presently this swelling of the belly, whereby it differs from a true
conception, in the which the womb first is drawn in, before it be bended
forth: if the matter of this false conception be windy, it is known by the
resounding of the belly beatten thereon, like unto a drum: also by a pain of
the head, loins, back, and of the privy members. If water cause it, there
is perceived into the motion from one side to an other, the noise of water
catched to and fro; also a dropping of a serious watrie matter from the secreete
places, which is very biting, and of an evil smell, the feet, face, and eyes
swell in it, the whole body becomes pale, and they look like hydropicks, and
almost the rest of the marks of a mola are to be found here, from this disease
women become often barren.

The not distinguishing of a true conception from the false, has been often
troublesome and chargable to diverse: Such was the case of a Lady in Burdeous,
who after nine months careful carrying of her self, least she should hurt
her supposed child, and three weeks troublesome travailing, in end was
delyvered of a fart forsooth: Let any man who is feared for to be deceaved
either with pillowes under the kilting, or farts in the skirping, supply that
which has been omitted by me, for I hope not to be deceaved this twelve
months by my wife, and so farewell.

FINIS.

