CHRIST'S LOVE AND AFFECTION toward JERUSALEM.

Delivered in sundry Sermons out of his words and carriage when he came unto
her, as they are recorded, LUKE 19.41, 42.

Wherein are handled, 1 Christ's tears which he shed for Jerusalem, and the
matter of singular observation in them. 2 The will of God touching man's
salvation, as it is generally propounded and revealed in the Gospel. 3 The sin
and misery of Jerusalem, because she would not know the time of her visitation.
4 The Day of Grace, wherein salvation is offered to the sons of men. 5 The
worth of that peace, which Christ and the Gospel bring with them. 6 The sin
and misery of those who live under the means, and have the things of Christ
and the Gospel hid from them.


By RICHARD MADEN B. D. Preacher of the Word of God at St. Helens LONDON, and
late Fellow of Magdalen College in CAMBRIDGE.

^^^DON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sol^ (...) Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS, LORD COVENTRIE, BARON OF A^LSBOROVGH Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privie-Councell All increase of felicity and true Honor.
Right Honorable,
AS God, in the bestowing of his gifts on men, does not observe an
Arithmeticall proportion, in giving to all alike, but according to his
unsearchable wisdom, uses a pleasing kind of variety and a discreet
inequality in the distribution of the same, committing much to some, little to
others, as is plain and evident by the parable of the Talents Mat. 25.15. Luke
19 12.
, whereof some received more, others but one; so neither does he measure the
service and obedience that is done unto him, by the matter and quantity of the
thing that is done, but by the mind and affection, by the parts and abilities
of him that does it, taking in good part the least and meanest performances,
when they proceed from a sincere intention, and an enlarged affection toward
him, and are suitable to the gift and ability that is received from him: for, as
Chrysostom well observes Chrysostom. to. 2. in V.T. Edit. graecolat. Homil. 42.
in Genesis page 609.
, God respects not so much what is given unto him, as the affection out of
which it does proceed; whence it comes to pass, that the price of those
services which are very small in themselves, are much raised, and advanced in
Gods esteem and account, by the zeal and sincerity that is stamped upon them;
whereas on the contrary, for want of this, those actions which are most
glorious in the eye of the world, lose much of their beauty and luster; and are
little or nothing regarded with him. Consona^t hereunto is that of venerable Bede Beda. com. in Mar. ca. 12. No^ perpendit Deus quantum in ejus sacrificio,
sed ex quanto proferatur.
, who says, that God respects not so much the substance of the offering, as
the conscience of him that brings it; nor does he so greatly regard how much
is laid upon his Altar, as he does how much he that comes unto him, is able
to give; And S. Ambrose Ambros. to. 1. li. de viduis pa. 142. Vberior est
nummus e parvo, quam thesaurus ex maximo, quia non quantum detur, sed quantum
resideat, expenditur.
gives the reason, because a little portion out of a small pittance, is more
than a greater oblation out of a large heap, and rich Storehouse, none can
give more than he that leaves himself nothing behind, though that which he
gives be never so little; and none does much, that might do much more, if he
did set his whole strength and ability upon it. To whom much is committed, of
him much is justly expected Lu. 12.48.
, and he that has but little committed to his trust, if there be a willing
mind to lay it out for his Masters advantage, it shall find acceptance,
according to that a man has 2 Cor. 8.12
. In the old Law all did contribute and offer to the use and service of the
Temple Exodus 35.5
, some brought gold and silver, blew silk and purple, Scarlet and fine linen;
others brought Goats hair, and Rams skins, yet all were accepted of God,
and taken in good worth; yea, perhaps the meanest oblations of those, who out
of their penury, were willing to contribute something to the Lord, might find
better acceptance with him, than the offerings of those, who out of their
superfluity and abundance, bring far greater matters unto him. Our blessed
Savior, when he beheld how people cast money into the Treasury Mark. 12.42.
, and took notice of many rich men that cast in much, yet he preferres the
poor widows two Mites, before the large contribution of many others: and
surely there is not any one thing, wherein greatness on earth does more
resemble the great God of heaven, than this, that it is willing to accept of
the meanest presents, that are tendered by inferiors, when they proceed out of
a hearty affection toward the same; the consideration whereof has emboldened
me (Right Honorable) at this time, to present your Lordship with this poor
tender; presuming it shall find acceptance with your Honor, because it is
willingly offered to the use and service of the Temple, though it be but as
Goats hair in comparison of the gold of Ophir, which others bring, or as the
poor widows Mite, in respect of those larger sums, which others cast into
this treasury of the Church, in this learned age. And indeed I cannot so
over-love this slender piece which now comes forth into the world, as to think
it of more worth than many of his fellows, which are willingly content to die
in the ear, rather than to stand in white sheets, that they might speak to
the eye; much less can I set such a high price upon it, as to send it abroad
with letters of credit and commendation, that might bespeake and procure
friends where it is unknown. It was first spoken to a popular Auditory,
without any thoughts or intentions of further publication; and therefore it
studied nothing more tha^ plainness, and such a familiar expression, as might
best suite with vulgar capacities: and now that it comes into the open light,
and public view, it cannot well leave that native language which it learned in
the Pulpit, to frame it self to a style and phrase of speech, concise and
pithie, more befitting the Press: Such as it is I make bold to send it abroad
into the world, under your name and honorable protection, that it may remain,
as a pledge and testimony of that humble respect and service that I owe unto
your Lordship. It comes therefore unto you, not as a Tutor with instructions to
teach you what you know not, but as a Pupil for protection, that being
sheltred under the shadow of your honorable Patronage, it may find the safer
passage in those unknown ways, and places whither it shall travel. There is
none that I know, in our English tongue, that has gone before me in handling
that portion of Scripture, which this ensuing Treatise, that now comes to your
Lordships hands, is spent upon; and, if I mistake not, there are few passages
in holy Scripture more necessary and useful for all sorts and conditions of
men, than this is, for it is a discovery of those thoughts of peace, which GOD
carries toward the sons of men, in the primary intention of that course of
providence that he has taken for their good; and withal, a declaration of
that care and diligence, that should be in every one to serve this providence
of GOD in the day of grace, by applying himself unto him in the use of those
means, wherein mercy may be had, if it be sought for. And these meditations,
as they are fit for every one to think upon, so more especially for men of high
place and condition, because, like high trees, they are more subject to those
winds of temptation, which may breed in them a forgetfulness of both; whereas
by this means they might easily prevent those two dangerous rocks of
presumption and despair, upon which many dash and split the precious vessels
of their souls, and suffer eternal shipwreck: for he that firmly believes,
and persuades himself that there is such thoughts of peace in GOD toward him,
as that mercy may be had if it be sought for, he cannot easily desparie of
finding mercy, if with care and diligence he apply himself to the seeking of
it; and he that lays this foundation, that GOD will be sought unto for the
obtaining of those blessings which he has promised, he cannot easily presume
of finding mercy, while he lives in the neglect of those means that lead unto
it. And this is the principal end and scope (Right Honorable) which these
weak and unworthy labors of mine do especially drive at: If they shall find
that acceptance with your Lordship, which they promise unto themselves; and be
availeable (if but) to add one little spark more to that flame of devotion,
which already shines forth so brightly in your honorable deportment; I shall
think my self happy in the success of this enterprise, and make it my daily
suite and request at the throne of grace, that when you have finished your
course with honor here on earth, you may be gloriously crowned with salvation
in heaven: in the desire whereof I shall ever rest,

Your Honors Chaplain in all duty and service, RICHARD MADEN.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Gentle Reader,
THere is nothing more availeable for the rectifying of the judgment and
understanding of a man in the mysteries of salvation, than a right apprehension
and conceit, touching the will of God; to wit, what God is willing to do for
him, and what he wills and requires him to do for the obtaining of it. The
clear understanding of this, it rectifies a man's faith in matters to be
believed, either concerning God, or himself: it regulates his obedience in
things to be done, teaching him how to pray aright with confidence to be heard,
and that is, when he asks any thing according to the will of God John 5.14.
, directing him to walk aright in the way of life; and that is, when he is
neither misled in his way, nor negligent in his work, but applies himself to
God in a wise and orderly carriage, suitable to that course of providence that
he has taken for his good.

Touching this will of God, there is something delivered in this ensuing
Treatise, by which every one may take a true scantling of the good will and
affection that God bears unto him, by those warm expressions of love which he
finds in the Gospel. Much more might have been said in this argument, and
perhaps in time may.

Mean while, for the preventing of all mistakes in that which is said already,
be pleased (Courteous Reader) to take notice, that it is no part of my purpose
and intention, in any part of these following discourses and meditations, to
enter the lists of that dispute and controversy which is now in agitation
amongst the learned Divines of the reformed Churches, touching the will of God
in the decree of Election. The heat of that contention has already troubled
and disquieted the peace of the Church too much, and want of moderation in some
on both sides, through the indiscreet handling, of that unsearchable depth,
does still beget ill blood in the veins of that body, that should grow up unto
an holy Temple in the Lord. As in all other Controversies, so in this, the
right stating of the matter in question, helps much for the clearing of the
truth; and if that be first done, (I hope) it wilfully appear, that the
conclusion here maintained touching the will of God, does no ways border upon
that controversy; for the matter there in question, is, Whether the decree of
Election, as it is terminated, and pitched upon particular persons, be
absolute, and irrespective, or out of a consideration of foreseen faith and
perseverance: that is, whether God do equally will the salvation of all, and
have no absolute and irrespective purpose of saving one more than another,
before he look at different qualifications in them. It is freely confessed
Ames. Antisynodal. Amstelod. 1633. art. 3. and 4. page 130. Non est in
quaestione, utrum Deus vere sincere, serio intendat hominis conversionem; sed
an pari modo intendat ac procuret omnium, etc. quibus Evangelium praedicatur,
conversionem ac salutem.
by one that is no stranger to that controversy, nor any ways partially
addicted to the Lutheran side, but in his judgment and opinion strong enough
against it, that the question of it be rightly stated, is not, whether God do
truly, sincerely, and seriously intend the conversion of that man who^ he
outwardly calls, but whether he do equally and indifferently intend and procure
the conversio^ and salvation of all those to who^ the Gospel is preached;
implying, that both sides agree upon this, that God does seriously will the
salvation of all those to whom he makes an offer and tendry of it in the
ministry of the Word; and that neither part maintains any such decree or
purpose in God, touching man's salvation, as is repugnant and contrary to that
will of God which is revealed in the Gospel, but subordinate unto it. And when
he does positively, and professedly set down Ibid. page 250. Asfirmamus Deum,
non pari modo, and gradu, velle and operari antecedenter, conversionem eorum,
qui convertuntur, and qui non convertuntur.
the position and conclusion which himself and others hold and maintain against
their adversaries, he makes this expression of it, namely, That God does not
antecedently will the conversion of such as die in their sins, after the same
manner, and in the same degree as he does the conversion of others, whom in
time he converteth; neither does he work equally and indifferently in them
both, but that by an antecedent purpose, independent upon any thing in the
creature, he absolutely inte^deth, and so accordingly effectually procures the
conversion of some, leaving others, who lie equally in the same condition with
them, and are no ways inferior unto them, save only in that previous purpose
of special love, which he is pleased of himself, and for his own sake, to
show to one more than to another. And this seems to be the mind of those
learned Divines in the Synod of Dort Act. Synodal. art. 2. reject. erro. 6. Qui
impetrationis, et applicationis distinctionem usurpant, ut incautis, etc.
instille^t Deum, quantu^ ad se attinet, omnibus hominibus, ex aequo voluisse ea
beneficia co^ferre, quae per morte^ Christi acquiruntur: quod aute^ quida^ prae
aliis, participes fiant remissionis peccatoru^, et vitae aeternae, discrimen
illud pendere, ex libero eoru^ arbitrio, se ad gratiam indifferenter oblatam
applicante, non aute^ ex singulari miscricordiae dono, efficaciter in illis
operante, ut prae aliis gratiam illam sibi applicent.
, who speaking of the benefits of Christ's death and passion, when they come to
that distinction of impetration and application, they show, that they do not
simply and altogether mislike it; and therefore they qualify their censure
thus far, that they do reject it only in this sense, to wit, as it is used
to further and lead in this conclusion, that God, in respect of himself, is
willing to bestow the benefits purchased by the death of Christ, equally and
indifferently upon all; and that the reason why some are made partakers of
remission of sins, and eternal life, rather than others, it is not primarily
from any greater good will in God toward them, or any special mercy
peculiarly showed to them before others, but from their own freedom and
liberty, whereby they apply themselves to God more than others, in making after
that grace and mercy which is indifferently offered to both. From whence it
appears, that the matter in question amongst the learned, is only touching
the Decree of Election, how man is considered and looked upon, when God passes
that decree upon him, whether barely and nakedly, as abstracted from all
qualifications and conditions which are required in the covenant of grace, or
clothed and invested with such preparatorie gifts of grace, as do by virtue
of Gods promise, entitle him to eternal life. This question I purposely wave,
and meddle not withal in this ensuing Treatise, but take that which is
generally granted by the more moderate, and best learned on both sides: to wit,
that all mankind are capable of salvation, upon such terms and conditions as
are expressed in the Covenant of grace: that is, if they repent of their
sins, and believe in Christ, and that when God offers life and salvation to
all and every one in the ministry of the Word, he is truly willing, and does
seriously intend to bestow the same upon the^, in that way that he has
commanded them to seek it, and according to that course of providence that he
has taken for their good: that is, if they will apply themselves unto him, and
follow the counsel and direction that he gives them. And this, if I mistake
not, is the general doctrine of the ancient Fathers, the learned Schoolmen, and
many modern Divines: both Papists and Protestants, Lutherans and Calvinists,
there is none that is well read and versed in their writings, that can much
doubt or question the judgment of any of them, save only of those who follow
and embrace Mr Calvin's way, and build upon his foundation: and yet amongst them
(over and besides those that are mentioned in the Treatise it self) these two
or three testimonies may serve to show that many of very good note amongst
them, are clear in this point:

First, it appears by Musculus in his Common places, that the redemption which
is purchased by Christ, is upon some condition applyable to the whole world,
and to every particular man from the first to the last Muscul. loc. de redemp.
generis humani. Profitetur titulus rede^ptionem generis humani, genus autem
humanu^ co^plectitur non unam aut altera^ gentem, sed mu^du^ universum, omnes
videlicet totius orbis nationes, cunctos homines a primo usque ad novissimum,
etc. ergo quae hic in consideratione^ veniunt, pertinent ad omnes homines:
Scimus non omnes fieri hujus rede^ptionis participes, verum illoru^ perditio,
qui non servantur, haud quaquam impedit, quo minus universalis vocetur
redemptio, quae non est uni genti, sed toti mundo destinata, etc. Quod illam
homines reprobi non accipiant, neque defectu fit gratiae Dei, neque justum est,
ut illa propter filios perditionis gloriam ac titulum universalis redemptionis
amittat, cum sit parata cunctis, and omnes ad illam vocentur.
: that is, according to the report made in the general offer of it; for though
all be not made partakers of it, yet their ruin and destruction, which is of
themselves, does not any ways prejudice or impeach the general good will of
God toward mankind, nor hinder, but that the benefit of redemption may be thus
far termed universal, as that it is in some sort intended for all, and upon
some conditions appliable unto all: and he illustrates this by two similitudes:
First, of the Sun, which may be said to send forth a general light and
influence into all places, and all creatures, and to make them fruitful,
though many of them remain barren, because the defect and hinderance is not in
the nature of the sun, but in other letts and impediments which hinder the
effectual working of it: Even so (says he) it is with the redemption
purchased by Christ; that Reprobates and wicked men do not receive it, it is
not for want of good will in God toward them; nor through the defect of that
grace he offers to them, for it is prepared for all, and in the preaching of
the Gospel are all invited to it: and therefore it is not fit that it should
forfeit the title of a general benefit, because the sons of perdition, through
their own fault, deprive themselves of it: for as a Medicine may be said to be
universal, though it do not actually cure all diseases, because it has such
a virtue in it, that it would heal them, if it were rightly and orderly
applied unto them: Even so the blood of Christ may be termed an universal
medicine, because it has sufficient virtue in it to heal the sins of the
whole world, though it do actually cure none, but such only to whom it is
applied.

The other similitude which he brings for the illustration of this point, is
drawn from a custom which was used amongst the Jews, who in the year of
Iubile, proclaimed a general liberty to all servants, whosoever would, might
go out free, though many remained still in their former bondage, refusing the
benefit of liberty when it was freely offered and tendered unto them: even so
in the Gospel, there is a Proclamation published of a general pardon
purchased by Christ, which is offered and tendered to all and every one, upon
such conditions as are expressed in the Covenant of grace. The reason why many
miss of it, is not for want of mercy in God, but because they are wanting to
themselves, and do not seek for it according to his will.

Another Paul. Testard. Synops. Doctr. de not. and great. these. 298. Voluntas
antecedens generalis, est voluntas dandi Christum mediatorem, voca^di ad
communionem Christi per media apta et in se sufficientia, dandi homini
peccatori, posse si velit, servari.
affirms, that besides that special and particular good will which God bears
to some, there is a general good will which he bears to all, out of which he
was moved to send Christ into the world, and out of a consideration, and for
that, which Christ has done and suffered, to crect and set up a throne of
grace, and from thence to offer grace, and that by means which in themselves
are apt, and some ways sufficient to bring a man to life and happiness, if
they be not hindered by a careless neglect on his part.

And this is plainly delivered by another Author Ames. Antisynod. p. 256. ar.
3. and 4 Seriam illam Dei intentionem quae requiritur ad mediorum
dispensatione^, ab illa dispensatione non separamus.
mentioned before, when he tells us, that the serious purpose and intention of
God, which is required to the outward means, is never to be separated from
them; that is, in the administration of the outward means, there is always a
vertuall purpose in God Ibid. page 259. Non simpliciter negamus Deum intendisse
in ipsis fidem efficere, est enim intentio quaedam Dei virtualis et
interpretativa, fidem efficiendi in omni, mediorum exhibitione, quae sua natura
faciunt ad fidem ingenerandam. Et paulo ante, Non negamus Deu^ vel intendisse
efficere in ipsis quicquam pertinens ad fide^: qualiscunque n. cognitio ista
veritatis fuit, quam hauseru^t ex concionibus Prophetarum: pertinebat ad fidem
tanquam antecedens praerequisitum, et praeparatio, et Deus candem in illis
efficiebat.
of doing that, which the means in their own nature lead unto. And again he
does freely acknowledge, that those general helps which God affords to the men
of this world, and those inferior gifts of the Spirit that he works in them,
though they be but common works, and common graces, yet they do in some sort
belong to a saving and justifying faith, as previous dispositions preparing and
making way for it, and that Gods purpose and intention in the working of them,
is to afford them some more general helps, which they ought to make use of,
for their furtherance, in the way of their conversion: and therefore God did
seriously will their salvation.

I will add but one witness more in this matter, and that is the testimony of
a learned Professor in one of the Universities beyond the Sea Jo. Camero. S.
theol. in Academ. Salmuriensi Professor. tom. 3. praelect. in Misellan: de
satisfactione Christi, page 575. Quomodo pro singulis est orandum, eodem modo
singulorum salutem vult Deus, at pro singulis orandum est cum condition, etc.
Ibid. page 576. Ita describit nobis Scriptura, amorem Dei antecedentem, ut in
eo gradus quosdam inesse doceat, etc. respectu primi gradus, Deus dicitur
dedisse Christum pro vita mundi, velle omnium salutem, quatenus nimirum vocat
omnes ad poenitentiam. Ibid. page 584. Rectius faciunt qui Christum pro impiis,
sufficienter (ut loquuntur) satisfecisse docent, (quae mea sententia est)
quanquam sufficientiae vocabulum, mihi amplius quiddam videtur in hoc argumento
significare, quam multi arbitrantur. Jbid page 577. Qui hominum amicitiam sibi
student conciliare, ii movent quidem affectus, sed (quatenus fieri potest)
beneficiis, precibus, hortationibus, significatione amoris, etc. quibus si
nihil promovetur, penes eos est culpa, qui se flecti noluerunt: certe qui haec
omnia adhibuit, et extra culpam est, et partibus suis ita defunctus est, ut
nihil omisisse censeatur. Deus igitur, hominum more, cum hominibus et agit et
loquitur, etc.
, who thus comments upon those words of the Apostle, God will have all men to
be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, etc. so as men are bound to
pray for the salvation of all men, so does God will it: that is, not
absolutely, but conditionally; for whatsoever God absolutely wills, that is
always effected, and cannot be hindered by any thing in the creature; but what
he wills only upon condition, that may be hindered, because such as fail in
the condition by a voluntary neglect, do thereby hinder and keep away good
things from them. And thus should every one pray for the salvation of others,
not absolutely that God would bring them to salvation, whether they repent or
no, but that he would bless the means unto them, and work grace in them,
whereby they may repent and turn unto him, in that way of obedience, that
leads to life.

And again, he shows that the Scripture does so describe the antecedent love
of God toward Mankind, as that there are certain degrees of love to be
acknowledged in it, whereof the first is more general, and belongs to all, and
out of this love he sends Christ into the world, to pay a sufficient price for
the redemption of all, and by that payment to make them capable of salvation,
upon such conditions as are expressed in the new Covenant: and out of this love
it is that he wills the salvation of all, and so accordingly calls them to
repentance, that they might be saved. As it is amongst men, he that uses all
fitting and convenient means to gain another man's good opinion of him, and to
draw his love and affection toward him, and for that end, makes a
signification of the good will and affection he bears him, and shows himself
ready upon all occasions to do any good office for him; and withal, shows him
such arguments and reasons, such motives and inducements, as are in their own
nature apt to persuade him thereunto, he may be truly said to desire his love
and friendship; though he do not prevail with him for the obtaining of it, he
has sufficiently managed and officiated his part, without omitting of any
thing that was fit and requisite for him to do: and the fault and hinderance
lies wholly in him that was so inflexible, that no means could prevail with
him, or move him to embrace such a friendly motion. Even so the case stands
between God and man, in respect of that general good will and affection that
God bears to him: God speaks unto him, and deals with him, as with a
reasonable creature; and if he do not prevail with him, the fault is not in
God, or in the means that are used by him, but only in man, who will not
apply himself unto God, and serve his providence in that way and course that
is taken for his good: and he illustrates this by two similitudes: First of the
Sun Ibid. page 579. Sol 1ste, qui lucet omnibus, dormienti, aut sponte oculos
claudenti, certe non lucet, nullo tamen solis vitio id accidit: sed illius qui
solis beneficio non utitur. Ita Christus pro omnibus mortuus est, sed eos demum
illa mors facit beatos, qui vera fide eam amplectuntur. Ibi. pa. 585. Captivos
redemit quidam nihil minus cogitantes, pretiu^ numeravit, addidit hanc lege^,
si eorum quispiam libertatem, libertatisve authorem, aspernatus fuerit, eodem
loco esto, ac si (...) non foret pro eo persolutum, ita finge, etc.
, which affords and sends forth sufficient light to all, and yet gives no
light to those that wink with their eyes, and shut those windows against the
light, not through any defect, or want of light in the Sun, but only through
his fault, who will not make use of that benefit which is afforded to him; so
it is with the benefits of Christ's death and passion, which though they be upon
some condition applyable unto all; yet are they effectual for the salvation of
none, save only those who do embrace and lay hold on them by a lively faith.

The other similitude he uses, is drawn from a captive or bondslave, who has
a friend, who lays down such a sum of money for his ransom, but withal
adds this caution, that he shall then come to enjoy the benefit of this
Ransom, when he comes to acknowledge the kindness that such a friend has
done for him, and humbly sues, and seeks that he may enjoy it: but if he value
his liberty at so low a rate, that he contemns and despises that which has
been done for him, then it is so ordered, that he shall be in the same place
and condition with those that are not redeemed at all. Even so it is here,
there is a sufficient price laid down by Christ for the redemption of all
Mankind: now if any one undervalue this mercy, and make light of it, he may
be justly upbraided with this benefit: and though he cavil and quarrel that
he is not redeemed, for as much as he still lies in prison, yet will this
avail him little, because the reason why he continues still in prison, is not
for want of a sufficient ransom to release him thence, but for want of looking
after it: even so it is here; all men are by nature captives and bondslaves:
Christ has laid down a sufficient price for their ransom, but with this
caution, that the benefit of it shall accrue only to such as do repent of
their sins, and believe in him.

The reason why so many miss of that benefit, is, because they will not
believe in him, nor lay down their weapons of rebellion, which they have taken
up against him.

Now from all these testimonies, it is plain and evident, that amongst those
who are most opposite to the Lutherans opinion in the matter of Election, yet
many of them do so conceive of Gods purpose therein, as that it includes
nothing in it contrary to that will which is revealed, and generally propounded
in the Gospel. All sides grant, that life and salvation is generally offered
to all in the new Covenant, and that God seriously intends to give it to all
and every one, upon such conditions as are there expressed, and that is all I
contend for in this ensuing Treatise.

Now that God may be said seriously to will the salvation of any, there are two
things necessary:

1 That there be in God a real purpose and intention of giving life unto him.

2 That the conditions required for the obtaining of it, be some ways
possible, not by the strength of nature, or the power and ability of his own
free will, but by and through those gracious helps which are afforded unto him
in the ministry of the Word.

To have made up the Treatise full and complete, it had been requisite to have
handled this second point, which I could easily have supplied, out of some
notes and meditations that lie by me: and it was more than once in my thoughts
so to have done; but my second thoughts resolved against it, because the laying
open of that point, would require a larger discourse than could well have been
concluded within the bounds or limits of a reason or proof, (as here it must
have been) as also in regard that the former point only was insisted upon,
when that Sermon was preached. If thou shall receive any profit or benefit by
that which is here delivered, it is that only which I have principally
endeavored and aimed at. If I miss of my purpose, and the success be not
answerable to my desire, yet let it find that acceptance at thine hands, which
thou art ready to afford to all such as unfainedly wish thy welfare.

And so I rest, Thine in our Lord and common Savior, RI: MADEN.

REcensui librum hunc cui titulus est [Christs love and affection, etc.] in quo
nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur.

March 24. 1637. Sa. Baker R.P. Episc. Londin. Cap. domest.

A Table of the Contents in the several Treatises which are here handled.
In the first observation touching Christ's tears.
1 CHrist had the same affections with other men, but with a twofold
difference. page 4 2 Jerusalem was besieged at that time of the year, and in
that place where Christ begun to weep for it. p. 5 3 Four remarkable
circumstances in the weeping of Christ. 6 4 The reasons why Christ wept for
Jerusalem. 8, 9 1 To demonstrate the truth and sincerity of his love and
affection toward her. 10 2 To show the serious wishes and desires he had of
her welfare. 12 3 To let her see how unwilling he was to bring upon her the
deserved punishment of her disobedience. 14 4 To show the heinousness of her
sin, and the greatness of her misery. 16 5 To teach Jerusalem what she
ought to do for her self. 18

The Uses to be made of the former point.
Use 1. To weep for the sins of others, as Christ here did. 20 1 Motives
persuading every one so to do. 1 Because God is much dishonored by them. 20,
21 2 Because it has been the general practice of the Saints and servants of
God. page 21, 22 3 Because the condition of such as are in their sins is
worthily to be lamented. 24 4 Because it is a means to procure a place of
refuge, and a sanctuary for a man's self. 25
Use 2. To weep for the miseries of others, after the example of Christ here.
27 It more concerns every one to weep for the misery of others, than it did
Christ; in four respects. 27 Inducements to move every one to weep for the
miseries of others, drawn, 1 From the Commandment of God requiring the same.
29 2 From the sympathy and fellow-feeling that each one should have of another
misery. 29, 32 3 From the example of others both good and bad. 30, 31
Use 3. To reprove every one that does not lay to heart, and weep for his own
sins. 33 1 Amplified and pressed, 1 From the heinousness of sin, and that,
1 In regard of the matter of it. 34 2 In regard of the object or person against
whom it is committed. 35 3 In regard of the helps and means afforded to the
contrary. 36
2 From the example of the servants of God in former time. 36 3 From the
carriage of men in matters of the world. 37 4 From the end for which tears
were made, and whereunto they serve. 37
2 Helps to further a man in this duty of weeping for his sins. 1 To get a
broken heart. 39 2 Often to look on such objects as are apt to beget
penitential tears. page 39 3 To take the hint and occasion, when God makes
the heart in a weeping case, and then to close with him. 41
3. Motives inducing every one to weep for his sins, 1 Because Christ here
is so plentiful, 1 In shedding tears for the sins of others. 42 2 Because
God takes special notice of every tear that falls upon this occasion. 42 3
Because God takes pleasure and delight in such tears. 4 Because God will
recompense and reward all such tears as are shed for sin. 5 Because it is
better to weep for sin here than hereafter.



In the second observation touching the will of God in the matter of man's
Salvation.
1 Christ did seriously will the salvation of Jerusalem, even of that part that
perished. 47 1 Proved, 1 By reasons out of the Text. 2 By testimonies of other
Scriptures.

2 God does seriously will the salvation of all those to whom it is offered. 50
1 Proved, 1 By Scripture. 2 By reason. 1 From the generality of the offer,
which appears, 60 1 Because none but may claim salvation, if he perform the
condition. 63 2 Because no other ground of faith but the general offer 65 3
Because else none should be guilty of refusing grace. 69
2 From the sincerity of Gods meaning in it, which appears, 1 Because he
appoints means for the obtaining of it. 72 2 Because the means appointed are
such as in their native tendency lead unto it. 76 3 Because he is so earnest in
pressing men to the acceptance of it. 79 4 Because the offer is backed with a
promise of good success to such as seek for it. 83
3 From humane authority and testimony of the learned. 87



The Uses to be made of this Doctrine.
Use 1. To reprove such as charge God foolishly to be the cause of their
destruction. 90 2. To show the the extreme folly of such as are unwilling to
have life, when God is willing to give it. 97 Amplified, 1 From the generality
of the fault. 97 2 The strangeness of it. 98 3 The heinousness of it, being
highly displeasing to God. 99 4 The consequent of it, because it leaves a man
without excuse. 100

3 To encourage every one to seek for life, and salvation. 104 And that, 1 By
laying this foundation, that God is both able and willing to give him life. 106
2 By building wisely upon it, and applying himself to God in the use of the
means. 107 And here a double care is required, 1 To pitch upon the right
means. 108 2 So to use them as that they may be availeable for the obtaining
of a blessing. page 110

In the right use of the means it is required, 1 To use them as means, with
subordination to God. 1 Upon whose blessing the virtue and efficacy of all
means does depend. 110 2 To use them diligently, which is seen 1 In the
frequency of the act. 111 2 The fervency and intention of soul in doing of it.
112
3 To use them entirely, so as no means appointed by God, be neglected. 113 4
To use them seasonably, then especially when God goes before and makes way. 114
5 To use them sincerely in obedience to God, and conscience of his duty. 115 6
To use them constantly, not giving over before the blessing be obtained. 116



In the third Observation touching the sin, and misery of Jerusalem, in that
she did not know the things of Christ and the Gospel.
1 Jerusalem did not know the things of the Gospel. 121 Amplified by showing,
1 Who they were that did not know, not all the inhabitants, but the greatest
part. 122 2 What knowledge it was they wanted, 1 Not so much a litterall, and
notionall knowledge. 122 2 As a lively, effectual, and actual knowledge. 123

2 It was a great fault in Jerusalem, that she did not know. 124 Amplified, 1
Because she had more helps, and means of knowledge. 125 2 Because she was more
bound to know. 126 3 Because both knowledge, and want of knowledge in her, was
of great consequence. page 127
3 It was a great part of Jerusalems misery that she did not know. 128 1
Because it opened a gap to her future sin, and further punishment. 128 2
Because it made her senseless of her own danger. 129 3 Because it makes her
abuse the patience of God, which ever breaks out into greater wrath afterward.
130

The Uses to be made of this Doctrine.
Use 1. To reprove all those who are guilty of the same fault. 132 Such are
those who refuse Christ when he comes unto them, 1 In the Ministry of the
Word. 133 2 In the motions of his Spirit. ibid. 3 In the works of his
Providence in mercies, and judgments. ibid. 4 In his poor members. 134

2 To show that the circumstance of the person does much aggravate the quality
of the offense. 134 1 In regard of the place he sustaines 135 2 In regard of
the parts and abilities wherewith he is endued. ibid. 3 In regard of the
relation he has to others. ibid. and 136
3 What to think of those who know as little of their misery, as Jerusalem
did. 137 1 They are more secure and senseless of danger. 1 Than any Creature
upon earth. 138 2 Than the Devils and damned spirits. 140
2 Their danger nearest, when they are most secure. 141 Proved by the time when
they do most securely give themselves to sinful pleasures. 1 When God is
silent, and seems to wink at their sins. page 142 2 When the world smiles
upon them, and fills their lap with all secular contentments. 144


In the fourth Observation touching the day of grace.
1 What the day of grace is, and why every one must account it for his day.
148, 149 2 What be the particulars which are comprehended under this day. 150 3
The Lords day how that is to be husbanded and improved. 151 4 Seasons and
occasions of doing and receiving good, how to be laid for, and laid out. 152 5
In the day of health and prosperity provision is to be made against the time of
need. 154 Urged from the examples, 1 Of the Pismire, that prepares her meat in
summer. 154 2 Of men who mend the high ways in Summer. 155 3 Of Joseph who
laid up store of provision in the years of plenty. 155
6 The day of youth being well ordered, has a great influence into the whole
conversation. 156 Amplified by the similitude, 1 Of a vessel that long tastes
of the first liquor it receives. ibid. 2 Of an arrow that flies as it is
directed at first. ibid. 3 Of a bowl or stone whose motion must be ordered
while it is in the hand. ibid. 157 4 Of a tree which is dead in winter, if it
do not bud in the spring. ibid. 157
Motives to persuade every one to lay out himself in the day of youth. 1
Because this is the time of sowing that seed, that must yield a crop afterward.
page 157 2 Because age is not a time of seeking, but of enjoying comfort. ibid.
3 Because God requires it, as he did the first borne under the law. 158 4
Because it is as the first fruits, procuring a blessing upon all the rest. ibid.
7 Every one should lay out himself while it is called to day. 158 1 Because
the present day is the day of salvation. 159 2 Because many good purposes are
lost, for that they are not presently followed. ibid. 3 Because just with God
to cut thee short of thy expectation of a future day, when thou neglectest the
present. ibid. 4 Because it is Satan's policy, under the pretense of the
present day, to rob thee of thy whole time. 160 5 Because if the present day
be neglected, the next is uncertain. ibid.
8 The day of grace reaches not beyond the time of this present life. 160 If
mercy be not sought and obtained in this life, it is lost for ever. 161 As
Commodities that must be taken in, before the fair be ended. 161 As Manna
that was to be gathered only on the six days. 161 As the tree yields no
more fruit after it be cut down. ibid.


The Uses to be made of the former Doctrine.
Use 1. To exhort every one to lay out himself in this day. 163 Amplified, 1
By examples, sacred and profane. ib. 2 By reason. 1 Because account must be
given for every hour spent idly. 164 2 Because as every one deals with God
in this day, so will God deal with him in his day. ibid.
Motives to persuade every one to lay out himself in this day. 164 1 Because
the day is not yet past, and therefore it is a thing possible to be done. 165
2 Because it is no long time of seeking that is required, only for a day.
ibid. Amplified, 1 By the damned spirits, what they would do if they were
alive again. 166 2 By the devil, who bestirres himself the more, because his
time is short. ibid.

3 Because an eternal weight of weal or woe lies upon it. 4 Because one day
well spent, has more sweetness in it, than a thousand days that are consumed
in the pleasure of sin. 167 1 Because there is sweetness in the action of
well doing, 168. 2 Because he reapes the crop and harvest of it in sweet
meditations afterward. ibid.
5 Because it is the wisest course, that any one can take for himself. 168 1
Because the chiefest commoditities in which a Christian deals, are current
only in this day. ibid. 2 Because it brings with it present profit, and future
income. 169



Use 2. To exhort every one to set forward betimes before the day of grace be
too far spent. 170 Pressed, 1 By examples of such as have done it. ibid. 2 By
reasons. 1 In regard of the shortness of the day, and the length of the
journey. page 171 2 In regard of the nature of the day. 173 For, 1 It is of a
fluent nature, always passing and flitting away. ibid. As the Oil in the
Lamp continually wasting. ibid. As the sand in the houre-glasse, continually
running. ibid.
2 It is carried with so swift a sail, that it seems rather to fly, than
run. 174 3 It passes away insensibly, whether it be discerned or no. 174 4
The best part of it goes away soonest, as in wine. 175 5 None can tell how much
of it is yet to come, or how soon it will end. 176 6 If this day be once
ended, there never comes a new day for the finding of mercy. 178

3 In regard of the danger which does accompapany the delay hereof. 1 Because
there is an uncertainty of the day, and means of grace, how long they will
continue. 179 2 Because there is an uncertainty of the time to come, upon which
he depends. 181 3 An uncertainty of those good motions and gracious helps
which now he has. 183 1 Because the spirit will not always strive with man.
ibid. 2 Because delay in this kind, it makes every one a loser. ibid. For, 1
It may be he shall never have such a kindy impression and motion of the spirit
any more. page 183 2 The oftener that grace is refused, the more difficulty will
there be in the obtaining of it. 184 3 The more that the spirit is resisted,
the more weakly and sparingly does it work. 184 4 The longer a man delays,
the more hard and obdurate will his heart grow. ibid.


4 In regard of the folly and impiety that accompanies this delay. 184 1 Folly.
1 Because he had rather continue sick, than be presently healed. 185 2 Because
it provokes God to cut him short of his expectation. 186 3 Because the longer
it is delayed, the more labor and pains it will require. ibid.
2 Impiety. 1 Because in so doing he shows less care for his soul, than for
his body. 187 2 Because he makes God wait upon his leisure. ibid.



Use 3. An exhortation to redeem the time out of the hands of usurping
tyrants. 188 Likewise merchants, who are sparing and provident in hard times.
ibid. 1 What time it is that must be redeemed, and how. 189 1 Time past
redeemed by repentance, for the ill peny-worths that have been made of it.
ibid. 2 Time to come redeemed, by laying in for it before hand, that it may
come to his hands. ib. 3 Time present redeemed. 1 By setting it at liberty from
those usurping tyrants, 1. that eat up all the good hours of most men. 190 2
By laying it out upon those occasions for which it was given. ibid.

2 Motives to redeem the time. 1 Because what ever he lay out for it, he
shall be no looser, but an infinite gainer. 191 2 Because time is precious. 1
Because a little time is worth eternity. ibid. 2 Because none can have more
than one minute of time at once. ibid.


Use 4. To reprove such as lose and lavish out the time and day of grace. 192
Amplified, 1 From the worth of this day, which appears. 1 By the example of
the damned spirits. ibid. 2 By the tears of Christ. 193 3 By the damage that
insues upon the neglect of it. ibid. 4 By the rareness of it, because it is
not to be repurchased with all the Jewels under heaven. ibid. 5 By the
infinite gain and advantage that might be made of it. ibid. 6 By the nature of
the loss, which is an irrecoverable loss. 194
2 From the shortness of it, because it is not so long, that any part of it
need to be lost. 194 Which is further enlarged. 1 From the greatness of the
work to be done in it. 195 2 From the practice of some heathen and others, who
have been sparing and provident herein, and are still in matters of less
worth. ib. and 196 3 From the practice of those who are most saving and thrifty
in the husbanding of it, and yet lose a great part of it. 197 1 In mere
idleness, and doing nothing. ibid. 2 In doing that which is evil, and worse
than nothing. ib. 3 In matters impertinent, and upon the by. ib. 1 In wandering
and roving thoughts. ib. 2 In idle words and vain speeches. ib. 3 In needless
and unprofitable actions. 198


3 From arguments dissuading from the prodigal expense of time, and motives
inducing to prevent this loss. 198 1 Because time is all that can be properly
termed a man's own, and therefore by losing that, he loses all that he has.
198 2 Because there are many incidentall occasions that take away much of it,
even from those that are most careful in looking to it. ib. 3 Because God
takes a course to make men ashamed of this loss. ib. 1 By the example of
heathens, who would not lose so much time from the service of their Idols. 200
2 By the brute beasts, which know and observe their appointed times. ib.




In the fifth Observation, touching the things that belong to every man's peace.
1 What is meant by peace. page 204 2 What be the things that belong to a man's
peace. ibid. 3 How Christ and the Gospel procure and further a man's peace. 205
4 There is a threefold peace that comes with Christ and the Gospel. ib.
Touching peace with God.
1 Christ lays the foundation of this peace, and how. page 206 2 The Gospel
is a Charter of this peace, and the Covenant of grace, a covenant of peace. 207
1 Because it declares the foundation of peace that Christ has laid. ibid. 2
Because it offers conditions of peace to men. ibid. 3 Because it guides their
feet in the way of peace. ib. 4 Because it keeps the heart and mind in a
peaceable estate with God. page 208 5 It brings a man to the full fruition of
everlasting peace. ibid.

Touching peace within, in a man's own soul.
1 Christ settleth peace in the Conscience. 209 1 By opening the eye of the
soul to see that God is reconciled. 209 2 By giving a sense and feeling of
that inward sweetness that accompanies the estate of peace, and
reconciliation. ibid.
2 The Gospel works this peace of conscience, and how. 210 3 Christ and the
Gospel work peace of contentment. 211 1 By teaching a man thoroughly to deny
himself. 212 2 By an orderly reducing of all the powers of the soul into
their right place. ib. 3 By pitching the whole bent of the soul upon God. 213
4 By becalming the winds of distempered passions within. 214

Touching peace with others.
1 A general peace through all the world at the birth of Christ. 215 2 Peace
on earth, a blessed fruit of Christ's birth. page 216 3 The Gospel is the
strongest tie and obligation for peace amongst men. 217 Like Mortar which makes
the stones lie firm in the building. 218
4 None more peaceable than true Christians. 218
Use 1. To ingratiate the things of Christ and the Gospel to every one. 219
For peace, 1 It sweetens all other blessings. ib. 2 All a man has is unblessed
without it. 220 3 It is a blessing desired of all. ib. 4 God is styled the God
of peace, and Christ the Prince of peace. 221 5 It is a blessing of an unknown
worth. 222

Use 2. A rule of direction how to get peace. 224 That is, to seek it, 1 In
the right place, that is, in the house of God. 224 2 In the right way, that is,
the way of obedience. 225 3 Of the right owner, ask it of God by prayer. ib.

Use 3. A touchstone of trial, whether his peace be of a right stamp or no.
229 Signs of it. 1 If he have been first humbled with the Law. 230 2 If the
Word speak peace unto him, as well as God. 231 3 If it be wrought leisurely,
and by degrees. 234 4 If it be accompanied with these fruits and effects. 236
1 A greater care to please God, and fear to offend him. ibid. 2 A loving and
peaceable carriage toward men. 237 3 An irreconcilable war with all sinful
lusts. 238


Use 4. To show the woeful condition of such as are enemies to Christ and the
Gospel. 240 1 Because they are at war with heaven. ib. 2 Because if they
have any peace, it is a false peace, of their own making. ib. For, 1 It will
awaken into horror and amazment. 241 2 It is a sign that Satan has quiet
possession of all. ib.


Use 5. To show the happy estate and condition of those that embrace Christ and
the Gospel. 243 For the peace which they have with it brings four singular
privileges to them. ib. 1 Boldness and confidence in their approaches unto
God. 243 2 Freedom from armies of fears and doubts. 244 3 A sweetning of all
conditions to them. 245 4 A willingness to leave the world, and embrace death.
ib.


In the last observation, touching the misery of those who have the things of
Christ and the Gospel hid from them.
1 From whom they are hid. 246 2 How, and in what respect they are hid. 247 1
By the natural blindness and ignorance that is in them. ib. 2 By a voluntary
neglect of their own. ib. 3 By the just judgment of God. page 248
3 By whom they are hid. 249 1 By Satan, who blinds their eyes. 249 2 By
themselves, who wink with their eyes. 250 3 By God, who as a just Judge, gives
them up to it. 250 4 The reasons why they are hid. 251 1 By their natural
blindness, because they wholly depend upon divine and supernatural
revelation. 251 2 By a voluntary act of their own, because they will not see
them. 252 3 By God, because they are worthy of that punishment. 252


Use. A glass to show the men of the world the miserable face of their estate.
252 1 Because these are the only things that can make them happy. 253 2 Because
they are incapable of better things, while they are hid. 253 3 Because if they
be now hid, they shall be hid for ever. 254

CHRIST'S LOVE AND AFFECTION toward JERUSALEM.
LUKE 19.41, 42. And when he came near and beheld the City, he wept for it,
saying, Oh if thou had known, at least in this thy day, etc.


CHAP. 1.
The division of the Text, and the explication of the former part.

THe Evangelist having set down the joyful acclamations wherewith Christ was
entertained in his progress toward Jerusalem; Coherence.
he shows here, how he was affected with it, that is, that he was so far from
being lifted up with vain glory and popular applause, that while they sing, he
laments; while they rejoice, he weeps; while they seek by all means to
honor him, he does nothing but complain of them. So that the words contain
Christ's lamentation over Jerusalem, The Analysis or resolution of the Text.
wherein there are two things considerable: 1. His carriage and deportment
toward her, He wept. etc. 2. His words and speeches of her, saying, Oh if
thou, etc. Christ has words to speak to Jerusalem, as well as tears to spend
upon her; those silent tears wanted not their force and efficacy, to make
Jerusalem sensible of her condition, and to be more deeply affected with her
own misery; yet because there is also in a lively voice, a powerful kind of
Rhetoric, to work upon the affections; that Christ might the better prevail
with Jerusalem, he joins them both together, He wept, saying, etc. By his
tears he speaks to her eyes, and lets her see his love; by his words he speaks
to her understanding, and lets her know his mind; he works upon the eye,
which is the window of the soul; he works upon the ear which is the door of
the heart, and shows by both, how willing he is to get within her, and to take
up his lodging there.

1. In the carriage and deportment of Christ toward Jerusalem, you may take
notice of three things: 1. Of the action it self, what it was that he did, He
wept. 2. Of the time and place, where and when he did it, When he drew near
and beheld the City. 3. Of the cause why he did it, and that was for the estate
and condition of Jerusalem, He wept for it.

2. In the words and speeches of Christ, of and to Jerusalem, you may observe
two things: 1. A passionate and patheticall wish or complaint, Oh if thou had
known, etc. 2. A positive assertion or affirmation, But now are they hid, etc.
1. There is a passionate and patheticall wish or complaint, wherein Christ
complains of that was wanting in Jerusalem, and wishes it had been otherwise
with her, and in this ye may consider two things also: 1. The manner of his
speech, Oh if thou had known, etc. 2. The matter of it, or the object about
which it is conversant, and that is knowledge; which is further amplifyed, 1.
By the circumstance of time, At least in this thy day: 2. By the worth and
quality of the object, or thing to be known, The things that belong to thy
peace. 2. There is a positive assertion or affirmation, wherein Christ shows to
Jerusale^, what her present estate and condition then was, But now are they hid
from thine eyes: That is, because she would not see them when in the day of
grace they were clearly set before her, and offered unto her; therefore now are
they hid from her eyes, that she could not see them.

To begin with the first of these, to wit, 1. Christ's action: He wept
the carriage and deportment of Christ toward Jerusalem, and therein first of
the action it self, He wept. Some have thought it unseemly for Christ to weep,
as Lib. qui inscribitur Ancoratus pa. ed. grae. 482. (...) etc.
Epiphanius has observed long since, and therefore have blotted that word out
of the Original, fearing, lest it might somewhat abate, and take away from the
honor and estimation of his person; but that learned Father does well oppose
that rash attempt, both by the authority of the most ancient Copies; as also of
Irenaeus, a most ancient Writer, who from this place proves the truth of
Christ's humanity, against such as denied the same; and indeed, if Christ had a
true humane nature, it cannot be supposed that humane affections are unseemly
for him; and therefore the Scripture makes mention of other affections in
Christ, as well as this; and of this also in other places more than once; and
therefore it may not be thought unseemly for Christ to weep: as he had the same
nature with man, so likewise the same affections with him: only with this
difference, 1. That these affections of joy, grief, etc. as they were in
Christ, they were fully, and absolutely in his own power, he was absolute Lord
of them; nothing could force him to grieve, or weep, unless himself pleased
so to do: but these passions and affections in us, they are not wholly in our
own power, but arise sometimes in us, when we are most unwilling to be moved,
and stirred with them. 2. These affections as they were in Christ, they were
without the least admixture of any sinful distemper: natural and unblameable
affections, as the Historian calls them Euagr. Scholast. l. 4. ca. 39. (...).
, like pure and clear water: but in us, now since the fall of man, they are
like muddy water, not without some sinful distempers, intermingled with them.

The time and place.
2 The time, and place, where, and when he wept, When he drew near and beheld
the City; it was before he came into the City, and yet in such a place where
he might have a full sight, and view of it; and that was upon Mount Olivet,
from whence he descended and came down to Jerusalem; and it is worth the
noting, as one observes well, Lucas Brugen. in loc. Observatione digna res est,
quod Romani eode^ in loco, c^stra ponere, and eodem fere dic civitate^ obsidere
coeperunt, quo Jesus praedixit, ac deflevit, visae excidium. Vide Joseph. de
bello Iud. l. 6. c. 3. and 4
that it was in that very place where the Romans first pitched their Tents when
they encamped against Jerusale^; and about the very same time, a little before
the feast of the Passover. To the eye of the body, the city of Jerusalem it
might appear as a goodly pile of building, apt to beget admiration in the
beholders, as it did in the Disciples, which said to Christ, Master, see what
stones and goodly building is here Mat. 13.1.
: but to Christ, who beheld it not so much with the eye of the body, as with
that all-seeing eye of his Deity or Godhead; by which eye he looked on the
Inhabitants, and saw the inward frame and disposition of their hearts, and
their secret consultations, whereby they plotted and conspired his death, and
brought the guilt of his blood upon them: to this eye (I say) it appears to
be a Cage of unclean birds, and a very sink of all filthiness and
abomination, as the Historian. speaks Egesip. li. 4. c. 6. Omnium flagitiorum
sentina.
of it; and therefore Christ foreseeing that the sins of Jerusalem would draw
her enemies upon her, who in this very place, and about this time of the year,
would begin to incampe against her; there, and then does he begin to weep for
her.

3 The cause why he wept: The cause why he wept.
It may well be supposed there was good cause why he did it, else he would not
have done it; especially so and in such manner as he did: for women and
children to weep it is no wonder; it is both easy and ordinary with them to
put the finger in the eye, and to wring out a few tears; but for men to weep,
men that are wise, grave, valiant, magnanimous, as Christ was, it commonly
argues, that there is some more than ordinary occasion for it. And there be
four circumstances in this weeping of Christ, that show it to be a matter of
singular observation.

1 If he look upon the person, who it is that weeps, and that is Christ; and
it was not ordinary for Christ to weep: ye do but read of three times that
Christ wept in all the Scripture Estius Annot. in loc. page 877. and Hugo
Cardin. in locum.

Cresol. Anthol. sacra page 23 3. Flevit ad Lazaritumulum ad solandam illa^
afflictam familiam, quae alieno funere prope^ exanimabatur; flevit in cruce,
non ob dolorum suoru^ magnitudinem et acerbitatem: sed contemplatione
exitioru^, in quae Iudaei, et alii perfidiosi, contempto purputeo illo
sanguine, mundi pretio, debebant incurrere; flevit super ingrata^ civitate^,
cui pestum indies cunti, et maleficio contaminatae, infensi numinis telum
imminebat.


, first, at Lazarus funeral John 11.35.
; and that was to show how deeply he was affected with a sense and feeling of
death, and mortality, and other miseries that sin brought into the world.
Secondly, at the time of his suffering Heb. 5.7.
; He offered up prayers, and supplications, with strong cries and tears to
him that was able to help him: and this was out of a consideration, wherein he
did foresee, that the greatest part of mankind would be little or no better
for that redemption that he purchased at so dear a rate: And thirdly, here
upon the sight of Jerusalem: and if we may judge of this last by the two
former, it must needs be granted that there was good cause for it, because
those were both upon special occasions.

2 If ye look upon the manner of Christ's weeping, it will appear to be a
matter of singular observation; for these tears, they were not extorted from
him against his will, but they were voluntary tears, tears which he shed
freely and willingly, of his own accord, by his own consent, with mature
judgment and deliberation. Sad occasions they do indeed sometimes wring tears
from the sons of men, because in them the will has not a plenary power over
the affections; but it was not so with Christ, no tears fell from his eyes,
but only voluntary tears, such as were fully and altogether in his own
power, and therefore it is a matter of more observation, that he would thus
weep upon set purpose as it were, and by special choice.

3 If ye look upon the place where he wept, there is some thing in that; for it
was not in a secret Closet, like Joseph, who gets himself into a private
chamber, and there weeps Genesis 43.30.
: but it was in a public assembly, in a great throng and concourse of people;
a place, in the judgment of reason, no ways fit or seasonable for such an
action; and therefore why Christ would make choice of that place, thus, and
there to weep, it is surely a matter worth the while, to enquire and find out
the cause of it.

4 If ye look upon the time when it was that Christ thus wept; there is
matter of observation in that: for it was not in a sad and gloomy day of
humiliation, when every eye sheds forth tears, and all faces gather
blackness; but in a solemn day of public rejoicing; and that all for his
sake, occasioned by his presence amongst them, when there was such a joy
amongst the people, that some spread their garments in the way, others cut
down branches from the trees; the whole company going before, and coming
after cried, Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: that
he who was the cause of all this joy, should thus weep, and at that very time
shed forth tears, in such abundance, it cannot but suggest matter of wonder
and admiration to him that does but seriously think upon it; and therefore as
Hazael, when he sees the man of God look steadfastly upon him, with weeping
eyes King. 8.12.
, he puts forth the question, saying, Why does my Lord weep? so when ye hear
of Christ his carriage and deportment toward Jerusalem, ye may well demand the
reason, why did he thus weep for it? was it because those stately palaces,
which now towred up so high toward heaven, should within a few years lie in
the dust? Surely, it could not but pity a man to see such a goodly pile of
building, utterly demolished and made even with the ground, yet it was not that
which fetched tears from the eyes of Christ Stel. Comment. in loc. No^ diruendos
muros, non subvertenda aedificia deplorat Dominus, sed caecitate^ civium,
animarum interitum et jactura^.
; he lamented more the loss of their souls, than their temporal ruin Dion.
Carthus. in loc. Magis planxit subversione^ anima^u^, quam ruinam parietum.
: or was it the foresight of that shameful and ignominious death which he was
ere long to suffer upon the Cross that drew tears from him? surely he was
not ignorant that the Rulers of Jerusalem would plot and contrive his death,
and take away his life; yet that was not the cause why he wept, because he laid
down his life willingly, and made himself a sacrifice for the sins of the
world; but it was the estate and condition of Jerusalem, as it now stood Lucas
Brug. in loc. Considerans una ex part civium ingratitudinem altera ex part
mala ipsis imminentia, induit affectum co^dolentiae hujusmodi qui lachrymas
ipsi excusserit.
in regard of her present sin, and her future misery, that makes him thus to
weep for her, because her estate and condition was truly lamentable, and yet
she neither sensible of her danger, nor apprehensive of her sin; this was it
that drew tears from his eyes.

CHAP. 2.
The reason why Christ wept.

weep for her; and there were diverse reasons and considerations moving him so
to do: More particularly and especially these that follow; namely, to
demonstrate the truth and sincerity of his love and affection to her, to show
the serious wishes and desires he had of her welfare, to let her see how
unwilling he was to bring upon her the deserved punishment of her
disobedience, had not her sin and his own justice in a manner compelled him
to it; to make her sensible of the heinousness of her sin, and the
greatness of her misery; and last of all, to teach her by his example, what
she ought to do for her self.

1 To demonstrate the truth and sincerity of his love and affection to her, in
that he could weep at the very thought of her misery, whom he knew to be a
deadly enemy to him. The Ivy which embraces other things, Crysol. Anthol.
sacra page 233.
which cleaves unto them, and claspeth so fast about them, that it will not
easily let go his hold, is said to weep and shed tears, and it may be a fit
emblem of love and charity; which the more affectionately it cleave to any,
the more ready it is to weep and shed tears for him, as Christ did here for
his enemies. To weep for the misery and misfortune of a friend, common
humanity teaches every one to do it; but to weep for an enemy, it argues not
only goodness of nature, but also abundance of love: corrupt nature would
rather have rejoiced and been glad of such an occasion, than found out matter
of weeping for it; but Christ, to show the truth and sincerity of his love and
affection toward Jerusalem, he melts himself into tears, so soon as her
woeful estate and condition offers and presents it self to his thoughts. When
the Jews saw him weep for Lazarus John 11.35.
death, they could easily make this collection, Behold how he loved him
Proverb. Graecum. (...).
; and he that looks on the tears which the sight of Jerusalem drew from the
eyes of Christ, what other conclusion can he infer but this? Behold how he
loved her. When Joseph's affection was inflamed toward his brethren, it melts
his eyes into fountains of tears; he could not forbear weeping, and
therefore he makes haste to get himself into a private Chamber, where this
passion of love might more freely vent it self Genesis 43.30.
: so Christ here, it pities him to think of the ashes and ruin of Jerusalem,
he is moved with love and compassion toward her; and this love it empties it
self into tears, and makes him weep for Cornel. I ansen comment in loc.
Observandum quanta charitate, civitatem ingratam, and se persequentem
prosecutus fuerit cum inter tot faustas populi aggratulationes mala civitati ob
ipsius coecitatem obventura, re cogitans, adeo est misericordia commotus, ut
etiam lachrymas profuderit, non super se occidendum, sed super illam and
propter illius exitium.
her. When a man suffers all manner of wrongs and injuries from his enemies,
and is yet content not only to pass by those wrongs, and put up those
injuries, but also to weep for the misery of the parties that offered the same
unto him; this, it argues a high degree and measure of love: so it was here
with Christ; never any that suffered more wrongs and injuries at the hands of
the Jews, than he did; yet such is his love unto them, that he is content, not
only to forget all that is done, but even out of a bleeding heart to shed
forth tears for the sin and misery of those that did it: in him (if ever in
any) was fulfilled that of the Psalmist Psalm. 137.5, 6.
, If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning; yea, if I
do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; If I
prefer not Jerusalem to my chiefest joy. When David fled from his ungracious
son Absolon, he climbes up to Mount Olivet, and there he weeps, every step
he takes he sheds forth tears 2 Samuel 15.30.
; not so much for the loss of his Kingdom, as the unnatural carriage of his
Son toward him; for when his Kingdom was restored, the death of his son
did still so deeply affect him, that he bewailes it with many tears, 2 Samuel
18.33.
O my son Absolon, my son, would God I had dyed for thee, O Absolon my
son, my son: So Christ he weeps here, not for his approaching Death and
Passion, which he did foresee, but for the unnatural carriage of the Jews
toward him, who Absolon-like, rebelling against him, saying, We will not have
this man reign ever us Luc. 19.14.
, did thereby pull upon themselves that inevitable wrath and indignation, that
could not but make any heart to bleed, that had a true sight and apprehension
of it; as for his death and Passion he did willingy undergo it: He laid down
his life, no man took it away from him, but of his own accord he laid it
down John 10.18.
; therefore it was only out of his love to Jerusalem, that he thus wept and
shed tears for her. We read indeed of Julius Caesar, that when he saw the
Head of Pompy his enemy that was slain in the war, he wept at the sight of
it; and Scipio Affricanus Crysol Anthol. sacra page 234. Adeo collachrymatus
est, ut fumantes adhuc cineres, florentissimae quondam urbis, oculorum flumine
restinguere velle videretur.
when he saw the flames of Carthage ascending upward, it drew tears from his
eyes; he could not look upon it with dry cheeks: These indeed were tokens
and testimonies of ingenuous and heroical spirits, that could be touched thus
with compassion toward others; yet all this did arise out of a consideration
reflecting on themselves, because they saw in these examples what might have
been their own condition: there was some mixture of self-love in it; but
Christ was no ways subject to such change and alteration of humane affairs,
further than himself pleased to submit himself unto them; and therefore it was
out of pure love that he was thus touched with the misery of Jerusalem, and
wept for it.

2 To show the serious wishes and desires he had of her welfare; for these
tears of Christ they are not Crocodile tears Plin Hist. not. l. 18. cap. 25.
, who first weeps over a man, and then devoures him; nor like the tears of
hypocrites, dissembling, lying, fained tears; but such as declare the truth of
his thoughts and intentions, for the good of Jerusalem; he did not delude her,
nor dally with her, when he offered life and salvation to her; but his
intentions were serious, as appears by this, if there were nothing else to
show it, because he weeps, and sheds tears for the refusal of it, which
plainly shows that he was much agrieved, that they should sell away his rich
mercy, and their own salvation at so low a rate: for tears they are
ambassadors sent from a bleeding heart; they are as it were the very blood of a
sorrowful soul Cyp. l. 2. ep. 7. Lachrymae sunt Legati doloris. J. Brent.
Com. in Johan. cap. 11. Lachrymae sunt sanguis animi vulnerati.
; that is, signs to show that the heart is deeply affected with grief, and
bleeds within; so that although Christ had not any absolute and irrespective
purpose of bringing those to salvation that perished in their sins; yet he was
truly willing that they should have life upon such terms and conditions as it
was offered unto them in the ministry of the Word, and the Covenant of grace;
that is, if they did repent of their sins, and believe in him Pet. Mart. in 1 Samuel Cap. 30. ver. 4. Ita enim co^parati sumus a natura, ut quemadmodu^ si
corpus vulneretur, erumpit sanguis: ita vulnerata anima, crumpunt lachrymae,
lachryma enim est sanguisanimae. Guliel. Par. To. 1. l. de mor. p. 213.
Lachrymae enim, ut ait H^^ronymus, v^^ quidam sanguis sunt animaru^.
. Although there be a remnant which shall most certainly and infallibly be
brought to life and salvation, yet Gods purpose and intention toward the rest
of the world, is truly serious, to give them life and salvation, upon such
conditions as are expressed in the Covenant. For to that end God the Father
Esaias 65.2.
stretches out his hand all the day long to a rebellious and gain saying
people, willing to receive and embrace them, if they would come unto him: God
the Son calls and invites them, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you:
God the holy Ghost Revel. 3.20.
stands at the door and knocks, willing to be entertained, if they would open
unto him, and so much is employed in that speech of Christ to the Jews, Joh.
5.40.
Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life: implying, that they might
have life if they did come unto Christ; he is willing enough to give them life;
the reason why they miss of it, is, because they will not come unto him Aug.
lib. 3. de l. arb. ca. 19. Non tibi deputatur ad culpa^, quod invitus ignoras,
sed quod negligis quaerere quod ignoras: nec illud quod vulnerata membra non
colligis, sed quod volentem sanare contemnis.
in the use of those means which he has appointed to bring them to life and
salvation.

3. To let her see, how unwilling he was to bring upon her the deserved
punishment of her disobedience, if her sin, and his own justice had not in a
manner compelled him to it. When loving Parents lament and bewail the untimely
death of their children, that would not be counseled and ruled by them; it is
a sign they did not desire they should come to such an end: when the careful
Physician weeps for his sick patient, that would not follow his advice, for
the recovering of his health; it is a sign he does not desire he should die
of that disease: So when Christ weeps for the destruction of Jerusalem, it is
a sign how unwilling he was of himself to have it destroyed; he entertains no
thoughts of her destruction, till he be provoked by her sins; and when there is
no other remedy, but that justice must have her course, it fetches tears from
his eyes, to give way unto it Gualt. com. in Luc Hom. 176. Non fingamus nobis
tale^ deu^ qui ut sanguinarii tyranni solent, hominu^ interitu delectatur, quis
enim hoc vel cogitet, qui Christu^ reprobae gentis, and ad omnem impietatem
devotae urbis, lachrymis prosecutu^ fuisse audit?

Stel. com. in loc. Tardus est Christus in poena infere^da, and illam lachrymis
manantibus pronu^ciat, et quasi coactus ingerit.


. He punishes not willingly, neither takes he delight in afflicting the
children of men Lam. 3.33.
. Hence it is, that when his own justice and the sins of his people call for
punishment, it puts him to a stand, he is at a strife and contention within
himself what to do; so contrary it is to the native propension of his loving
kindness, that he cannot tell how to go about it. How shall I give thee up, O
Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, O Israel? How shall I make thee as Adma? How
shall I set thee as Seboim? My heart is turned within me, my repentings are
rolled together. I will not execute the fierceness of my wrath, I will not
return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God and not man Hosea 11.8.
. Hereupon it is, that punishment in Scripture it is termed Esaias 28 21.
Gods act, and his strange act, his work, and his strange work, Hieron in loc.
Non est opus Don ini perdere quos creavit, et quod ad crudelitatem magis quam
ad clementiam pertinet, et non est opus ejus punite peccantes, sed peregrinum
et alienum ab eo, ut puniat qui salvator est, etc. Tremel. in loc. Christus ne
reproborum exitio simpliciter delectatur. Tossan. com. in loc. Confirmat hic
locus Deum invitum accedere ad ultionem, nisi quatenus id ejus justitia
postulat, ut impoenitentibus poenas infligat.
Implying, that mercy and kindness, it is Gods proper work, there is no more
required to the exercise of it, than what is to be found in God himself; but
punishment and destruction, that is Gods strange work, as if it were scarce
agreeable to the blessed nature of his sovereign goodness; it is opus suum
alienum, so his work, that another also has a hand in it; it cannot come from
him alone, but by occasion of the creatures disobedience: for judgment and
mercy, they come from God, as honey and the sting do from the Be: the Be
affords honey naturally, but stings not, unless she be provoked: so it is
natural to God to show forth his goodness, but not to inflict punishment,
unless he be provoked. And the reason is, because the motive of showing mercy,
it is in God himself; he has it within him, in the goodness of his nature;
but the motive of inflicting punishment, it is in man's sin, which provokes
him to it. Valor. Max l. 5. memorab. c. 1.
Valerius Maximus reports of Marcellus, that when he came against Syracuse, a
City of Sicilie, he wept, to think of her ruin and destruction; which makes
the Father say of him, Aug. lib. 1. de civ. Dei, cap. 6. Quod ante ejus
sanguine^, suas ille lachrymas effuderit.
That he could not think of drawing her blood, but first it makes his own
heart to bleed with pity and compassion, and tears to trickle down and fall
from his eyes: So it was here with Christ: he could not think of drawing the
blood of Jerusalem, by the Roman sword, but that very thought it first draws
tears from his own eyes; so unwilling he was to have had that punishment
inflicted upon her, had he not been in a manner compelled unto it by her sin.

4. To show the heinousness of her sin, and the greatness of her misery;
the heinousness of her sin appears by this, that it could not be
sufficiently bewailed by any tears, but such only as fell from the eyes of God
himself Jo. Brent. com. in Luc. Hom. 31. Cette horribile sit oportet quod
Christo lachrymas extorqueat.
. Had all the creatures in heaven and earth shed tears continually in great
abundance, it had not been a sufficient ransom for one sin: it is only the
tears of Christ that were thought sufficient by the wisdom of God, to
satisfy the wrong that sin had done to Divine justice. If one man sin
against another, the Judge shall judge it; but if a man sin against God, who
shall plead for him 1 Samuel 2.25.
? Who? Surely a mere creature may not do it; only the tears that fall from
the eyes of him that is God, as well as man; these are silent orators to plead
for him. And again, this, it does abundantly show the heinousness of sin,
because it is that only that makes the God of heaven and earth to weep for
it. If ye look into all the rest of the creatures that God made, ye shall see
that all in their kind, they yield some delight and contentment to God; Psalm.
104.31.
He rejoices in all the works of his hands: only man whom of all other
creatures he made for himself, that he might take pleasure and delight in
him; he only fetches tears from the eyes of God. God made a number of other
creatures, but never repented of any that he made, save only man; but of man
it is recorded in sacred Writ, Gen 6.6.
It repented him that he made man upon earth, and he was sorry in his heart.
Such is the heinousness of sin, that it causes repentance in heaven, and
fetches tears from the eyes of God himself; and happy was it for us, that
Christ would be pleased to shed tears for it; had not he found a time to weep
for it, we might have spent all our time in that infernal lake, where there is
nothing else but weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth. His weeping was the
cause of our rejoicing Aug. Ser. 104. de tem. Lachrymae Domini, gaud^ mundi.
; if we enjoy any occasions of gladness, we may thank his weeping for it; who
as 2 Cor. 8.9.
he became poor to make us rich, and suffered death to restore us to life; so
he was made sorrowful to make us joyful, he weeps to fill us with gladness.

Again, this weeping of Christ for Jerusalem, as it shows the heinousness of
her sin, so also the greatness of her misery Stel. com. in Luc. pa. 234.
Saepissime in V. T. Prophetae praedixerunt, calamitates and inf^rtunia populo
Israelitico eve^tura, non verbis solu^ sed operibus and signis exterioribus: ut
1 Sa^ 15 27. 1 Reg. 11.30. Jer. 19.11.28.10, 11. Ezekiel. 5.1. sic in praesentia
Christus etc. ostendit per has lachrymas, aliquando fore ut Hierosolymitani,
licet nunc rideant, non mediocriter defleant.
: for the tears of Christ they were precious tears, of more worth and value,
than like water to be spilt upon the ground; the tears of Gods own people,
they are so precious, that Esaias 25.8. Apoc. 7.17.21.4.
God wipes them off their faces with his own hand, and Psalm. 56.8.
puts them up in his own bottle. But those tears that fall from the eyes of
God himself, must needs be far more precious; and therefore had not the
misery of Jerusalem been such, as would make any heart to bleed that did fully
comprehend the dimensions of it; surely, Christ would never have wept so much,
nor spent so many precious tears upon her Bern. Ser. 3. in Romans palm. Non
solis oculis, sed quasi membris omnibus flevisse videtur, ut totu^ corpus ejus
quod est Ecclesia, totius corporis lachrymis purgaretur.
. His weeping shows that her misery was such a transcendent and superlative
misery, as was more than enough to make both his ears to tingle that did but
hear of it, and both his eyes to fall out with weeping, that did but seriously
consider it in his heart, and steep his thoughts in the meditation of it.

5 To show Jerusalem what she ought to do: as Gedeon said to his Soldiers,
Judge. 7.17.
Look on me, and do likewise; so this very action of Christ speaks to
Jerusalem in the same language: his weeping bids her weep: Jo^n 13.15.
I have given you an example that you should do as I have done. The actions of
Christ they are our instructions: every true Disciple of Christ must write
after the copy that he has set him; Hilar. Pictavien. de Trin. l. 10.
Christus non sibi flevit, sed vobis. Aug. in Io. Tract. 49. To. 9. Quare flevit
Christus, nisi quia homine^ flere docuit? Gerb. com. in loc. Sunt lachrymae
invitantis, ut nos quoque lachrymas profundamus.
when he looks upon the tears of Christ, he must learn to weep as he did;
yea Christ himself bids him do it in his own words, Luke 23.28.
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves. And good reason, for it was our
sins which made him to weep; he had no matter of weeping in himself, but
we have; and therefore if he wept for sin that knew no sin, much more
ought every one to weep for sin, that is guilty of it: as the drops of rain
do excavate and make hollow the hardest rocks; so the tears of Christ should
mollify and soften the rockie and flintie hearts of men, and melt them into
penitential tears; if they do not, these will rise up in judgment against
impenitent sinners, and condemn them, because Christ in shedding so many
tears for sin, shows unto them, that if it were possible for them, it were
too little to lament and bewail them, even with tears of blood.

CHAP. 3.
It should be every man's care to weep for the sins of others.

Application.
ANd now that ye have heard what Christ did, how he wept over Jerusalem, and the
reason why he did it; what remains more, but to wind up all in a word of
Application; and though I might enlarge this into several heads, yet I will
confine all within the compass of these two, of Imitation and Exhortation. 1.
Let it be a ground of imitation to follow Christ in this that he did; I will
express it in the words of the Apostle, Phil. 2.5.
Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus. Look on the example of
Christ, and do likewise; look on the sins and miseries of others, and weep
for them; if a man should hear his own Father reproached and dishonored,
though it were by those that are above his reach; yet if there be any spark of
good nature in him, it will make him at least to take it to heart and weep for
it. Now God who is the Father of Spirits, he is reproached and dishonored
every day, and that by men of all sorts, young and old, high and low, rich and
poor, etc. and can any profess himself to be the son of God, and not to
weep for this? When Elisha fixed his eyes upon Hazael, and foresaw the evil
that he would do to the children of Israel 2 Kings 8.12.
, it fetched tears from his eyes, and made him weep at the very thought of
it; and can we see and hear of all the abominations that are done and
committed every where, by Superiors, inferiors, friends, foes, etc. and yet
shed never a tear for them? If a man be touched with wrongs and injuries that
concern himself and his person, his goods, his good name and reputation, how
sensible is he of it? how deeply is he affected with it? how much does he lay
it to heart, and grieve for it? Oh then that God should be so much
dishonored, and so few tears shed, so little weeping and lamenting for it
Pint. comment. in Ezekiel cap. 9. v. 4. Nos contumelias in Deum jactas, and impia
adversus ipsum facinora praetermittimus, si autem ipsi vel solo verbo
vulneremur and in cos a qubus fuimus injuriis lacessiti impetum facimus, etc.
and paulo post, lege divinas literas and replica animalium memoriam, inquire
sanctorum patrum historias, and invenies passim, viros pietate illustres, etc.
ob alierum sceleta quibus Deus offend batur, oculos suos vertisse in vivarum
^achrymrum son^es.
? What love can there be to God whose honor is trampled under foot by sin?
What charity to his brother whose salvation is hazarded, and his soul mortally
wounded by it? What conformity to this example of Christ in that soul, that
never takes to heart the sins of others? that never mournes in secret, or
sheds tears for them? David's heart and affection was so inflamed with the love
of God, that it made his eyes gush out with rivers of water, because men kept
not Gods Law Psal^ 19.130.
. Oh if David had lived in our times, walked through our streets, if he had
seen the pride, heard the oaths, taken notice of the profaneness that is in
every corner; surely he would have even washed the streets with his tears.

When Lot dwelt amongst the wicked Sodomites, in seeing and beholding their
unlawful deeds, it vexed his righteous soul from day to day 2 P^^ ^2.8.
: If he had seen and heard that which every eye may see that will look abroad
into the world, and that which every ear may hear almost in every place; to
wit, those rotten and unsavory speeches, those cursed and blasphemous oaths
which the black and unhallowed mouths of many sinful wretches belch forth
against heaven; how would he have been grieved and troubled at it? When Saint
Paul takes notice of inordinate walkers, it makes his very heart to bleed, and
fills his eyes with tears to think upon it: Phil. 3.18.
Many walk inordinately, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you
weeping, that they are enemies to the Cross of Christ. But alas we, what do
we? we make our selves merry with the wickedness of men; we look upon the
drunkards that go reeling and staggering in the street, and make it a matter
of laughter; we hear the bloody oaths and scurrilous speeches of profane
persons, and make our selves sport with them: one man makes another drunk, and
then laughs at him; another casts a bone of contention between friends, and
breeds a quarrel amongst them, and then makes himself sport with it. Oh that
we should make that a matter of sport and laughter, that fetched tears from
the eyes of Christ! that the members should rejoice in that, which makes the
Head to weep Stell. commen. in loc page 236. Flenda sunt aliorum peccata, ut
Christus exemplo suo docet, non ridenda.
!

It is reported of St. Ambrose Paulin in vita S. Ambrosu c. 20. Quotiescunque
illi obpercipiendam poenitentiam, lapsus suos confessus esset: ita flebat ut
illum flere compelleret.
, that when any confessed their sins unto him, desiring his help and counsel
for the obtaining of comfort, he would fall into such a vein of weeping, that
his example drew tears from the party that came unto him; and as the learned
observe well, godly minds are ready so much the more to melt themselves into
tears, by how much more they see and hear the sins of others to multiply
and increase.

When the Prophet had exhorted the Rulers of Israel to humble themselves, and
to reform things that were amiss in Church and Commonwealth, he tells them,
Ier. 13.17.
If ye will not hear this, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride, and
mine eye shall drop down tears, because the Lords flock is carried away
captive. But alas, we, what do we? If we do but conceit any thing to be
amiss in Church or Commonwealth, we murmr, we complain, we throw dirt in
the face of Authority; reviling those who ought to be obeyed for conscience
sake: but where is the man that enters into his Closet, and mourns in secret
for things that are indeed amiss? The Christian world is little inferior to
Sodom in many sins, but where are the righteous Lots that trouble their own
souls with the thought of it? Men are now as ready to forsake the Law of God
as ever they were, but where are the David's, whose eyes melt into fountains of
tears at the sight of it? Men now walk as inordinately as ever they did, but
where are the Paul's, that cannot think or speak of it without bleeding hearts
and weeping eyes? Again, what charity is there in that soul toward his
brother, whose salvation is hazarded, and himself mortally wounded by sin?
who sees him daily run into sin, and does not mourn and weep for him? Oh
how far does this swarve from the frame and temper of that blessed Apostle,
that Vessel of Election, whose heart was ready to bleed within him for the
sins of his brethren and kindred according to the flesh; Romans 9.1.
I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart, for I would wish my
self to be separated from Christ, for my brethren that are my kinsmen
according to the flesh: So Moses and the Children of Israel, they wept for the
sins of their brethren and companions Number. 25.6.
; They wept before the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. The Apostle
also bewailed some who had sinned, and not repented of their sins 2 Cor.
12.21.
; Guliel. Paris. to. 1 li. de morib. page 204. Nemo dubitet, quin pia corda
tanto lachrymis compassionis uberius affluant, quanto proximorum peccata magis
abundare, vel conspexerint, vel etiam audierint.
and good reason, for there is not a more lamentable spectacle under heaven,
than a man that lives and wallowes in his sin; If tears be deservedly powered
out for any evil that befalls another, then are they unworthily restrained for
sin, which is the greatest evil. If a man weep and shed tears for his
friend that lies upon his sick bed, from which he may possibly be raised up;
there is greater reason why he should do it, when he is sick unto death. Now
so it is with those who give themselves over to any sinful course, they are
sick unto death; nay, they are dead in trespasses and sins, as the Apostle
speaks Ephesians. 2.1.
; therefore sufficient cause there is to weep for them August. to. 10. de
Sanctis sermon. 13 page 322. Plangis mortuum, magis plange impiu^, plange
infidelem, etc. an vero in te non sunt viscera Christianae miserationis, ut
plangas corpus a quo discessit anima, et non plangas anima^ a qua recessit Deus?
, because they are full of spiritual evils, which of all others are the
greatest evils; and therefore, if any else, much more these should fill every
eye with tears that looks upon them. Common humanity teaches every one to
weep and lament for the death of his friends, and yet it may be a happy
exchange that they make by death; but when friends are dead in trespasses and
sins, there is matter of lamentation indeed; because, if they be not helped
out of that condition, they must die eternally, and perish for ever.

We read of a time when there was a great cry and lamentation in Egypt Exodus
12.30.
; and what was the reason? The Text shows it, because there was never a house
in all the Land of Egypt, where there was not one dead. If a man should go
through all the families in this Kingdom, how many houses might he come into,
where he should not find one alive? what house could he enter into, where he
should not find many dead? and what a cry and lamentation should this cause
amongst us? especially seeing this cry, it is never in vain, but always
procures a blessing, and provides a Sanctuary or place of refuge against all
dangers. Whereupon it is that Saint Augustine August. epist. 199. Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 129.
affirms, that tears are the best sacrifice that any one can offer up for
himself: and Saint Chrysostom is not afraid to say, that they are the best
alms he can bestow upon others. Like as it was with the Israelites, when the
destroying Angel was to pass through the Land of Egypt, God caused them to
take the blood of the Lamb, and to sprinkle it on the Lintels, and the door
checkes, that when the destroying Angel saw the mark, he might pass over
that house, and not enter into it: so when the destroying Angel is abroad in
the world, the Providence of God sets a mark upon those that mourn in Sion;
either to keep them safe in the common calamity, or else to provide better
for them, by taking them away from the evil to come. Ezekiel. 9.4.
Go through the midst of the City, even the midst of Jerusalem, and set a
mark upon the forehead of all those that mourn and cry for all the
abominations that are done in the midst of her Hier. com. in Ezekiel. ca. 9.
Gementes igitur dolentesque salvantur, qui non solum malis non consenseru^t
operibus, sed et aliena planxere peccata.
.

Finally, what conformity is there to this example of Christ, in that man that
never lays to heart the sins of the times and places where he lives? If
Christ spent so many tears for this one City of Jerusalem, how should it fill
every eye with tears, when he looks upon the sins that are done and
committed in all Countries and Regions through the whole Christian world? What
was Jerusalem to the whole world? or what were the Inhabitants of Jerusalem in
comparison of those who now make profession of religion in the time of the
Gospel? If therefore the sins of Jerusalem drew such abundance of tears
from the eyes of Christ, what measure of tears can sufficiently bewail the
sins and transgressions that are done and committed by all the sons and
daughters of the Christian world in the times of the Gospel?

CHAP. 4.
It is the duty of every one to weep for the miseries of others.

Look on the miseries of others, and weep for them. We read of three
several times that Christ wept, but not that he laughed so much as once in all
his life Salvian. l. 6. Christum flevisse legimus, risisse nunqua^ legimus.
; and surely he that looks on the miserable face of things here in the world,
he shall find more cause of weeping than rejoicing: for though all be well
at home, and with himself yet the misery of others abroad in the world, that
lie bleeding under the hand of God, some in one kind, some in another, that
should make his heart to bleed, and shed tears for them. This very example of
Christ here in the Text, it presses upon others for imitation in this kind,
and that by many terms of advantage; for,

1 This misery was to come upon Jerusalem forty years after, and yet even then
it drew tears from the eyes of Christ, though he saw it so far off, and
thought upon it so long before; how far greater equity is there, that every
one should lay to heart the misery of others, which he sees hanging in the
Clouds, ready to fall upon their heads, or that perhaps has lain heavy upon
them a long time?

2 Christ wept thus for Jerusalem that was a deadly enemy to him, that was a
most wicked and rebellious City, the very Shambles, as it were, where all the
holy Prophets were slain; as Christ himself complains of her, Matt. 23.37.
Oh Jerusalem Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, etc. and again, It cannot be that a Prophet should perish
out of Jerusalem Luke 13 33.
. Now if Christ wept for the misery of Jerusalem, that was his enemy, it will
conclude more strongly for every one to lay deeply to heart the misery of his
friends: if Christ shed so many tears for the misery of Jerusalem, that was
the very Shamble of the Prophets; none can doubt, but that he ought to weep
and shed tears much more abundantly, when he thinks upon the ruin and ashes
of those flourishing Churches that have been ever helpers and honorers of the
Prophets.

3 Christ weeps for those miseries whereof himself should bear no part; for
they were to come upon Jerusalem a long while after his death: and therefore it
concludes more strongly for those to lay to heart and weep for the miseries of
others, which may possibly be inwrapped and involved within the compass of
the danger. When a man hears of lamentable fires in the farthest and remotest
parts of the Kingdom, though he have no fear of receiving any personal hurt
and damage from the same, yet common humanity lays a tie upon him to be
moved and affected with pity and compassion toward the misery of those that
perish and are consumed thereby; but when his neighbors house, which is the
next door unto him, is all on flame, he has then more reason to be sensible
of it, and lay it to heart.

4. Christ weeps for the misery of others, when himself had no hand in those
sins which were the cause of it; but who can wash his hands from the guilt of
those sins that bring public calamities upon himself or others? and if he
have a hand in the sin, there is great reason why he should have a heart
more deeply affected with the misery of others that smart for his sin, as
David, 2 Samuel 24.14.
Behold I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but these sheep, alas, what
have they done? When every one else is upon his knees, and calling upon his
God, there is little reason why Jonah, who is the cause of all that storm,
should sleep securely in the bottom of the Ship. If Christ weep for the
misery of Jerusalem, who is altogether free from the sins of Jerusalem;
little reason is there, why any else should look on these or the like miseries
of his brethren with dry cheeks. To weep with them that weep, is a duty
which the Apostle calls for; and which every one is bound to perform Romans
12.15.
. As he must be sensibly affected with the miseries of others, so his heart
must bleed, and his eye shed tears for them. Heb. 13.3.
Remember them that are in bonds, as if ye were bound with them; and them that
are in afflictions, as if ye were afflicted in the body. For as it is with
brazen vessels, when they are set together, if ye strike one, the rest will
sound; so it should be with men, when one is smitten by the hand of affliction,
the sound of it should reach unto others, and make a kindly impression of
grief and sorrow upon them. So it has ever been with the Saints of God; they
have been tenderly affected, and tenderhearted toward others in misery. And
indeed, who can want matter and occasion of weeping, that lays to heart the
miseries of his brethren? that considers how some are wounded in their spirit
with the sense and feeling of their sins Aug. Ser. 44. de verbis Domini.
Gemimus pleru^que in peccatis fratrum nostrorum, and vim patimur, and torquemur
animo.
; how others are weakened in their estate with losses and crosses in the world;
how others languish in their bed of sickness under the arrest of some grievous
disease; how others are consumed or scattered abroad with the miserable face of
war; who can refrain tears at the sight or hearing of these miseries? and
yet are not these the tithes of those burdens and miseries that lie upon men
Crysol Anthol. Sac. page 234. Q^^d dic^m ingentium miseriatum acervos, clades
innumeras, and multipliciu^ malorum iliadem, quibus nostri in Christo fratres,
et ejusdem magni parentis filii, ante oculos miserrime conficiuntur? ansumus
tam duri, tamque dissimiles praestantiu^ hominu^, et sanctissimorum, ut
spectantes et scie^tes nihil afficiant? Virg. Aencid. 2. Quis talia fando
Myrmidonu^ Dolopumve aut duri miles Vlyssis Te^peret a lachrymis.
; and therefore he cannot but easily incline to weep and shed tears, that
looks upon them with an eye of pity and compassion.

For like as it is with a vessel that is full of water, or any other liquor;
if it be moved, or shaken, it will easily run over: so the heart that is full
of tender pity and compassion toward others, when it comes to be moved and
affected with their misery, it will easily run over, and shed tears. There
are not examples wanting in holy Writ, of those who have shed tears for the
ruin of their enemies. Samuel 1 Samuel 15.35.
wept for Saul, even then when God had rejected him: and the Prophet Esaias, Esaias
15.5. and 16.11.
he cried out for Moab in the day of her misery; but much more plentiful are
the examples of those who have wept and lamented for the misery of their
friends: So it was with good Nehemiah, when the King wondered to see him much
dejected, and his countenance cast down, thinking his royal favor more than
sufficient to make him cheerful; he makes this answer and apology for
himself, Nehem. 2.3.
Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City and place of my fathers
sepulchers lies waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire? He thought
the misery of the Church matter enough to make his thoughts sad and pensive;
even then when he had all other contentments that royal favor could heap
upon him. So it was with the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 9.1.
O that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, to
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people! And again,
Lam. 1.16.
For these things I weep, mine eye, even mine eye casts out water, because
the Comforter that should refresh my soul is far away from me. So it was with
Christ, when he sees Mary weep, and the Jews weep with her for the death
of Lazarus, it makes tears to stand in his eyes, and John 11.35.
he weeps too. So it was with Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 11.29.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? The Lord
himself complains of the want of this, Amos 6.6.
They drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chiefest ointment:
but no man remembers the afflictions of Joseph, etc. And it is a pitiful
moan and complaint that the Church makes, because she was neglected in this
kind: Lam. 1.12.
Is it nothing to you, and have ye no regard? O all ye that pass by, behold
and see, if there was ever sorrow like unto my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath! And therefore when the face of the
Church gathers blackness, when sad and lamentable times fall upon her, all her
children, yea all her friends must lament with her, and weep for her Greg.
Nyssen. ut citaturin 2. Nice. Sym. Act. 4. c. 2. Cum vidisset immolationis
Isaac imagine^, sine fletu tra^sire non potuit.
.

It is reported of Gregory Nyssen, that when he saw but the show and
representation of the sacrificing of Isaac, it made such an impression upon
him, that he could not forbear weeping: and if an imaginary show of misery
could do so much, there is great reason why the real calamities of others
should fetch tears from the eyes of such as look upon them.

As in the natural body there is no lively member but will sympathize and
suffer with the rest, and be sensible of the smart and pains that other
members feel; when the foot is trodden upon, (though there be a great distance
between that and the head;) yet the head complains, saying, Why do thou
tread on me? Even so it is in the politic body both of Church and
Commonwealth; it is a sign of a livelesse member, when he does not take to
heart, nor shed tears for the affliction of the body; like as it is with a
wooden leg, or an Ivory tooth, or an eye of glass, which do not partake with
the body in pain, because they do not share with it in life; so it is with
those who can look on the misery of others with dry cheeks; nay which is
much worse, insult and trample upon them in their misery; like the wicked
Edomites, that cry Psalm. 137.7.
Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. It is a sign of a wicked
Shimei to curse David in his affliction, and to add to his misery. It is the
devils property (...): Id est, qui g^udium et laetitia^ percipit ex alienis
calamitatibus. Arist. Eth. 2. cap. 7.
to rejoice in evil, and take pleasure and delight in the misery of others:
but 1 Cor. 13.6.
love rejoices not in evil; but with Christ here sheds tears at the sight of
it.

CHAP. 5.
It should be every man's practice to weep for his own sins.

IF Christ wept at the sight of Jerusalem, in regard of her present sin, and
future misery; what then shall we say to those, who are so far from weeping
for the sin and misery of others, that they shed few or no tears for their
own sins? Christ himself, he was without sin, yet none more plentiful in
weeping and shedding tears for it, than he was: Whereas many, though they be
full of sin and iniquity, and those aggravated by many foul circumstances,
yet can they look upon them with dry cheeks, and shed never a tear at the
sight of them; they set themselves upon a merry pin, they can find a day and a
day, yea many days to run into sin; but the day is yet to come, wherein
they ever shed so much as one tear for it. O how unlike are these to Christ?
Although they could weep out both their eyes, and pour forth tears a
thousand years together, it were not sufficient for one sin: But that they
should multiply, and heap up their sins, till they be more in number than
the hairs on their heads, than the stars in the firmament, than the sands on
the sea shore, and yet look upon them without bleeding hearts, and weeping
eyes, that a few tears should not fall from their eyes at the sight of them;
this deserves a sharp and cutting reproof. He that looks on sin in the
mildest notion of it, he shall find in it sufficient matter to fetch tears
from his eyes; but he that waighes it more narrowly in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and takes a view of all such passages as add to the weight and
heinousness of it, what is it that can turn his eyes into fountains of
tears, if this do it not Crysol. Anthol. sac. page 219. Omne genus divinarum
literarum fletu^ hominibus indicit etc. pleni sunt Prophetarum libri, etc.
Euangelium quoque totu^ lachrymis, et imbre illo salutari madet.
? When the Prodigal considered with himself what he had done, what plenty
and abundance he had forsaken, what want and misery he had brought himself
unto, what a course he had run, what extremities he was now put upon; this
made him come unto his father weeping and lamenting, and say unto him, Luke
15.15.
Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, etc. And when a man
waighes and considers with himself, what a righteous law he has transgressed,
what a gracious Covenant he has broken, what happiness he has lost, what
misery he has wrapped himself in; that he has grieved the good Spirit of
God, that he has provoked so merciful a Savior as Christ is, that he has
displeased so kind and loving a Father as God has been unto him; how should
not this fetch tears from his eyes, if his thoughts were well steeped in the
meditation of it Aug. enarrat. in Psalm. p. 82. B.C. Sitienti mihi illum fonte^
que^ qua bibere no^dum poteram, avidius meas lachrymas ma^ducabam, non enim
dixit, factae sunt lachrymae meae potus, ne ipse desiderasse videretur, sed
servata illa siti qua rapior, servata illa siti, qua inardesco, ad fontes
aquarum, panes mihi factae sunt lachrymae meae dum differor.
?

When David considered whom he had offended, and against whom he had sinned,
it made him with a bleeding heart, and weeping eyes to confess and acknowledge
his sin to God Moller. in loc. Repetit querelam et co^fessionem tristissimis
verbis amplificatam: q.d. hoc unicum me cruciat et affligi^, quod fentio me
tibi peccasse etc. Ille dolor tantus est, ut etiamsi totus mundus me absolvat,
tamen me quiescere non patiatur. Hominum enim levationes, si vel parcant mihi,
vel adulandi causa extenuent scelus, vel blanditiis dolorem lenire studeant,
adeo nihil proficiunt, ut sentram peccatum subinde fieri gravius.
, saying, Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil
in thy sight Psalm. 51.4.
. How should it make a man's heart to bleed within him, when he considers how
he has sinned against God, against his neighbor, against his own soul,
against the heavens that are above his head, against the earth that is beneath
his feet, against the means of his own salvation, against the good motions of
Gods Spirit, against light revealed, even the light of grace, the light of
nature, the light of his own conscience, against mercies received, promises of
mercies, experience of mercies, fruits and effects of mercies, against the
checks and reluctations of his own conscience, against his own vows and
resolutions to the contrary, etc?

When the Angel expostulates the matter with the Israelites, why they obeyed
not the voice of the Lord, especially considering the helps and means
afforded unto them for that end and purpose, it is said, that they Judge. 2.3.
lift up their voice and wept. And is there not cause of weeping, when a man
looks into Gods dealing with him, and his own carriage toward God? when he
considers how often God has called him by the voice of his creatures, by the
voice of his Ministers, by the voice of his mercies, by the voice of his
judgments; and all this while he has stopped his ear, and would not hear;
hardened his heart, and would not be reclaimed? when he sees and observes, how
that no means, no mercies, no judgments, no threatenings could prevail with
him; what is it that can melt his soul into penitential tears, if this do
it not? it has wrought much upon the servants of God in former times; it
wrought so with David, that he caused Psalm. 6.6.
his bed every night to swim, and watered his couch with his tears Chrysostom.
in N. T. To. 6. edi. graecolat. page 962. (...).
. It prevailed so far with Peter, that when Christ looked upon him, and put
him in mind of what he had done, Mat. 26.75.
he went out and wept bitterly. It made so deep an impression upon Mary
Magdalen, that she did not only weep at the feet of her Savior, but also
poured out such abundance of tears, that Luke 7.44.
she washed his very feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of
her head. And who can look upon such a cloud of witnesses, and not wish with
the Prophet, Oh that my head were a fountain of tears?

If ye look abroad upon the men of this world, how do they over grieve losses
and crosses in earthly matters? if they be crossed in their profits,
pleasures, honors, preferments, or other like designs, how near does it sit
unto them? If they lose friends, kindred, wife, children, etc. how does it go
to their heart, and fetch tears from their eyes? and yet what are these losses
in comparison of that which a man loses by his sin? If they shed so many
tears for the loss of temporal things, who can refrain tears for the loss
of spiritual things, which are of infinite worth, beyond all price that can be
set upon them? especially if he consider that it is the best use that tears
can be put unto Chrysostom. in N. T. to. 5. 2 Cor. 7. (...).
, to spend them upon his sins; this is the end for which they were made, and
indeed they are profitable for nothing else. If a man weep for the death of
friends, kindred, wife, children, etc. his weeping cannot make them alive
again: If he shed never so many tears for the loss of house, inheritance,
lands, goods, etc. his tears cannot restore them again: if he should weep
out both his eyes for the loss of his time, or things that are past and gone,
he cannot possibly recall them again; but if he lament after God, who absents
himself, and hides the light of his countenance from him, this will cause him
to return again: if he weep for his sins which have defaced the beauty of
his soul, this will wipe them out again; when a man weeps and sheds tears
for his sin, then is the stream of his tears turned into the right
channel, then are his tears pitched upon the right object, then are they in
their proper place where they should be: other tears pay no debts, heal no
diseases, help not to remove the evil that is present, or procure the good
that is wanting; but penitential tears, those ever leave a man better than
they find him: Sin brought tears into the world, and tears are the only
remedy against sin Chrysostom. in N.T. to. 5. 2 Cor. 7. (...).
; as the ashes of the Viper that is burned, is the most present remedy against
the venomous and impoysoned sting of the Viper: even so the tears of
repentance, sackcloth and ashes, these are the most present remedy against
sin. If the wicked turn from his wickedness, he shall surely live, and
shall not die Ezekiel 18.21.
. As the Worm that breeds in the wood Chrysostom. edit. Graecolat. to 1. de
poenit. hom. 5. (...), etc. (...).
consumes and eats out the heart of it, so tears which were bred and brought
forth into the world by sin, are a special means to consume and abolish it:
Tears which are the daughters of sin, devour and eat out the bowels of
their mother. Peter wept for his sin, and it was remitted; it could be washed
out, though it could not be excused, and therefore the Apostle does not spend
words in vain, to extenuate or lessen, to defend or excuse his sin, but he
keeps silence, and weeps for it Petrus flevit et tacuit, quia quod defleri
solet, non solet excusari, and (...) defendi non potest, ablui potest. Ambros.
to. 3. sermon 46. Greg. Hom. 39. in Evang.
; go thou and do likewise: and for thy better help and direction herein,

1 Labor to get a tender and broken heart, that is the leader of the whole
man, and in such sort as that goes before, so does all the rest follow after:
If the master mourn Chrysostom. to 1. hom. 3. ad pop. Antioch page 44. Cassian.
Collat 9. ca. 28. Cassiod. instit. divin. ca. 23. Guliel. l'aris. de sacram.
poenit c. 5. Qui pungit cor confert sensum, propter hoc compu^ctio nominatur,
ipsa poenitudo interior, quae de stulto cord sensum producit emendationis: vel
ideo dicitur compunctio, quia quemadmodu^ arbores thuris et myrrhae, sudi bus
ferreis vulnerantur, et ipsa vulneratione velut lachrymatae, aromata myrrhae et
thuris proferunt: thus enim et myrrha, lachrymae sunt ejusmodi arborum, sed
coagulatae, sic compuncta corda poenitentium, thus devotae orationis, and
myrrham internae amaricationis emittunt.
, all the servants are clad in black; so when the heart mournes, the voice,
the face, the tongue, the hand, etc. all mourn; the head becomes a well of
water, and the eyes are turned into fountains of tears, like as it was with
Nineveh, when the King himself came from his Throne and put on Sackcloth, all
his Nobles, and all his servants, and all the people, yea the beast of the
field lament with him: So when the heart descends from her throne, and puts on
sorrow and contrition, it melts the head and eyes into penitential tears: and
therefore as he that would find a Well of water, he must dig deep in the
earth, so he that would melt himself into tears of contrition, he must steep
his thoughts deeply in the meditation of sin, that his heart may be thoroughly
humbled in the consideration of it.

2 Look often upon such objects as are apt to make the heart to bleed, and
fetch tears from the eyes Cornelia Lap com in Pro. 4.25. Magna est vis oculorum
ad cor et mentem vulnerandam: species enim visa per oculos transit ad cor et
mentem, illiq, suam formam, et consequenter amorem velodium imprimit, quae
species haeret in cord, etiam postquam res visa abierit. Ibid. ca. 23.27.
Magna Sympathia cordis cum oculis, ut cor in oculis, et oculi in cord siti
esse videantur: quod enim cor amat, ad illud intuendum dirigit oculos, ut
objecto amato per visum et intuitumse pascat.
, as Christ here, he beheld the City, and that makes him to weep for it: and
again, when he saw the multitude he was moved with compassion toward them,
because they were scattered and dispersed as sheep having no shepherd Mat.
9.36.
; so is it prophesied of the Jews, They shall look on him whom they have
pierced, and lament over him Zach. 12.10.
: so it was with righteous Lot, in hearing and seeing their unlawful deeds, it
vexed his righteous soul from day to day 2 Pet. 2.8.
.

When Jesus saw Mary weep, and the Jews weep for Lazarus, he was troubled in
spirit, and wept with them John 11.35.
. God and Nature have made the same member to be the instrument of weeping and
seeing; implying, that he that would weep for sin, must often look upon it
in those circumstances of aggravation, whereby the ugliness and deformity of
it may appear unto him. He that shuts his eyes, neither sees his sin, nor
weeps for it; therefore says Solomon, it is better to go to the house of
mourning, than the house of feasting, for this is the end of all flesh, and the
living shall lay it to his heart Eccles. 7.4.
. David, till his eyes were opened to see his sin, he wept not for it; so a
broken heart till it look upon objects which are apt to beget impressions of
grief and sorrow; it does not bleed within, or shed tears without: for like as
it is wht the infant while he is shut up in the womb, he weeps not; but when
he comes into the world, and sees the light, then he weeps: so while men are
shut up in the womb of ignorance, and do not see their sins, or look upon
those objects that are apt to beget tears, they do not weep for them: and
therefore he that would weep for his sin, must feed his eyes with the sight
of it.

3 When God begins to work upon thy soul, Chap. 5.
and melt thy heart with motions and impressions of grief, now be sure to
close with God, take that hint, and lay hold upon that opportunity, improve it
for thine own advantage; betake thy self to some convenient place where thy
soul may freely melt it self into tears, without distraction. As the
Husbandman puts in his Plow after a shower, when the ground is soft, so when
God softens and prepares the heart, melts and mollifies it, then Cic. li. 1. de
invent. Occasio est pars temporis, habens in se alicujus rei idoneam faciendi
occasionem.
set thy self more seriously about this work, even then when God stirs thy
heart, and makes it in a weeping case; that is, apt and inclinable to shed
forth tears: so did Peter, while he was in the High Priests Hall, he wept
not, he knew that was no convenient time or place for him to melt himself
into tears of contrition; therefore he first went out, and then having found
convenient time and place, he wept bitterly. Even so do thou; thou have had a
time to sin in; yea, many times, and many places can witness thy
forwardness this way; o then find out some time and place that may witness
thy tears, as well as it has done thy sin; find out some time and place to
weep for thy sin, to lament after God whom thou have offended; to mourn
after Christ whom thou have pierced; to languish after the communion and
fellowship of that Holy SPIRIT whom thou have so often grieved Gaspar. Sanct.
com. in Ier. page 326. Lachrymae latebras amant, ut liberius, et sine
interpellatione fluant. and comment. in Lam. page 1046. Tempus nocturnum,
maxim oportunum lugentibus: et quia tenebrae ipsae animum aegru^ magis ac
magis contrahunt, et quia silentiu^ ipsum nocturnum ab ea cogitatione non ^init
animum abduci, quae graviter excruciat.
. The silent time of the night, when the soul is sequestered from all other
secular occasions, is a fit time for penitential tears; because then the
heart may freely melt it self into sorrow and contrition, without fear or
suspicion of vain glory, without interruption or avocation from those sad and
serious meditations which make his soul to bleed within him. And when once
thou have opened this vein, suffer it not to close and dry up again, Motives
to weep for sin.
but keep the wound still fresh and bleeding. And for Motives to stir thee up
hereunto,

1 Look upon the example of Christ; he did not only offer up strong cries,
with tears and supplications, (as here he wept for Jerusalem) but he shed his
own most precious blood: Now what comparison is there between a few drops of
thy tears, and the streams of his precious blood? If Christ thought not much
to shed many drops of his dearest blood for sin, why should any think much
to shed a few tears for it? The holy Martyrs have resisted sin, even to
shedding of their own blood, with which they have quenched the fire of
persecution; and if the streams of blood be spared, through the mercy of God,
in the days of peace, none may think much, as Chrysostom Chysost. to 5.
Grae^o Lat. de sanct. Martyr. s^r. 67. (...).
well gathers, to let a few tears fall from his eyes, wherewith he may quench
the fiery darts of inordinate lust and affections.

2 Consider, that God takes notice of every tear that falls from thine eyes; as
himself speaks to Hezekia, I have heard thy prayers, and have seen thy tears
Isay. 38.5.
: so David speaks, The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping Psalm. 6.8.
: implying, that tears have a voice, which God hears and understands, when
the speech fails, and the tongue is not able to utter a word; yet if the heart
can bleed for sin, and the eye shed tears for it, these speak a language
that God is well enough acquainted withal. Mary Magdalene wept, and washed the
feet of Christ; Peter went out and wept bitterly: we do not read of any
words they spoke; but doublesse those tears they had a voice that made earnest
prayer and request to God August. to. 5. de civit. Dei ad Marcell. l. 20. p.
191. Q^^nto quisque sanctior est, et desiderit sancti plenior, tanto est ejus
in orando fletus ube^ior.
: The prayers of the mouth are oftentimes but lip-labor, and false witnesses
of a double heart; as the Lord complains of his people Isay. 29.13.
; but the prayers of tears, those are always testimonies of a single heart,
and prevail with God. It is said of Anna, that she prayed to the Lord, and
wept sore, Laurent. Justinian. lignum vitae grad. 12. de orat. c. 9. Nemo ad
Deum aliquando fleus accessit, qui non quod postulavit, acceperit: nullus ab
eo, beneficia, dolen^er optavit, qui non impetravit; ipse enim est, qui
consolatur flentes, dolentes curat, poenitentes informat.
but her voice was not heard 1 Samuel 1.10.
: so that God hears prayers when no voice is uttered. The silent voice of
tears makes a loud noise in the ears of God.

3 God does not only take notice of thy tears that are shed, but he takes
delight in them, as sinful mirth makes him to weep as it were: as Christ here
wept for Jerusalem, when she was in the height of her voluptuous courses; so
penitential tears make him to rejoice; There is more joy in heaven for one
sinner that repents, than for ninety nine righteous persons that need no
amendment Luke 15.7.
.

4 GOD does not only delight in thy tears, but he will also reward thee; for
if a cup of cold water shall not lose his reward, much less shall those
precious tears, which fall from the eyes of the Saints of God, go unrewarded;
not as if there were such worth and merit in them; but because God is pleased
out of his gracious dignation freely to promise a reward unto them August.
10.8. in Psalm. page 325. Dulciores sunt lachrymae otantium, quam gaudia
theatrorum. Bernard. super. Cant. ser. 30. Lachrymae poenitentium vinum eorum,
quod in illis vitae odor, sapor gratiae, indulgentiae gustus, reconciliationis
jucunditas, sanitas redeuntis innocentiae, serenatae suavitas conscientiae.
: They which sow in tears shall reap in joy Psalm. 126.5.
: and again, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted Mat.
5.4.
. If therefore thou will now weep and shed tears for thy sin, God will
find a time to wipe all tears from thine eyes Revel. 21.4.
.

5 Is it not better now to weep for thy sins when thy tears may do thee
good Chrysostom. to. 3. Graecolat. in Psa. 125. page 454. and in Psalm. 50. page
1004.
, then hereafter to spend an endless number of fruitless and bootlesse tears
without any profit or advantage to thy self? There will come a time when
tears will not prevail with God. When the Blessing was gone, Esau could not
obtain it, though he sought it with tears Heb. 12.17.
. He that will not now weep for his sins here in this world, he shall
weep for them unto all eternity in another world, in that Lake which burns
with fire and brimstone, where there shall be nothing else but weeping and
wayling and gnashing of teeth: and therefore as ever thou desire to escape
this weeping, so let it be thy care now to prevent it, by weeping and shedding
tears for thy sins, whiles the shedding of them may do thee good.

Chap. 6.
LUKE 19.42. Oh if thou had known, at least in this thy day, the things that
belong to thy peace, etc!


CHAP. 6.
The will of God touching man's salvation, as it is generally revealed and
propounded in the Gospel.

HItherto of Christ's carriage and deportment toward Jerusalem; It follows now
to speak of his words and speeches to her, and therein first of his passionate
and patheticall wish or complaint: wherein first of all, the manner of speech
offers it self to our consideration, because the original text is not
rendered alike by all. In the translation of it, some looking more at the scope
and intention of Christ, who sets himself purposely to bewail the condition
of Jerusalem, than at the bare and naked translation of the words; do render
them in the nature of a wish or desire, Oh that thou had known, etc. and so
make the sense full and complete, without the supply or addition of any thing
else unto it; and the particle (If) is sometimes rendered in that sense, as the
learned observe Jo. Gerh. com. in loc. page 344.
: and many Interpreters go this way Theoph. Ca^t. ^ans. etc. Em. Sa.
. Others looking more punctually at the grammatical construction of the words
in the Original, render the words in a conditional phrase, by way of
supposition, If thou had known, etc So the New Translation reads them.
. and so seem to make it a defective speech, or a broken and imperfect
sentence, which must be thus supplied and made up: If thou had known the
worth and excellency of those good things which are offered unto thee by the
coming of a Savior, thou would not value them at so low a rate: Or; If
thou had known the misery and calamity thou lie open unto, thou would
not sing and rejoice as now thou do, but weep and shed tears as thou see
me do. And this also is well backed with the authority of the learned Cyril.
Theod. Maldonat. Stell. Tirin. Tremel.
, and they are induced to incline to this opinion, because of the tears of
Christ mentioned in the verse before.

Now for a man that speaks out of depth of sorrow, and fullness of grief, it
is nothing strange for him to break off his speech, and leave it imperfect;
for as it is the nature of joy to enlarge the heart, and dilate the spirits,
and so set open as it were a wide door for the thoughts of the heart to go out
and vent themselves; so it is the nature of sorrow to contract and straiten, to
narrow and draw together the spirits, and as it were to shut the door of the
soul, so that like as it is with a vessel, though it be full of liquor, yet
if the mouth of it be stopped, none will flow out; even so it was here with
Christ: having begun to speak, he was so overwhelmed with grief, and so
deeply affected with the estate and condition of Jerusalem, that he could not
speak out, but was even constrained to weep out the rest of the sentence,
leaving the full sense and meaning to be gathered and supplied out of his
tears: as is used in such passionate and patheticall speeches. The matter is
not much in regard of the sense and meaning, whether the words be read in
manner of a wish, O that thou had known, etc. or whether they be translated
by way of supposition, in a conditional phrase, If thou had known, etc. And
happily he shall not do amiss that joins them both together, and reads the
words thus, O if thou had known So the Old Translation reads them. So Gerh.
comment. on the place. Doct. 2.
and so they afford this observation.

That Christ did seriously will and desire the welfare of Jerusalem, even that
part of Jerusalem which was afterward miserably destroyed, for refusing the
mercy that was tendered and offered unto her: neither did he will this as man
only, but likewise as God; the will of the humanity, and the will of the Deity
were not contrary, but subordinate; they did both meet in the object or thing
willed; that is, in the good and salvation of Jerusalem. And that he did
seriously will it, there be three things in the Text seem plainly to evince:
1. His tears, as has been showed before. 2. His patience and long-suffering,
because notwithstanding the killing of so many Prophets, as had been slain
before, the contempt and undervaluing of so many mercies as had been offered
before; yet even to that very day he carried thoughts of peace toward her,
and accordingly sent her means of peace, even such means, as from that day
forward she should never enjoy the like again. And what more evident sign of
his serious intentions than this, that he is so long, before his thoughts can
be taken off from it. 3. His coming to her in his own person: when the
Physician does not only prescribe remedies for his sick Patient, and gives
order what he shall take, but also comes himself in his own person to apply
them, lest there should be any mistake or neglect; it is a sign he does
seriously will and desire his recovery; so when Christ comes himself in person
to Jerusalem, as to his sick patient; it shows how willing and desirous he
was to work a cure upon this diseased party, and to heal that was amiss; and
this is that which himself testifies, and speaks out plainly elsewhere, Mat.
23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee, even as the hen
gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Ye see what Christ
professes, I would have gathered thee, etc. and that his purpose and intention
was serious in the willing of it, appears, 1. From the ingemination of the
word, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem: a single compellation had been sufficient, to
let Jerusalem know his mind; but that it might make a deeper impression, and
that she might see and perceive his thoughts and purposes to be serious
indeed; therefore he doubles the word, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem Chrysostom. To. 1.
in N.T. com. in lo. edit. graecolat. page 789. (...).
: to show that he desired her welfare, not by a single and slender intention,
but by a more serious and re-doubled affection. 2. From the qualification of
the persons Chrysostom. ibid. (...)
, whom he would have gathered, they were such as had killed the Prophets,
stoned them that were sent, etc. and now ready to exercise the like cruelty
upon himself. Here were indignities more than sufficient to have abated
somewhat of his affections toward her, and to have taken off his thoughts and
intentions of doing her good, had not the bent and inclination of his will been
seriously propending that way. 3. From the frequency of his endeavors; he had
made an offer and tendry of of salvation unto her, not once, but often; even by
all the Prophets in the Old Testament that went before him: neither was there
only an offer tendered, but that also seconded with earnest entreaties and
exhortations to accept of it, and that after so many denyals and refusals of
it, he would yet still continue to make the same offer, and that in his own
person; it plainly shows, that he did seriously will and desire her good. 4.
From the manner of willing, which is set forth here by way of comparison, as
the hen gathers her chickens, etc. Now of all femals amongst the unreasonable
creatures, there is none more tenderly affectionate toward her young, than the
hen is toward her chickens; other fowls are not known to have young, unless
it be when they are in the nest, or together with them; but the hen is known
to have young, even then when she is apart from them, when they do not follow
her, because even then her wings flagge and hang down, her feathers are rough,
Chap. 5.
and stand up, she goes feebly, and clocks mournfully, as the Father well
observes Chryso. ibid. and Aug tract. 15. in Jo. and to 4 oper. 76. H. and To.
8.128 K L. and 216 F.G. and to. 9.29. H.
. And therefore Christ comparing his will and affection for the good of
Jerusalem, with the native propension that is in the hen, to gather her
chickens under her wings, does plainly show that he did seriously will and
desire her good.

And Io. Bient. came. in loc. Hae lachryme ut ex insimis Christi e^^nant, ita
produnt non ipsius tantu^, sed etiam Dei p^tris su^ affectu^ erg^ homines
pereuntes, etc. declaravit volu^tate^ Patri^ sui, tam verbis qua^ ^^^ribus, ut
fletu and lachrymis super urbe Hierusal. his n. manifest videmus, Deum maximo
ommu^ dolor propter homines pereuntes affici, etc. etsi non dolet Deus sua
natura ut homines dole^t, auame^ doloris affectus propter homines percuntes
divino quoda^modo in deo sum^^us est.
to enlarge the point a little more, and raise it a little higher, from the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, to all those to whom the Gospel is preached, and to
whom Christ is offered in the ministry of the Word: for there is a like
paritie of reason in both: for Christ came not Ioh. 6.38.
to do his own will, but the will of his Father that sent him. And therefore
so as Christ willed the good and salvation of Jerusalem, to which he was sent;
so does God will the good and salvation of those to whom the Gospel is
preached: that is, as Christ did seriously will the good and salvation of
Jerusalem, even of that part of Jerusalem, which for the refusal of his mercy
was afterward miserably destroyed by her enemies: So God does seriously will
and desire the salvation of those to whom the Gospel is preached; even of
those, who through their own fault perish in their sins: For God will have
all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth 1 Timothy 2.4.
: which words I take in that sense and meaning that I find them interpreted in
the Articles of our Church R^gers An ar. 17. pro. 9. et 10.
, to wit, according to that conditional promise of grace and favor to
mankind, which is universal; universal, I say, in the offer, or antecedent
part of it, though not so in the event or consequent part of it: and so it is
taken by Zanchy, and some other modern Divines Zanch. de not. Dei, l. 3. c. 4.
q. 3. Quaedam vult Deus conditionaliter, ut omnes homines servari si velint,
legem implere, aut in Christu^ credere, and jux^^ hanc sensum illud Apostoli
quidam interpreta^tur, 1 Timothy 2.4. proinde quia non omnes praest^nt
conditionem, idcirco non omnes servantur, etc.

Paulo post, Haec voluntas vocatur antecedens, idque proptereae quod Deus
antequam alique^ vel coelo beet, vel puniat, praemittit praecepta quibus
significat quid sibi gratum sit, deinde subdit minas et promissiones, quibus
quid facturus de nobis sit, si non obtemperemus, et contra quid largiturus, si
obediamus, declarat. Eade^ tradit in Mis. l. 3. de pr. sa. ex these. 2. de vol.
Dei Pol. par. theol. de vol. Dei. Co^ditionalis voluntas Dei est, qua quaeda^
vult cum adjuncta condition, and haec vocatur antecedens, quia antecedit
praemium vel poenam proposita in promissionibus vel comminationibus; hac vult
Deus omnes homines etiam reprobos salvos fieri, et ad agnitionem veritatis
venire, nimirum si promissionibus et praedicationi Evangelii fidem habeant and
obtemperent, etc. Eadem tradit Synt. theol. l. 2. c. 19.


, who make the latter part of the sentence to be a condition required of every
one, for the obtaining of that salvation which is mentioned in the foregoing
part of it, so that the will of God revealed in the Scriptures touching man's
salvation, it respects both the end, and the means; the end which God would
have men come unto, it is a happy end, even the salvation of their souls;
which salvation he is willing to give unto them, upon such terms and
conditions as are expressed in the new Covenant; the means he would have them
use for the attaining of this end, is, to come to the knowledge of the truth,
even that lively and effectual knowledge which is accompanied with the love of
the truth, and obedience to it.

I am not ignorant that some understand the Apostles words of an absolute will
in God, and therefore do not extend or enlarge it to all and every one to whom
the Gospel is preached, but only to some few of all sorts of men. And this
interpretation they father upon St. Augustine, the more to endeare it to their
followers, by so great a name: and it may not be denied, but that it contains
a truth in it: Chap. 6.
for God by his absolute will, which does always most certainly and infallibly
take effect, he wills the salvation of none but the elect only. But yet that
learned Father, in that very place where he gives this interpretation, does
also give leave and liberty to every one to follow any other sense and meaning
that the words may bear, so be it do not constrain us to believe that the
omnipotent power of God can be hindered in those things which he absolutely
wills Aug. Enc^yrid. ad Lauren. c. 103. Decimatis omne olus, etc. Sicut hic
omne olus, omne olerum genus, ita et illic omnes homines, omne hominum genus
intelligere possumus, et quocunque alio modo intelligi potest, dum tame^
credere non cogamur, aliquid omnipotentem Deum voluisse fieri, factumque non
esse.
. And the same Father does elsewhere acknowledge that the words may well admit
of another interpretation Epist. 107. vit. Si quo alio modo illa verba
apostolica intelligi possunt, ut tame^ huic apertissimae veritati, in qua
videmus tam multos, volentibus hominibus, sed Deo nole^te salvos non fieri,
contraria esse non possint.
: and himself does so qualify his former exposition Bespad art. falso sibi
impositos art. 2. Remota ergo hac discretione, qua^ divina scientia intra
secretu^ suae justitiae continet, sincerissime credendu^ est ac profitendu^,
Deum velle ut omnes homines salvi fiant, etc. Paulo post, Ex quibus quod multi
pereunt, percuntiu^ est meritum; quod multi salvantur, salvantis est donum, ut
enim reus damnetur, inculpabilis est Dei justitia; ut autem reus justificetur,
ineffabilis Dei gratia est.
, as that he plainly shows, that the cause why men perish, is in themselves,
because they do not desire salvation, neither are they willing to have it,
upon such terms and conditions as it is offered unto them; so that they come
to perish, not simply for want of good will in God toward them, but because
they are wanting to themselves, in the use of those means that lead to life;
and thus do some of his own followers interpret his mind and meaning, and
will have him to make the Apostle to speak of the antecedent part of that
conditional will, which is revealed and generally propounded in the Gospel
Alvarez. de auxi^. great. l. 5. disput. 33. explicat 4.
. But however that be, it is certain, that many learned men do so interpret
the Apostle, both ancient and modern Ambros. Theophilact. Oecumen. Aquin.
Cajetan. Cornel. ^ lapide, Heming. Muthes. Balduin. Bullinger.
: Some in their commentaries upon the place Chrysostom. hom. 1. in epist ad Ephesians.
Damas. l. 2. de fide orthod. cap. 29. Prosper. l. 2. de vocat. gen c. 19. et
25. Ambros. 2. de vocat. genesis ca 1. Gerb. lo. to. 2 page 186. Meisn. Anthrop.
deca. 2. disp. 2. q. 1. did. 2. Paul. Testard. synops. Doctr. de not. et great
these. 298. Sluter. Philant. Divina. ca. 2. Muscul. lo. co^. de dispensatione
gratiae Dei. page 272.
, and some in other parts of their works; and that seems most agreeable to
the scope and intention of the place: he that takes a view of all other
interpretations that are given of the words, he shall find none amongst them
all (those only excepted which are in sense the same, and do but differ from
it in words and expressions) but it is more strained and wrested from the true
sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost, and liable to more just and material
exceptions, than this is.

As for that first exposition of Saint Augustine, which interprets the Apostle
of an absolute will in God, and restraines it only to some of all sorts,
though it be received by many, yet it seems not so proper and suitable to the
scope of the place; because the words are brought in as a reason or motive to
press the exhortation laid down before; to wit, that prayers and
supplications be made for all men; and therefore must be of equal extent and
largeness with it. The word All must be so taken in the Motive annexed, as it
is in the duty enjoined; God wills the salvation of all those for whom he will
have his people make prayers and supplications: Their charity in praying must
reach to all, because God will have all men saved. Now the word All, in the
duty enjoined, as Calvin well observes Calvin. comment. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
Orationes jubet non pro fidelibus modo concipi, sed pro universo genere humano
etc. Videatur Aug to. 2 ep. 107 Vitali Carthaginensi.
, it signifies the whole race of mankind, and so reaches to all and every
one: God will have prayers and supplications made, not only for some of all
sorts, but for all of every sort; and therefore the Text gives express charge,
that prayers be made for all in authority; not only for some of all sorts, as
for some Kings, and some that bear office and authority under them, but for
all in authority; even those that were no better than Wolves and Bears, and
Lions to the Church; for such were Kings and all in authority in those times;
they were so many sworn enemies to Christ and his Kingdom, and yet prayers
and supplications are to be made for them. So the Prophet injoynes the
Israelites, when they were in captivity under the King of Babel, to seek the
prosperity of the City, and to pray for the Kings welfare, and the good
success of his government Ier. 29.7.
: So Christ enjoynes his Disciples to pray for their enemies and persecutors,
etc. and that from the example of God himself, who causes his Sun to shine,
and the rain to fall upon the just and unjust Mat. 5.44.
: So when the people had revolted, and provoked God with a high hand, what does
Samuel? does he cease to pray for them? No: God forbid that I should sin
against God in ceasing to pray for you 1 Samuel 12.23.
. There is not any particular man whom the faithful are to exclude from the
benefit of their prayers. Every one is capable of salvation upon such terms as
are expressed in the Covenant; and it is the duty of every one, as to seek the
enlargement of Gods Kingdom, so for that end to pray for him that is without,
that he may be added to it: as he is bound to do good unto all Gal 6.10.
; so likewise to pray for them, that being one principal means and way by
which he is enabled to do them good; as he is bound to love his neighbor,
that is, every one as himself, so likewise he is bound to pray for him; this
being one of the best fruits and effects of love that he can show unto him; as
there is none but stands in need of his prayers, and may receive benefit and
advantage by them; so none must be excepted in the making of them. Now from
all these premises, it is plain and evident, that in the duty enjoined by the
Apostle, the word All, is to be taken in a general sense, for all and every
one; and therefore in all congruity of reason, it must be of the same extent
and largeness in the Motive that is used for the enforcing of it, because
otherwise it would not bear up the weight that is laid upon it, it would not
reach home, nor serve the Apostles purpose and intention; it would not be
sufficient or available to persuade unto, or to further and put on the practice
of that precept for which it is brought: and this is consonant and agreeable to
other places of Scripture, where the same truth is asserted and laid down. Let
one or two suffice in stead of all the rest; Ezekiel 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that
he should turn and live, etc. Where ye have first the declaration of Gods will
and affection to the sons of men, and then the proof and confirmation of it.
God declares himself to stand tenderly affected toward the sons of men, as
appears,

1 By the quality of the person to whom he bears this good will, and that is
a sinner, not only a repenting sinner, as some gloss upon it, but even of that
sinner, who for the refusing of mercy offered, dies and perishes in his
sin; as is plain by comparing this with another parallel place Ezekiel. 18.23.
; I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, etc.

2 By the nature of the affection he expresses toward him, and that is set
down partly by way of negation; I have no pleasure in his death, or I desire
not his death: that is, antecedently, and of himself, in the primary intention
of his Providence toward him: for Gods primary intention in sending the
Gospel to any, is to bring him to salvation, and not to seal up and further
his condemnation; unless it be through his own fault, undervaluing the mercy
offered, and neglecting the helps and means afforded unto him in the same
Bernard ser. 5. in natali Domini. Deus ex se sumit seminariummi serendi: quod
judicat and condemnat nos, eum quodammodo cogimus, ut long aliter de cord
ipsius miseratio, quam animadversio procedere videatur.
; as Christ tells the Jews John. 5.34, 40.
; These things I say unto you that ye might be saved, but ye will not come
unto me, that ye might have life, etc. And partly it is set down by way of
affirmation, but rather that he turn from his wickedness and live; he would
have him to live, and is willing to give life and salvation to him, according
to that course of providence that he has taken for him, in, and by the new
Covenant; and that he may live, he would have him to turn away from his
wickedness, that deprives him of life: for to that end and purpose he sends his
Word and Messengers, to convince him of his sin, to terrify and affright him
with it, to shame him out of his sinful courses. Again, ye have the proof
and confirmation of all this, As I live says the Lord; he confirms it with
an oath: the bare promise of God deserves credit, because it is he that cannot
lie which has promised; but when he binds himself by oath to make good that
promise, who can make the least doubt of it? And therefore God promises with
an oath to make his promise the more firm and stable Hier. to. 2. epis^ 46.
Ide^co jurat, ut si non credimus premittenti Deo, credamus saltem pro salute
juranti.
: God willing more abundantly (says the Apostle) to show to the heirs of
promise the stablenesse of his counsel, has bound himself with an oath, etc.
that by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie,
they might have strong consolation Heb. 6.16.
.

Again, the same truth is confirmed in the new Testament, by those two great
Apostles, the Apostle of the Gentiles, and the Apostle of the Jews, S. Paul,
and S. Peter; Romans 11.32.
God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. Where ye
see, that misery and mercy are in some sort of equal extent; that is, though
all that be in misery do not obtain mercy, yet they are some ways under
mercy: those that are made miserable by the breach of the first Covenant, are
made capable of mercy by virtue of the second Covenant Bernard. ser. 1. in
purificat. Mariae. Omnibus offertur, and in communi posita est Dei
misericordia: nemo illius expe^s est, nisi qui renuit. See Dr P. ser. on Romans
^.17. pa 9. 10. 11. etc. H. Scud. his Chrystians daily walk ca. 15. s. 2. page
458. Culverwell his Treatise of Fa. p. 29.
: Whom the Law convinces of sin, to them the Gospel offers mercy in
Christ. And the primary purpose and intention of God in the work of the Law,
is to prepare them for Christ, and for the Gospel; that being made sensible of
their sin and misery by the Law, they might be more willing to accept of
mercy, upon such terms and conditions as it is offered in the Gospel. God
never shuts up any under sin by the spirit of bondage, but it is with a
purpose and intention to fit him for mercy, if he make a right use of this
passage of his providence toward him; that is, when out of a kindly impression
that it has wrought upon him, he is moved to seek out for mercy, in that way
and order that God has appointed. So then, as the purpose and intention of God
in the Ministry of the Law, is to shut up all under sin, to show them what
they are in themselves, that every mouth may be stopped, and all made culpable
before God Romans 3.19.
: so his pupose and intention in the Gospel, and the Covenant of grace, is, to
set open a door of mercy to all, that they may be encouraged through hope of
finding mercy, to seek after it: and to this accords the Apostle S. Peter
Pet. 3.9.
; God is patient toward us, and would have no man perish, but all men to come
to repentance. The persons of whom God speaks, are such as are the object of
his patience, toward whom he exercises his long suffering; and those are not
only some of all estates and conditions, but all and every one, of what estate
and condition so ever he be; not only the elect, but more especially the
rest of the world, even those that abuse his patience, and treasure up unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath Romans 2.4.
; who are therefore termed vessels of wrath Romans 9 22.
, he suffers with much patience vessels of wrath fitted for destruction; Aug.
resp ad artic. falso sibi impositos art. 13 Nefas est Deo ascribere causas
peccatorum and ^uinarum omnium.
now if ye would know how God stands affected to these, the Apostle resolves it
first negatively, not willing that any should perish; having no antecedent
thoughts of their destruction, before they give occasion, and are looked upon
as persons worthy of destruction, for their sins: then affirmatively, He
would have all men come to repentance Calvin comm. in loc. Mirus hic erga
humanum genus amor, quod omnes vult esse salvos, and ultro pereuntes in salutem
colligere paratus est, etc. omnibus enim promiscue manum porrigit Deus, in
Evangelio.
, lest any should think that the act of Gods will stands in an indifferent
neutrality, touching man's salvation, not caring greatly whether they sink or
swim, or what become of them; therefore the Apostle does not only clear the
will of God from being a cause of their perishing; but also shows, that it
has a positive act, for, and toward the procuring of their salvation, because
he is willing that all should come to repentance, and by repentance to
remission of sins, and eternal life. By all which places, and many others that
might be alleged to the same purpose; it is plain and evident, that God does
seriously will the good and salvation of many, who notwithstanding through their
own fault, perish in their sins.

CHAP. 7.
That the offer of Grace in the Ministry of the Word is general, without
exception of sins or persons.



1 The generality of the offer that is made unto them.

2 The sincerity of Gods meaning in it: for if God offer life and salvation
unto all in the Ministry of the Word, and withal mean truly, and sincerely,
as he speaks, and as the offer imports, it must needs follow, that there is a
real purpose and intention in him of giving life and salvation accordingly.

1 The offer is general, without exception either of sins or persons: Peter.
Com. in loc. Illud (omnis) indicat divini hujus deni f^uctum esse generalem, et
ad omne genus hominum pertinere.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that who so
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life John 3.16.
: Where ye see there is an offer of salvation tendered to the world, not only
to the world of believers, but to the whole world of mankind, wheresoever the
Gospel is preached to them; as appears by another place equivalent to this,
and which may be in stead of a comment upon it 1 John 2.2.
; where there is mention made of the whole world, Chap. 6.
and that phrase is not any where restrained in all the Scripture, either to
the elect only, or true believers, and that it is so to be understood in this
place, may appear partly from the text it self, which does not obscurely
imply, that this world, to which the offer of salvation is tendered, is divided
into believers, that do obtain salvation; and unbeleevers that miss of it
See Culverw. his apology annexed to his treatise of faith Calv. com in loc.
Ideireo Christus vita^ attulit, quia coelestis pater genus humanu^ quod amat,
pe^ire nolit, etc. universale^ nota^ apposuit, tum ut promiscue omnes ad vitae
participatione^ invi^et, tum ut praecidat occasionem incredulis. Eodem etiam
pertinet nomen Mundi, quo prius usus est, etc. se toti mundo propitium esse
^ste^dit, cum sine exceptione omnes ad fidem Christi vocat, quae nihil aliud
est quam ingressus in vitam, etc patet omnibus Christus, et expositus est.
; for when the text says, whosoever believes in him shall be saved, etc. does
it not secretly intimate that there is but only a part of this world, even
that part that believes in Christ, that is brought to salvation? the rest of
this world, though they have life and salvation offered unto them as well as
others, yet they miss of eternal life, and perish in their sins, because
they do not believe in him. But more plainly does this appear from the words
following, where ye have first the end of Christ's coming into the world, set
down ver. 17. and that both negatively, not to condemn the world, removing
that from Christ, which was not any part of his primarie purpose and intention;
and also affirmatively, but that the world through him might be saved: that was
his primarie and principal intention; and he did make the world capable of
salvation. Then secondly, ye have the issue and event that falls out in the
world by the coming of Christ, and that set down ver. 18. He that believes
in him is not condemned, but he that believes not in him is condemned already.
What could be spoken more plainly and fully, to show that part of this world to
which salvation is offered in Christ, is saved by believing in him; and part of
it is condemned for not believing in him.

Again, not to multiply Scriptures in so clear a case, take one for all, Mar.
16.15.
Go and preach the Gospel to every creature. Now to preach the Gospel, it is
not to make an historical narration of the nature, person, and offices of
Christ, but to publish and declare, that there is a redemption purchased by
Christ, and that whosoever believe in him shall be made partakers of it: So
that upon the matter, to preach the Gospel, is nothing else, but to offer life
and salvation; and therefore to whomsoever the Gospel is preached, to him is
life and salvation offered. Now when Christ sends forth his Apostles to preach
the Gospel, he furnishes them with authority and commission, to go and
preach to every creature: that is, to hold forth the golden Scepter of mercy,
and to offer life and salvation, upon such conditions as are expressed in the
new Covenant, to every person under heaven Muscu. de dis. great. Dei in loc.
com. page 268. Parata est gratia Dei, et exposita toti orbi, perinde ac solis
beneficium, calorem ac splendorem suum passim effundentis, omnibus est paratum.
Et. p. 272. Hujus vero (sc. gratiae) dispensatio, ad universas totius orbs
nationes, ac mortales omnes, divina est bonitate destinata. Item de
Philanthropia Dei, pa. 767. Quintum Philanthropiae Dei argumentu^, est in
redemptionis nostrae dispensatione, quae complectitur vocationem generalem, qua
per evangelium regni sui, cunctas totius orbis nationes, ad coelestem gratiam
vocavit. Act. syn. Dor. ar. 2. these. 5. Promissio Evangelii, omnibus populis et
hominibus, ad quos Deus pro suo beneplacito mittit Evangelium, promiscue et
indiscriminatim annunciari, et proponi debet, cum resipiscentiae et fidei
mandato. Sent. Theol. mag. Brit. art. 2 these. 5. In Ecclesia juxta Evangelii
promissum, salus omnibus offertur. Zanch. suppl. ad Sen. Arg. de praed. these.
8. Promissiones cum sint universales, quibus Deus gratiam suam offert, ideo
nemo scipsum excludat, sed cum pariter omnes peccaverimus, omnes ex aequo
salutem oblatam apprehendamus.
.

And the Ministers of the Gospel which now succeed the Apostles in preaching
the faith of Christ, they have the same commission to preach the Gospel
respectively in their several places; they are Ambassadors for Christ, as the
Apostle speaks 2 Cor. 5.19.
: and therefore may not deliver any embassage, but such as is agreeable to the
mind and meaning of their heavenly Master: and therefore if by virtue of their
office and commission they may hold a treaty of peace with every creature under
heaven; and in the name of their Lord and Master offer conditions of peace to
all and every one that hears, if he will come in, and lay down his weapons of
rebellion; it must needs follow, that God who sends this message of peace by
the hands of his servants, does also by them, offer conditions of peace, to all
and every one to whom this message is sent, and the Gospel preached.

And it must needs be so for these three reasons: 1. Because there is no
creature under heaven, but may lay claim and title to the blessings promised
in the Gospel, upon performance of the conditions; that is, if he repent, and
believe, which could not be, unless the same were offered and tendered unto
him, upon such conditions; as we see it is with the devils, though they could
repent of their sins, and believe in Christ; yet can they not challenge thereby
remission of sins, or eternal life, because there is no such promise made
unto them; life and salvation is no where offered unto them upon any condition;
and therefore if life and salvation were offered only to the Elect, Chap. 6.
the rest of the world should be in the same condition with the devils, as
incapable of mercy as they are; which may not be granted: for there is not any
man living within the pale of the Church, but has a tie and obligation laid
upon him to repent and believe: Acts 17.30.
Now he commands all men every where to repent; And again, 1 John 3.23.
This is his commandment, that we believe in the name of the Son of God,
etc. And God never requires of any the conditions of faith and repentance, but
with assurance of remission of sins, and eternal life, if they be performed.
Acts 2.38, 39.
Repent and be baptized every one of you, and ye shall receive the gift of the
holy Ghost: for the promise is made to you, and to your children, and to all
that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. All that are
under the command, are also under the promise; they are both of the same
latitude and extent; that is, both run in general terms; and no marvel,
for the promise is used as an argument or motive to persuade and encourage
obedience to the command; and therefore if it were not of equal extent with
it, if the commandment were more large than the promise, or if the promise did
not reach as far as the commandment, it would not be able to bear up the
weight that is laid upon it: whereas God never uses any motive to persuade
obedience to his people, but there is sufficient reason in it, to prevail with
them, if it be rightly considered, and so it is in this case, as the Scripture
makes it plain and evident, Mat. 7.7, 8.
Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, Chap. 7.
knock and it shall be opened unto you: for whosoever asks receives,
whosoever seeks finds, whosoever knocks, to him it shall be opened
Bulling. com. in loc. Ne diceres, non aude^ Deu^ precibus meis fatigare, in
praesentia dixit, Petite et dabitur. Imo ne causareris hanc sententiam
fortassis ad te nihil pertinere, addit: quisquis enim petit, etc. Muscul com.
in loc. Ita comparata est divina bonitas, ut nemo sit futurus cui non detur,
dummodo petat; nemo sit qui non sit inventurus, dummodo quaerat; nemo sit
excludendus, modo pulset.

Sent. Theol. mag. Brit. art. 2 these 4 In merito mortis Christi, fundatur
universale promissum evangelicum, juxta quod Omnes in Christu^, remissionem
peccatorum, et vitam aeternam reipsa consequantur. Caejet. com. in loc.
Quodlibet horum trium definitur, efficax, universaliter.


. Where ye see the promise is made to all those upon whom the commandment is
laid, they run along together in an equal extent, and the promise is made
good, in as full and ample terms, as the command is obeyed: not any of all
those that perform the conditions required, that is disappointed of the
blessing promised to it: for whosoever asks receives, etc.

2. Because there is no ground or warrant, that any one can have that he shall
receive remission of sins, if he do embrace the promise of the Gospel, and
lay hold upon it by a lively faith; if the offer be not tendered in general
terms, without exception either of sins or persons, to all and every one
that does believe; for there is no such promise as has this, and that man
particularly, and by name, mentioned in it; and therefore if ye ask any man a
reason of the faith that is in him, or what ground and warrant he has, to
believe that he shall obtain remission of sins, if he do repent, and obey
the Gospel, seeing his name is no where in all the Gospel particularly
mentioned; he can give no other reason but this, that remission of sins is
offered and tendered in general terms; whosoever repents, whosoever
believes, etc. and therefore it will follow by good consequence, If I repent
and believe, I shall obtain mercy and forgiveness Muscul. com. in Joan. c.
3.16. Neque putare quisquam debet dilectione^ ha^c Dei, ob id ad se minus
pertinere, quod in genere destinata est omnibus: ut enim nemo est mortalium,
qui non sit mundi hujus a Deo dilecti portio: ita nemo est ad quem non
pertineat divina ista dilectio, nisi sit, qui incredulita^e sua, seipsum a
beneficio illius excludat.
, because there is none excluded in the general offer of it; no particular,
but falls within the compass of that general, whosoever repents, whosoever
believes, etc. whereas if the offer of Christ and salvation were not general,
there is no man could have any ground or bottom for his faith to rest upon,
when the Gospel is first preached unto him; for when the Gospel is first
preached to men, in the estate of their unregeneracy, it is impossible for any
to know his election, then, when there is no peculiar fruits or effects of it
to be found in him; when as yet there is nothing wrought in him, Romans 3.33.
that puts a difference between him and another man. And therefore if the
offer were made only to the Elect, the Gospel should be preached in vain, to
men in their natural estate and condition, because they could not then
possibly know whether it did concern them or not, being altogether ignorant of
their election; and therefore that every one may know, that it does concern
him, the offer of mercy is tendered in general terms without exception either
of sins or persons: for there is none can believe in Christ by a justifying
faith, before he do believe the general promise of the Gospel by an
historical faith: he must first believe this to be a truth in general, That
whosoever repents of his sin shall be forgiven; whosoever takes Christ, shall
have salvation with him, etc. before he will ever come to resolve upon it, for
the doing of the same; but when this foundation is well laid by an historical
faith, That whosoever lays hold upon the general promise of the Gospel by a
lively faith, shall be saved: this is apt to beget thoughts and purposes
inclining that way, to make a man willing to embrace that conditional promise
by a lively and justifying faith, by consenting and agreeing to the conditions
of it, and undertaking by way of covenant for the performance of the same: for
the preaching of the Gospel, it is like the proclamation of a general pardon
sent forth into the world Aret. com. in Joan. 1.9. Illuminat omnem hominem,
etc. potest intelligi hic locus de oblata gratia, quae omni mortaliu^ generi
offertur, etc. Christi enim beneficiu^ omnibus offertur sine discrimine.

Perer. com. in Io. 1.9. Dicendum divinum lume^ lucere omnibus, qui omnibus
propositum et oblatum est. Tolet. com. in Ioa. 1.9. Dicitur lux illa omnem
hominem illuminare, sicut et sol, qui sufficiens lumen expandit, ut omnes
illuminet, et omnibus propositus est, ut videant. Lorin. com. in 2 Pet. 3.9.
Hinc porro elicitur, etc. parata^ semper in hac vita, hominibus gratiam esse,
etc. nec ullam poni exceptionem debere, vel in peccatis, vel in peccatoribus,
quantumlibet peccaverint.


: like as it is with a King, that sends forth a Proclamation of pardon to his
subjects that are run out in rebellion against him; promising, that if any will
lay down his weapons of rebellion, and come in and submit himself, he shall be
received again into favor. Now seeing there is not any, whose name in
particular is set down, nor himself by name mentioned in that Proclamation;
none could have any ground or warrant to obtain pardon, upon his submission, if
the offer of it were not tendered in general terms; but when he sees that
the proclamation of pardon runs in such a generality, that none are excluded;
this makes him assume and infer upon it; therefore if I come in and submit my
self, I shall find favor and mercy at the Kings hand; and so building upon
the truth of that general promise or offer made by the King, he is thereby
drawn to lay down his weapons of rebellion, and so comes again to be received
into his Princes favor: even so it is with the King of heaven; he sends out a
proclamation of pardon into the world, promising life and salvation to all and
every one that repents and believes in Christ, etc. Now seeing there is not any
man particularly, and by name mentioned in that Proclamation, none could have
any ground or warrant to obtain life and salvation upon his repentance, if the
offer of it were not tendered in general terms; but when a man sees the
promise of pardon run in such a generality, as excludes none; then he begins
to think with himself, certainly there is mercy to be had for me, if it be
sought for: why? because there is a general Proclamation made at the Market
cross, of every thirsty soul, and an offer of mercy tendered to every one that
is desirous of it, without exception either of sins or persons. Esaias. 55.1.
Hoe, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and ye that have no money
come, come, I say, and buy wine, and milk, and refined things, without silver
and without money: Then he begins seriously to consider with himself,
certainly God will receive me, if I come unto him: why? because there is a
general invitation sent forth to all and every one, he lets every one know
that he keeps open house, and sets open his doors for all comers; Rev. 22.17.
Let whosoever will come and take of the waters of life freely: not as if it
were in the power of a man's own will to come unto Christ; for he must be
prevented by the grace of God, and made willing, before he have any thoughts or
inclinations that way; but when he finds himself thus far wrought upon,
that he has a will and desire after that which is good, he needs not make
any question, but God is ready and willing to do him good, if he come unto him
in that way, and those means that God has appointed for his good, because the
invitation runs in general terms, let whosoever will come.

3 Because those that live under the means, and enjoy the Ministry of the
Word, and are not effectually wrought upon by the same, they are guilty of
refusing Christ, and of refusing grace, and mercy, and salvation with him; Pro.
1.24.
Behold, I have called, and ye have refused, etc. Implying, that those who are
outwardly called by the Word, if that Word do not prevail with them, it
leaves them guilty of the refusal of grace, and mercy; those that have the
Gospel preached unto them, and receive no benefit or advantage from it, they
refuse life and salvation: Acts 13.46.
It was necessary that the Word of God should first of all be preached unto
you, but seeing ye put it away from you, lo we turn to the Gentiles. Now
they could not be said to refuse Christ, or the privileges and benefits
purchased by him, unless they had been tendered unto them; no man can be
said to refuse a thing, that was never offered unto him; no more than he can
be said to forget a thing, which was never known to him. The Heathen that
never heard of Christ, they may be guilty of other sins, and justly condemned
for them, but they are not guilty of positive infidelity or refusing Christ
Dyke on John 3.19, 20. Perkins in his Treatise of conscience, fol. 522.
. John 15.22.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin, but
now have they no cloak for their sin Bernard. epist. 77. Si non loquutus
fuissem eis, etc. Ostendens sine dubio non ante censeri inexcusabiles de
contemptu, quam ad ipsorum usque notitiam jussio perveniret, nam si loquutus
fuisset sed non eis, inobedientiae culpam ignorantia nihilominus excusaret.
Vide Aug. in Evan. Joan. tract. 89. in ep. Joan. tr. 6. and sermo. 11. de Verb.
Dom. and epist. 105. Estius in sent. l. 2. d. 22. s. 14. Ignorantia juris
positivi, reddit actum involuntarium, quoad rationem peccati; nam qui eum facit
nescit esse prohibitum: non est autem ejusmodi actus peccatum, nisi quatenus
prohibitus est. Sylvius comment. in Thom. 2.2. q. 10. arti. 1. Observandum est
infidelitatem, aliam esse negativam, aliam privativam, aliam contrariam:
Negativa, est nuda fidei carentia, in eo cui fides vel non est annuntiata, vel
certe non sufficienter; talem infidelitatem habent ii, qui vel de fide nihil
audiverunt, vel audiverunt quidem, sed ita obiter, ut mysteria fidei nondum
sunt eis ostensa esse evidenter credibilia. Privativa infidelitas, est carentia
fidei in eo qui potuit ac debuit credere, sed non voluit, etiamsi nullum habeat
ertorem positivum in intellectu, ut quando aliquis non vult fidem audire, vel
auditam, sufficienterque propositam, omittit acceptare. Infidelitas contraria,
est carentia fidei, in eo, cui, etsi fides sit sufficienter proposita, non vult
tamen credere, sed vel express et formaliter, negat aliquam propositionem
pertinentem ad fidem, vel asserit errorem tali propositioni contrarium.
Infidelitas mere negativa, non est peccatum, sed infidelitas contraria vel
privativa, ejus qui doctrinam fidei, sufficienter sibi propositam, non
acceptat, peccatum est, sive positivum errorem fidei contrarium habeat, sive
non habeat.
: that is, they should not have been guilty of this sin of refusing Christ,
and salvation by him, as now they are. It is mercy offered that makes men
guilty of refusal: the Jews were guilty of refusing Christ, because he came
unto his own, and his own received him not John 1.11.
. The world is guilty of refusing light, because light is come into the world,
and men love darkness more than light John 3.19.
. The Guests in the Gospel were guilty of refusing kindness, because when
they were invited they would not come Matthew. 22 3.
; but all with one consent began to make excuse Luke 14.18.
. The Jews were guilty of refusing grace, because they always resisted the
Holy Spirit Act. 7.51.
: So that if the offer of mercy were not general, if Christ and salvation were
offered only to the Elect, then none should be guilty of refusing Christ, and
his benefits; for all the Elect do embrace him, at least some time or other,
and the rest of the world cannot be said to refuse him, if he was never
offered unto them; and therefore either none refuse him, or else there is a
general offer made, and tendered to all and every one, as well those that
refuse him, as those that do receive him; and so the Apostle speaks Tit.
2.11.
, The grace of God which brings salvation to all men, etc. The doctrine of
grace which is the Gospel, is said to bring salvation to all men, because it
makes a general offer and tender of it to all and every one to whom the
Gospel is preached. And so much shall suffice for the first thing, to prove
that there is in God a real purpose and intention of giving life and salvation
upon some condition to all those to whom the Gospel is preached, namely, the
generality of the offer.

CHAP. 8.
That Gods meaning in the general offer of grace is sincere.

the sincerity of Gods meaning in this general offer, it may appear from
these four grounds.

1 From his appointing of means for that end. 2 From the nature of the means
which he appoints. 3 From his earnestness in pressing and persuading men to
use the same. 4 From his promise of a blessing to the careful and diligent use
of them.
1 From the appointing of means; for God would not ordain and appoint means
to be used, if he had no purpose or intention of bringing men to that end, for
which they were appointed, and to which they lead. No man will provide wood,
and stone, and other materials, and then hire workmen to hew and square, smooth
and polish them with choice instruments, that never intends to build a house.
No man will take order with servants to plow his field, and sow his seed in it,
that never intends a crop or harvest: So GOD would not appoint means to be
used by men for the obtaining of life and salvation, if he had no mind or
meaning to bestow it upon them Ruiz. de voluntate Dei, disput. 20 s. 6. Quia
Deus vult medium salutis, formaliter ut medium, convincitur eum velle
singulorum salutem, quae est finis, et consequenter non habere voluntatem
antecedentem, impediendi consequutionem finis: quia medium formaliter, ut
medium, quiddiattive consistit in eo, quod destinetur ad finem actualiter
consequendum: qui ergo antecedenter, et quantum est ex part sua, impedimentu^
medio vult opponere, ne finem actualiter co^sequatur, eo ipso vult in medio,
non exerceri rationem medii: nam qui vult medium formaliter ut medium, vult
illud propter finem, unde prius, et magis vult finem.
; for the means, as means, are neither useful nor desirable, but as they
stand in reference to the end: The end is desirable for it self, as having
that in it which is apt and sufficient to fill and satisfy the desire of the
soul; but the means have nothing in them which is amiable, pleasing, or worth
the desiring, but what they receive by an influence which the end has into
them. No wise Physician will prescribe or appoint bitter Pills and potions to be
taken for any sweetness or pleasantness which they have in themselves, but
only out of a desire, and in hope of obtaining health, which is the end for
which they are made; a man may in some sort desire the end, that does not
desire the means that lead unto it; as the sluggard, that desires wealth, but
will not labor or take pains to get it; but as the Schoolmen well observe,
he can in no sort will and desire the means, but he must withal will and
desire the end for which they were appointed Aquin. 1.2 q. 8. art. 3. Voluntas
potest ferri in finem, in quantum hujusmodi, sine hoc quod feratur in ea quae
sunt ad finem, sed in ea quae sunt ad finem, in quantum hujusmodi, non potest
ferri, nisi feratur in finem.
: And therefore if God have appointed means to be used for the obtaining of
life and salvation, there can be no question made touching the truth and
sincerity of his purpose and intention of giving life and salvation to all, and
every one that is careful and desirous to use the same; because the means in
which he offers mercy, they are his own means, even of his own
appointment; and if he had no mind or meaning to bestow those blessings on
men, which he commands them to seek, then should the means be appointed in
vain, which is far from the thoughts and counsels of the most wise God: for
if Nature, which is but Gods Handmaid, appoint nothing in vain, much less
will the God of Nature do it. Esa. 45.19.
I said not in vain to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me: for I the Lord speak
righteousness, and declare righteous things.

If a King do not only offer a pardon to a Traitor that is banished, but also
appoint means, and set him in a way by which he may obtain it; it is a sign
that his meaning is real in the tendrie of it, and that his purposes and
intentions are serious in it. Even so it is with God, he is general in the
offer and tendrie of salvation, as has been showed, and he appoints means
to be used by all, for the obtaining of it; and therefore he means sincerely,
as the offer imports. When the woman of Tekoa goes about to persuade David to
call home Absolon, whom he had banished, and be reconciled with him, she
draws her argument from the example of God, who is willing to be reconciled to
the banished sons of men, if means be used for it; nay, himself has
appointed means for the procuring of it 2. Sam. 14.14.
; God accepts no man's person, yet has he appointed means not to cast out
from him him that is expelled: and therefore his purposes and intentions are
serious in it: Men cannot be so willing to be reconciled to God, as he is
willing to receive them again into his favor; God is the more willing of the
two, because he makes the first offer of it, and ordaines and appoints means
for the furtherance and procuring of it; and as a learned Writer observes Mat.
Martin. in Schol. Premens. professor. com. in Psalm. 2. page 285. Non dubitabo
in eo me nunc statu vitae esse, ubi misericordiae janua patet, ut ego non
possum esse tam cupidus ad ingrediendum per eam, quin Deus long sit promptior,
ad me recipiendum: absit enim ut mihi quisquam persuadeat, me esse proniorem ad
diligendum Deum, quam ille sit ad me amandum: hac itaque ignominia Deum meum
neutiquam asficiam, ut existimare velim, me esse melius affectum in Deum, quam
ille sit in me animatus.
, it casts a great ignominy and reproach upon God, for any to think that he
stands better affected toward God, than God does to him. The truth of this
will yet further be cleared, if it be well considered; either what God himself
speaks of his own purpose and intention in the appointing of means; or what
the Scripture says of the neglect of the same: God knows best his own mind
and meaning, and there is no better way to judge aright of it, than according
to that report which he himself makes of it. Now ye know what Christ says of
himself, John 5.34.
These things have I spoken, that ye might be saved: where it is clear, that
his purpose and intention in speaking the Word of life, is to bring men to
life; and the purpose and intention of God in all the means and mercies he
shows unto them, is to lead them to repentance Romans 2.4.
. yea, God himself in affording those means, is said to express his
willingness to purge them from their sins; Ezekiel. 24.13.
I would have purged thee, but thou art not purged, etc. his readiness to
heal and cure the diseases of their souls: Jer. 52.9.
We would have cured Babel, but she is not healed, etc. his desire to gather
them under the wings of his mercy; Mat. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee, even as the
Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, etc! And what could be said more
plainly to manifest and declare the truth and sincerity of his meaning in those
offers and tendries of salvation which are made unto them; the same is likewise
apparent by that which the Scripture speaks of the neglect of the means; to
wit, that men miss of those blessings which they might have had, if they had
not been wanting to themselves in that kind: 2 These. 2.10.
They received not the love of the truth that they might be saved: their
neglect in this kind is said to hinder and keep back good things from them,
as the Prophet speaks; Ier. 5.25.
Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have hindered
good things from you: and again, Isa. 59.2.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have
hid his face from you that he will not hear. Now the neglect of duty cannot be
said to turn away that blessing which was never intended to be given upon
performance of the same. If God had not prepared blessings for his people, and
provided means by which they might be made partakers of them, and withal had
a sincere purpose and intention, upon some conditions, to bestow the same upon
them, they could not be said by their sins and iniquities, in neglecting the
means, to turn away those blessings from them.

2 The truth and sincerity of Gods meaning in that general offer of life and
salvation, which he makes to men, may appear from the nature of the means
which he appoints; because they are such, as in their native tendency lead
unto it, there is no better way to judge of Gods purpose and intention in
appointing means, than by the nature of the means themselves; for look what
is the end which the means in their own nature tend unto, and that is Gods
end in the appointing of them, and in his ordinary course of dealing with men,
as the learned observe Sen. Theol. mag Brit. ar. 3. and 4. ad these. 3. Ex
natura beneficii oblati, et verbo Dei apertissimo, judicandu^ est de illis
gratiae auxiliis, quae hominibus suppeditantur, non autem ex abusu, aut eventu.
Cum igitur Evangeliu^, ex sua natura vocet homines ad poenitentiam et salutem,
cum gratiae excitamenta eodem tendant, nihil hic simulate a Deo agi putandum
est.
: because the means are always chosen and appointed, for and out of a love and
desire of the end. If the Physician prescribes such receipts to his sick
patient, as are in their own nature apt and fit to cure his disease; what
other thoughts can be entertained touching his purpose and intention, but that
he means truly and sincerely to do him good? when a Master puts his servant
into such a way, and gives him order and direction to hold on and go forward
in it; what other thoughts can be conceived of his purpose and intention, but
that he should come to such a place whither that way leads, and brings unto?
even so when God wills and requires that I should use such means, that I should
walk in such a way, as leads to life and happiness; what other thoughts can
be entertained touching his end and purpose in so doing, but that he means
truly and sincerely that I should come to that end, which that way and means
lead unto Heming. ad Ephesians. c. 1. ver. 6. pa. 386. Cum Deus invitat omnes per
praedicatione^ Evangelii ad fidem, non est dubita^du^, quin revera velit omnium
salutem: absit enim a piis me^tibus procul, entire cor miseretis disc^e pare a
voce vocantis.
?

If God send me food and nourishment, which in its own nature is apt, and also
appointed for the preserving and maintaining of life; shall I think that it is
his purpose and intention in so doing, that I should pine away, and die of
famine? If God send me raiment and apparel, which in it self is apt, and in
its own nature ordained to cloathe the body; shall I think it is his purpose
and intention that I should go naked? what were this but to say that God
intends to fill the world with darkness, when he causes the sun to shine upon
it? or that he intends to scorch and burn up the fruits of the earth, when he
causes the former and later rain, in seasonable and plentiful showers to
descend upon it? whereas there is an inseparable connection between the end and
the means. In Gods ordinary course and dealing with men, of his own accord, he
never separates them or puts them asunder, neither would he have his people to
do it: as he would not have them expect the end, any other way than in the use
of the means appointed by him; so neither would he have them doubt of
obtaining the end, if the means be carefully used according to his will: as
Christ implies in that speech of his to the woman of Samaria Musc. com. in loc.
Divina providentia, non solu^ in Christo considerat, quibus bonis egeamus, sed
et ad petendu^ allicit, ad dandu^ patara et exposita, modo petamus. Ferus in
lo. Nulla igitur nobis, remanet excusatio, si spiritualia bona non consequamur:
signu^ enim est quod ea non petimus.
, If thou had asked, he would have given thee water of life John 4.10.
: Where ye see, man's asking, and Gods giving, man's using of the means aright,
and Gods blessing of the same for the attaining of his end, are inseparably
knit together in the ordinary course of divine Providence: and it is a great
sin in any to entertain such a thought of God, as that his primarie purposes
and intentions, run a quite cross and contrary way, to that which the means
in their own nature lead unto. For as Manoahs wife said to her husband, Judge.
13.23.
If the Lord would kill us, he would not have showed us all these things, nor
have told us any such matter: so if God did absolutely intend, by an antecedent
purpose, to deny the blessing, he would never afford those means, which in
themselves are apt, and by virtue of his own gracious appointment, availeable
also for the obtaining of it: because in so doing, he should go cross and
contrary to himself; and therefore wheresoever the Gospel is preached, God
gives, or is prepared to give the blessing which is offered, and the mercy
which is therein tendered to any. And as one says well, He is serious in the
salvation of every soul, to which the word of salvation is sent J. Ya^es in
his treatise called the Saints suffering and sinners sorrow, p. 196.
: Every hearer in the Church is zealously persuaded to repent: the Ministers
mind and Gods, meet in his holy ordinance: and the word is earnestly spoken
to every ear: God himself goes with his message from seat to seat, and from
man to man, with true and hearty desires of his conversion.

3. It is plain and evident, that God means sincerely when he offers life and
salvation in the ministry of the word, because he is so earnest in pressing
and persuading men to the acceptance of it; for he does not only offer mercy,
but he sues unto them, that it may find entertainment with them for their own
good; nor is it a cold and complementall suit and request that he makes, as men
that invite others in a kind of formality only, and for fashion sake; but a
request that is seconded with entreaties, expostulations, lamentations,
commiserations, and all other Rhetorical strains, that are apt to move
affections, and prevail with men to draw them nearer to God; he does not only
invite them to accept of mercy, but earnestly entreats them, as they tender
their own good, as they pity their own souls, to entertain thoughts of
returning unto God: 2 Cor. 5.20.
We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech you through us, we pray
you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God. Now that the Lord of heaven and
earth should come to his poor creature, with suites and entreaties, and that
in a matter that concerns not his own advantage, but only the good and
welfare of his creature; it is a strange manner of condescending, and argues a
great desire of prevailing with him for his good; when he will rather stoop so
low, than fail of his purpose; when he that commands heaven and earth, shall
come in such low terms, as are in humane reason scarce beseeming his honor, or
consistent with it; and that to him who lies even now at the foot of his mercy,
that he should then come with entreaties, when he might make way for his own
honor, through the bowels of his sinful creature, and out of the very ashes
of his ruin and destruction, raise up glory unto himself: surely this, if
there were no more, has so many prints and footsteps of sincere and hearty
affection in it, as does abundantly testify, that he was serious in his
purposes and intentions of doing his people good Math. Martin. in Schol.
Bremen. Professor. com. in Psalm. 2. page 270. Deum meum nunquam hac ignominia
asficiam, ut opinati velim, vel etiam levissime in animi mei superficie^
admittere hanc cogitatione^, quod Deus forte aliud externo verbo sentiat, aliud
animo suo cogitet.

Ibid. page 287. Si uspiam verbi proprietas retinenda est, ibi certe ubi de Dei
amore erga homines, and de pietate erga Deu^ agitur: alioquin omnis consolatio,
and omnis vitae emendandae cura, uno impulsu penitus prosternetur: si enim
quicquid tandem egeris, vel omiseris, eundem te rerum exitum habiturum putes,
cui usui erunt tam suaves Dei promissiones? cui fini tam dirae comminationes?
hoc itaque omnis religionis caput teneo, Deu^ sincere velle, quod se velle
dicit, and quidem eo ipso modo quo id dicit, id est, sub condition, non
absolute, and sine condition.


.

2. When he has entreated his people by all terms of love to accept of the
tendry of mercy and salvation made unto them, and prevails not, he falls from
entreaties to expostulations, urging and pressing them to give but any color
of reason, why they will rather perish in their sins, than be reconciled with
him. Ezekiel. 33.11.
O turn you, turn you, why will ye dye, O ye house of Israel? As if he
should say, Is there no hope? will ye not return? will nothing prevail with
you? no means? no mercies? no threatenings? no judgments? will ye not enter
into covenant with me? oh why will ye not? why will ye not? why will ye dye O
ye house of Israel? So Micah 6.3. O my people, what have I done unto thee?
wherein have I grieved thee? testify against me: As if he had said, What
could I have done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done unto it? I have
offered mercy, and it has been refused: I have afforded gracious helps and
means, and they have been neglected: I have bestowed blessings upon you, and
they have not been regarded: I have called unto you, and ye have not hearkened:
I have waited for your conversion, and ye have not returned: and what is there
in all this, that should make you so unwilling to lay down your weapons of
rebellion, that ye have taken up against me? Now all these interrogations they
savor of nothing but truth and sincerity; for to that end does he thus speak
unto his people, to that end does he thus deal with them, that they might
know he is serious in his thoughts and intentions for their good.

3. From expostulation he falls to lamentation, to see if the voice of tears
will prevail, where the sound of words cannot be heard: as here in the text,
when he had begun to speak to Jerusalem, Oh if thou had known, etc. he is so
deeply and affectionately taken, that he could not go on, but is enforced to
break off, he cannot speak out, but is even constrained to weep out the rest of
the sentence. And can it enter into any man's thoughts, to imagine or conceive,
that God is not serious in the offer of grace, when he seeks and sues, even
with tears in his eyes, to have it accepted Ruiz de volun. Dei, disp. 21. s.
1. Affectus tristitiae proprie in Deum cadere non potest, resecata tamen illius
imperfectione, debemus in Deo relinquere integra, quaecunque absque
imperfectione verificari possunt. proprie igitur Deo convenit displicentia
illius mali, propter cujus praesentiam dolere, atque tristari dicitur. Sed non
quaelibet displicentia meretur tristitiae nomen, sed illa tantum quae est de
amissione alicujus boni, quod amabat Deus et de siderabat: nam amor est causa
tristitiae, sicut caeteraru^ affectionu^ animae, ut ait Aug. de Civ. Dei, l.
14. c. 7. and 9. and Aquin. 1. 2. q. 36. ar. 3. Cum ergo Deus tristatur and
dolet, quod nolu^t homines propriae saluti consulere, sed eligunt potius in
aeternum perire, ergo quod ex se est, amat and concupiscit, ut iide^ ipsi
homines, qui de facto pereunt, non pereant in aeternum, sed actualiter velint
propriae saluti consulere: nam alioquin Deus procuraret suae tristitiae causam,
quod vix potest in homine^ sanae mentis cadere, nedum in Deu^: deinde, non
pretatis, sed crudelitatis officium esset, misetis condolere, occulte tamen
procurando, and disponendo, ut illis sit absolute impossible, actualiter
evadere miseriam: porro cum Christus Dominus loquitur in quantum Deus and homo,
certe humanitatis affectus divinis debent apt correspondere.
?

4. When tears are spent in vain, and foolish men will not be reclaimed, but
rather perish in their sins, than make out after God, who is now wearied out
with attendance, and even going away from them, how does it melt his bowels
into commiseration, to think of their misery, who might have been so happy in
his love, and would not? Mat. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee, etc! The
doubling of the word shows how deeply he took it to heart, and was grieved
for it. And again, Hos. 11.8.
How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, O Israel? how
shall I make thee as Adma? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned
within me, my repentings are rolled together: I will not execute the
fierceness of my wrath, I will not return to destroy Ephraim. He that goes
on so unwillingly to punish, that makes so many pauses, that is affected with
so much tender pity and compassion, that has so many relenting motions within
him, before he can gain a full consent to give way unto it; it plainly shows
how much and how earnestly he desired the contrary, and that he meant sincerely
in the offer of it.

4. Lastly, it is clear and apparent that Gods meaning is sincere, in the
general offer of grace; because it is not a bare and naked offer that is made,
but such an offer as is backed and hedged in with a gracious promise of good
success, to those that look after it, in the use of those means which are
appointed by God for the obtaining of it. 2 Chro. 15.2.
The Lord is with you, while ye are with him: If ye seek him, he will be found
of you. In which words, for our present purpose, there be three things
observable: 1. That God is ready, and offers himself to do his people good,
as appears by those words, the Lord is with you, etc. 2. He lets them know the
way and means, wherein and whereby they may find this good that he offers to
do for them, and that is, by seeking unto him. 3. He makes an undoubted
promise unto them, and gives them an assured hope, that their seeking shall not
want success answerable to their desires, If ye seek him, he will be found of
you. And again, Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened: for whosoever asks, receives; whosoever seeks, finds;
whosoever knocks, to him it shall be opened Mat. 7.7.
. Where ye see the promise is full, and speaks home, in as large an extent, as
the means is required, and is ratified and confirmed by the experience of all
those who have used the same. Our blessed Savior goes yet further, and
confirms it by an argument drawn from the less to the greater: Luke 11.13.
If ye which are evil can give good gifts unto your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the holy Ghost to them that desire him Calv.
com. in loc. Malignos nos reddit (...), quia dum sibi quisque plus satis
addictus est, alios praeterit ac negligit: atqui hoc vitium superat paternus
amor, ut homines sui obliti, se in filios plusqua^ liberaliter effundant. Vnde
autem id, nisi quia Deus, a quo desce^dit omnis paternitas, particulam suae
bonitatis coru^ cordibus instillat? quod si tantu^ ad beneficentiam valent
guttulae, quid ab ipso mart inexhausto sperandum est? an restrictus esset Deus,
qui hominu^ corda sic aperit?
? God is more prone and inclinable to do good to mankind, than earthly
parents can be to do good to their children: for they have but a drop of
goodness in comparison of God, in whom there is a whole ocean of bounty: and
besides, that goodness which they have, it is mingled with much evil; whereas
God is pure love, without any mixture of the contrary: in him is pure
goodness, and nothing else; he is light, and in him there is no darkness:
yea further, God stands in nearer relation unto men, than parents to their
children: for children indeed, they receive their bodies from their parents in
some sort, but more from God than from them; and their souls they receive
wholly from God; to say nothing, that Christ has taken their nature upon him,
which much strengthens that near relation that is between God and them; and
therefore from all these, the argument strongly concludes; If ye which are
evil can give good gifts, much more your heavenly Father, etc? for God never
injoynes the means to be used, but with assurance of the end to such as walk
answerable to them, and use them aright; because every such precept as requires
means to be used, has a promise annexed unto it: and therefore says one W.
W. in his Sermon of redemption of time, upon Ephesians. 5.16. page 32.
, Who so ever lives under the preaching of the Gospel, has this privilege
annexed to the outward teaching, that if he will but strive, and pray to God
to give him strength to repent, etc. GOD will upon his promise hear his
prayer, and assist him. For if God should not mean sincerely in the promise
which he makes, he should but delude his people, and dally with them; nay, it
makes God a liar, as learned Zanchy observes Zanch. de not. Dei l. 5 c. 2. An
non hac ratione Deum in animo tuo perstringis mendacii, qui tibi verbo quidem
dicat te velle servare, etc? interim tamen licet tu velis in Christum credere,
et ita servari ipse tamen nolit?
, if he promise that which he has no mind or meaning to give, which is far
from the nature and goodness of the holy GOD; who as he loves plain and
sincere dealing in others, so he will not be a stranger to it himself; for it
is contrary to the oath that he has sworn Ezekiel. 33.11.
, As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should return and live. Now, shall we think that Gods intentions
are not serious, when himself does not only avow them to be so, but also
ratify and confirm it with a solemn oath? Besides, what can be more contrary
to those passionate and patheticall expressions, which God himself uses, when
he lays forth the truth of his desires for the welfare of his people? Deuteronomy.
5.29.
O that there were such an heart in this people, to fear me, and to keep all
my commandments always, that it might go well with them, and their children
for ever! and again Psalm. 81.13.
, O that my people would have hearkened to me, and that Israel would have
walked in my ways! then would I soon have humbled their enemies, and turned
mine hand against their adversaries. What can there be else, but mere deceit
and dissimulation in these patheticall wishes, when God makes show of such
earnest desire that his people were thus and thus, that they might be capable
of further happiness, if he had no mind or meaning upon any condition to make
them happy? And therefore it follows undeniably from all these grounds, that
when God offers life and salvation to all those to whom the Gospel is
preached, there is in him a real purpose and intention of giving the same, if
they would apply themselves unto him, in a wise and seasonable looking after
it. Thus much learned Zanchy Zaneb. de not. Dei, l. 5. c. 2. Nonne igitur
reprobis illudit, quum vocat ad salutem? Minime; quia vocat cos cum condition,
se velle cos servare, si ipsi velint in Christum credere, et sibi obedire, etc.
ita apparet Deum illis non illudere, quia per ipsum non stat, quo minus juxta
promissionem conditionalem serventur, sed culpam in ipsis reprobis haerere,
quod nolint in Christum credere.
lays down in the place quoted before; for when he had propounded the
question, whether God do not illude reprobates, in offering salvation to them;
his answer is negative; and he gives this reason, Because he offers it upon
condition, to wit, if they will believe in Christ, and yield obedience to him;
and therefore he does not delude them, because there is no hinderance on his
part; but that according to that conditional promise they might obtain
salvation, were not the fault in themselves, that they will not believe in
Christ. This also our learned Divines in their Synodicall suffrages Sent.
Theol. Mag. Brit. artic. 3, and 4. These. 2.3, and 4.

1 Sunt quaedam effecta interna ad conversionem praevia, quae virtute verbi
spiritusque in nondum justificatorum cordibus excitantur, etc.

2 Quos Deus mediante verbo, per Spiritu^ suum hunc in modu^ asficit, cos ad
fidem conversionemque vere et serio vocat.

3 Quos ita effecit, non deserit, nec desistit in vera ad conversionem via
promovere, priusquam ab illis per neglectionem voluntariam, aut hujus gratiae
initialis repulsam, deseratur.


do plainly discover to be their judgment, when they tell us these three
things.

1 That there are some internal effects, praevious, and in order of nature
before regeneration and justification, which are wrought in the hearts of men
not yet converted, yea, in some that are never converted at all.

2 That those whom God does thus affect, and work upon, he intends their
conversion, and seriously calls them unto it; because if they be not converted
by it, they are left without excuse: Now that calling would not leave them
without excuse, if God did not seriously intend their conversion in it; for it
cannot be imagined that such a calling should leave a man without excuse, which
intends nothing else but only to make him inexcusable.

3 That those who are thus called by GOD, they are not left or forsaken of him,
till by a voluntary neglect they leave him; nor does GOD cease to further and
promote these beginnings, and to help them forward in the way toward their
conversion, till they reject and repel this initiall grace thus begun in them:
for then he should desert and leave the creature, before the creature did
leave and forsake him; whereas God is neither wont, nor willing to withdraw his
helping hand, where he has once put it forth; or to be wanting in that
necessary aid and assistance, which might cause his handy-worke to prosper,
where there is no fault committed, nor just occasion given by the creature: he
never takes away the talent that he has once bestowed, save only from him
who, through his own fault, buries it in the earth Mat. 25.28.
: from whence it plainly follows, that Gods primary scope, and intention in
these previous works of his Spirit, is to help men forward in the way of
their conversion, and that he would by degrees promote and further them, and by
little and little carry them along in that way, if by their, careless neglect
they did not hinder his intentions, and their own good. And lest any one
should think that our Divines are singular in that opinion, he may read what
one of those outlandish Divines, which were present in that Synod, has also
written to the same purpose Mat. Martin. Divinarum literarum professor in
Schola Bremensi, Comment. in Psalm. 2. page 266. and sequent.
; where he does professedly handle the matter, and lays it out in these three
particulars, which are requisite and necessary for every one to be resolved in.

1 Whether God does seriously will his salvation in particular or no.

2 Upon what terms and conditions he purposes and intends to bestow
salvation upon him.

3 How, and by what means he may be enabled to perform those conditions.
Whereunto his answer is large, and it would be too long to transcribe it, but
the whole substance and abridgement of it may be summed up in these three
conclusions.

1 That every man in particular ought to be persuaded, that God does seriously
will his salvation, and that no man that ever believed in Christ, had any other
ground or foundation for his faith, to stay it self upon.

2 That the terms and conditions upon which God is willing to give him life
and salvation, are no other, than those which are expressed and set down in
the new Covenant; to wit, faith in Christ, and the necessary and inseparable
fruits of it.

3 That the means whereby he may be enabled to perform the Conditions of the
Covenant, is to submit himself to the public Ordinances of God, and to use
the means appointed by him for that end and purpose; to suffer himself to be
wrought upon, and to apply himself to the discipline of the Spirit, in the
Ministry of the Word. And the same Author in his judgment at the Synod of
Dort Act. Synod. page 133. de art. 2. these. 1. Est communis quaedam Dei (...),
qua dilexit totum genus humanum lapsum, and serio omnium salutem voluit.
, shows, that God bears such a general love toward all mankind, now since
the fall, as that he does seriously will the salvation of all: and he does
else where give three reasons of this his assertion and opinion Act. Synod.
art. 2. these. 26. page 138.

1 Vt Scripturae possint non contorte conciliari.

2 Vt maneat Deo gloria veritatis, misericordiae, and justitiae in mandatis,
promissionibus, et comminationibus Evangelicis: ne illis Deus secus aliquid
velle vel ag^re judicetur, quam verba sonant.

3 Vt manifestum sit culpa^ interitus impiorum esse in ipsis; non autem in
defectu remedii, per quod servari potuissent.


.

1 That the places of Scripture, which at the first view seem contrary and
repugnant one to another, might be reconciled without forcing or wresting the
words contrary to the scope and intention, and to the mind and true meaning of
the holy Ghost.

2 That God may have all the glory of his truth, mercy, and justice, both in
his precepts, and prohibitions; especially in the promises and threatenings of
the Gospel; Chap. 9.
that he might not be thought to will and do otherwise than the words import;
wherein he makes an expression, and declaration of the same.

3 That it might be clear and evident, that the cause of every man's
destruction is in himself, and his own ill carriage; and that he does not
perish for want of mercy in God, or through the want and deffect of that remedy
which God has provided, and whereby he might be saved; but through his own
fault. And thus much may suffice for the proof, and clearing of the point,
that God does seriously will the salvation of all those to whom the Gospel is
preached; because he offers life and salvation unto them; and he offers
nothing but what he means and intends truly and sincerely to give, upon such
conditions as the offer and tendry is made unto them.

CHAP. 9.
That man's ruin and destruction is not to be charged on God.

charge God foolishly, like the evil servant in the Gospel, who hid his
talent in a Napkin Mat. 25.24.
, and then lays all the blame on God; I knew thou wast a hard Master, who
reapest where thou sowedst not, etc. Even as it was with the blind woman in
Seneca, when she wanted eyes, she lays all the blame on the darkness of the
house, as if that were the cause and reason that she did not see Sen Epist. 50.
Subinde rogat paedagogum ut migret, domum tenebrosam esse ait.
: so it fares with many in their spiritual blindness, and other sinful
distempers, they are ready to charge all on God, as if there were no cause of
their misery; but only because he is unwilling to make them happy: So it was
with the Israelites Ezekiel. 18.25.
, when they dealt unfaithfully with God in his Covenant, they are ready to
charge the crookedness of their own doings on God, saying, The ways of the
Lord are not equal, etc. in so much that he is put to justify himself, and
his dealings with them. And so it is with many, who when they are unwilling to
walk in the ways of God, or take those courses that might do them good, then
do they charge all upon God, as if he were unwilling to show any mercy unto
them: they think it skils not much in the point and matter, of their salvation
what they do; for if they be ordained unto eternal life, they shall
undoubtedly come unto it; and if Hell and damnation be appointed for them, it
is not possible by all their care and diligence to keep it away; it would
nothing avail them though they should apply themselves unto God in the use of
all good means, and strive with all their might to obtain mercy, because
there is an unchangeable decree and sentence passed upon them, which by no
means can be altered or revoked: and what is this but to justify themselves,
and lay all the blame upon God, as if they were innocent, and he only in
fault; whereas it is most certain, that at the last day God will clear the
equity of his dealing with men in the Ministry of the Word, and make it
appear to all the world, that there was no hinderance in him, or in his Word,
why those that did enjoy it, were not brought into a more happy condition by
it; but that the fault was wholly in themselves Admonit. Neostad. c. 3. p. 113.
Adversarii fingunt, nos doceiE Deum sine respectu peccati, nuda et absoluta sua
voluntate and decreto, aliquos ad damnatione^ ordinasse: nos vero cum Apost.
docemus, Deum in damnatione reproborum, velle sua^ justitia^ declarare; non
igitur quemqua^ damnationi addixisse, nisi propter peccatum.

Fulgent. l. 1. ad Moni. Deus ad supplicium destinavit, quos a se praescivit
voluntatis malae vitio discessuros. Vide Aquin. l. 1 sent. did. 40. q. 4. art.
2. and 1. 2 q. 112. art. 3. Mat Martin. co^. in Ps. 2. page 134. Deus neminem
statuit damnare, nisi propter peccatum, imprimis propter incredulitatem.


: and therefore it cannot be but a safer course to every one, to set the Saddle
upon the right horse; that is, to justify God, and lay the blame upon
himself, where indeed it lies. It is the part and duty of every good servant
now to clear his Lord and Master from all such unbeseeming imputations, as are
cast upon him by the enemies of his truth. God indeed can clear himself, and
will do it another day, but with little thanks to those, who now father upon
him such antecedent purposes, such absolute and irrespective decrees, touching
the ruin and destruction of his creature, as cannot well stand with the
greatness of that love that he professes in the Gospel; with the nature of
that Covenant that he has made with man; or with the truth and sincerity of
those passionate wishes, Patheticall exclamations, mournful expostulations,
and compassionate lamentations which are so frequent in holy Scripture.
Wherefore it is my counsel and advice to every one that loves his own
salvation, If he cannot comprehend and fathom the unsearchable depths of Gods
secret counsel, and eternal decrees, to let them alone, or at least so to
conceive of them, as that they may be reconciled with the declaration of that
will of God, which is generally propounded in the Gospel: for it is most
certain, that there is no particular decree of God, that is repugnant or
contrary to his revealed will, but subordinate unto it.

It is true indeed, that the revealed will of God, it is not his whole will,
but only a part of it; there is another part kept secret, but it is never
contrary to this. As for example, the time when the day of Judgment shall be,
it is kept secret Mark. 12.22.
: but it may be to day, or to morrow, this year, or the next, for any thing
that is revealed in the Scripture to the contrary: and the like is to be
conceived, touching other passages of Gods secret will and purpose in the
matter of salvation. It is most certain, that the decree Aug. vel Prosp. ad
art. falso imposit. ad 7. Dei volu^tas est, ut in bona voluntate maneatur, qui
et priusqua^ deseratur, nemine^ deserit, et multos saepe desertores convertit.

Sent. Theol. mag. Brit. de Reprob. these. 5. Deus neminem damnat aut da^nationi
destinat, nisi ex consideratione^ peccati, quia mala poenae no^ decernit, nisi
pro hominum praevio merito: da^natio enim est actus justitiae punitivae, culpa^
igitur praecede^tem supponit. Aug. ep 106. ad Paulin. Si quenqua^ immeritu^, et
nulli obnoxium peccato, Deus damnare creditur, alienus ab iniquitate non
creditur.


of election and reprobation, divides the whole race and body of mankind: not
Adam himself, nor any that ever came out of his loins, but does necessarily
fall under one of these two: this is a truth which none questions, all agree in
the thing that it is so, though they differ in the manner, how man is
considered and looked upon, when God passes this decree upon him. And indeed,
the curiosity of man has presumed far, and waded deep into this high and
profound mystery, which made the great Apostle of the Gentiles to stand and
wonder, Romans 11.33.
O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! and therefore
it shall be every man's wisdom in these high matters, and incomprehensible
depths, to keep himself within due compass and moderation, not to presume
above that which is written, but so to frame his thoughts and notions, and to
regulate his judgment, that it may be clearly consonant, and no ways contrary
to that which is revealed, and then I am sure whatsoever he holds, there will
be the less danger in it.

The Gospel reveals and testifies, that there is in God such a general love
toward the sons of men, that he is willing to give them life and salvation,
upon such terms and conditions as are expressed in the new Covenant; and
therefore it is a safe way so to conceive of the decree of reprobation, as that
it may not go cross and contrary thereunto; that is, that it leaves a man
under such a general providence, wherein he is capable of salvation, upon
such conditions as the Gospel tenders it unto him, though it be most certain,
in regard of the infallible pre-science and foreknowledge of God, that in the
event he will never attain unto that which the Covenant of grace makes him
capable of, no more than Adam attained to that happiness which the covenant of
works made him capable of. And let not any then say, that God made the way to
life impassable for him, and that he is absolutely purposed to deny that grace
unto him, without which he cannot repent and forsake his sins Aug. ad ar.
these. falso imposi. ar. 3. Omnium quidem hominum Deus Creator est, sed nemo ab
eo ideo creatus est ut pereat, quia alia est causa nascendi, alia percundi: ut
enim nasca^tur homines, Creatoris est beneficium; ut autem pereant,
praevaricatoris est vitium.

Idem l. 3. con. Iul. c. 28. Potest aliquos sine bonis meritis liberare, quia
bonus est; non potest quenquam sine malis meritis damnare, quia justus est.


. For whosoever thou art that thus speak against God and thine own soul,
let me but ask thee this question: How can thou tell that God will not
hear, nor have mercy upon thee, before thou have made trial, and used all
fitting means for the obtaining of his favor? and who is there that ever did
seek unto God in this manner, that ever found him unwilling to help him, or
have mercy upon him? and if there can be no example found in all the Book of
God, of any one who did apply himself to God in the use of the means, and set
himself seriously and in good earnest to seek unto God, so as he ought, and
might have done, that did not speed in his errand, and find God willing to
meet him, and inclinable to hear his prayers, and grant his requests; why
should any entertain such a groundless suspicion of God, as that there is no
mercy to be had and obtained at his hands, though it be sought for? It is fit
indeed, that God should reserve a liberty to himself, in the dispensation of
his gracious favors, because he is indebted to none, he owes nothing to any;
and therefore if he should with hold from his creature that help and assistance
which is sought for, there is no place for dust and ashes to complain against
him, because he does him no wrong; but yet God does not so deal with men
under the Gospel of grace; he is beforehand with them, in working upon them
by his preventing grace, before they seek unto him; and when he has done so,
he lets them know that it shall not be in vain for them to seek unto him;
for he lays this tie and obligation upon every one that comes unto him, in the
use of the means, Heb. 11.6.
to believe that he is a rewarder of those that seek him. So that if any ill
betide him, he may thank himself and his own ill carriage for it Fulgent. li.
1. ad Monimu^, c. 22 Nec justitia iusta dicetur, si puniendum reum non invenit,
sed fecisse dicatur. Major vero erit injustitia, si lapso Deus retribuit
poenam, quem stantem praedestinasse dicitur ad ruinam. Chrysostom. to. 2 in N. T.
in Ioa. hom. 67. pa 438. (...).
, according to that of the Prophet, Hos. 13.9.
Thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel, only in me is thy help. And
indeed, he that observes Gods dealing in particular with this people of the
Jews, who notwithstanding were afterward miserably destroyed for their great
ingratitude and contempt of his favors, he shall find so many prints and
footsteps of love and kindness toward them, as do abundantly testify how
willing and desirous he was to do them good; and that the fault was wholly in
themselves, that it was so ill with them; for he chose them out of all other
Nations to be a peculiar people unto himself Deuteronomy. 7.6.
: He entrusted them with the oracles of heaven Romans 3.2.
: He showed his statutes to Jacob, and his judgments to Israel, dealing
better with them than with any other Nation Psa. 147.19.
. His ways were so full of equity in this kind, that he referres himself to
the judgment of any, that had but the light of common reason left in him; If
he had failed or been wanting in any thing that was requisite and fitting for
him to do. Esaias 5.4.
O ye Inhabitants of Jerusalem, judge I pray you between me and my Vineyard:
what could I have done more that I have not done unto it? Implying, that if
they would look upon his carriage toward them, and his dealing with them,
with an impartial and indifferent eye, they might clearly see that they had
none to complain of but only themselves, Chap. 10.
and their own ill carriage, if any good thing were wanting to them, as the
Prophet tells them plainly elsewhere, Jer. 5.25.
Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have kept away
good things from you.

CHAP. 10.
The folly of those who are unwilling to embrace life and salvation when it is
offered unto them.

2 IF God do seriously will the salvation of all those to who^ the Gospel is
sent; oh how heavy will this fall upon many in the world, who are so
regardlesse of their own welfare, that they wait upon lying vanities, and
refuse their own mercy, when it is freely offered unto them? When God is
willing to give them life, they are unwilling to have it, unless they may have
it upon their own terms and conditions; and yet if ye look abroad into the
world, and take a view of the lives and conditions of most men, ye shall find
that in all ages of the world, some such, yea and many such there have been,
and still are: So it was in David's time, Psalm. 81.11.
My people would not hear, Israel would none of me Moler. com. in loc.
Significat eos non ignorantia aliqua, aut communi hominum imbecillitate, co
prolaps^s esse, ut a cultu divino discederent, sed ex professo and deliberato
contemptu, se sperni ac rej^ci.
. So it was in Solomon's time, Wisdom called on the sons of men, and cried
after them, and they would not listen or incline their ears unto her: Prove.
1.24.
I have called, and ye have refused. So it was in Isaiahs time, Esaias 65.2.
I have stretched out my hands all the day long, to a rebellious and gainsaying
people Musc com. in loc. Quotidie ad populu^ meu^ clamito, et ad me revoco, quo
servari possit: verum ille sic a me pertinaciter declinat, ut ne audire quidem
sustineat, adeoque frustra manus expandam, quibus cum recipere vellem, si
reverteretur.
. So it was in Ieremiahs time, Jer. 7.25.
I have sent unto you all my servants the Prophets, rising up early, and
sending them, yet they will not fear me, but hardened their hearts, and did
worse than their fathers. So it was in Christ's time, Mat. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee, etc. and ye would not Aret.
com. in lo. In Deo nulla fuit major cura, quam ut servaremini, in vobis autem
nulla minor. Simpliciter Noluistis magna est ingratitudo, oblata beneficia sine
ratione, sine causa negare. Bullin. com. in lo. Noluit impiiss: populus colligi
and servari, in amicitia et faedere Dei, dispergi and perdi maluit, unde
propria culpa, nulla Dei motositate periit: nam Deus servare voluit, imo omnem
movit lapide ut servaret, at isti servari noluerun^.
! So it was in the Apostles time, Acts 13.46.
It was necessary that the Word of God should first of all be preached unto
you; but seeing ye put it away from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
eternal life, lo, we turn unto the Gentiles. And can we imagine that it
should be better with us now in these last and worst times? nay verily this
honey comb is every where despised: Christ finds but cold and poor
entertainment with many, though he bring life and salvation unto them; it is
with most men now adays, as it was with those guests that were invited to the
great supper in the Gospel, Luke 14.18.
they all began with one consent to make excuse; or as it was with those that
were called to the marriage feast, Mat. 22.5.
they made light of it, and would not come, but went their way, one about his
farm, and another about his merchandise. This is that which makes God so much
to complain of his people, Hos. 8.12.
I have written unto them the great things of my Law, and these were accounted
a strange thing: strange to their judgments: they did not prize or esteem
them, but even pass them by, as if they were not worth the taking up, or
looking after: strange to their thoughts, they did not mind them, nor meditate
upon them: they laid them aside as things impertinent, they had no familiarity
or acquaintance with them: strange to their affections, they did not love them,
nor delight in them, they could not relish any sweetness in them: strange to
their practice, they did not apply themselves to the doing of them: and what
greater undervaluing of such high favors and transcendent mercies can be
imagined, than for men to make so strange of them, as if there were a question
to be made, whether they were worthy of the acceptance or no: what greater
unthankfulness can be supposed, than for men to look so strange upon those
great things, which God reckons amongst the choicest and chiefest of all his
blessings, as if they were worth little or nothing at all? what greater neglect
of a man's own good, than to make himself a stranger to those ways, which
lead unto the greatest happiness, that the reasonable creature is capapable
of? and by this it may appear how highly displeasing it is unto God, seeing it
includes in it, such a manifest contempt of those great mercies, than which
heaven it self affords no greater to the sons of men? and therefore it is,
that he threatens to show so great severity against those that are guilty of
it, Ezekiel. 24.13.
Because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall never
be purged any more, till I have caused my wrath to light upon thee Lavat. com.
in loc. Servi mei Prophetae frustra labores insumpserunt, in te purgando,
poenas quoque leviores frustra adhibui, ut te purgarem, tam pertinaciter
adhaerent tibi sordes peccatoru^, ut defricari nullo modo possint. Nulla spes
emendationis tuae, donec Dei ita^ gravissima^ experiaris: medicus in desperatis
morbis, etia^ ad extrema remedia confugit.
. And how miserable the estate and condition of such a person is, needs no
other proof or demonstration than this, that it makes the very mercy of God to
rise up in judgment against him, and if mercy condemn him, what is it that
can help him? what is it that can save him? to sin against the mercy of God,
it is a sin against which there is no remedy. If he sin against the law and
justice of God, there is yet a remedy, because he may appeal from the seat of
justice to the throne of grace: but if mercy afford him no help, then there is
no remedy. The Jews sinned grievously against the law of God, yet for all this
God did not cast them off from being his people; but when once they came to sin
against his mercy, when salvation was sent unto them, and would not be
accepted, this makes him utterly to reject them from being a people; and though
they have lain more than sixteen hundred years under that curse, yet would
God never be reconciled again unto them, until this day; yea this is that
which makes God, contrary to the goodness, and inclination of his own nature,
to express a kind of pleasure and delight, in the ruin and destruction of his
creature: Prove. 1.25.
Because I have called and ye have refused, etc. therefore will I laugh at your
destruction, and mock when your fear comes. Oh who will pity and bewail
your condition, when heaven it self laughs at your misery? or who shall
comfort you, when the God of heaven mocks at your fear? who will pity a
malefactor that dies for his offense, if a pardon were sent unto him, and he
would not accept of it? and so it is with every one that lives under the
means, and dies in his sins, he has a pardon offered unto him, and will
not take it; he is more unwilling to have his sins pardoned in Gods way, and
according to that course of Providence that is taken for his good, than God is
to forgive him, and to have mercy upon him. Oh then think with thy self,
whosoever thou art, that now forsakest thine own mercy; think I say, how
heavy it will lie upon thee, and come against thee another day, when the
approaches of mercy, when the Proclamations of pardon, when the offers and
tendries of salvation, when the promise of help and assistance, when the
entreaties of the Spirit shall rise up against thee, o who shall plead for
thee, when all these plead against thee? and if thou desire to escape all
these things, which will most certainly fall upon the world of the ungodly, o
then be willing to apply thy self unto God, and the discipline of his Spirit,
while he does so seriously will and desire thy good Moller. in Psa. 81. v. 14.
O si, etc. quasi diceret Deus, quantum in me est cuperem illis optime esse,
sumque animo ad benefaciendum promptissimo, sed illoru^ scelera, et impietas,
impediunt quo minus benefacere illis possim. Quod autem Deus ping^tur, quasi
cum gemitu, ac susperio hoc votum proferre, (...) loquitur, volens ardentem
ipsius erga nos amore^ aliquo modo exprimere, et commendare; homines enim cum
benefacere alicui cupiunt, et impediuntur, cum re non possunt, voto saltem suum
erga ipsum amorem, et desiderium declarant.
. Oh think with thy self how often God has called thee, how long he has
waited to have mercy upon thee, and always hitherto has found thee unwilling
to return unto him; o how does it make him to complain of Jerusalem, not
without wonder and admiration, that she should be so regardlesse and
neglective of her own good: Ier. 13.27.
O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? O when will it once be? For
Jerusalem to fall into sin, it is no wonder, for he knows that the
imaginations of a corrupt heart, they are only evil continually Genesis 6.5.
: but that he should provide means, and take a course to have her purged and
purified from her filthiness, and that she should be unwilling to be washed
from her pollution, when God is willing to make her clean; this it is the
wonder and admiration of Heaven and Earth: for if a man fall, will he not rise
again? If he wander out of his way, will he not return again into it?
Wherefore then is Jerusalem turned back with a perpetual rebellion? She has
given her self to deceit, and would not return Jer. 8.5.
.

If a special friend should come and knock at thy door, and that upon a
business and errand that did nearly concern thee, and make much for thine
own advantage, thou would think it an unmannerly part, to make him stay
and wait two or three hours before thou did open thy door, unto him: O
then, when GOD comes unto thee with a special purpose and intention to do
thee good, and to have mercy upon thee; think with thy self what it is to make
him stay and wait, so many hours, so many days, so many months, so many
years, before he can find thee willing to lend an ear unto him, for thine
own good? Oh consider and ponder it in thine heart, that God files up every
blessing that he bestows upon thee, he keeps a Talley of every mercy that is
offered to thee; he sets down every time that he comes unto thee, he takes
special notice how long he waits, how often he calls, how often thou
refusest; and why then do thou not reason thus with thy self? Has God
waited so long for my conversion, and shall I yet put him off unto another day?
Has he put up so many wrongs and injuries at my hands, and shall I still
provoke him? Has he called so often upon me, and shall I yet turn the deaf
ear unto him? Oh think with thy self; if GOD should pay thee home in thine
own coin, and make thee wait for mercy as long as thou have made him wait
for thy repentance; how irksome and tedious would it be unto thee? how many
tears would it make thee shed before thou could find mercy? How many
requests and petitions might thou prefer and put up at the Throne of
Grace, before thou should receive any gracious answer? how many sad days,
and weary nights might thou see before the face of heaven shined upon thee?
and yet what more just and equal than for God so to deal with thee? And
therefore if thou would have him to answer thee when thou call upon him,
and find him willing to help thee when thou art at a dead lift, be not
unwilling to apply thy self unto him, and to serve his Providence in that way
that he has taken for thy good, now, while he waits to have mercy upon thee.

CHAP. 11.
Gods willingness to give life and salvation should be an encouragement to
every one to seek for it.

one to seek for it. It is a rule observed amongst Politicians, to put
themselves forward upon the least hope and possibility of preferment, because
they reason and collect thus with themselves, if the worst fall out, they can
but miss of what they desire to compass; whereas if they sit still and do
nothing, they are sure to miss of it; but if they use the means, who knows
any thing to the contrary but that they may speed. And it were well if men
could be as wise for themselves, and their own advantage in spiritual
matters, and those things that concern the good of their souls Bullinger.
com. in Mat. ca. 32. v. 37. Non denegasset Hierosolomitanis, suam gratiam
dominus: si voluissent, si no^ sprevissent ea media, per quae pervenitur ad
salutem.
. Salvation is a good of infinite worth, beyond all price that can be set upon
it; and if it were no more but only a possibility of compassing such a good,
it were enough to put heart and spirit into every one to use his best, and most
effectual endeavors for the compassing of it, and the Scripture is not
wanting, either in precepts, or examples in this kind. Solomon gives a precept
for it Eccles. 11.6.
, Sow thy seed in the morning, and in the evening let not thine hand rest, for
thou know not which may prosper, this or that, or whether they may be both
alike: that is, because there is a possibility that both may prosper, and
succeed well, therefore neglect no season or opportunity of sowing thy seed,
and doing that which God requires; and if one time succeed not according to thy
mind, be not discouraged, still apply thy self to God in the use of the
means; that which one day yields not, another day may bring forth.

The people of Nineveh went upon no other ground but this, when they humbled
themselves in fasting and prayer, they knew not whether God would be entreated
to spare them or no; but they knew nothing to the contrary, but that their
humiliation might prevail with God; and therefore they resolve to make trial:
Iona. 3.9.
Who can tell if God will repent, and turn from his fierce wrath, that we
perish not? And it was not in vain for them so to do, for God saw their
works, that they turned from their evil ways, and he repented him of the
evil that he said he would do unto them, and he did it not.

But here is more encouragement to seek for those things which are simply and
absolutely necessary to salvation, because there is not only a possibility of
obtaining them, but also a real purpose and intention in God, as has been
showed, to give and bestow them, if they be sought for; and he that would make
his advantage out of this truth, he must do these two things Cajetan com. in
loc. Haec duo oportet credi, non a quolibet Deo grato, sed a quolibet accedente
ad Deum, non e^ conjuncto. Calvin. com. in loc. Haec est ratio cur citra fide^,
nullus Deo placeat, quia nullus ad Deu^ unqua^ accedet, nisi qui credit Deu^
esse, et statuit remuneratorem esse, omnibus qui cu^ quaerunt. Hinc ostendit
Apostolus, quomodo gratia^ nobis conciliat fides, nempe quia ad colendu^ verum
Deum nobis Magistra est; deinde quia nos de ejus volu^tate certiores reddit, ne
frustra nobis videamur eu^ quaerere: haec duo me^bra non leviter praetereunda
sunt; nempe ut ipsum esse Deu^ credamus; deinde ut persuasi fimus, non frustra
ipsum a nobis quaeri.
.

1 He must lay a good foundation, by settling this persuasion in himself, that
God is both able and willing to give him life and salvation.

2 He must address himself unto God in the use of those means, that he has
appointed for the obtaining of it.

First, this foundation must be laid, that God is both able and willing to give
him life and salvation, and it is no other foundation, than that which the
Scripture has laid already Heb. 11.6.
, He that comes unto God must believe, that he is, and that he is a rewarder
of those that come unto him. In which precept there are two things considerable.

1 The person to whom it is given, and that is, he that comes unto God; that
is, as I conceive, not a person actually believing in Christ, for then there
would be a tautologie in the Precept, and the sense would run thus; He that
believes in God, must believe that he is, etc. which were a needless
injunction, requiring nothing but what was done already: but by him that
comes unto God, I understand such a person as first begins to entertain some
thoughts of leaving his sin, and turning unto God; such a one it is to whom
the precept is given.

2 What it is that is required of him; and that is, to believe and persuade
himself of these two things touching God.

1 That he is: that is, that he is God, infinite in wisdom, and power, and
therefore able to supply all his wants, to subdue all his corruptions, and to
make good whatsoever he promises unto him; for infinite Wisdom can never be
at a loss to find out ways and means to do him good; and infinite Power can
never fail to put those means in execution.

2 That he is a rewarder of those that seek him; that is, that he is willing
to do them good, willing to enter into a covenant with them; and therefore it
shall not be in vain for them to seek unto him; they shall not lose their
labor, but they shall be sure to speed in their errand: for God has
signified his willingness and consent already in the Gospel, there needs no
more but their consent to make an actual agreement, and to strike up a
covenant between them.

2 When this foundation is well and soundly laid, the next care must be wisely
to build upon it, by applying himself unto God in the use of those means Mat.
Martin. com. in Psalm. 2. page 298. Quo consequaris, ut conditionem impl^re
queas, non opus est curiosa disputatione, sed simplici obsequ^o, in usu
medioru^, quae Deus ad fidem creandam constituit, etc. omnibus nobis ad fidem
and salutem praeparandis ac du^endis vi^ ista est, ut informari nos
sustineamus, etc. and in divini spiritus disciplina^ nos tradamus, ut sincere
stud^^mus sequi Dominu^ nostru^, et long fave^tiorem in nos experiemur, quam
mente percipere possunius.
, which he has ordained for the obtaining of life; for though a man cannot
plant in himself any principles of life, either in whole or in part; yet he
may use the means, wherein, and whereby God is pleased to do it. Like as it
was with Naaman the Assyrian, though he could not cure his Leprosy either in
whole, or in part, yet he could wash himself in Jordan, according to the
Prophets direction 2 King. 5.
; and if he had not done so, for any thing we know, he had never been healed:
so it is with men that are endued with an inferior and more common work of
the Spirit; although this do not work a perfect cure upon them, and restore
health into their souls, yet it does enable them to use the means, whereby
they are fitted and prepared to receive those essential ingredients and
principles of grace, by which a perfect cure is made: and in the use of the
means there is a double care to be had.

The first is, to pitch upon the right means.

The second is, so to use them, as that they may prove effectual, for the
obtaining of those blessings which God has promised to such as use them aright.

First there must be a care to pitch upon the right means: The outward means
is, the hearing of the Word; Jsa. 55.3.
Hear, and your soul shall live. The inward means, which are especially to
be used, are meditation and prayer: Meditation, whereby he steepes his thoughts
in the consideration of those arguments and reasons, those objects and Motives,
which the Scripture propounds unto him, to draw his heart and affections nearer
unto God; 2 Timothy 2.7.
Consider what I say, etc. Prayer, whereby he makes his approaches to the
Throne of Grace, and becomes an earnest and humble suitor unto God, that he
would be pleased to corroborate, and strengthen his purposes and desires, and
to establish him with the spirit of grace and power, that he may be able
wisely to manage those blessed opportunities that are put into his hand, for
his own everlasting good, and to follow that counsel, and direction which is
given unto him from the mouth of God in the Ministry of the Word: Jam. 1.5.
If any one lack wisdom, let him ask it of God.

The reason of all this, is, because God will not work but by his own means
Stel. com. in Luc. 16.29. Quando mortuus est Christus multa corpora Sanctorum
surrexerunt, etc. sed nunquid propter hoc emendati sunt Iudaei? imo pejores
effecti sunt: qui adeo induratus est, ut Scripturae no^ credet, nec mortuis
resurgentibus credet.
: his blessing must not be expected in any other, than his own way: few or none
but would have the blessings that God has promised, and God is as willing that
they should have them; only here is the difference, God is willing they should
have them in that way that he has appointed them to be sought, and they
would have them in their own way, and not in Gods way; and therefore they
miss of them, because they will not apply themselves to God to seek for them
in his way. Naaman would be cured of his leprosy, and God is willing to do
that cure upon him; only here is the difference, Naaman would have it in his
way, he thinks the Prophet must come forth, and lay his hand upon the sore,
and call upon the name of his God, and so heal him, that was his way; and
therefore when the Prophet does not pitch upon this way, he is ready to fling
out from him, and look no more after him; but God would have it another way;
he must wash himself in Jordan seven times, and so be cured. Now because this
did not suit well with Naamans conceit Hugo Card. com. in loc. Multis vilescit
medicina facilis: and ideo saepe medici, quod non valet obolum, faciunt emi
december solidis, et morbum qui facile et, cito curari posset, faciunt durare diu,
et cum multis expensis curari. Sanct com. in loc. Non unius Naaman hoc est
vitium, sed omniu^ ferme, etc. qui sive spirituali, sive corporali morbo
laborent, praescribunt medico, quem tenere debeat curationis modum, nec
patienter ferunt, si aliter ac ipsi cupiunt, medicinam adhibeat. Et nonnunquam
magno suo malo, illorum mulliori voluntat^ obsequuntur medici, qui cum a
severiori medicina abstinent, alii corpus, alii animani languentis perdunt,
quae servassent omnino, si arti suae, potius quam ignavorum and mollium
voluntati paruissent.
, he is ready here to fling away again, saying, 2 Kings 5.11.
Are not Abana and Pharpar rivers of Damascus better than all the waters of
Israel? may I not wash my self in them, and be cleansed? And had not his
servants been wiser than their master, and counseled him better, he had
missed of that blessing, because he would not apply himself to seek it in
Gods way: and so it is in spiritual things; many miss of the blessings that
God is willing to bestow upon them, because they are unwilling to seek for
them, in, and according to his way.

2 When the right means is once pitched upon, the next care must be so to use
them, as that they may be availeable for the attaining of that end, whereunto
they serve: 1 Cor. 9.24.
So run that ye may obtain: If any one strive for a mastery, he is not
crowned, except he strive as he ought to do 2 Timothy 2.5.
. And he that would thus strive, and thus run in this spiritual race, he must
be careful to observe these fix rules:

1 He must see that he use the means, as means; that is, with subordination
unto GOD, upon whose blessing the virtue and efficacy of all means does
depend. When means are lifted up above their own place, it is Gods usual
manner to dash them in pieces, as he did the Acts 27.22.
Ship wherein St. Paul sailed: to let men know, that it is not in him that
runs, nor in him that wills, but al in God that shows mercy. And it is
one of Satan's great policies to take men off from the present helps and means
that they do enjoy, by setting up idolatrous fancies and conceits in their
minds of other means, as if they lived under such a ministry, and had such
teaching, and such means, oh what excellent ones they would be! whereas indeed,
he that has the Word of God truly preached, though but by weaker means, and
profits nothing by it, it is to be feared, if he had the best means under
heaven, he would not be much better for it. Dives was sick of this disease,
Luke 16 31.
Oh if one might be sent to his brethren from the dead, what miracles and
wonders would he not work among them? but ye know what answer he had, They
have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; Implying, that if Moses and
the Prophets, that is, the common and ordinary means which they had, could not
prevail with them, neither would other means do it, if they could be had
Pet. Mart. com. in 2 Reg. 5.12. Facile hinc animad vertere licet quanta sit
humani ingenii perversitas, quae dona Dei maliz assequi viis ac rationibus,
duris et difficilibus excogitatis a se, quam facilib: et meliorib: a Deo sibi
descriptis.
. If a key of Iron will not open the lock, it is very likely a key of gold
would do no more, because the virtue and efficacy of it, is not from the
matter, but from the form of it: so the virtue and efficacy of Gods
ordinances, is not from the messenger that brings them, but from God that sends
them, and his blessing upon them.

2. He must use them diligently: it is the diligent hand that makes rich,
both in spiritual and temporal things Prove. 10.4.
: and diligence includes two things, to wit, the frequencie of the act, and the
intention of the soul in the doing of it.

1. The frequency of the act is signified by those several expressions of
asking, seeking, knocking, etc Mat. 7.7.
. When the man of God bade the King of Israel smite on the ground, he smote
thrice, and then ceased 2 King. 13.18.
: but the man of God was angry, saying, thou should have smitten five or six
times: so should thou have smitten Aram, till thou had consumed it Pet.
Mar. com. in lo. Rex eo quod primo impigre imperata facit, dein, vix dum ter
pulsata terra destitit, ingenitam nobis socordiam representat, qua fit ut in
omnibus, etc. initio industrii simus, et spem virtutis prope incredibilis
praebeamus deinde remisso studio, negligentes, et interdum degeneres evadamus.
. So many, they hear, read, meditate, pray, and use other means to overcome
their corruptions, and prevail not, because they do it seldom, and they give
over too soon when they apply themselves unto it.

2. The fervor and intention of the soul in the doing of it, is signified by
that phrase and expression which the holy Ghost uses, when he injoynes every
one Luke 13.24.
to strive to enter in at the strait gate. Now when a man strives with another,
he puts forth all his strength, and uses all his might against him; so he
that with diligence applies himself to seek grace and mercy, he does not go
about it with cold, careless, and remiss endeavors; but he seeks for it, as
men seek for silver Muse com. in Joan. c. 5. ver. 4. Quod donum sanitatis ei
obtingebat, qui primus post aquae motum descendisset, documento nobis esse
debet, coelestia dona illis demum co^petere, qui avide illa, et quanta poterunt
celeritate amplectuntur, potiora scilicet quam quae haesitantibus, tardantibus,
ac pigris exhibeantur.
, and as they search for gold. This is that which the Wiseman requires, Eccles.
9.10.
Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with all thy might. And again,
Prove. 4.7.
Get wisdom, and with all thy getting, get understanding. Yea he that was
wiser than Solomon, calls for it, John 6.27.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures unto
everlasting life. Implying, that the care and endeavor that should be taken
for these earthly things, it is not worthy to be styled by the name of labor,
in comparison of that diligence that should be used for the getting of
spiritual blessings. But when men are as busy as bees in seeking for earthly
things, and as lazy as drones in using the means of grace and salvation; when
their prayers, which should be fervent and frequent for the obtaining of
spiritual blessings, are faint and few, no marvel though they miss of them.

3. He must use them entirely, and that is, when all means are used without
neglect of any. God has appointed sundry helps and means for the obtaining of
grace and salvation, as hearing, reading, meditation, prayer, good conference,
good company, etc. all must be used in their due place and order, because none
of them are appointed in vain: Like as it is in matters of bodily health, God
has appointed sundry means for the preserving of it, as food, physic,
sleep, recreations, exercise, etc. and all must be used: he that neglects any
one of them, in his due place and order, will find a decay of his health: so
God has appointed sundry means for the preserving of spiritual health, some
private, some public, and all must be used Guliel. Parisi. de legib. c. 1. p.
19. Ex unaquaque enim regul^ praeceptu^ oritur tanquam ex sua causa.

Cassion. li. 4. inst. 41. Obedi^ntia nihil discernit, nihil dijudicat, ex his
quae ei praecepta sunt, non discutit Dei mandata, sed fucit.


. The Husbandman he plowes, and sowes, and harrowes, and weeds his field, and
uses all other convenient means of necessary culture, because he knows that
if any be neglected, he shall find it in the harvest: even so it is in the
spiritual husbandry of the soul, there be sundry means appointed by God, and
all must be used in their due place. But when men will pick, and choose, use
what means they like, and neglect the rest, no marvel though they do not
prevail with GOD.

4. He must use them seasonably, as shall be more fully showed hereafter: that
is, not to foreslow the time, but seek early unto God: Prove. 8.17.
they which seek me early shall find me: but then especially must he bestirre
himself, when God stirs up good motions and desires in his soul; then is the
principal season to apply himself unto God, and strike in with him. When David
asked counsel of God, whether he should go up against the Philistines, he
received this answer, 2 Samuel 5.24.
When thou hear the noise of one going in the top of the mulberry trees,
then remove, for then shall the Lord go out before thee to smite the
Philistims Pet. Mar. com. in loc. Non miru^ est si David vincat, cum sequatur
ductum Dei.
. So should every one observe, when God casts into his mind sweet thoughts
and motions of leaving his sin, and turning unto God; when he hears a voice
within him, saying unto him, Come with me from Lebanon, my Spouse, etc. Come
away from thy sinful pleasures and delights, and then step in, and apply
himself unto God, when God himself makes such way for it. There are certain
acceptable times, when God makes kindly impressions upon the hearts of men, and
if they would then make out for help and assistance, they should find him
pliable to them, and ready to meet them with more abundant expressions of his
love, than they could expect from him. Like as it was at the poole of Bethesda,
John 5 4.
there were certain times when the Angel came down and troubled the waters,
and whosoever did then step in, was healed of whatsoever disease he had Mal.
com. in lo. Ex co quod unus tantum, et is qui primus in aqua^ desce^dit sanatus
fuit, docere voluit Deus, etiam in percipiendis divinis donis, quae gratis
nobis et sine merito ullo nostro dentur, multu^ nostram valere diligentiam,
divina enim gratia gratis datur, sed non nisi vo lentib: non nisi quaerentib:
non nisi conantib: diligentiss: quisque hoc beneficiu^ praecipiebat.
. So there are certain times when God moves and stirs the waters; that is,
the heart and affections, and if men would observe the times and seasons when
God works thus kindly upon them, and apply themselves to work with him, they
should find him easy to be entreated, and ready to help them; but the case of
Saul is the case of all reprobates, whereof he was a type, 1 Samuel 13.13.
they miss of that acceptable time wherein mercy and salvation might have been
had, if it had been sought for.

5. He must use them sincerely, that is, out of conscience of his duty, and in
obedience to the commandment of God; as Peter said to Christ, Luke 5.5.
We have labored all night, and have caught nothing; yet at thy word will I
let down the net: the labor and diligence that is spent in vain, out of
other respects and considerations; yet when it is undertaken sincerely, out of
a consideration of a man's duty, and a respect to the commandment of God that
does require it; it proves successful, and draws a blessing after it, as the
learned observe Aret. in loc. Discamus hinc quaesit causa fa^licis successus,
et benedictionis Domini, nimirum si in illius jussu^ laxemus retia nostra.
. And therefore he that would find a blessing in the use of the means, must
use them sincerely, and for a right end; not for by-respects, but that he may
thereby be fitted and furnished with ability to serve God according to his
will; this is that which the Prophet enjoynes, Esaias 2.3.
Come, let us go up to the house of the Lord, and he will teach us his ways,
and we will walk in his paths. When a man comes to the public ordinances,
merely out of a desire to be taught the will of God, and with a purpose and
intention to walk according to that which shall be taught unto him, this
seldom or never misseth of a blessing; this is that which the Apostle calls
for, 1 Pet. 2.2.
desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. When the Word
is desired for a right end, it is not desired in vain; but when men are moved
and set aworke in the use of the ordinances with sinister ends and respects; no
marvel if they prove fruitless and ineffectuall unto them; this is that
which Saint James tells them, Iam. 4 3.
Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might spend them
upon your lusts. Christ himself blames some of his followers for this, that
they were drawn with earthly motives and carnal respects, John 6.26.
Ye seek me, not because of the miracles that ye saw, but because ye did eat
of the loaves, and were satisfied.

6 He must use them constantly, not limiting or confining God to any certain
time, but waiting patiently upon him, till he be pleased in his own time to
show mercy unto him; and indeed he may well be content to wait Gods leisure,
and think himself abundantly happy that he has a Bill of his hand, though he
take his own time for the payment of it. This is that which Solomon injoynes
Eccles 11.6.
, Sow thy seed in the morning, and in the evening let not thine hand rest Joan
Ferus com. in loc. Solemus plerunq, ab incepto opere cessare, si vel semel
infaeliciter cesserit. Hoc igitur praevenire vult. q.d. ut maxim matutinus
labor, interiisse tibi videatur, noli tame^ ob id cessare, forsitan enim
aliquid vespere proventurum est, forsan utrumque te^pore suo, credentis enim
est summa diligentia exequi opus a Domino sibi commissum, sive aliquid
proveniat, sive no^. Ideo enim Deus interdum labores piorum frustratur, ut eos
probet an caepta diligentia in vocatione perseverare velint.
: that is, apply thy self unto God early and late, not by fits and starts, but
constantly, and at all seasons. God does sometimes delay the blessing promised,
when it is sought for, not out of a purpose to deny it, nor because he would
be rid of his Clients, but because he would exercise their patience, and
stir them up with more earnestness of spirit to seek for it; and therefore
the Apostle tells those to whom he writes Heb. 10 36.
, Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God ye might
receive the promise: That is, because God does not give the blessing promised
presently, as soon as it is sought for; therefore he that would obtain it,
he must wait patiently upon God, as David did Psalm. 40.1.
, I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined to hear my cry. The woman
of Canaan did not presently speed in her suit and request that she made to
Christ Mat. 15.22.
; yet for all that she would not be so taken off, but she still follows and
pursues her first motion; and though Christ put her off a long while, yet he
granted her request at last. To this end does Christ propound the Parable of
the unjust Judge Luke 18.1.
, to show how much importunity prevails with God; for if the importunate woman
prevailed so far, and gained so much upon the unjust Judge, that it did even
constrain him to do her justice, though he was unwilling to do it; much more
shall it prevail with God, for the obtaining of his blessing, because he is of
himself willing to give it, and does but even stay and wait for such an
occasion; as appears by another Parable, parallel and suitable unto this, which
Christ himself does interpret according to this sense and meaning Luke 11.5.
: The reason why many prevail not in their suits, is, because they do not
constantly apply themselves to God, but are ready to fling away, if they do
not presently speed in their errand Sen. epist. 120. Indicium maximum est malae
mentis fluctuatio.
, saying with the messenger of the King of Israel King. 6.33.
, Behold, this evil is of the Lord, why should we wait on him any longer?
Whereas he that is careful thus to use the means, as has been showed, he
shall be sure to prevail with God, for the obtaining of that which he seeks
for, at least so far forth as it shall be requisite and necessary for his
salvation: and how should this encourage every one to do it? Can any think
much of his best and most effectual endeavors in this kind? How do the men
of this world lay out themselves in the things of this life? what means do
they use for the compassing and scraping together of this earthly trash? how
early do they rise? how late do they sit down? how do they even macerate
and pine away themselves with thought and care? and yet what are these things
in comparison of grace Plato l 6. de repub. Qui been natus est, and qui vere
amator est disciplinarum, no^ haerebit in his bonis quae vulgus admiratur: quae
vere non satiant, sed perget porro ire, non delassabitur, sed mistus vero enti,
vere vivet, vere nutrietur, vere saturabitur.
? what are they in comparison of heaven? If means should be used for other
things, why not for life and salvation? Other things they are but Husks, and
not bread; they do not feed and nourish the soul, they do not satisfy the
desire of the heart, but only fill it with flatulent and windy humors; and
why then should any lay out his money, and not for bread? why should he labor,
and not be satisfied, as the Prophet complains Isa. 55.2.
? why should he not rather listen to the counsel of God, when he does so
friendly advise him to that which tends so much to his own advantage, and the
furtherance of his own good? as it is recorded Gaspar. Sanct. com. in loc.
Alia omnia acuunt potius famem quam obtundunt, inflant non imple^t famescente^
animu^; quae sane cogitatio ad re^ morale^ gravis est. Nam revera Deus solus
est panis, etc. Si quidpiam a Deo in alia co^silia aut lucra derives, perdis
operam et argentum.
, Revel. 2.7.
He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches, etc. The ear it does enable a man to hear, and it was given for
that end especially, that he might hearken after spiritual things, and learn
out the means of salvation, and therefore God looks that it should be
applied thereunto. Experience shows it in all other matters, that they are not
gotten and obtained without using the means: The Husbandman does not expect a
crop without plowing and sowing and using the means? Arts and Sciences they
are not obtained without care and study, without labor and diligence in using
the means? If it be a gainefull Office, how many competitors are there, who
use all possible means for the procuring of it? and if a man cannot earne a
poor living in the world without care and diligence in using the means, it is
in vain for any to hope that grace and salvation will fall in his lap; or to
dream that heaven and happiness will drop into his mouth, while he neglects
the means that lead unto it.

Thus far of the manner of Christ's speech, as it is expressed or set forth in
a pathetiall and passionate wish and complaint; now follows the matter of it,
to wit, the want he complains of in Jerusalem, or the thing he wishes to her,
and that is knowledge; Oh if thou had known, etc. from whence arises this
observation, That it was the great fault of Jerusalem, and a great part of her
misery, that she did not know the things that concerned her peace. For the
more full opening and unfolding of the whole matter which is summed up in this
Conclusion, it may be parcelled out in these three particulars.

1 That Jerusalem did not know the things that concerned her peace. 2 That it
was her great fault that she did not know them. 3 That it was not only her
fault, but also a great part of her misery, that she took no more notice of
them.
Chap. 12.
LUKE 19.42. Oh if thou had known, at least in this thy day, the things that
belong to thy peace, etc!


CHAP. 12.
It was a great fault in Jerusalem, and a great part of her misery, that she
did not know Christ.

1 THat Jerusalem did not know the things that concerned her peace, may seem
something strange to him that considers that of David Psalm. 76.1.
, In Jury is God well known, and his name is great in Israel, etc. and yet it
is nothing strange, if it be rightly conceived, either of whom it is spoken,
or of what knowledge it is to be understood: For, first of all, neither does
David there in the Psalms, nor Christ here in the Gospel, speak of all the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem; God might be well known amongst some of them, though
in some respect unknown to the greatest part: GOD was well known in Israel,
yet not of all Israel, nor of the greatest part, at least with that knowledge
which Christ here speaks of; that is, with a lively and effectual knowledge:
for when Christ here speaks of the whole body of Jerusalem, as if she had not
known him; the denomination (as is usual in speeches of that nature) is taken
from the greater part: and the meaning is, that though there were some amongst
them that did receive and acknowledge him for their Savior, yet they were but
a few in comparison of the rest; like a few Grapes that are left after the
Vintage is gathered: Generally and for the most part they would not receive and
acknowledge him, yet some of them did, as the learned observe out of that in S.
John Tollet. comment in loc. Cu^ dicimus a Iudaico pop^receptum non fuisse non
singulos de populo intelligas, (nam a multis ex suis receptus est) sed majorem
partem a qua totus populus denominatur.
, He came unto his own, and his own received him not; but as many as
received him, to them he gave power to be the Sons of God John 1.11, 12.
: which plainly shows, that many of his own did receive him, though generally,
and for the most part they did refuse him.

2 It is not every kind of knowledge that Christ here speaks of; for there is
a two fold knowledge Aqu part. 1. q. 59. ar. 23. Cogni^io alia est speculativa,
alia affectiva, sive imperativa. Vide Cajetan in loc. Item cognitio duplex, una
quae est speculativa tantu^, ut cu^ alicui aliqua secreta divinoru^ revelantur,
alia quae est effectiva producens amorem Dei. Aquin part. 1. q. 64. art. 1.2.2.
q. 97. art. 2. q. 154. art. 5. q. 162. art. 3 Cognitio alia apprehensionis,
alia approbationis. Aquin 2.2 q. 188. art 5.
, to wit, a literal, and a notionall knowledge, swimming in the brain; and a
lively and effectual knowledge that sinkes down into the heart. The former it
is but a sleeping habit, which may be separated and disjoined from obedience;
as in the evil servant, who knew his Masters will, and did it not Luke 12.47,
; he had a barren, fruitless, livelesse knowledge, but not such a knowledge as
had a prevailing influence into his life and conversation; the other, it is a
knowledge well husbanded, and improved, which is not only apt, but also
availeable, to beget in the soul desires and endeavors, and some degree and
measure suitable unto it; that is, a lively, effectual and saving knowledge,
which is always accompanied with the duties of obedience. For though the
motion of the will do not necessarily follow the light of the understanding,
nor the knowledge of that which is good, always draw obedience after it Scot.
sent. l 3. d. 36. art. 2. dub. 1. and d. 33. q. 1. Gandavens. quodl. 1 q. 16,
17 Mai^o. sent l. 2. did. 24. Estius sent. l. 2. did. 22. page 236. Constat
Angelum and primos homines, quando primum peccaverunt, no^ ex ignorantia
peccasse, neque enim poterat ignorantia ejus quod agendum esset, praecedere
peccatu^, sic enim Angelus et homo miser fuisset antequam malus, quod est
contra primaevam institutionem intellectualis creaturae.
, as appears by the Angels which fell, even then when they had neither
darkness nor error in the understanding, as also of our first Parents, who had
perfect knowledge when they fell from God; and experience shows it both in men
regenerate, and unregenerate; both which may commit sins against their
knowledge. An unregenerate man he may in many things know how to do well,
when he does it not Iam. 4.17.
: and so a regenerate man, he may fall into those sins which he knows to be
sins, as David when he fell into murder Aquin. 1.2. q. 6. art. 8. Ignorantia
voluntaria ejus est, quod quis potest scire ac debet, etc. hoc igitur modo
dicitur ignorantia, cum aliquis actu non considerat, quod confiderare potest ac
debet. Medaea. Ovid. Metam. Video meliora proboque Deteriora sequor. Aquin.
1.2. q. 58. art. 2. q. 76. art. 4. ad 1. q. 77. art 1. and 2. q. 78. art. 1. ad
1. q. 51. art. 3. q. 53. art. 2 Disput. de verit. q. 24. art. 2. and 8.
Sentent. l. 2. d. 39. q. 1. art. 1. ad 4. Durand. sent. l. 4. d. 39. q. 1.
Capre. sent. l. 3. d. 36. Cajetan. and med. ad 1.2. q. 77. art. 2. 12 Sam. 11.
and adultery 2 Samuel 11.
; yet when the knowledge of the Gospel is well husbanded and improved, when he
knows things as he ought to know them, this knowledge is never separated from
obedience, no more than saving faith is separated from love and charity;
according to that of the Psalmist Psalm. 9.10.
, They that know thy name will trust in thee: Agreeable whereunto is that of
Christ to the woman of Samaria John 4.10.
, If thou had known thou would have asked, etc. Now it may well be, that
some amongst the inhabitants of Jerusalem were so ignorant, through the neglect
of the means, that they did not know, either the present mercy now offered
unto them, or the future misery that waited for them: others, though they had a
general knowledge of the things of the Gospel, yet they wanted the actual
use and consideration of it Arist. Ethic. ad Nicomach. l 3. c 1* (...).
Simil^ter l. 6. c. 15. l. 7. c. 2, and 3. Becan. Theol. Scholast. to. 1. de
peccato ca. 4. Ignorantia alia opponitur scientiae speculativae, etc. alia
prudentiae, seu rectae electioni, quae reperitur in omni pecato; nam quicunque
peccat, nec prudenter agit, nec recte eligit.
; they did not actually remember and apply what they knew, they did not mould
their knowledge into obedience, nor reduce it into practice; and Christ
interprets such a knowledge as this to be no better tha^ plain ignorance. He
that has no more but only the sleeping habit of knowledge, is said not to
have it Mat. 13.12.
, because it stands him in no more stead, nor does he make any more use of it,
than if he had no knowledge at all. And thus it was with the City of Jerusalem
in regard of the generality, and for the most part, they had not that lively
and effectual knowledge, which is ever fruitful in the works of piety,
though they might in a general manner know much, according to the bare and
naked letter of the truth.

2 It was the great fault of Jerusalem, that she did not know these things Est.
sent. l. 2. d. 22. page 229. Dicimus omnem and solam eam ignorantiam, peccatum
esse, qua quis ignorant, quod scire tenetur; quandocunque enim scientia in
praecepto est consequenter opposita ei ignorantia prohibita censetur, et non
alias: sicut enim omittere, quod quis tenetur facere, peccatum est omissionis,
ita nescire quod quis scire tenetur, peccatum est ignorantiae.
, this imputation lies more heavy against her, and leaves a deeper guilt upon
her, than it would have done upon many others: for though it were to be wished,
that all had knowledge, and though the want of it be worthy of blame in any
that might attain unto it, yet above all in Jerusalem, and that for these
three reasons:

1 Because she had more helps and means of knowledge; she had the Oracles of
God, which are the key of knowledge; and do not only unlocke the door, and
enable a man to know, but also call upon him, and stir him up to improve that
knowledge which he has, to those ends and purposes for which it was given, and
whereunto it serves. Psalm. 147.19.
He has showed his statutes to Jacob, and his judgments to Israel: he has
not dealt so with every Nation, neither have the heathen knowledge of his Name.
And where should God look for knowledge, if not in Jerusalem, and amongst his
own people; who were entered into a Covenant with him, and professed themselves
to have the knowledge of his will? he must needs take it ill at their hands,
that they who stood in such near relation to him, and were called by his name,
should have no more care to know and take notice of those things that did so
much concern his own glory and their everlasting good.

2 Because she was more bound to know: God had bound her by his own precept
and commandment: she had bound her self by entering into Covenant with God:
the means of knowledge afforded unto her, did lay a tie and obligation upon
her, to walk answerable unto them: but above all, those peculiar mercies
wherein the favor of God seemed as it were to empty it self toward the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, did lay the strongest tie and obligation upon her,
because they were such, as that no Nation under heaven enjoyed the like: God
took special notice of this people, when he passed by, and seemed to neglect
all the rest of the Nations besides. Amos 3 2.
You only have I known of all the families of the earth Calv. com. in lo.
Deus beneficia sua in medium profert, ut magis exaggeret crimen populi, quod
referat Deo pessimam mercede^, a quo tam liberaliter et benign tractatus
fuerat, etc. Deum non agnoscunt, ut se totos ei addicant, cui omnia debebant.
: and therefore if they did not take special notice of this undeserved favor,
and so accordingly make use of it, it would leave a fouler blot of ingratitude
upon them, than is to be found in the very brute beast, as the Lord himself
complains, Esaias 1.2.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but Israel has not
known, my people have not understood. When a Savior was sent into the world,
he was first sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: and together with
him the Gospel of salvation Acts 13.46.
. This people of Israel, they were the only Church of God in the time of the
Old Testament, and in the New Testament the first offer or tendry of salvation
was made unto them. Romans 2.10.
To every one that does good shall be glory, and honor, and immortality, to the
Jew first, and also to the Grecian. Hereupon it is, that the Apostle does so
highly extol the privilege of the Jews Romans 3.1.
, they had received more from God than many others, and therefore were more
indebted to him: for Luke 12.48.
to whom much is given, of him much shall be required.

3. Because both knowledge and want of knowledge in her, was a matter of
greater weight and importance, than it would have been in many others: for
first of all, If Jerusalem had minded the things that concerned her peace, she
being the most eminent and public place in the kingdom, her care and
forwardness this way, might have been a special means of procuring a
public blessing upon the whole land; all Judea might have fared the better for
her sake; as God would have spared the whole City of Sodom, if there had been
but Genesis 18.32.
ten righteous persons found there. And again, she being the Metropolitan and
chief City, as it were the eye of the whole land; her example would be a
leading example, and likely to prevail much in drawing followers after her
Claudian. Totus co^ponitur orbis Regis ad exemplum: nec sic inflecteresensus
Humanos edicta valent, qua^ vita regentis. Bonart. com. in Eccl. c. 10. p. 152.
Vt ex sanitate capitis in me^bra eadem profluit, et ex sole tanquam font, lux
toti orbi co^municatur, ita virtus ex principe, tanquam ex arce quadam in pop:
descendit, etc. Vid. Nazian. orat. 1. apologet.
. All inferior places would be ready to pattern themselves by Jerusalem; her
good example might have drawn all the rest to be like unto her. If Jerusalem
the mother had acknowledged Christ, all her Daughters, in imitation of her,
would in all likelihood have become followers of him; whereas now on the
contrary, her careless neglect of the things belonging to her peace, makes
others as negligent in looking after them. And besides, being a place of such
public eminency, her sins would have a special hand in drawing down
public judgments on the whole land; so that all Judea should fare the worse
for her sake; and therefore it is, that Christ sets a special Emphasis upon
Jerusalem, saying, Oh if thou had known the things that belong to thy peace!

3. It was a great part of Ierusalems misery, that she did not know or take
notice of these things, and that in three respects:

1. Because it opened a gap to her future sin, and further punishment, she
refuses mercy when it is freely offered unto her, because she does not know or
take notice of the worth and value of that blessing Pecan. Theol. Schol to. 1.
de pec. c. 4. Qua^do quis ex professo vult aliquid ignorare, ut postea liberius
peccet, tu^ prima origo peccati non est ignorantia, sed prava ignorandi
voluntas.
, and by running daily upon the old score, and adding still more and more to
the heap of her former sins, she treasures up wrath unto her self against
the day of wrath, because in those sins, and in that soil of iniquity, she
sowes the seed of her future woe and misery; like as it is with intemperate
persons, though for the present they neither see nor feel any hurt in their
riotous and excessive courses, yet in them is sown the seed of consumptions,
dropsies, and other noisome diseases, which will make their life wretched and
miserable afterward; or as it is with a prodigal spend-thrift, though he see
no hurt for the present, by taking up at Interest, and running on the score in
his Creditors books; yet in the end it will break his back, and bring him to
nothing, because though it do supply his wants for the present, yet it lays a
foundation of unavoidable misery for time to come; even so it was with
Jerusalem, because she will not know or take notice either of the worth of
mercy when it is freely offered, or of the danger of sin and iniquity when it
might be avoided, but refuses the one, and runs into the other; she did
thereby add more weight to the unsupportable burden of her future misery.

2. Because it lulls her asleep, in such a deep security, that she has no
sense or feeling of her own estate and condition, when it is most lamentable;
and that is the cause why she gives her self thus to mirth and pleasure, when
her condition is such, that it fetches tears from the eyes of Christ, because
she would not take notice of her sin, or think upon her danger; she did not
lay it to heart, nor was she deeply affected with it; whereas if she had
known as much by her self, as Christ did, and rightly applied that knowledge,
it would have made a great change and alteration, both in her carriage and
condition; that is, whereas now her mouth runs over with mirth and laughter,
even then, when Christ's eyes are full of tears at the very thought of her
misery, had she known and considered as much as Christ did, she would have
wept and lamented as he did; but now she drownes her self in sensual
delight, because she knows not the day of her visitation Pint. com. in Isa.
ca. 16. ver. 2. Vt enim cervus, foeminae cupiditate incensus, accurrit ad
absconditum venatorem rugitu^ cervae fugiente^; ductusque appetitu, dum
existimat se ad desideratam cerva^ festinare, currit velocissime ad mortem
ipsam, and ad venenata^ venatoris sagittam recipie^da^: sic qui indomito
appetitu ducuntur, quanto celerius ad res desideratas contendunt, tanto
perniciosius ad mortem ipsam amplectendam accurrunt.
. Like as it is with the sheep or the ox that go to the shambles skipping
and leaping, as if they were going to the pasture, because they know not
whither they are going; even so it was with Jerusalem here, she buries her
self in sinful pleasures, even then when her eyes should have been filled
with penitential tears, nay even then when tears of blood had been too
little to bewail her misery, and all because she knows not whither she is
going. Her estate and condition is lamentable for the present; she is passing
on to a more lamentable end, there to be swallowed up in that bottomless gulf,
where there shall be nothing else but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth unto all eternity; and never thinks with her self whither she is going.
John 12.35.
He that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes Heming. Com. in loc.
Que^ idmodum illi qui noctu in densissimis tenebris ambulant, viam non tenent;
atque ideo in praecipitia incidu^t, et vitae pericula: ita qui eunt in tenebris
ignorantiae, fe^ u^tur in aeternae mortis praecipitia, unde eluctari non
possunt, horrenda caligine obruti.
. And this makes up the height of her misery, that ruin and destruction is so
near at hand, even ready to fall upon her head, and she knows nothing of it;
had she seriously considered those unknown dangers which she lay open unto,
and steeped her thoughts in the meditation of that which Christ did, it could
not but have fetched tears from her eyes. The reason why Christ has no more
companions in weeping for Jerusalem, is, because he has no more to share with
him in the sight and survay of her sin and misery; if others had known all
by Jerusalem that Christ did, they could not but have pittyed her estate and
condition; or if Jerusalem her self had been privy to it, in such manner as
she ought, and might have been, she would surely have wept and shed tears:
whereas now she makes her self merry, and sings care away, because she will
not know, or take any notice how matters stand between God and her own soul.

3. Because it makes her abuse the patience of God, mis-spending and
mis-imploying that precious time that was given for better ends and purposes,
because she does not know or take notice of the price that is put into her
hand, either for the obtaining of mercy, or the escaping of punishment; and the
long abused patience of God, ever breaks forth into greater wrath, and brings
more misery with it afterward Greg. Moral l. 25. cap. 9. Qui^ omnipotens Deus
ad poenitentiam tempus indulget, quod tamen humana malitia ad usum suae
iniquitatis incorquet: nimiru^ justo Dei judicio augeri culpa permittitur, ut
ad ferre^du^ altius quandoque cumuletur
. If Jerusalem had known the time of her visitation, and the worth of those
blessings that were offered unto her by the coming of Christ, she would not
have valued them at so low a rate; nay she would have purchased and procured
them, had it been with the dearest drop of her own blood; little did she
think what she lost by losing Christ, and the privileges and mercies that
came along with him; for the Kingdom of heaven comes along with Christ, and
goes away with him: and therefore our blessed Savior, to let the Jews know
what they lost by losing Christ and the Gospel, he tells them in plain
terms, Mat. 21.43.
the Kingdom of heaven shall be taken away from you, etc. So that it is a
blessing of infinite worth, beyond all price that can be set upon it, that
Jerusalem here passes away, and deprives her self of, because she will not
know or acknowledge that blessed opportunity Sanct. com. in Isa. 1.3. Illustris
co^paratio, qua stuporet vecordia hominum ita significa^tur, ut nullo modo
videa^tur exprimi posse significantius: quando neque illud repende^^ quod
omnium animantium stolidissimi refer solent possess^^^ suo.
, which now by the presence of Christ was put into her hands, for the obtaining
of it: and on the contrary, she brings upon her self woe and misery
unspeakable, beyond all expression, because she will not know the time of Gods
patience and forbearance: whereas if she had known, and rightly considered of
it, she would not have trifled out that time as she did, but rather have agreed
with her adversary quickly, and have made her peace before the sentence had
been past, and the decree come forth against her. Mat. 24.43.
If the good man of the house had known at what hour the thief would have
come, Chap. 13.
he would surely have watched, and not suffered his house to be dug through.
If the traveller did know that he should fall into the hands of robbers, he
would be wiser than to put himself upon such apparent dangers. If the Mariner
did know that in such a voyage he should split his vessel, dash upon a rock,
and suffer Shipwreck; he would pull down his sails, and turn his course,
that so he might escape the sands, that otherwise would have swallowed him up:
So if Jerusalem had known the gall and wormwood, the venom and poison, the
ugly tail of punishment that her sinful neglect drew after it; she would not
thus have refused Christ, nor forsaken her own mercy as she did; but because
she will not know and consider this, therefore her misery is great upon her.

CHAP. 13.
The use which is to be made of Ierusalems estate and condition, and the
instructions to be gathered from it.

did not know things that concerned her peace, then may this serve to reprove
all those that are guilty of this fault; and there are not a few such, who when
Christ comes unto them, they will not know him, or take notice of him; for
though Christ do not now come unto men, Chap. 13.
as he came to Jerusalem, in his own person, yet still he comes unto them, so
and in such manner, as that he is worthy of the best entertainment they can
afford unto him; and therefore the more to blame are they that will not know or
take notice of him.

1. He comes unto them in the ministry of the Word; and when men do not judge
that Word to be, as indeed it is, an infallible truth, and worthy of all
acceptance; when they turn the deaf ear upon it, and will not receive the
Messengers that bring those glad tidings unto them; then they do not know or
take notice of him Mat. 10.40.
.

2. He comes unto them in the motions of his Spirit, knocking at the door of
their hearts Revel. 3.20.
, inlightning, and informing their minds and understandings with the knowledge
of their duty; Micah. 6.8.
Calling upon them for the performance of it, by those secret intimations,
which do sufficiently make known unto them, that it is their duty so to do,
the neglect whereof they can no ways excuse Isa. 30.21.
; and when they will not open unto him, when they will not follow his counsel
and direction, but grieve the Holy Spirit of God, and quench the good motions
that are kindled in their breasts, then they do not know or take notice of him.

3 He comes unto them in the works of his Providence, in mercies, in
judgments, in blessings, in crosses Exodus 24.25. Rev. 2.25.
: and when men receive and enjoy these blessings, and do not raise up their
hearts with true and unfeigned thankfulness to him that gave them; like the
Swine, that devoures and eats up the fruit, but never looks up to the tree
from whence it falls; when they lie bleeding under the hand of judgment, and
will not look beyond the second causes, to see God in it, like the Dog that
barks, and bites, and snarles at the stone, but never looks at the hand which
threw it; then they do not know or take notice of him.

4 He comes unto them in his poor members: when they are hungry, and want
food; naked, and want clothing; sick, and in prison, and want comfort and
refreshment; and when they shut up their bowels of compassion, and will not
succor and relieve their wants, nor be helpful to them in their distress,
then they do not know or take notice of him: Mat. 25.45.
Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of these, ye did
it not to me.

the circumstance of the person adds much to the quality of the offense Iuven.
Satyr. 8. Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se crimen habet, quanto major
qui peccat habetur. Bernard. de consid. ad ^ugen. Nugae in ore saecularis sunt
nugae, in ore sacerdotis blasphemiae. Inter erit multum Davusne loquatur,
herusve.
; Thou that preachest another man should not steal, do thou steal? thou
that say, a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou
that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege Romans 2.21.
? As if he should say, it were too bad that any should do it, but much more
that thou should do it. And therefore the more careful should every one be
to stand upon the credit and reputation of his place and profession, not doing
any thing which ill beseems his person or calling, but to answer that which
the nature of his place promises to others, and which both reason and religion
may justly expect from him. Thus it was with Nehemiah, Shall such a man as I
fly? Who is he, that being as I am, would go into the Temple to live Nehem.
6.11.
; and Christ himself does greatly upbraid Nicodemus with the want of this John
3.10.
, Art thou a Teacher in Israel, and know not these things? And it is a
circumstance of great weight, in regard of that relation that is between the
person and the action. Now relation, as the Rhetoricians observe, though it
have the least being, yet it is of the greatest force in the aggravation of
things Relationes sunt minimae entitatis, sed maximae efficaciae.
. That any who lives under the means of knowledge, should remain ignorant of
the things of Christ, it is too bad; but that thou, who have enjoyed the
means, in a plentiful manner, so long, as that, in regard of the time, thou
might have been a teacher of others, as the Apostle speaks of some Heb.
5.12.
, that Thou should have need to be taught again the very first principles
of the Word of God, this, it is much more worthy of blame. That any should
run into those disorderly ways and courses, whereby not only his own soul
is wounded, but also Christ and the Gospel dishonored, the hands of the
wicked strengthened, and the hearts of Gods own people grieved and
discouraged, it is a matter of lamentation, and just reproof; but that thou
should do it, whose actions are enough to command imitation from others, in
regard of the interest and authority that thou have in them Just. Lips. exempl.
Polit. l. 2. c. 8. Vt in corporibus gravissimus est moribus qui a capite
diffunditur, sic qui a principe, etc.
, o that is much more worthy of blame; that thou who art a Father, should
eat sour Grapes, whereby thy Childrens teeth are set on edge; that thou,
Vitia privatorum morbi sunt; in Magistratu positoru^, pestes. Cicero 3. de
legib. non solum vitia concipiunt ipsi, sed ea infundunt in civitatem; nec
solum obsunt quod ipsi corrumpuntur, sed quod corrumpunt, and plus exemplo,
quam peccato nocent.
who should be a means to reduce others into a more peceable way, art the
Ringleader in a faction, and do open a gappe unto a further breach; who can
look upon it, and not dislike it? who can see it, and not be sorry for it?
That any should prove false or disloyal to Christ, it is too much; he never
deserved any such ill carriage, or undutifull respect from him; but that thou
should do it, who have given up thy name to Christ, who art entered into a
professed Covenant with him, this, it is much more. That thou who art a
professed Disciple of Christ, that thou should betray him, like Judas, o
this goes near to his heart, and makes him greatly to complain of it Psalm.
55.12.
; It was not an open enemy that did me this dishonor, for then I could have
borne it; but it was thou, O man, even thou my companion, my guide, and my
familiar friend, with whom I had taken such sweet counsel, and gone so
friendly together into the house of God.

When Caesar was slain in the Senate, it troubled him no doubt, to see others
rise up against him; but when he sees Brutus his own son come amongst them, o
that strikes him to the heart, and makes him cry out, (...), etc Sueton. in
Iulio Caesare.
? what? and thou my son? have I not enemies enough to rise up against me,
but that thou also should add to the number of them? Even so it was here
with Christ; that others should refuse him, it was nothing in comparison; but
that Jerusalem should do it, Jerusalem whom he had thus honored with his
presence, and with the first offer and tendrie of salvation; Jerusalem, to whom
he was in more especial manner sent; that she should refuse him, that she
should not acknowledge him; no, not then, when it it did so much concern her
own happiness; this is that which makes him put such an Emphasis upon it; Oh,
if thou had known!

Ierusalems misery, that she was senseless of her danger, and did not know it,
but gave her self over to mirth and pleasure, and drowned her self in
sensual delights, even then when the Decree was ready to come forth against
her; then by this ye may see what to think of the estate and condition of
many in the world, who are lulled asleep in security, and drown themselves in
sensual and sinful pleasures, when they have more cause to weep and shed
tears, if they did but know and rightly consider, how matters stand between
God and their own souls: surely, if the misery of Jerusalem was great upon
her, because she did not know this; how can he be free from misery, that know
as little, perhaps, less of it, than she did? And yet if ye look abroad
into the world, and take a view of the lives and conversations of most men;
what more common and ordinary, than for men to sing and rejoice, and go on
securely, as if there were no fear of danger; even then, when their estate is
most lamentable? As it was with the Church of Laodicea, she thought her self
rich, and increased in goods, lacking nothing; and knew not that she was
poor, blind, wretched, and miserable Revel. 3.17.
: even so it is with many, they bless themselves in their sinful courses,
because they do not know, nor rightly consider, how wretched and miserable
they are.

If ye take a view of all Creatures in the world, ye shall find none amongst
them all, but are more sensible of approaching danger, than sinful man: The
Fowls of the Air, they know and foresee the storm and tempest, before it
come; they prophecy and foretell it, give presages of it, by providing a place
of refuge and shelter for themselves: The bruit Creatures that live on the
earth, even the meanest of them, they can foresee their danger, and fly away
from it, the very Rats and Mice, when the house grows ruinous, they are
sensible of their danger, and forsake their lodging, before it fall upon them;
only sinful man, he is so blinded and besotted with the pleasures of the
world, that he neither knows, nor foresees his misery before it falls upon him.

When Noah and his Family entered into the Arc Genesis 7.14.
, we do not read of any that brought Creatures unto him, but, as some think
Sanct. Avitus. Alcim. lib. 4. de diluvio. Occultus brutis in sensibus ardet
Terror, et expectans agitat formidine me^tem; Ast homines quos sors certi
discriminis urget, Vicina nec morte pavent. etc.
, such a secret instinct was put into them, and such a universal fear of the
approaching danger did seize upon them, that all in their several kinds, they
came by couples, and offered themselves to be received into the Arc; and yet
we do not read of any amongst the sons of men, not any of that great number
that perished in the Deluge of waters, that ever came to Noah to desire a place
of refuge and shelter there; the fear of the ensuing danger makes a deeper
impression upon the brute creatures, than it does upon men, who were exposed
to greater danger by it, and endued with reason and understanding to apprehend
their danger; for they in their kind, are sensible of their danger, and
provident to shun it; but men go on securely, and will not know or take notice
of it. The very untame creatures, that are by natue untractable, and use to
run at liberty in the wild Forest, they seem to lay aside their natural
wildness, offer themselves contrary to their nature, to be taken with the
hand; and forsaking that boundless liberty which they enjoyed before, are
willing to be shut up within the walls of the Ark, for the preventing of future
danger: but men, more senseless of their danger, than the Fowls of the Air,
than the beasts of the field, they will not know it Nescire est ignorantis;
nolle autem scire est superbiae. Aug. l. 3. de great. and lib. arbit ca. 19 and
22. de not. et great. c. 17. de duab. animab. ca. 12 Bern. ep. 27. Isidor. de
sum. bono. l. 2. c. 17. Greg. moral. l. 25. ca. 16.
, nor steep their thoughts in the meditation of it, though they have Noah, a
Preacher of righteousness, by his own example to go before them, and daily to
call upon them, and put them in mind of it, for an hundred and twenty years
together.

When David came against that proud and uncircumcised Philistim with a sling
and a stone, he takes it in high disdain, and great scorn, that he should
think him like a dog, that was afraid of a staff or a stone 1 Samuel 17.43.
: but, as Chrysostom Homil. de Davide and Saul.
well observes, he was worse than a Dog; for the Dog when he sees his
Master take the whip, or cudgel into his hand, he knows there is danger, and
provides for himself, either by running away, or casting down himself, and
crying out before his Master; using all means which the instinct of nature
has put into him, for the securing himself from danger: but this
uncircumcised Philistim, when he sees the stone taken out of the bag, that
was the instrument of his death, he will not know, or take notice of his
danger, till he feel the dint and impression of it upon his own forehead.

Nay more, the very devils themselves are more sensible of their own misery,
than sinful men are: for when Christ met two possessed with devils, Mat. 8.28.
they cry out, saying, what have we to do with thee? art thou come to torment
us before the time? they do not feel the weight of his power, they do not
hear so much as an ill word from him; yet the conscience of their own
guiltiness, and the presence of Christ, makes them cry out for fear, though
for the present they enjoyed a liberty, and were let out from the bottomless
pit, for a time to make their abode and habitation amongst men; yet in this
time of respite, they cannot forget the punishment they are liable unto, but
are so sensible of it, that the very sight of Christ revives the memory of it,
and brings it fresh to their mind: but when Christ comes to Jerusalem, though
he cannot without tears think of her misery, yet we hear not of any, that
either cries out of his own guiltiness, or is sensible of the deserved
punishment of his disobedience. They are so taken up with secular contentments
for the present, that the thought of future danger is quite laid aside, and
has no room to lodge within them; and here is the misery of it, that men in a
matter that does so nearely concern them, should not only come short of the
very bruit creatures, but even of the devils themselves; for infernal impiety
in those wicked spirits, has not so far drowned them in security, but that
they are sensible of their danger, and ready to presage it upon the least
occasion Basil. Seleu (...). 23. Norunt ex his quae perp^tiuntur, se tormentis
ob^^xios. Neque tantu^ apud eos m^^tu^ potuit improb^^as, ut illatae ob
siagitia poenae oblivionem inducat.
. The wickedness of their nature cannot work them to a forgetfulness of it;
but sinful men, they are so deeply soaked in sensual pleasure, and so settled
upon the lees and dregs of iniquity, that they will not see or be sensible of
their own danger, though it be never so clearly set before them; and thereupon
it is that they sing and rejoice, and drown themselves in mirth and delight,
even then when their estate and condition is most miserable: the truth whereof
will yet further appear, if ye do but take notice of the time when it is
especially that they do most securely give themselves up unto mirth and
jollity, and that is usually, and for the most part, upon these two occasions:
to wit, when God is silent, and seems to wink at their sins, and when the
world smiles upon them, and poures into their lap all outward and secular
contentments that their hearts can desire. First of all, men are most
inclinable to drown themselves in sinful pleasures, when God is silent, and
seems to wink at their sins; when he suffers them to thrive and prosper in
their sinful courses, and seems to say nothing to them: Eccles. 8.11.
Because sentence is not executed speedily against an evil work, therefore is
the heart of the children of men fully set in them to do evil. Psalm. 50.21.
These things have thou done, and I held my peace; therefore thou thoughtest
wickedly that I was even like unto thy self, etc. So it was with the old
world, because God was silent, and spared them a long while, they are ready to
think that he will not come unto them in judgment at all; and thereupon give
themselves more freely Mat. 24.48.
to eat, and drink, and be merry, as Christ himself shows: As in the days
before the flood, they did eat and drink, marry, and gave in marriage, until
the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and knew nothing till the flood came
and swept them all away; so shall the coming of the Son of man be. Now the
estate and condition of men is never more miserable, than when the patience and
mercy of God, which should lead them to repentance, becomes an occasion and
encouragement unto them to go on in their sinful courses; because it is
either a forerunner of more heavy judgments, to follow and ensue afterward,
or else a sign that their disease is incurable: and therefore God leaves them
as men that are in a desperate and forlorn condition, and will not spend his
rods in vain upon them.

1. It is an usual forerunner of more heavy judgments, because the longer
that God forbears men in their sinful courses, the more heavy he strikes when
he comes: as the axe, the higher it is lifted up, and the longer it be before
the blow be given, the more heavy it falls, and the deeper it cuts when it
comes. If they were presently smitten with temporal judgments, they might be
much more happy than many times they are, because when they do not profit by
the mercy and judgment of God, the hardness of their heart, which cannot
repent, heapeth up wrath unto themselves against the day of wrath.

2. It is a sign oftentimes that their disease is incurable; and therefore God
deals with them, as the Physician does with his sick patient; while there is
hope of recovery, he cutteth, and seareth, and launceth his body, gives him
bitter pills and potions to work out his disease; but when he gives him over,
and lets him have whatsoever he calls for, and go whither soever his mind and
affection carries him; that is a sign he is past help, and that there is little
hope of doing him good: even so when God crosses a man in his sinful courses,
and makes him feel the smart of his own doings, there is some hope he may be
reclaimed; but when he keeps silence, and says nothing to him, that is a
sign there is little hope; and therefore God will not spend any more rods in
vain upon him. Isa. 1.5.
Wherefore should ye be smitten any more, for ye fall away more and more? It is
a sign of mercy in God, when he chastises and corrects his people for their
sins, because by this temporal correction, he prevents the eternal ruin
and destruction of their souls; according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.32.
When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world: but when he suffers them to thrive and prosper in
their sins, and does not visit their iniquities and transgressions upon them;
that is a sign of his sore displeasure against them. For when God would show
his greatest severity against the Israelites, he tells them, that he Hos. 4.14.
will not visit their daughters when they are harlots, nor their spouses when
they are whores. If God speak to sinful men in his wrath, it may be ill
enough with them; but if he keep silence in his wrath, it is far worse,
because that argues more wrath against them: even as it is with the water,
which is there deepest, where it runs along with greatest silence; and more
shallow, where it makes the greater noise. When a potent enemy thunders out his
wrath against a weak and naked City, it is ill enough with the inhabitants
thereof; but when he dissembles his wrath, only waiting a fit occasion and
opportunity to crush them in pieces, it makes their condition much worse: even
so it is with God; when he keeps silence in his wrath, that is a sign that his
thoughts are deeply steeped with unalterable purposes of their ruin and
destruction.

2. Another time and occasion when men drown themselves in sinful pleasures,
and melt themselves more freely into mirth and jollity, is, when they swim in
wealth and riches, when they enjoy honors and preferments, credit and
reputation amongst men; when the world applauds them, and claps them on the
back, as the rich man in the Gospel that prophesies of peace to his own soul,
saying, Luke 1^.19.
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, and
drink, and take thy pastime: and yet, even then, there is more cause of weeping
than rejoicing, if men did thoroughly know, and rightly consider, either the
vanishing nature of those contentments, or the miserable end that will ensue
upon them. When Christ was entertained with the joyful acclamations of the
people, he was so little affected with it, that he did not rejoice, but shed
tears, because he did thoroughly know how fickle and uncertain those
contentments were; he knew that those very men who now cried Hosanna, Blessed
is he that comes in the name of the Lord, would within a few days cry as
loud, Crucify him, crucify him: and what wise man can rejoice or take
contentment in that which he knows to be of so short continuance, and to end
and determine in a condition so contrary and unlike unto it self? And so it is
with all the earthly felicity of sinful men. Sweet meat, as says the
Proverb, must have sour sauce; sinful pleasure ever ends in severe and sore
punishments: as Abraham told Dives, Son remember, thou in thy life time had
thy pleasure, therefore art thou now tormented Luke 16.25.
. The Be has Honey and Wax, things pleasant and profitable, but withal a
sting in the tail; so sinful pleasure has honey to entice, and wax to
inflame; but withal, a deadly sting in the tail of it. And like as it is with
the rose, when the leaves are plucked off, there is nothing but pricks remains
behind; even so it is with the pleasures of sin, when the leaves of profit
and advantage are plucked away, they ever leave a sting behind them. The Wine
goes down pleasantly, and shows forth his color in the cup; but in the end
it will bite like a serpent, and hurt like a cockatrice. Stolen waters are
sweet, says Solomon, and the bread of deceit pleasant, but they know not that
the dead are there, and that her guests are in the depth of hell. And therefore
though wicked men set themselves upon a merry pin, and sing care away, when
they swim in wealth and riches, and abound in other worldly contentments, yet
have they little reason so to do, if they did thoroughly know, and rightly
consider how matters stand between GOD and their own souls, and how soon
all those secular contentments will determine, and come to a fearful end: for
even as we see in nature, the more heat there is in the Sun, the more vapors
are drawn up, and so accordingly the more abundance of rain falls afterward;
even so the more blessings God bestows on wicked men, and the more they drown
themselves in sinful pleasures, the more heavy torments fall upon them
afterward. Rev. 18.7.
In as much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give you
to her torment and sorrow. So that they have little reason to melt themselves
into such brutish sensuality, and to nourish their hearts, as in a day of
slaughter, if they knew all that concerns them to know. When Haman was highly
exalted in the Kings favor, and set above all the Princes in the Court, he
promises himself much happiness in that royal favor, and much gloried in
it; but he had little reason so to do, if he had known and considered, that
the very next day he should end his unhappy life upon that tree which he had
prepared and set up for Mordecai the Jew to be hanged upon Hest. 5.14.7.9
. Dives he builds much upon his plenty and abundance, and promises himself no
small contentment in it; and so did the rich man in the Gospel Luke 12.19.
: but had he not more cause to wail and weep, if he had known and considered
that fatal doom and sentence, which so soon after sounded in his ears, O
fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul, and then whose shall all
those things be? So Acts 12.21.
Herod, he was much tickled and taken with that flattering acclamation of the
people, saying unto him, The voice of God and not of man; but he had more
cause to have melted himself into a fountain of tears, if he had known how
near the destroying Angel had been unto him; and that in the next breath he
was to be eaten up of worms, and give up the ghost.

CHAP. 14.
The day of grace wherein life and salvation is offered to men.

saving knowledge that he wished to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and want of
knowledge that he complained of; it remains now to speak of the
circumstances, whereby it is amplifyed, and therein first of the circumstance
of time, in those words, at least in this thy day.

It is no small aggravation of the sin of Jerusalem, that she had continued
so long in the neglect of her duty; God sent his Prophets unto her long before,
rising up early, and sending them, and she made light of the things that
concerned her peace, not only all the time that went before, but even until
this very day Gerhard. com. in lo. Magna est Emphasis in voce Diei, hoc enim
vult dicere Christus, dies gratiae adhuc v^bis lucet, haec dies est ul ima
occal^o, quae vobis ad salu^ e^ off^rtur. Hactenus aliquot annos ^^buistis,
nunc pauculi dies restant, cito praete^labetur haec occasio, nisi cupide eam
amplexamini.
that Christ came unto her: yea and in that day too, which was the last day
that any tendry of peace was to be offered unto her: and Christ speaking to
Jerusalem of this time of mercy, he calls it in special manner her Day Ibid.
Emphaticum etia^ illud est, Indie tuo, id est, qui peculiariter tuus est, a Deo
ad salutem tibi datus. Significat ergo adesse extremum tempus quod in salutem
Hierosolymae erat destinatum, illud si absque fructu ^labi sineter, praedicit
f^re, ut in posterum salutis ja^^^ ipsis penitus praecludati^.
: implying, that it was in much mercy afforded unto her, for the furtherance of
her own good; because if yet at length she would come in, at least within the
compass of this day, there was mercy yet to be had, if it were sought for; but
if this day were once past, she should never come to enjoy the benefit of
another day, but the night of eternal misery would unavoydably fall upon her,
because she would not know this day of her visitation; so that the observation
which I make hereupon is this:

That the time and season allotted to any for the getting of grace, and the
procuring of salvation, it is in special manner his Day; that is, a day
afforded unto him, for the furtherance of his greatest benefit and advantage,
if he know rightly how to husband and employ it for his own good. The Apostle
speaking of this Day, he calls it, the Day of salvation 2 Cor. 6.2.
; because so long as this day does continue, there is a door of mercy stands
open for the sons of men, there is peace and reconciliation to be had, upon
such terms as are expressed in the New Covenant, if it be sought for according
to the will of God. Such a day was that in which Zacheus climbed up into a wild
figtree, to behold Christ, and therefore Christ tells him in the former part of
this Chapter, that he might write down that day in the Calender of his best
and most happy days; a day that might upon special reason, be termed his
day, because this day salvation came to his house Luke 19.9.
: So God afforded to Iezabel a time and space of repentance Revel. 2.21.
, and that was her day, though she had neither heart nor grace to make that
good use of it for her own advantage, that she ought to have done, and might
have done; and so that space of time that God affords unto any for his own
spiritual advantage, that is his day, the total sum whereof of may be
parcelled out into these particulars following.

1 The Lords day, which is as it were the market day, to make provision for the
soul.

2 Such particular seasons and opportunities, wherein occasion is offered unto
him, either of doing or receiving good.

3 The time of health and prosperity, wherein he is best able to lay out
himself for the compassing of those things, which belong to his peace.

4 The golden time of youth, which is as it were, the morning, and first part
of the day.

5 The time present, which is as it were the Noone-tide, or middle part of the
day, coming between, and uniting together that which is past, and that which
is to come.

6 The time of this life, which is, as it were, the Evening and closure of the
day, beyond which it cannot extend it self.

1 First then, while thou have leave and liberty to come to the house of God,
and to enjoy the benefit of the public assemblies, while the door of the
Sanctuary stands open for thee; that is thy day, a day set apart for the
public service, and the solemn worship of God; a day which the Scripture it
self dignifies with the title and prerogative of the Lords day Revel. 1.10.
, and therefore in a high degree and measure, sacred and venerable, as all
other things are, which by any such special and peculiar relation, are
appropriated unto him, or termed his; a day that is styled by the Fathers See
Bishop of Ely in his Treatise of the Sabbath Day. part. 2. page 209.
the Queen of days, and graced with many honorable Epithetes above other
days, in regard of the end and occasion for which it has been kept, and
observed by the universal consent of the whole Christian Church, ever since
the Apostles times; a day wherein there is special provision made for thy
soul; a day, wherein thou may benefit and advantage thy self many ways, by
frequenting the House of God, which is the place where his Honor dwells, by
joining with the Assembly in the public prayers of the Church, which ever have
been, and deservedly ought to be greatly esteemed of all Gods people See A.
Hild. in his Lectures on John 4. page 115. and page 340 alias 353.
; by hearing the Word of God publicly read, and the mind and meaning of God
publicly interpreted, and declared, for thy further edification and building
up in the ways of piety; and therefore special care is to be had, and taken,
at least in this thy day, that thy soul may thrive and prosper by all these
public Ordinances; where God is in more special manner present, and whereunto
the promise of a blessing is more especially made. Every day in the year is
not the Fair day, nor every day in the week, the market day for thy soul, as
this is; and therefore suffer it not to slip and pass away without any
certain profit and advantage made unto thy self, but husband it wisely for
thine own good; be sure to make thy markets out of it, before it be gone; not
forsaking the fellowship and the Assemblies of the Church, as the manner of
some is Heb. 10.25.
, but carefully laying out thy self, and taking in those precious Wares and
Commodities, which there are vented, because this is in special manner thy day.

2 While there is any fit season and opportunity, wherein occasion is offered
unto thee, either of doing good to others, or reaping good to thy self; that
is thy day, a day that God has put into thy hand, for thine own good, if thou
be not wanting to thy self, in the well husbanding and improvement of it; and
it is a day that will not always last; it must be laid hold on while it
presents it self; for if it be once gone, it cannot be called back again:
and therefore the Ancients Erasm. Adag. tit. tempestiva. page 687. Front
capillata, post est occasio calva.
they painted opportunity with a hairy forehead, but bald behind; to signify,
that while a man has it before him, he may lay hold on it; but if he suffer
it to slip away, he cannot pull it back again. And again, season and
opportunity, it does not only grace and beautify the thing that is done, and
make it like Apples of Gold, with pictures of Silver, as Solomon speaks Pro.
25.11.
; but also it does facilitate and make easy the way, and passage that leads
unto it: it is like the joint in a member, as a learned Prelate Bishop Andrews
Sermon on Jer. 8.7 page 200. Cornel. lapid com. in Proverb. ca. 10.5. Aestas
and messis est symbolum occasionis, sive temporis idonei ad rem been gerendam;
q. d. Qui arripit occasionem rei conficiendae, du^ illa sese offert, ille
sapit; qui negligit, desipit. Plin. l. 11. c. 6. and 10 Apes peragunt opus
suum, non statis diebus, sed quoties coeli commoditas invitat: ita suo quaeque
tempore capienda est occasio.
speaks, He that hits on the joint, may easily divide one part from another,
but he that misseth of that, either by falling short, or going beyond it, he
shall not do it at all, or at least, not without more pains, and greater
difficulty. And therefore, whosoever thou art that have a price in thy hand,
which through thy good care and husbanding of it, may be happily improved to
the glory of God, the benefit of thy neighbor, or thine own advantage; make
account with thy self, that this is thy day. If thou have a blessing for the
poor in hard times of want, this is thy day, wherein thou may make thy self
friends with the riches of iniquity, that when thou shall want, they may
receive thee into everlasting habitations Luke 16.9.
. If thou have the tongue of the learned, in such places where much people
perish for want of knowledge, this is thy day, wherein thou may minister a
word in season to him that is weary, and win many souls to God, by doing the
work of an Evangelist, preaching the Word, in season, out of season, making thy
Ministry fully known. If thou have power and authority in thy hands, where
wickedness and profaneness are set on high, where piety and religion is
trodden under foot, this is thy day, to lay out thy self for the reforming of
all such disordered courses, and the rectifying of things that are amiss. If
thou fall into the company of such as are wise and learned, able to inform
thee in all needful matters, and to give thee sound direction, this is thy
day, now to have all thy demands satisfied, thy doubts resolved, and thy
scruples removed.

While the Jews enjoyed the light of the Gospel, and had the person of Christ
himself amongst them, that was their day; Christ knew it was not to continue
long, and therefore he applies himself to the work of their conversion,
while it was day; John. 9.4.
I must work the work of him that sent me while it is day Hemin com in loc.
Diem vocat in genere tempus lucentis Evangel^i, and sicuti dies sunt alii aliis
clariores; ita aliis temporibus clarior est lux Evangelii, aliis obscurior;
merito igitur clarissimus dies judicandum est illud tempus, quo ipse Dominus
hic in terra corporaliter versatus est.
: and it was a great fault in the Jews, that having had so many signs,
fore-shewing the coming of Christ, yet for all this they did not know, or
discern him, at least in this day of their Visitation; they were skillful
enough in any other matters, as Christ himself tells them; the more shame for
them, that they were so blind and ignorant in taking notice of this day. Luke
12.54.
When ye see a Cloud rise out of the West, straight way ye say a shower
comes, and so it is; and when ye see the South wind blow, ye say that it
will be hot, and it comes to pass: Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of
the earth, and the sky, but why discern ye not this time? Why do ye not
learn to know, that this is your day?

3 While thou art in health, and in thy full strength, while thy hands are
strong to labor, and thy bones full of marrow; while the face of the heavens
is clear over thy head, and the Sun of prosperity shines upon thee, that is
thy day; a day allotted unto thee for this end and purpose, that now thou
might lay up store of provision against the evil day; that now thou
might gather for thy self that which might be stead thee in time of need,
that so thou might not have grace to seek, and comfort to seek, when thou
have occasion to make use of it; like the foolish Virgins, which had their oil
to seek when they had occasion to spend it. The silly Ant or Pismire has this
providence planted in her by the instinct of nature, to know her day, and to
apply her self for the gathering of her store, and the making of her provision
in that her day; Pro. 6.8.
She prepares her meat in the Summer, and gathers her food in harvest: Go
to the Pismire, O thou Sluggard, that sleep'st out the best part of this day,
and mis-spendest the rest wastefully, in the pursuit of vanity; Behold her
ways, and be wise; learn from her to know, that the springtime of thy
health, and the summer of prosperity, that is thy day Basil. Homil. 9. Hexam.
Formica temporis hyberni pabulu^ aestate sedulo sibi condit; et non, quod
hyemis incommoda nondu^ adsunt, otiosa tempus traducit: sed incessabili quodam,
intentoque studio legendi semina tantisper incumbit, dum sufficien alimentum in
cellulis sibi recondat.
; a day, wherein health and strength concur, and even strive together to make
thee fit for labor and employment, that thou may now make thy provision,
and lay up for thy self, before the hard time of Winter come upon thee; that
thou may now gather a stock of grace and comfort, before the time of
spending come; the day of sickness and infirmity, the day of trouble and
adversity, that is a day of spending, not of gathering: all the store and
provision thou have laid up before, will be little enough at that day; if it
were more than it is, it would not be too much, there will be need of all, and
use for all. Therefore now, while strength and ability serves, as the Poet
spoke Dum vires annique sinunt, tolerate laborem. Ovid.
, fit it is that thou should lay forth thy self in this thy day.

Men use to mend the Highways in Summer, when they are fairest, and all
little enough, to make them passeable in Winter; Joseph had this providence and
forecast with him Genesis 41.
, to store himself, and lay up beforehand, in the years of plenty, because
he knew that was his day, for the making of his provision against the ensuing
years of famine, and therefore he lays up heaps, like the sands of the sea,
without number or measure; because he foresaw there would come a time of
spending, that would consume, and eat up all the provision that he could
possibly make, though it were never so much: even so it should be with thee;
the days of health and prosperity, those are the years of plenty, that is thy
day; a day of gathering and laying up provision for thy soul; when weakness
and infirmities, troubles and adversity come upon thee, those are the years of
famine, that is a day of spending; and all the provision thou have made and
laid up before, will be little enough to bear the expense, and supply the
wants of this day.

4 While thou art in the flower of thy youth, while the day begins to dawne
upon thee, while thy years are yet green, and do but even now begin to
blossom and bud forth, that is thy day; a day, wherein to sow that seed which
may yield a crop at harvest, in time to come; a day that has a great influence
into the whole life and conversation Corn. a Lap in Eccles. 25.5. Iuventus suos
mores sive probos, sive improbos transmittit et transcribit in seniu^.
; a day, which if it be well ordered by good education, and piously employed in
seeking after the best things; it may prove such a seasoning, as will make all
the rest of thy days to relish of it; as the vessel that long tastes of that
liquor, which is first put and powered into it. As the Arrow is directed and
sent forth at first, so it commonly flies all the way, under, over, or besides
the Mark; but seldom hits the Mark, unless it be levelled aright in the
hand; even so the day of youth, that is as it were, the morning and beginning
of thy time, where the day of thy life first begins to put forth it self: the
greatest part of this day is yet in thine own hand; if it be carefully looked
unto in due time, before it be too late, it may be improved and laid forth to
thy great advantage; but if it be once out of thy hand, then thou have no more
power over it: even as it is with a bowl, or a stone, while it remains in thy
hand, it is in thy power to cast it this way, or that way, or which way thou
please; but when it is once out of thy hand, then it is no more in thy power
to dispose and order, to alter and change the course and carriage of it; so it
is with this day of youth, etc.

If the tree do not bud, and blossom, and bring forth fruit in the spring, it
is commonly dead all the year, because the winter is no season for such
matters; and though it be not always so with those rational trees which God
has planted in the Vineyard of the Church, yet experience shows, that often
and many a time it falls out so to be: for as the son of Syrach observes,
Eccles. 25.5.
If thou have gathered nothing in thy youth, what can thou find in thy age
Mi^um est, quod arte^ been vivendi in juve^ tute non addiscimus, cum arts
alias a teneris arripianus: praecipitur filiis Israel ut mane Manna
colligerent. Exo. 16.21 Pona^t. in Ecclas. 25.5.
? and therefore the more it concerns thee to lay forth thy self upon the best
employments in this thy day. Age is the time wherein thou art to solace thy
self, with the remembrance of thy fore-past life, wherein thou art to feed
upon the comforts that thy former courses yield unto thee, wherein thou art to
gather the crop and harvest of thy former endeavors. When age comes upon thee,
it is not then a time to seek, but to enjoy comfort, as he speaks Eras. Adag
pa. 204 Quaere adolescens, utere senex; juvent parandum, seni utendum.
. It is not then a time to sow, but to reap: the feed must be sown in youth,
that is reaped in age Cassian. colla. 2. cap. 13. Divitiae senum non sunt
canitie capitis, sed industria juventutis, and praeteritoru^ laboru^ stipendus
meciendae.

S. Cyp. Vt fructus in arbore non invenitur, in qua flos prius no^ apparuerit:
ita senectutis honorem non consequetur, qui in adolescentia animum disciplinae
exercitatione non excoluerit.


. In the old Law, God required the first fruits for his offering Levit. 23.10
, and the offering up of that did sanctify all the rest: that is, whereas by
the ceremonial law the Israelites might not eat the fruits of the earth,
while they were profane; and they were accounted profane, till they were
hallowed, by offering up the first fruits: but when this oblation was once
made, then by virtue of it, the rest of the harvest was blessed unto them, so
that they might comfortably use and enjoy the same: even so God requires the
morning of this day; as well as the evening. Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. And again, Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, etc. Yea God
requires the beginning of this day, that the end may be made more happy by it:
and the consecrating of the first part of this day to God, does not only
prepare and make way for a blessing, (that such a happy and hopeful beginning
may in the remaining part of it be seconded with proceedings suitable
thereunto) but is also a means to procure a blessing upon all the rest.

5. While it is called to day, while time and occasion is present with thee,
that is thy day; a day wherein the door of grace stands open for thee; a day
wherein mercy may be had, if it be sought for; but if the seeking of it be
posted and put off from this day, thou know not what another day may bring
forth: the day that is past, is gone and cannot be re-called: the day that is
to come, is uncertain, and cannot be promised: only the present day, that is
thy day, if thou have a heart and grace to make use of it for thine own
advantage. Heb. 3.15.
To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. And again, 2 Cor.
6.2.
Behold, now is the acceptable time: behold, now is the day of salvation. It is
every man's desire, and indeed, a part of his wisdom to seek unto God, in a
time, and a day when he may be found, to call upon him in the day of
salvation, to make his prayer unto him, at such a season, when it may find
acceptance with him. Now if thou would know what time that is, the Apostle
here resolves thee, Behold, now is the acceptable time: behold, now is the day
of salvation. There is many a good motion lost, many a good purpose withers and
dies, and comes to nothing, because it is not presently followed, but delayed
and put off from day to day.

When S. Paul discoursed before Felix the Governor, of righteousness,
temperance, and the judgment to come Acts 24.25.
, Felix begun to be touched with it; he felt some impression made upon him, and
some stirring affections working within him; but for the present he puts off
all with this saying, Go thy way for this time, and when I have convenient
leisure I will call for thee. He neglects the present opportunity, and said he
would find a more convenient time for it; but he that said it, never found a
time to do it. So when God gives thee a day for the present, wherein to work
out thy salvation with fear and trembling, and thou neglectest to do it in
this thy day, building thy self upon the execution of a future day; it is but
just with God to keep thee from ever seeing that day, by cutting thee off
before ever that day come: for there is no time thine, but the present time, no
day thine, but the present day ^onart. com in Eccles. c. 5. v. 8. page 81.
Totum vitae nostrae spatium est unu^ hodie, cujus una pars jam pertransiit,
quantula supersit nescimus, cras nullum hic habemus.
: and therefore to entertain thoughts of seeking God hereafter, this is not
wisely to apply thy self unto him in thy day. And indeed it is the policy of
Satan, as the Fathers S. Basil. Hom. 13 ad pop. Nosce immici dolos, etc.
hodiernum tempus nobis furatur astute, and spem facit crastini, postqua^
crastinu^ venerit, rursus malus divisor, sibi hodiernum, crastinu^ vero Deo
petit: Nazian. orat. in S. bap. Da mihi id quod nu^c fluit temporis, futuru^
Deo, etc
well observe, the better to deceive men, and steal away from them the present
time, to feed them with hopes and promises of time to come, saying, Let me have
this day, and God shall have to morrow, which in effect is as much as if he
should say, Give me the prime and flower of thy days, and let God have the
dregs. And therefore God, as it were of set purpose to meet with this deceit,
takes order for the present day: Heb. 3.13.
Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day: for as Saint Augustine
Aug. tract. 33. in Ioh. and de util. poenit. c. ult. Semper expectas, and de
misericordia Dei tibi plurimu^ polliceris, quasi illi qui tibi per poenitentia^
promisitindulgentia^, promiserit etia^ longiore^ vita^.
says well, he that has promised favor and mercy unto thee, upon what day
soever thou do return unto him, has not promised to prolong thy life till
that day come; and therefore to prevent all hazards and uncertainties, there is
no better means than to lay hold upon the present time, because that only is
thy day.

6. While thou art in the land of the living, and art not yet lodged in the
region of darkness, that is thy day; and it is the utmost bounds, beyond which
this day cannot be extended: if grace and mercy be not sought and obtained
within the compass of this day, it is lost for ever; because after this day
ended, there never comes a new day to trade and traffic for these
commodities; the day of this life only is the day of merchandise, as the
learned observe S. Ephre. tract. de ^. ort. ^o. 1. Nemo finitis nundinis
mercaturam exe^cet, etc Similiter Epictot. apud Arrian l 2. ca. 14. Menand.
apud Stob. Sermon. 122. Nazian. tetra^. ^9
. When that is once expired, there is no more gains to be made in this
spiritual negotiation; these kind of wares are neither saleable, nor vendible
after this life; when the Fair is ended, there is no more dealing in such
commodities as are vented there only; when the garland is bestowed, there is
no more striving for it: when the field is wholly lost, without hope of
recovery, there is no further use of Warlike preparations; they which are dead,
they rest from their labors, and their works follow them Rev. 14.13.
. When this day of life ends, their course is finished 2 Timothy 4.7.
. And there is no more to be done, they are then at the end of their journey,
and have no farther to travel, as it was with the Israelites, when God rained
Manna from heaven, it was to be gathered Exodus 16.26.
only on the six days, not on the seventh; because that day was the Sabbath,
which is a day of rest; even so the spiritual Manna of faith, repentance, and
other graces, is to be gathered only in the six days of this life; the time
after this life, it is a Sabbath, a time of rest, wherein there is no more work
to be done, by which it is possible for a man to further and procure his own
salvation; the time of the spiritual warfare, it is only the time of this
life; when that time ends, there is no more fighting in that battle, because
then the victory is either won or lost for ever.

When the tree is cut down, it yields no more fruit; no man gathers grapes
from the branches that are lopped off from the Vine; for the branch cannot
bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine John 15.4.
; even so it is with men; those reasonable trees which God has planted in the
Vineyard of his Church, when they are once cut down by death, there is no more
fruit grows upon them, which has the promise of salvation made unto it: the
day of grace, and the day of this life are of an equal extent, they begin and
end together; when the sun of this life sets, the door of grace and mercy
is shut up, and shall be opened no more; as the tree falls, so it lies; as
death leaves thee, so judgment finds thee; all that can be done for the
procuring of thy peace, it must be within the compass of this thy day. If thy
adversary be not quickly agreed withal, while thou art with him in the way,
there is no composition to be made afterward; if thou get not oil in thy lamp
before the Bridegroom come, there is no buying or borrowing of it at that day;
such as are ready shall enter with him into the marriage chamber; but he will
not stay for any that has his provision then to make: if thou gettest not into
the state of grace, before the door of grace be shut, there is no hope of
entrance afterward, because that time falls not within the compass of this thy
day.

CHAP. 15.
It should be every man's care, in the day of grace, to lay out himself upon
those matters that concern his everlasting welfare.

thy day? oh then let it be thy care to lay forth thy self for thine own
everlasting welfare in this day: this is that which the holy man Job resolved
upon, Job 14.14.
All the days of mine appointed time will I watch, until my changing shall
come. This is that which the Psalmist prays for, in the behalf of himself and
others, Psalm. 90.12.
Teach us O Lord so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to
wisdom. This is that which the Prophet enjoynes, Esaias 55.6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near unto
you. This is that which the Apostle presses and exhorts all unto, Gal. 6.10.
While we have time, let us do good. This is that which Christ himself
teaches every one by his own example, 1 Pet. 4.2.
That hence forward he should live so much time as remains in the flesh, not
after the lusts of men, but after the will of God. And therefore it was said of
Apelles Plin. l. 35. c 10. Nulla dies sine linea.
that famous Painter, that he was so diligent and intentive upon his work,
that he would not suffer a day pass over his head without his line, that is,
without doing something belonging to his profession: so let it be thy care so
to husband and improve the several hours of this thy day, that every hour may
testify and witness thy care and forwardness in looking after those things
that belong to thy peace; there is no part of this day that shall go for
naught; account must be given, as of every idle word that thou speak, so of
every idle hour that thou spendest, because it might have been taken up with
better employment; for as thou have thy day, so God will have his day; a day
wherein he will render unto thee according to what thou have done; now in this
thy day, thou have all the doings; God leaves thee in the hand of thine own
counsel, to follow the desires of thine own heart; but when this day is
ended, there will come another day, that shall be none of thine Gerhard. com.
in loc. Videmus illud esse nostru^ tempus, in quo ea curare possumus quae ad
pace^ nostra^ pertinent, etc. succedent alii dies qui non erunt nostri.
, that shall be Gods day, and he will have all the doings in that day: and as
thou have dealt with him in thy day, so will he deal with thee in his day: he
will then pay thee home in thine own coin: and what shall it then avail thee,
that thou have had thine own will, in turning the deaf ear unto God, seeing
that for this very thing he will have his will upon thee, and stop his ears
when thou cryest unto him? oh how much better were it for thee to follow and
mind the things that make for thy peace, Motives exciting to it.
now in thy day, that God might be pleased to speak peace unto thee in that his
day?

1. a possibili.
And therefore to work thy affections this way, consider first, that it is a
thing possible for thee to do: the date of this thy day is not expired. red.
The thief upon the Cross, though he had lavished out the greatest part of
this day, and was now even come to the last hour of it; yet his day it was not
past, there was yet a door of mercy stood open for him, and he found mercy,
though he came not for it, till the eleventh hour of the day; so it was with
Jerusalem here in the text, after the killing of so many Prophets; after the
stoning of them that were sent unto her; yet she had her day, and there was
mercy yet to be found, if she had sought for it; and so it is with thee, that
hear me this day, thy day is not yet past, though perhaps a great part of
it may be spent; it is not yet too late to return, though it be high time,
yea more than time to think upon it: there is yet a door of hope stands open
for thee, yet there is grace and mercy to be had, if so be that even now at
length, if so be at least in this thy day, thou can but yet with purpose of
heart cleave unto God, and seek for it.

2 And it is no long time of seeking that is required, 2. a facili.
it is not here expressed and set forth by the long term of years and ages;
but only by the length and duration of a day, and that day, a very short day;
if it were stretched out to his full length, it is but a spanne long, and some
part of it is already spent, and how short the time may be that is yet to
come, how little that is which remains behind, who knows? It may be this
very day in which thou hear me speak unto thee, it is the last day that
thou have to live, and then it is but the well-husbanding and improving of this
day, that shall land thee upon the coast of Eternity. Oh, if the damned spirits
were now again upon the earth, how many days would they willingly spend, and
that in the most hard and difficult services, if at length they might but yet
once again have that price put into their hands, which sometimes they had, and
are now for ever deprived of? and can thou think much then to lay out thy
self for so short a time? If it were a longer day, it were no great while, but
being so short, the less reason there is why any should think much of it. The
Devil knows how to make his advantage out of the shortness of his time, and
to take occasion from thence, so much the more to bestirre himself: it is
said, that he is full of wrath, because he knows his time is but short Rev.
12.22.
: there be sixteen hundred years of this time past already, and for any thing
we know, there may be as many more yet to come; and yet he thought all this
while but a short time: now what is thy short day in comparison of this? If so
many hundred years be but a short time, then surely thy day it can be little
more than nothing at all; and therefore well may it set an edge upon thy
desire, to bestirre thy self so much the more, and the less to entangle thy
self in matters of this life, considering thy day it is so short. 1 Cor. 7.30.
And this I say brethren, because the time is short, that they which use this
world, should be as though they used it not.

3. ab utili and necessario.
3 And yet there is something more that may quicken thy dullness in this
employment, if it be well weighed, what it is that depends upon the well or
ill improvement of this thy day; for it is an eternal weight of weal, or woe,
that lies upon it. When Christ here speaks of the day of grace, and the day of
thy life, he speaks in the singular number, as of one day; but when he
speaks of the misery that follows the neglect of the same, then he speaks in
the plural number; Verily I say unto thee, the days shall come, etc. implying
that there is a plurality of days, even days without number; the days of
darkness are many; yea, so many, that they fill up the measure of eternity,
which shall never have end: and so on the contrary, the happiness purchased by
thy good care, and well husbanding of this day, it is an everlasting
happiness, like the days of heaven, which are as far from end or
expiration, as they were upon the first day that the heavens were made. The
provision is made in this day, which feeds and nourishes up the soul unto all
eternity; she has no other means or maintenance to live upon in the world to
come, save only that which was provided and laid up in this day: the short and
momentany afflictions, which thou suffer and endurest for Christ and the
Gospel, in this thy day, it causes unto thee a 2 Cor. 4.17.
far more excellent and eternal weight of glory, which thou shall receive
another day.

4 In the mean while, 4. a jucundo.
there is nothing that sweetens the days of thy life, and makes them
comfortable unto thee; nothing that shows thee to be wise for thy self, so
much as thy care and providence in laying out thy self upon the best
employments in this thy day, for the well husbanding of this day.

1 It is a reward unto it self, it carries meat in the mouth; there is much
sweet contentment in the very action it self, in the doing of that which is
good. A day well spent, yields more sweet peace to the inward man, than a
thousand days that are consumed in the pleasures of sin; according to that
of David Psalm. 84.10.
, One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere: and besides the
inward peace and comfort which accompanies the action of well-doing, and goes
along with it; there is comfort in the remembrance of it, when thou look
back upon the day that has been well spent, o it is a great satisfaction to
the mind, it leaves a sweet relish behind it, it makes thy very sleep
sweeter to thee; thou shall reap the Crop and harvest of it in sweet
meditations every day.

2 And it is the wisest course that thou can take for thine own advantage,
thus to lay out thy self in this thy day, because the chiefest commodities, in
which a Christian deals, as humiliation, repentance, sorrow for sin, etc.
they are only current and availeable for the furtherance of thy good in this
day; there is enough of them in Hell, but alas, there they are nothing worth;
they are only profitable and useful in this thy day, and therefore the more
willing should thou be to have this day spent and taken up in the exercise of
them.

3 The day will run on with an equal pace, and swiftness, upon whatsoever
employment thou bestowest thy self; whether it be well or ill doing, both
waste and wear out thy day alike; and therefore seeing thou must lessen and
cut short the length of this day, by that which thou do, what ever it be;
is it not far better that it be spent in such affairs as may refresh and
raise up thy spirits, with the apprehension and fruition of present comfort,
and the hope and expectation of future income, than in those things that will
afterward terrify and affright thee upon all occasions, with the remembrance
of that account and reckoning that must one day be made?

When a man is in a ship at Sea, he is continually passing toward the Haven,
whatsoever his employment be; but there is no man but will easily conceive,
that it is a wise man's part, rather to busy himself in such matters, as may
serve for his further advantage, when he comes to land, than to be taken up in
such practices, as may procure his commitment, so soon as he comes to shore:
even so it is with thee, the day of thy life is continually passing on toward
that Haven which will land thee upon the Coasts of eternity; and therefore it
shall be thy wisdom, now, in this thy day, to lay out thy self upon those
designs, which may make that eternal condition, an estate of everlasting
happiness unto thee.

CHAP. 16.
It is every man's wisdom not to delay the time of seeking for mercy, but to
set forward betimes, before the day of grace be too far spent.

speedily, without delay; It is not enough for thee to lay out thy self in all
useful employments, but it is expedient also, to take the first hint and
occasion, to do it as soon as thou can; this use Solomon makes of it
Eccles. 9.10.
, Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it instantly Jo. Ferus com. in loc.
Quicquid tibi exequendu^ injunctum fuerit in hoc saeculo, id diligenter
exequere, non est quod differas in aliud saeculum; te enim mortuo, simul tibi
aufertur omnis operandi copia.
; or, as some read it, with all thy power: the sense may well admit of both
readings: and the reason which is there rendered, does sufficiently confirm the
former, which is, because the day is coming wherein the occasion of doing it
will be taken away: As if he should say, Now is thy day, now may thou lay
out thy self, with infinite advantage to thine own soul; and therefore
whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it instantly, defer not the time,
but go presently about it; and that earnestly, and with all thy might; for
there is neither work nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave,
whither thou go: and this is the counsel of him that was wiser than
Solomon; Mat. 5.25.
Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art with him in the way, etc.
so it was with David Psalm. 119.60.
, I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy righteous judgments; so it was
with Peter and Andrew Mat. 4.20.
, they straight way leave their nets, and followed CHRIST, so soon as he
called them; and so it was with S. Paul, when he was called to preach the
Gospel Gal. 1.16.
, He did not consult with flesh and blood, but immediately went about the
work: And so it should be with thee, and with every one else, because thou
have but thy day, therefore should thou begin betimes to put thy work in
some forwardness, before the day be too far spent; and there is a great
deal of good reason for it.

1 In regard of the shortness of this day: He that has a long journey to
go, and but a short time for the dispatching of it, had need to be going
early, and take day before him: now so it is with a man that travels toward
the celestial Jerusalem, he has a long journey to go, as far as it is
from earth to heaven, and but a short time allotted for the dispatch of it; no
more but a day; and therefore has no need to lose any part of it, but to set
forward betimes, while he has day before him; as Abraham, who when he was
commanded to sacrifice his son, he straight way prepared to go to the place
which the Lord should show him Genesis 22.3.
. Many have cried out of themselves for delaying and putting off this duty so
long, till their day was already past, and it was even now too late for them;
but never any that repented himself for beginning too soon; for the sooner
he begins, the more service he may do unto God; and the more service he does
unto him, the greater recompense and reward shall he receive from him.

It is a general complaint, as Seneca Sen. de brevit. vitae, cap. 1. Major
pars mortalium de naturae malignitate conqueritur, quod in exiguu^ aevi
gignimur, quod haec tam velociter, tam rapide, dati nobis temporis spatia
decurrant, etc.
well observes, that the day of life is but short, but who is it that takes
occasion from the shortness of it, to make the more haste, and to lay out
himself betimes upon that maine business for which he came into the world?
Nay, who is there that makes it not much shorter than it is, by suffering a
great part of it to slip away, before he apply himself to the works of
piety and religion, for which this day of grace was afforded to him? In so
much, that if this day of life were measured according to that space of time,
which is spent in matters that concern the good of the soul, how many would
be found, who have been in the world many years, and yet scarce lived one
day? even as it is with a Mill-horse that has been going all the day long,
and yet is still in the same place where he was in the morning: it may be
said of him, that he has gone much, and yet traveled but a little way; or as
it is with a Ship Sen. de brevit. vitae ca. 8. Non est quod quenquam propter
canos, ac rugas putes diu vixisse: non ille diu vixit, sed diu fuit. Quid enim
illum putas multum navigasse quem saeva tempestas a portu exceptu^, huc et
illuc tulit, ac viribus ventorum ex diverso furentium, per eadem vestigia in
orbem egit: non ille multum navigavit, sed multum jactatus est.
that has been wheeled and circled about in a storm and tempest, and at
length is driven back again into the Haven; it may be said of it, that it
has been long at Sea, and yet sailed but a little way: so it may be said of
many a one, that he has been long in the world, and yet lived but a while,
because he has scarce yet begun to lay out himself upon those employments for
which the day of life was granted to him; whereas all the day is little enough
for the work and business that is to be done in it; and therefore he that
wisely considers the greatness of the work that is to be done, and the
shortness of the day allotted for it, he will not loyter out the time with
lingering delays, but speedily apply himself unto it. It was Nehemiahs
answer, when his enemies called him from his work to confer with them Nehem.
6 3.
, I have a great work to do, and I cannot come down; why should the work
cease, while I leave it? Even so do thou reason with thy self, I have a great
work to do, and but a short day allotted for it, why should the work be
neglected, and left undone, while I delay to go about it?

2 In regard of the nature of this day, which is made up out of such particular
considerations, as do all of them persuade thee, to set forward betimes; for,

1 It is not of a permanent, but of a successive and fluent nature; it does not
make any stay, but is always in motion, not tarrying for any, but continually
going and passing away; like the oil in the Lamp, which continually wastes,
or as the sand in the houre-glasse, which continually runs, till all be
run out; and every part of this day it posteth on so fast, and is carried
with so swift a sail, that it seems rather to fly, than run, as the
Heathen man observes Sen. de brevit. vitae, cap. 10. Praesens tempus
brevissimu^ est, adeo quidem ut quibusdam nullum videatur; in cursu enim semper
est, fluit et praecipitatur, ante definit esse quam venit.
; and therefore the Ancients they painted time like a young man with wings,
sitting in a Chariot, drawn with two horses, whose motion is so swift, that
they seem rather to be carried on wings, than feet. And therefore seeing thy
day is so short, as has been showed; and withal of such a transient nature,
that it is continually flying and passing away, and that with so swift a pace,
there is little reason why any part of it should be dallied out with needless
delays; because if all were laid out upon the best employments, the day would
sooner be ended, than the work could be brought to any great perfection; so
that thy forwardness, and readiness to lay hold on the day so soon as it
comes, and to put thy matters in some good forwardness, should even strive and
contend with the swiftness and celerity of it, and even prevent and out-goe it
as far as possibly may be; and the rather considering, that when thou
delayest thy work, thy day does not abate any thing of her pace, nor stay for
thee; she walks on her way, when thou sit still; Ambros. Ps. 1. Sicut
dormiens in navi vehitur ad portum, ita tu dormis, sed tempus tuum ambulat.

Sen de brevit. vitae, ca 9. Quid cunctaris? quid cessas? nisi occupas fugit;
cum occupaveris tamen fugiet, itaque cum celeritate temporis utendi velocitate
certandum est.


as a man in a ship, he is passing on toward the Haven, even then when he
sleeps, and perceives it not; so thy time passes along, and carries thee on
with an insensible motion, which will be clearly seen and acknowledged when
it is gone, though it be not discerned or perceived, while it is agoing. The
finger on the Dial, seems to pace it very slowly; yea, it seems rather to
stand still, than move, because the motion is insensible, and cannot be
discerned, till it be finished and past; and yet it passes so far within
less than the space and compass of an hour, that all the world may perceive,
that it did not stand still: Even so thy day, it passes on with an insensible
motion, thou discernest not while it is agoing, and yet thou shall find within
a small compass of time, that it is so far spent, that perhaps it may be
near unto a period, and even upon the very point of expiration. And therefore
when thou hear the Clock strike, and see that the houre-glasse is run
out, think and consider with thy self, how thine own day passes on, and
defer not to turn unto God, but speedily apply thy self unto him, before it
be too far spent.

2 And again, as thy day is still flitting and flying away, so the best part
of it goes away first; like as it is in a vessel of Wine, the best and purest
part of it is drawn out first, and that which remains behind, is not only
less, but worse; for the dregs and lees remain in the bottom: even so it is
with the day of thy life, the first part of it is the best and purest, most
free from that soil and corruption, which it still gathers, the further it
goes on. The Heathen man could see this by the light of nature Ovid. l. 3. de
art. amand. Vtendum est aetate, cito pede labitur aetas, Nec bona tam sequitur,
quam bona prima fuit.

Sen. de brevit. vitae, c. 9. Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus aevi,
Prima fugit; Item ad Lucil. l. 19 ep. 109. and ep. 1. Non tantum minimum in
imo, sed pessimum remanet. Et Epist. 108. Vt ex amphora primo sincerissimum
effluit, turbidumque subsidit, sic in aetate nostra, etc.


, and thereupon make this application, that time and opportunity it must be
used while it may be had; and the rather, because the best part of it is
commonly soonest had; the first opportunity which is offered to any, either
for the doing or receiving good, is commonly the best; and experience will
learn him, that if he let this slip, he shall not usually meet with so fit an
occasion for it afterward: and indeed it is a great want of providence in any,
to delay and put off the taking in of useful commodities, till the best season
be past, and it be now the worst time to go about them. He were an unwise
Merchant, that would neglect to buy his wares, when they are cheap, and come
to the market, and are brought home to his door; whereas afterward he must
be constrained to send for them into far parts, when the things themselves
are at a dearer rate, and traveling is more dangerous, and he must pay a
higher price for the carriage of them: even so it is with those that delay and
put off the seeking of things that concern their peace from day to day.

And yet further, thou know not how much of this thy day remains behind,
or is yet to come; it will not always last, and none can tell how soon it will
end Tertull. de anim. c. 52. Vis est and illa navigiis cum long a saxis,
nullis depugnata turbinibus, nullis quassata decumanis, adulante flatu, labente
cursu, laetante comitatu, intestino repent perculsu, cum tota securitate
desidunt: non secus naufragia sunt vitae etiam tranquillae, mortis eventus.
: the Sun knows the time of his setting and going down, but the sons of
men know not the time when the sun of their life shall set, and the day of
grace end with them; because death, it does not call out men according to their
seniority, but sometimes begins with the youngest; the tender Lamb comes to
the Shambles, as well as the old sheep, and sometimes before it; an earthen
pitcher, it is as soon broken when it is new made, as afterward; young Josiah
dies as well as old Methushelah. If a man had a full vessel that contained a
great quantity and measure of liquor in it, yet if it were always running, and
if he did continually draw out of it, without ceasing, it would soon be
spent: so it is with the vessel of time, with the day of grace, and the day of
a man's life, it is always running; God sets it abroach as it were, so soon as
a man comes into the world; and therefore it should be every man's wisdom not
to delay Sen. de bre. vit. ca. 9. Velut ex torrente rapido, nec semper casu^o
cito hauriendum est.
, but draw out betimes that which he has need of, before it be too late,
before all be spent; and the rather, because no man knows how full this
vessel of time is, how many of his days are yet contained in it: it may be
his last day is even running out, when he least thinks of it. When Lots wife
looked back toward Sodom, little did she think that the vessel of her time
had been then running out her last; that her death had been so near; that
this should have been her last look, and yet so it proved: she looked back
toward Sodom, and she never lived to look forward any more, but was turned
into a pillar of salt, even in that very moment, while her face was toward
Sodom Genesis 19.26.
. The Dear in the Forest little thinks himself to be aimed at, when the
arrow is in the bow, and ready to be dispatched at him; and yet immediately
after, he feels the deadly wound in his side; Even so it is with the sons
of men, their last day is running out, when they dream of many days yet to
come. The rich fool in the Gospel promises to himself many years of
pleasure, even then when he had not so much as one night more to live. And
therefore little reason there is, why thou should delay the time, and in a
matter of so great importance, as concerns the everlasting welfare of thy
soul, to put it off from this day to another, seeing thou know not whether
this be thy last day, or whether thou shall live till that other day come.

4. And yet there is one passage more, that has some weight in it, to quicken
thy dullness, and hasten thy endevors, without further delay, to look after
the things that concern thy peace; because if this day of grace be once ended,
there never comes a new day for the finding of mercy: this is the day of
salvation, and if grace and mercy be not sought and obtained within the
compass of this day, it is lost for ever, as has been showed before. Catul.
Epig. 5. Soles occidere et redite possu^t, Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux,
Nox est perpetuo una dormienda.
The Sun sets, and rises again; that which one day yields not, another day
may bring forth; but if this day of grace, and the day of life be once ended,
it can never be recalled; there is an everlasting night of darkness that comes
after it; there is but one fountain that can wash away sin, even that
fountain which is set open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in: and as the old
saying is, In ide^ flumen bis non descendimus.
there is none that descends twice into it; there is but one pitched field
wherein salvation is to be won; and if one error happen in that battle, as the
proverb says, In praelio non licet bis peccare.
It leaves no place for a second error to be committed.

3 In regard of the danger which does accompany this delay; Delay breeds danger
in all other matters, but most of all in this, of greatest weight and
importance; thou make little or nothing of a day; nay the neglect of those
things that concern thy peace, though it be for days, weeks, months, years,
etc. it never troubles thee; but Christ here lets thee see in the example of
Jerusalem, what an infinite prejudice it may be to thine everlasting
happiness, to neglect the looking after these things, though it were no more
than for one day Cart com. in lo. Si eo ipso die resipuisset quo Christus urbe^
ingressus est, haec sententia lata no^ fuisset: quod quia neglexit, in posteru^
nullus misericordiae locus: ex quo liquet, quantu^ interest resipiscentiam, non
dico in annum, sed in die^ differ.
. If Jerusalem had received Christ, even now at length, at least in this day
when he came unto her, the fatal sentence of ruin and destruction had not
gone out against her; but because she neglected him, and would not take notice
of him in this her day, therefore her destruction is sealed up against her, and
she never finds another day for the obtaining of mercy; so that it cannot be
without certain danger for thee, or any else, to delay and put off the laying
forth of thy self upon those designs which do so nearely concern thy peace,
and that in regard of the uncertainty of the day and means of grace, the
uncertainty of the future day of thy life, and the time to come upon which thou
dependest, and the uncertainty of those good motions and gracious helps which
hitherto thou have had experience of.

1. There is an uncertainty in regard of the day and means of grace; there is
no man that has a patent of it. When Christ exhorted the Jews, while they had
the light to walk in it John 12.35.
, he gives them plainly to understand, that the having of the light, it was
not an inheritance settled upon them for perpetuity, but only a grant passed
upon condition of their obedience, so long only to be continued upon them, and
enjoyed by them, as they should continue to walk answerable to it; but if once
they should come to grow weary of the light, (as in time they did) then this
light should be taken away from them, and together with it life and salvation:
for if the candlestick be removed, he that walks in the midst of the golden
candlesticks will not stay behind; and what will it avail thee then to look
after the food of thy soul, when there is a famine of the word, when thou
may wander from sea to sea, and run to and fro, even from the North unto the
East, in seeking the word of the Lord, and shall not find it Amos 8.11, 12
? What will it avail thee then to apply thy self to the work for which thou
came into the world, when the light is gone, and John. 12.35.
such a night of darkness come upon thee, that none can work Musc. co. in
loc. Qui in intinere sunt vesperi, ubi animadvertunt imminere noctem, and parum
adhuc superesse die^, ne tenebris nocturnis comprehendantur, studi osius
promovent, nec ullas moras nectunt, quo civitate^ ingredi valiant, antequa^ nox
cuncta occupet; impedire non possunt ne nox invalescat, hactenus tame^ commodis
suis consulere possunt, ut donec lucem habent, ambulantes in civitate^ se
recipiant, etc. hac itaque similitudine, admonemur etipsi, quid nobis sit
facie^dum. q. l. utimini commoditate praesenti, ad vestram utilitatem, donec
illius est copia, etc.
? Now thou have the light, but it is uncertain how long it will continue; now
thou have the word of the Gospel, but it is uncertain how long thou shall
enjoy it: therefore delay not the time any longer, but even now from this day
forward, begin to lay out thy self for thine own advantage, and wisely to
apply thy self to the things that belong to thy peace. The Sea-faring-man
makes use of the wind and tide when it serves his turn, because he knows it
will not always continue, and therefore he launcheth forth into the deep,
when a prosperous gale of wind comes. The wayfaring man takes day before
him, and travailes while it is light, because he knows the night is coming.
The husbandman makes hay while the sun shines, because he knows it is not in
his power to cause it to shine when he will. The Smith strikes the Iron while
it is hot, because he knows it will grow cold again, and then it is not
pliable to be wrought to his mind. The reaper observes when the regions are
white unto the harvest, and then puts in his sickle, because he knows the
corn must be reaped, and inned in seasonable time, else it will be lost, and
rot upon the ground. The Lawyer follows his suites, and entertains his Clients
while the Term lasts, because he knows there will be a time of vacation,
when all such business and employments must cease. Go thou and do likewise;
learn wisdom from the men of this world, (for they are wise in their
generation) and while the day and means of grace continue, lay out thy self
for thine own good; and because it is uncertain how long they will continue,
delay not the time, but speedily apply thy self unto it.

2. Again, there is an uncertaintie of the time to come, upon which thou
dependest; it may be this very day, is the last day that thou have to live; and
then the neglecting of thy salvation, though it were no longer but for this day
only, is the losing of it for ever; this day thou may reckon upon; but when
this is gone, who can promise unto thee another day? nay, who can assure thee
that thou shall see the end of this day? no man knows what the late evening
may bring forth: the same day may find thee alive when it comes, and leave thee
dead before it be gone. The very heathen could see this by the light of nature,
and likewise the vanity of those who build upon such uncertainties Quis scit an
adjiciant hodiernae crastina su^mae, Te^pora dii superi. Hora.
. Whereupon Seneca advises and incourageth his friend Lucilius, to lay hands
upon all good hours so soon as they come, and not to feed himself with the
expectation of future uncertainties, or depend upon them Sen ad Lucil. ep. 1.
Fac ergo mi Lucili, quod facere te scribis omnes horas complectere, sic fiet ut
minus ex crastino pendeas, si bodierno manu^ injeceris.
. And it is the counsel of Solomon himself, who was guided in his counsel by
the Spirit of God, and so went beyond the wisest of the heathens in this
matter: Prove. 27.1.
Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth. As if he should say, Thou see what falls out this day; but when this
day is come to an end, there is no counting of thy chickens before they be
hatched; there is no depending upon that which shall be to morrow, because thou
know not what that day may bring forth, whether thy conversion, or
confusion; hell is full of delayed purposes. If thou would come to heaven,
thou must seek and find grace sometime, at least before thou die: and if thou
would be sure of that, be sure to do it this day, because thou art not sure
that thou shall live to see another day. It is true indeed, he that came to
labor in the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, he had his penny, and so shall
thou, if thou do as he did: but trust not to that, for thou may be in hell
long before that hour come. If thou could certainly know how much of this
thy day is yet to come, as well as thou know how much of it is past already;
then there might be some pretense and color for the putting off and delaying
of this duty till such a day; thou might so order and dispose of things,
that every business might be sure to have his day: but now it cannot be
without certain danger, to put off this days work to another day, because it
is uncertain if that day will ever come or not; for he that has promised
remission of sins to him that repents this day, has not promised to afford
him another day when this is gone Greg. hom. 12. in Evang. Si sciret quisque de
praesenti saeculo quo te^pore exiret, aliud te^pus voluptatibus, aliud
poenitentiae aptare potuisset. Sed qui poenitentiae veniam spospondit peccanti,
diem crastinum non promisit.
.

3. Furthermore, there is an uncertainty of those good motions, and gracious
helps which hitherto thou have had experience of: the Spirit that stirs up in
thee good motions this day, will not always strive with thee Genesis 6.3.
: at least in that degree and measure that now he does: for though the day of
grace, and the day of the Gospel be of an equal extent, and there is none
that can say that his day is past, or the date of acceptance and finding mercy
with God expired, so long as the Gospel is preached, and grace offered unto
him See Scud. his christians daily walk, cap. 16. 3 page 540. and seq.
: (and therefore the Spirit does not wholly give over to strive with him in the
ministry of the Word) yet there is none but is in danger to be a great loser,
by delaying to cherish and entertain the good motions of the Spirit: for,

1. Whenever he stirs up in thee any purpose or intention, any motion or
desire to such a particular duty, or good work, and thou suffer it to die,
and be quenched, and come to nothing, it is uncertain whether ever thou shall
have such a kindly impression wrought in thee any more. There was a time when
Christ knocked at the door of the Spouse, when he put in his hand by the hole,
and entreats her by all terms of love to open unto him Cant. 5.
: but because her heart was gone when he spoke unto her, and she puts him off
with such poor excuses, that she had put off her clothes, and loath she was to
rise out of her warm bed, etc. therefore when afterward upon her second
thoughts she grows better advised, and resolves with her self to open the
door, her beloved was then gone.

2. Besides, the more often that grace is refused, the more difficulty will
there be in obtaining of it afterward: as God has often called upon thee, and
thou have neglected to hear; often tendered mercy unto thee, and thou have
refused it; so he will make thee often to seek for it, before thou find it;
often and earnestly to beg for it, before thou obtain it; often and many a
time to cry unto him for it, before thou have it.

3. And again, the more that the Spirit is grieved and resisted in this kind,
the more weakly and sparingly will it stir up good thoughts and affections in
thee; and the weaker thy receipts are in this kind, the more shall be abated of
the reward and blessing which thou might have had, both in grace here, and
glory hereafter.

4. Yea farther, the longer thou delayest to look after grace in this thy day,
the more hard and obdurate will thy heart be; and who can tell how far God may
leave thee to thine own hardness, and heart that cannot repent, even to
treasure and heap up wrath unto thy self against the day of wrath, and of the
declaration of the just judgment of God Romans 2.5.
?

4. In regard of the folly and impiety that is inseparably linked and
commingled with the delay of this great and weighty business. It is both a
foolish and a wicked thing for any to delay and put off the seeking after those
things that concern the good of his soul, till the best and greatest part of
this day be gone: who was ever so foolish in other matters, that he could be
persuaded to endure a long and tedious sickness, and to neglect all present
helps that might do him good, only upon a bare and uncertain hope of being
cured afterward? yet so foolish are men in matters that concern the welfare of
their soul, as the Father observes, Aug. tract. 33. in Joan. Laegitur tibi
Dominus spatiu^ correctionis, sed tu plus amas dilatione^ quam emendationem.
That they had rather continue sick, than be presently healed: yea he found it
so in his own experience Aug. cons l. 8. c. 5. Modo et modo, sine paululum,
etc. modo et modo non habebant modu^, and sine paululu^ in longu^ ibat. Et cap.
7. Da mihi castitatem, sed noli modo, etc.
: for when first he entertained thoughts and purposes of leaving his sin, he
was still apt and inclineable to put them off with delays; He would do it
anon, but not now; by and by, but not presently; shortly after, but not yet; he
prayed for chastity, but was afraid God would hear him too soon: in his
secret thoughts he wished to have it, but not yet: and so it is with many, they
plead for delay, as Solomon's sluggard does for sleep, Prove. 6.10.
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep.

When Moses asked Pharaoh Exodus 8.10.
, When shall I take away this plague from thee? he answers, To morrow; even so
do many deal with their sins, though they be no better than plagues, yea, Hag.
1.2.
the greatest plagues that can befall them; yet are they well content to keep
them this day, not willing to part with them, before to morrow; as the Jews
said of the building of the Lords temple, build it they would, but it was not
yet time; so it is with many, they will lay out themselves upon those
employments that concern the good of their souls, but it is not yet time, the
day is not yet come; like unthankful debtors, when their day is already past,
they crave a longer, and a longer, and yet a longer day, till all the day be
almost run out, before they find any part of it to seek after God: they
have a day and will not take it; and therefore it is but just with God, as
Fulgentius S. Fulgent. de fide ad Pet. c. 3. Nullus hominum debet sub spe
misericordiae Dei, in suis diutius remanere peccatis, cum etiam in ipso corpore
nemo velit sub spe futurae salutis diutius aegrotare: tales enim qui ab
iniquitatibus suis recedere negligu^t, et sibi de Deo indulge^tia^
repromittunt, non nunqua^ ita praeveniuntur repentino Dei furore, ut nec
conversi onis tempus, nec beneficium remissionis inveniant.
well observes, to cut them short of that day, which they so fondly and
foolishly dream of, and even to prevent their expectations with such
unexpected judgments, that they never live to see either the day of their
conversion, or a time for the obtaining of the remission of their sins. Now
what greater folly can be imagined, than for a man thus to delay that, which
can never either be begun too soon, or put off for the least space of time,
without manifold danger? for the longer this work is delayed, the more pains
and labor it will require when it is done: as it is with a ruinous building,
the longer it remains without reparation, the more cost and charge it will
require at length: the longer it be before the plaster of grace be applied to
the soul, the more hard and difficult it is to do a cure upon it; even as it
is with a wound in the body, it is not so easily cured when it is festered and
rankled, as when it is green, and but newly taken. The more strength that sin
has gotten through long custom and continuance, the more ado there will be
to cast it out: as it is with a plant, which may be easily plucked up while it
is a tender twig, but not without much difficulty when it is grown up to a
strong tree: the more deeply that iniquity is rooted in the heart, the harder
it will be to dig it out: as it is with a nail that is driven into the wood,
it is a harder matter to draw it out, when with many blows it is driven to the
head, than it was before, when with but few blows it was but weakly fastened in
it. Inordinate lusts and affections are not so easily mortified, when they have
burned long in the soul, and are now come to an open flame; as when the fire
of concupiscence first begins to move and stir within it: as it is with a
material fire, which is more easily quenched when it does but begin to fly out
in a little spark, than when it is grown to a full flame: and yet such is the
folly of most men, that they will not lay out themselves for their own good,
but delay and put it off, till the fire of concupiscence be grown to a full
flame, till the nail of iniquity be driven to the head, till the wild olive
plant of sin be grown to a tree, till that old sore and disease of wickedness
be even rankled with corruption, yea till the earthly house of their bodies be
grown so ruinous, that they are even ready to fall upon their heads. If any
thing offend or trouble the eye of the body, no haste is enough for the removal
of it, as the heathen man observes Horat. 1. ep. 2. Quae laedunt oculos
festinas demere; si quid Est animu^, differs curandi te^pus in annum.
: but if any thing troubles or indangers the soul, a years time is too little
to consider of the matter, before they can resolve to go about it. And what a
height of impiety is this? what greater dishonor can be done unto God, than to
make him thus to wait upon thy leisure? how does it make him complain of it,
Esaias 65.2.
I have stretched out my hands all the day long to a rebellious people?

CHAP. 17.
It is every man's duty to redeem the day of grace out of the hands of all such
usurping tyrants, as eat up all the good hours of it.

thy day, why do thou suffer it to be held captive in the hands of usurping
tyrants? why do thou not rather redeem it, and get it into thine own hands?
it had been thy wisest part to have kept this day in thy hands, when thou had
it, and to have been more saving and thrifty in the husbanding of it; but
seeing that which is past, cannot be recalled, it will now be thy wisdom to
contract with time present, for some allowance toward it, and to give
something thy self, nay any thing that lies in thy power for the redemption of
it; that is, to win all the time that possibly thou can, for the duties of
piety and religion. This use the Apostle makes of it, Ephesians. 5.16.
Redeem the time, because the days are evil. In hard times, when trading is
dead, and there is little to be got, the wise Merchant will be sparing and
provident; sparing in his expenses, and provident to lay out for all occasions
and opportunities of gaining something: so it behooves Christians to be good
husbands and merchants of their time, because the days are evil: that is,
hard times, full of misery, full of trouble, full of danger, full of
temptations; they are dead times, wherein there is little spiritual good to be
got; or as the Father Anselm. Quae occasione^ been agendi vel adimunt, vel
minuunt, vel periculo exponunt.
expounds it, days and times that either diminish and take away the occasions
of well-doing, or expose them to much trouble and danger, because they days
are such: therefore must Christians play the good husbands in the merchandise
of their time, that is, as provident Merchants they cast a curious eye upon all
commodities, and consider which are like to be most gainful, and buy up them,
and get them into their hands, because that is the end why they take up
commodities, namely, to make gain of them: so should every one wisely consider
what time and season is likest to bring in greatest gain and advantage, if it
be well husbanded and improved, and be sure to get that into his hands, and
make his best penyworths of it; this is to redeem the time: as for time past,
that cannot be otherwise redeemed, than by true and unfeigned repentance for the
ill penyworths that have been made of it, and the ill husbandry that has been
used in the laying out of the same: time to come, that cannot be redeemed any
other way, but by laying in for it aforehand, that it may come to thy hands;
and that is, by walking carefully in the duties of obedience, and so bringing
thy self within the compass of that promise, which prolongs thy days in the
land which the Lord thy God shall give thee Exodus 20.12.
. For as God cuts short the days of wicked men for their sins, so that they
do not live out half their days Psalm. 55.23.
; so he prolongs the days of the righteous, and adds unto their days, as he
dealt with Hezekiah, to whose days he added fifteen years 2 Kings 20.6.
; but the time present, that is the time that must especially be redeemed: and
the redeeming of it consists in two things:

1. In setting it at liberty out of the hands of those usurping tyrants, which
eat up all the good hours of most men, and keep them prisoners, and so
hinder them from being taken up with better employments; so that a man redeemes
his time, when he gets it into his own hands.

2. In applying of it to his right end, and laying it out upon those
employments for which it was given: the former of these is laid down by Saint
Augustine Aug. Sermon. 24. de verbis Apost. Quando aliquis tibi infert lite^,
perde aliquid, ut Deo vaces, non litibus: id enim quod perdis, pretiu^ est
temporis; sicut enim das nummos, et panem emis, itaque aliquid amittis et
aliquid acquiris; sic perde nummos ut emas tibi quiete^, id est, tempus vacandi
Deo, hoc enim est te^pus redimere.
, who tells thee, that earthly and secular employments are those usurping
tyrants, that imprison most men's time, and keep it in hold; and therefore he
that would redeem it, must be content to lose something in the things of this
world, that he may more freely enjoy himself, and be at leisure for God; even
as a man that is unjustly molested with suites of Law, he is content to lose
something for the redeeming of his peace, rather than to be robbed of so many
good hours, as he must of necessity lose, by following and attending upon
those troublesome suites. The second is laid down by Saint Hierome Hier. com.
in lo. Quando tempus in bono consumimus, emimus illud et propriu^ facimus, quod
malitia hominum venditum fuerat, sicque dies malos in bonos vertimus, et
facimus illos non praese^tis saeculi sed futuri.
, who gives thee to understand, that time was given to men, that it might be
serviceable unto them in doing of good; and is then sold away, and held captive
in prison, when it is laid out upon those sinful designs, and taken up in
those sinful actions, which have no time by God allowed for them; and
therefore is then redeemed, when it is set at liberty from that which is evil,
and applied unto that which is good; as a thing is redeemed, when it is bought
again out of those men's hands, into which it was unjustly sold by thieves, and
such as had no right in it: this is to turn evil days into good, and to make
them to be days, not of this present evil world, but days of eternity, and
parts of another world: and there is great reason why every one should redeem
and buy out all the time of this day, that possibly he can, because every part
of it is exceeding precious, and of infinite worth and value, beyond all price
that can be set upon it: and therefore he shall be no loser by it, but an
infinite gainer, what ever it cost him; for it can but cost him the loss of
temporal things, which in comparison are vile, and of no worth; but it brings
with it the gain of eternal things, which are more precious tha^ gold, yea
than the finest gold: for if gold be precious, because a little quantity of
gold is worth a great quantity of other things; then time much more, because a
little time is worth eternity; for a little time well spent, procures an
eternal weight of glory. Or if gold be precious, because it is rare, and not
to be found in many men's hands, then time much more; because there are sundry
men that have many pieces of gold, all together and at the same time; but there
is no man living that has more than one minute of time at once; he cannot
possibly get another into his possession till that be gone: Chap. 18.
and therefore great reason there is why every one should be careful to
redeem the time, because this is nothing else, as Saint Augustine Aug. hom. 1.
inter. 50. Quid est redimere te^pus, nisi cum opus est etia^ detrimento
temporalium commodoru^ ad aeterna quaere^da and capescenda; spatia temporis
comparare.
says well, but to lay out temporal things for the purchasing of eternal;
and with the loss of earthly commodities, to buy in that day, wherein
everlasting happiness is set at sale, and offered to every one that will lay
out himself for the compassing of it.

CHAP. 18.
A just reproof of all such as lavish out, and lose the day and time of grace.

4 ANd what shall I say to thee, that triflest out the greatest part of this
day, and make so large penyworths of it, as if thou could not tell how to
pass it away fast enough? do thou know the worth of this day? or if thou
do not, ask the damned spirits in hell, and let them resolve thee: they had
a day, as thou now have, and they like prodigalls lavished it out vainly, as
now thou do: but what is it that now they would not willingly expend and lay
out for the redeeming of it, if it were possible to be done? Oh if they had ten
thousand worlds in their hands, o how glad would they be to part with all, if
it were for no more, but the repurchasing of one hour of this day? If this be
not enough, look upon the tears of Christ here in the text, that Christ
should thus bewail the condition of Jerusalem, as here he does; Oh if thou
had known at least in this thy day, etc! it plainly shows, that there was
somewhat in it of singular observation; it was not usual for him so to do,
and therefore it should seem that there is something more than ordinary in it,
and so indeed there is; Oh these tears show what the worth of that day was; it
was a great blessing to Jerusalem that she had it, a greater blessing had it
been if she had known it, and taken notice of it; and the greatest blessing
of all, if she had been so wise as to have laid out her self upon the best
employments in that her day: and let me tell thee withal, that the cause of
all that misery, which falls upon thee, either here, or hereafter, it is because
thou know not this day of thy visitation. If a man had Jewels of rare
virtue, and incomparable worth, would he cast them away, or bestow them upon
every one that comes unto him? o then, why should thou lose and lavish out
thy precious time? why should thou waste and wear out the good hours of
this thy day, the worst of which is not to be purchased with all the Jewels
under heaven? and therefore consider with thy self, what a loss and damage
thou bring on thine own head, by losing any part of this day.

1 To say nothing of the infinite gain and advantage that might acrue unto
thee by the good improvement of it, the very time it self, it is an
irrecoverable loss; for Sen. de brevit. vitae, ca 8. Nemo restituet annos,
nemo iterum te tibi reddet, ibit qua coepit aetas, nec cu^sum suum, aut
revocabit, aut supp^^met.
who is it that can restore unto thee the loss of a day? If thy house be
burnt, or thy goods stolen away, or thy lands forfeited, there be friends that
can make a supply of that loss; but if all the friends thou have in the world
should conspire to do thee good; nay, if all the creatures in heaven and earth
should unite their forces, they could not all restore unto thee so much as one
of those good hours, or any less part of this day, that has been lost.

2 If it were a matter of less worth, it is not so long, that any part of it
should be lost, all will be little enough for the work and employment that
lies upon it; the heathen Philosopher Sen. ep. 118. Non tam benignum, and
liberale tempus natura nobis dedit, ut aliquid ex illo vacet perdere, etc.
Jterum. Ex hoc tempore tam angusto, tam rapido, and nos auferente, quid juvat
majorem partem in vanum mittere?
could observe this, that nature deals not so liberally with man, nor gives
him so long and large a day, that he may well spare or lose any part of it. He
that has much work lying upon his hands, many irons in the fire, or a great
journey to go, and but a little time allotted for it, a small part of the day
yet remaining, he had need to lose none of that; and so it is with man,
especially with a Christian man, he stands in so many several relations, and
each of them requires so many duties at his hand, that if he carefully apply
himself unto them, there is no part of the day can possibly want his work;
for how many duties are required at his hands, as he is a creature in relation
to God? how many more, as he is a subject in relation to his Prince? how many
more as he is a master in relation to his family, and servants, as a Husband in
relation to his wife, as a father in relation to his children? and how many
more as he is a neighbor, and has to deal with men in matters of the world,
and has relation to others? and how many more as he is a man, in relation to
himself? and what part of the day is it that can want his work, if all these
be carefully looked unto? and yet if ye look abroad into the world, and take
a view of the lives and conversations of most men, it is strange to see, how
liberal, or rather how prodigal every man is of his time, as if it were nothing
worth. Sen. de brevit vitae, ca. 8. Mirari soleo cum video aliquos tempus
petere, and eos qui regantur facillimos, illud uterque spectat, propter quod
tempus petitu^ est, ipsum quidem neuter, quasi nihil petitur, quasi nihil
datur, res omnium pretiosiss luditur.
Many a one that is sparing enough of his money, and will give little or
nothing to the poor, when their necessities and occasions call and cry for it;
and yet so prodigal of his time, that every one may have it that will but
speak a word for it; if any desire to borrow of him an hour, or a day, or
more, from other necessary and weighty affairs, wherein it might be profitably
expended and laid out, to trifle it out with him in needless vanities; it is
no sooner asked but granted; which made that devout Father complain, that the
days of salvation pass away even as the water in the river, and no man
considers it in his heart. Bern. Sermon. var. Transcunt dies salutis, and nemo
recogitat
It is reported of Vespasian, one of the Roman Emperors, that upon a certain
day looking back upon his own doings, and finding that no man had received
any benefit from him that day, he makes his complaint to his friends, saying,
O my friends, I have lost a day Eras. Apophthe l. 6. Vesp. filius. Amici, diem
perdidi.
: but alas, how many are there, who let one day after another pass over their
heads, without either doing good to others, or receiving good to themselves,
and never complain of any loss? No man, says Seneca Sen. de brevit. vitae,
ca 3. Praedia sua occupari a nullo patiuntur, and si exigua contentio est de
modo finium, ad lapides, and arma discurrunt, in vitam suam incedere alios
sinunt; imo vero ipsi etiam futuros ejus possessores inducunt; nemo invenitur
qui pecunia^ suam dividere velit, vita^ unusquisque quam multis distribuit;
astricti sunt in continendo patrimonio, simul ad temporis jacturam ventum est,
profusissimi in eo, cujus unius honesta avaritia est.
, will suffer another to entrench upon his lands, or to occupy his fields;
nay, if there arise any doubt or difference touching the bounds or limits of
them, he is ready, like a mad man, to throw stones, to take up arms in the
defense of his own right; and yet he will suffer any one to invade and make an
inrode upon his life, to take up his time, to run away with his days; yea,
he himself will be ready to bring in those that eat up all his good hours,
and become, as it were, future owners and possessors of his days. There is no
man found, that will divide his estate and substance between him and another;
but his life and good hours every one is ready to parcel and cut out, to as
many as desire to have a share and portion in it. Men are sparing and close
handed in keeping their wealth and patrimony, and will not lose a mite or
farthing of it; but when it comes to the loss of time, in which only they
might be honestly and virtuously covetous, therein above all other things,
they are most prodigal and profuse.

3 And again, Ad Lucil. 1. ep. 1. Magna pars vitae clabitur male agentibus,
maxima nihil agentibus, tota aliud age^tibus; quem mihi dabis qui aliquod
precium tempori ponat? qui diem aestimet?
a great part of a man's life is spent and consumed in doing evil, the greatest
part of it in mere idleness, and doing nothing; and the whole sum of it,
and all the particular days contained in it, is vainly laid out in matters
upon the by, which little or nothing help and conduce, for and toward the
attainment of happiness; but where is the man that knows how to prize his
time according to the true worth of it, or that knows how to set a valuable
rate and estimation upon his days? Now if heathen men complained so much of
the loss of time, that knew no further use or improvement of it, than for the
affairs of this present life only: what a shame is it for Christians to set
no higher price upon the day of grace, or to make so light account of the loss
of that time, which might have been improved for the gaining of happiness,
even happiness that endures to all eternity? and yet experience shows, that
even a great part of this day of grace is lost amongst Christians; for many
there are that trifle out a great part of it in doing nothing; the householder
in the Gospel finds fault with such Mat. 20.6.
, Why stand ye here all the day idle? Many that lose a great part of it in
doing that which is worse than nothing, in sinful pleasures. Hieron. com. in
Hag. ca. 2. page 224. Omne tempus in quo non virtutibus, sed vitiis deservimus,
perit, and quasi non fuerit reputatur in nihilum.
They spend their days in wealth, and pleasure, and in a moment go down to
the grave Job. 21.13.
: so it was with Dives Luc. 16.25.
, Son remember thou in thy life time had thy pleasure, therefore art thou
now tormented: many that lose a great part of it in matters impertinent, and
upon the by.

1 In wandering and roving thoughts, which run to and fro from one object to
another, without any certain profit or advantage, because they do not fasten
or stay upon any thing, but presently grow weary of it, and are ever flitting
and removing, and so disjoynt the soul, and put it out of an orderly frame and
disposition.

2 In idle words and vain speeches, which eat up many good hours that might
have been laid out more profitably in savory and religious communication.

3 In needless and unprofitable actions, from which redounds little or no good
to themselves or others; the days that are thus lavished out, they are but
days of vanity, as Solomon calls them Ecces. 7.17.
: And they that wait upon lying vanities, forsake their own mercies Iona 2.8.
; and therefore to prevent, or at least to repair this loss, consider with
thy self,

1 That Sen. instit. ad Lucil. l. 1. ep. 1. Omnia aliena sunt, tempus tantu^
nostrum est.
it is only time that can properly be termed thine, and therefore the losing
of that, is the losing of all that thou have, or that can properly be called
thine own: thy goods thou have from others, and thou must leave them again to
others, and they can make use of them as well as thy self; but thy time thou
had it not from any but God only, neither can thou leave and bequeath it
to any, nor can any make use of it to his benefit or behoof, but thy self
only; in other things, the propriety thou have in them: increases thy care
for them, and love unto them: Thou love and carest for thy Country, not
because it is great, but because it is thine; thou carest for thy Children, and
would not lose them, not because they are Children, but because they are
thine; and why then will thou lose and lavish out thy time, seeing it is that
only that most properly can be termed thine?

2 Again, consider how much of Sen. ad Lucil. l. 21 ep. 118. Vide quam multa
etiam diligentissimis pereant, aliud valetudo sua cuique abstulit, aliud
suorum, aliud necessaria negotia, aliud publica occupaverunt, vitam nobiscu^
dividit somnus, etc.
this day is lost already, and how much is, and will be taken away with
incidentall occasions, even from those that are most careful and diligent in
looking to it; a great part of this day is spent in sleep, for the refreshment
of nature; and all that time is lost, in respect of any spiritual employment;
another part of it runs out in the years of childhood, and infancy, wherein
men are rather troublesome, than profitable, and cannot do any great service
either to God or man, and all that upon the matter, is little better than lost
and trifled away; another part of it is taken up in eating and drinking, and
other necessary recreations, and this is to be reckoned but as lost time,
(though it be needful and necessary in other respects) because it is
abstracted from those serious employments, wherein the life of Christianity
does consist: Another part of it, and the greatest part too, it is eaten up
with earthly employments, as buying, selling, plowing, sowing, and other civil
and secular works, agreeable to every man's calling, and condition of life; and
this time, though it be allowed by God, for these occasions, and the actions
themselves required by God; yet it is lost from sacred and spiritual services.
Now if all this time be deducted and taken out of the day of grace, what is it
that remains behind? how small a part is that which is left? and how little is
that can be saved, even by those that are most provident and sparing of their
time, to be laid out upon the duties of piety and religion? and if it be so
little, is it not pity that any of that should be lost?

3 Lastly, consider what course God himself takes, to make men ashamed of
their loss, and lavishnesse in this kind; he does not compare them with the
Heathen, who would be ashamed to lose so much time from the service of their
dumb Idols, which are but stocks and stones, as many do from the service of
the living God, who made heaven and earth; but as if there were none bad enough
amongst men, even the worst of men, with whom he might compare them, he sorts
the^ with the brute beasts; and if there be any amongst them more brutish than
others, it is with those brutes, that are most blockish, with the horse and
Mule, with the Ox and Ass; Psalm. 49.20.
Man being in honor, understands not, but is like the beast that perishes:
and it is no small disparagement to man's nature, to be matched with a beast,
and yet to be like unto a beast in that sense, is worse than to be a beast
indeed; for to be a beast indeed, is without any fault in the creature, it was
God that made it so; but to be made a man, a Christian man, and yet to be like
a beast, that is not without his own fault, not without his great sin: and
yet more, he that loses his precious time, and lavisheth out this day of
grace, he is not only like unto the beast, but even worse than the beast; the
brute beast is not only matched with him, but even preferred before him: Ier.
87.
Even the Storke in the air knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and
the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people
knows not the judgment of the Lord, These Fowls here mentioned, they have a
day, and a certain time for their return, and they never lose or lavish out
that time, but observe and keep it; he that lavisheth out the day of grace,
and makes so large penny-worths of it, he comes short of them; in both these
he cannot pitch upon a day, nor find out a time of vacancie and leisure to
look after the things of God Sanct. com. in loc. Vis comp^rationis in eo
cernitur, qui^ volucres istae, multo ante praesagiunt, aut hyemalem
inclementiam, aut vernalem temperiem: neque illas unquam in regione frigida
deprehendit hyems, neque in calida aestas: ita debuisset pop: praesagire et
providere, etc.

Tertull. de poenit. cap. 12. Mutae quidem animae et irrationabiles, medicinas
sibi divinitus attributas in te^pore agnoscunt. C^rvus sagitta transfixus, ut
fertu^ et irrevocabiles moras ejus de vulnere expell^t, scit sibi Dictam^o
^^^e^dum. Hitundo si excaecaverit pullos, novit illos oculare rursus de sua
Chelidonia, peccator restitu^ndo sibi institutam a Domino exhomologesim, sciens
praeteribit illam, quae Babylonium Regem in regna restituit?


: he can find a day, yea too many days to take his flight from God, and to
run out of his ways, not occasioned only by trouble and adversity, by
peril and persecution, that is, by evil days, as these fowls are, by the
coldness of the weather, and the hard time of winter, but often and many a
time in the Halcion days of prosperity, in the best and fairest days: but he
can never find out a day, nor so much as half a day to resolve and pitch upon,
for his return back again to GOD: or if in his purposes and intentions he
pitch upon a day, he does not observe and keep it: when the day comes, he has
not yet convenient leisure for it: ever and anon he will do it, and he will
do it; but still he is to seek for the time and season wherein to do it;
like the younger son in the Gospel, who when his father bids him go and
work in the Vineyard, he gives him good words, I will Sir, but he went not
Mat. 21.30.
. Therefore the fowls of the air are preferred before him, as having more
skill to know their time, and more care to observe it, than he has either to
know and discern the day of grace, or to lay out himself in those employments
which are most proper for it. Yea further, he that so forgets himself in this
day of grace, as to lose that blessed season and opportunity, he is set to
school to creatures, yet more mean and despicable than the fowls of the
air, to the Ant or Pismire: that silly and contemptible creature is set before
him as a pattern, and set over him as a Tutor to teach and instruct him, that
he might learn care and providence from her, for the well husbanding and good
improvement of the day of grace. Prove. 6.6.
Go to the Pismire, O sluggard, behold her ways, and be wise; for she having
no guide, governor, nor ruler, prepares her meat in the Summer, and gathers
her food in the harvest: That is, as God and nature has assigned unto her a
day, and a season wherein to make her provision, so she observes it, and with
all diligence applies her self to the work, while that season lasts, and
will not lose any part of it; and what is it now that can shame thee out of thy
sinful course of extreme negligence, if this do it not? Is it not shame
enough for thee to come below thy self, and the worst of men, but that the
meanest and most contemptible creature under the face of heaven should go
before thee in the care and providence of observing his day and time? thou have
thy day set out unto thee, for the works of piety and religion, even the day
of grace, as well as the creature has his day for the works and employments
belonging to his nature; yea every day is thy day; no day unseasonable for the
works of grace; every day is to thee that acceptable time, and the day of
salvation. And what a shame is it that the day should be yet to come, that ever
thou did seriously apply thy self to the proper and seasonable works of
this day? many perhaps are now in hell, who never enjoyed half so long a day
as thou have done: and thy day is even ready to expire, before thou have begun
that great work for which it was afforded unto thee. Oh consider therefore
that if this thy day be once come to an end, it will then be too late to lay
out thy self for the seeking of grace and salvation; it is neither prayers nor
tears that can then prevail for the obtaining of it.

There is a day when Gods affection cannot be won, though Moses and Samuel
should stand before him Ier. 15.1.
. There is a day when God will not hear, though many prayers should be made
unto him Esaias 1.15.
. Esaus tears are spent in vain, when the time is past, and the blessing gone
Heb. 12.17.
. When the door is shut, the foolish virgins they knock too late, and but a
little too late; yet can they find no admittance Mat. 25.12.
: and therefore lose not the time, but lay out thy self at least in this thy
day, before the day of grace be ended, and it be too late for thee.

CHAP. 19.
Christ and the Gospel are the means whereby true peace is wrought between
God and man.

the day of grace; it follows now by order of the text, to speak of the
second, namely, the worth and quality of the object, or things to be known, in
those words, the things that belong to thy peace.

Peace Hebraei nomine pacis omnis generis foelicitatem intelligunt, animi et
corporis, temporale^ et aeternam: Hoc ergo in Hierosolyma Christus accusat,
quod non erat sollicita de iis, ex quibus tota ejus foelicitas pendebat: non
enim tam ipsa^ faelicitate^, qua^ media ad eam ducentia, et sic consequenter
etiam faelicitatem repudiabat.
, it is a word of a large and comprehensive signification, and includes in it,
whatsoever tends to a man's prosperity and welfare, even a confluence of all
such things as may render him happy; and the things that belong to a man's
peace, are all such things as do either help and conduce toward the
attainment of it, or have a necessary and inseparable connection with it, as
companions and attendants, without which it cannot consist, and such are the
things of Christ and the Gospel: whatsoever things are required of any by
Christ in the Gospel, whatsoever things are promised to any, they are such
things as belong to his peace: and that is the observation that I intend to
insist upon, That the things of Christ and the Gospel, are things that belong
to every man's peace.

The Gospel it self, it is termed the Gospel of peace Ephesians 6.15.
, both in respect of the matters contained in it, which are rules and
directions concerning peace, as also in respect of the effect of it, because it
is the isntrumental cause of peace; it is the channel or conduit pipe,
wherein and whereby all true peace is conveyed to the soul; and Christ he is
the Prince of peace, as the Prophet styles him Esaias 9.6.
: to show, that the things of Christ, they are things that concern every man's
peace, and that it is he only that can give peace Justin. fascic. amoris, c.
7. p. 153 Pacem dare debuit, ipsa pax divina, pax aeterna, pacifica in seipsa,
pacificans universa in sc.

Gerha. com. in lo. Abundabat Hierosolyma omnibus non solu^ ad vitae
sustentationem, sed etia^ ad splendorem necessariis, verum quia Christum
repudiabat, ideo a vera pace et faelicitate exulabat.


: and therefore at the birth of Christ, the Angels sing Peace on earth Luke
2.14.
, that the inhabitants of the earth might learn to whom they are beholding for
peace, and by whose means it is procured for them: and when Christ himself
sends forth his Ambassadors abroad into the world, it is not to proclaim
war, but to preach peace: it is the principal thing in their charge and
commission, to offer conditions of peace, where ever they come: Luke 10.5.
Into whatsoever house ye enter, say first, Peace be unto this house. And there
is a threefold peace that comes along with Christ and the Gospel: peace with
God, peace with a man's self, and peace with others. Peace with God, that is
the spring and fountain of all; peace with a man's self, that is as it were a
stream that flows from it: and peace with others, that is a fruit and effect
that grows out of both the former: this was employed, as some think, in that
salutation Christ used to his Disciples, who when he appeared unto them after
his resurrection, he said unto them three several times, John 20.
Peace be unto you: to signify, that by his death and passion, this threefold
peace was purchased for them. When man was first created, he had all this peace
Bern. in annun. B. Mariae ser. 1. p. 30. Homini recens orto, etc. pace^, qua
foveretur et delectaretur, addidit manus benigniss: creatoris: pacem utique
duplice^, ut nec intus pugnae, nec foris timores, id est, nec caro
concupisceret adversus spiritu^, nec esset ei creatura ulla formidini.
, till his sin and disobedience robbed and spoiled him of it: and when sin
had once made entrance into the world, there was no more peace on earth, till
Christ had brought it from heaven: but he undertaking to make war upon the
enemies of peace, overcame them all, and so again settled this inheritance of
peace upon the sons of men, making way through the blood of his Cross, that
they might again have peace with heaven, with earth, and within themselves.

1. First then, touching peace with God, the things of Christ and the Gospel,
are things that belong to this peace. It is Christ that laid the foundation of
it, by taking man's nature upon him: and therefore says the Apostle, Ephesians.
2.14.
he is our peace: Implying, that it is for his sake, and through his
procurement, that there is a happy peace concluded between heaven and earth.

When two great Kingdoms are at deadly war and enmity one with another, if a
marriage can be contrived between the two heirs of those Kingdoms, it is a
means to unite them into one, and conclude a happy peace between them, as we
have seen by experience in this Land, when there was deadly feud and enmity
between the house of Lancaster and York; the happy conjunction of the
red-rose and the white, brought a settled peace unto this Nation. So when there
was nothing but war between heaven and earth, the Son of God matching
himself to the nature of man in his incarnation, did thereby lay the
foundation of this happy peace, and therefore he calls it his peace John 14.27.
, as well he might, because it cost him dear to make that purchase; it was the
price of his own blood, the dearest blood that ever was shed, and therefore
the greatest price that ever was paid. And when he was about to leave the
world, he left this peace to his Disciples, as the best and greatest legacy
that he could bequeath unto them Aug. to. 10. de temp. sermon. 146. Dominus
noster de hoc mundo ad pattem transiturus, etc. maxim pacis bonum, et
unitatis, quasi speciale munus, discipulis commendavit, dicens, pace^ mea^ do,
etc. q.d. in pace vos demisi in pace vos inveniam, proficiscens voluit dare,
quae desiderabat rediens, in omnibus invenire.
, My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave with you, etc John 14.27.
. Had it not been for Christ, God the Father had never entertained any
thoughts of peace toward the sons of men; and the Gospel is nothing else but
a Charter of peace, wherein is set down that new covenant which is written and
sealed with the blood of Christ, and those new articles of agreement between
heaven and earth; and therefore the Covenant of grace, it is termed a covenant
of peace Esa. 54 10. Ezekiel 34.25.
, because it declares that foundation of peace which Christ has laid; and is
the ordinary means, and the isntrumental cause of working a settled peace
between God and man: for,

1. It offers conditions of peace to the sons of men, and lets them know upon
what terms God is willing to enter into a covenant of reconciliation, and to
be at peace with them; and in this respect the preaching of the Gospel is said
to be a publishing of peace Esaias 52.7.
, and the preaching of peace Acts 10.36.
.

2. It guides their feet in the way of peace Luke 1.79.
: it works faith in them, whereby they are justified, and so come to have an
actual share, and interest in this peace. Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God.

3. It keeps the heart and mind in a peaceable estate with God; feeds and
fills it with peace, while he walks in obedience answerable unto it, till at
length he come to see the salvation of God with old Simeon, and to have that
peace which he so much desired; that is peace at the last, peace at the
parting, which is worth all the rest. Luke 2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, etc.

4. It brings him to the full fruition and enjoyment of everlasting peace, to
the crown and perfection of this peace, where all things shall be removed away
for ever, that might any ways hinder or disturb this peace Cassiod. in Psalm.
36. Vbi nihil adversum, nihil contrarium.
, to the peace of glory, or that peace which accompanies eternal life, which
is a peace that passes all understanding, a peace as far above that which now
he has, as the heaven is above the earth; as far beyond it, as the life of
glory goes beyond the life of grace Aug. de civ. Dei li. 19. c. 11. and to. 10.
tract. in Joan. 77.
. This is that peace foretold by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 57.2.
Peace shall come, they shall rest in their beds, every one that walks before
him: so that the things of Christ, and the things of the Gospel, are things
that belong to this peace with God.

CHAP. 20.
Peace of Conscience, and peace of contentment, are from Christ and the Gospel.

peace which a man has at home with himself, and in his own breast; this is a
fruit of the former, that is, of his peace and reconciliation with God; and
therefore it is a part of that purchase which Christ has made, and a part of
that precious fruit which the Gospel bears; whether it be peace of
Conscience, or peace of contentment; both grow upon this root.

1 When Christ comes to dwell in the heart by faith, he stils all the raging
storms of a guilty conscience, and settles peace in it; like as it was with the
Disciples when they were in a Ship at Sea, there rose a great tempest, so that
the ship was covered with waves; but so soon as Christ was entered into the
ship, he rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm Mat.
8.23.26.
; so when Christ enters into the ship of the soul, he rebukes the raging
winds of a guilty conscience, and establishes peace there, by opening the eye
of the soul, to see that God is become a reconciled Father unto her, and at
peace with her; and by giving unto her a sense and feeling of the love of God,
and of that inward sweetness that accompanies the estate of reconciliation,
saying unto her, as he did to the sinful woman, that washed his feet with her
tears Luke 7.50.
; Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace; for this peace of conscience it is a
principal part of Christ's Kingdom, as the Apostle speaks Romans 14.17.
, The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost; and it is a fruit of the Gospel to; for when a man
takes in those undoubted and undeniable principles of practical truths, which
the Gospel commends unto him, and endeavors in truth and sincerity to walk
answerable unto them, this breeds peace of conscience; because when he
reflects upon himself, and his own ways, he finds in himself those
qualifications which have the promise of mercy and peace made unto them;
according to that of the Apostle Gal. 6.16.
, As many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God: and when a man walks according to the rule
and direction of a conscience rightly informed, it will ever excuse him for
well doing, and withal speak peace to him; so that the life of justification,
it begins with this inward peace of conscience; and the more studious and
careful that any is to follow after righteousness, the more is he filled
with this peace; and by continuance in well doing, till he come to the up-shot
and closure of his life, he comes to end his days in peace; according to that
of David Psa. 37.37.
, Mark the upright, and behold the just, for the end of that man is peace.

2 Again, peace of contentment, it is a part of that fruit which Christ and
the Gospel yields: A man that is a stranger to Christ and the Gospel
Chrysostom. to. 3. in V. T. ca^t. Graeco-lat expos in Psalm 4 page ^6. B.C.D. and
page 37. A. B. August. to. 10. ad fratres in cremo. sermon. 2. G. H. O pax tale
bonum es in reb. creatis, tam mirificum, etc. quod nihil dulcius solet audi^i,
nihil delectabilius concupisci, nihil utilius possideri, spiritus. n. humanus
sicut nunquam vivificat membra, nisi fuerint unita, sic Spiritus Sanctus
nunquam nos vivificat, nisi fuerimus unici pace, etc. Ille ve^e pacem habet,
qui nihil appetit de saeculo possidere, etc. quietissimam vitam agerent h^mines
in terra, si haec duo verba a natura terum omnium tollerenter, s^licer, meum et
tuum.
, if the world frown upon him, and cast him behind hand, it distracts and
divides his mind with carking cares, and distrustful thoughts, saying, What
shall I do? what shall I eat? what shall I drink? or wherewithal shall I
be clothed? If losses and crosses lie heavy upon him, or threaten him much,
it rends and pulls him asunder with excessive grief, and immoderate fears; if
the sun of prosperity do but begin to smile upon him with the flattering
rays, and beams of these outward things, if there be but the least door
opened to wealth and riches, to honor and preferment, and some slender hope
given unto him of obtaining the same, he is carried after them with a restless
and inordinate desire; he cannot sleep for the thought of them; and if his
hopes be dashed, and disappointed, his heart is troubled, and even ready to
break asunder, and die within him, through anguish of spirit, through
impatience and discontent: but when the heart is established with grace, when
it is filled with the things of Christ and the Gospel, this it balaseth the
soul, and works in it that calmnesse and quietness of thoughts, that
tranquillity and serenity of mind, that stayednesse and composedness of
affections, that keeps a man within due compass, and moderation in all
estates. The heathen Philosophers which have spent their thoughts upon this
theme, and argument, and bent their studies and endeavors, to find out some
helps and remedies in this kind, they have done something, but all too little
to bring the soul to a settled and resolved peace; it is only Christ and the
Gospel, only grace and religion that can do this; because it is that only
that inables a man thoroughly to deny himself, without which selfe-denyall it
cannot be done; it is only that which rectifies the judgment, and sets up
reason in her lawful throne, to rule and command aright; and where reason
rightly commands, and the rest of the powers and faculties obey and submit
themselves, that preserves and keeps an orderly peace in the soul; for like
as it is in the natural body, when there is a sweet harmony of all the parts,
and every member keeps his due place and order, the body is at ease and rest;
but if any member be out of joint, or one member pulled from another, brings
much grief and trouble, and the body cannot be at rest, till every member be
rightly joynted, and set again in his due place: even so it is with the soul,
when reason is set below, that should sit as a Queen above, to give direction;
and sensual appetite, which should be subject, bears rule, all things must
needs be disjoynted, and out of order; and therefore there can be no peace
till every power and faculty of the soul be orderly reduced, and set again in
his own place: Or, like as it is in the Commonwealth, when the lawful King
is unnaturally dethroned, and a Tyrant set up in his place, there can be no
peace, because the lawful King, and all that take part with him, will still
be endeavoring, and attempting to to recover that which is lost, and to have
the crown set again upon the right head; even so, when reason is dethroned,
and the inferior faculties of the soul, the fancy and conceit, or the
sensual appetite set up a loft, it must needs put all out of orer, and
occasion trouble within, there can be no peace there, till all these misplaced
powers of the soul be reduced back again into such an orderly frame, that
each of them keeps his own place and rank: now it is only. Christ and the
Gospel, only grace and religion, that can help all this.

1 This peace of contentment is that in the soul, which rest is in the
natural body. The stone cannot rest till it come to the earth and center which
is the place of its rest, and there it rests, and moves no more; so the soul
cannot rest, nor find any true peace, till it come to pitch and settle it
self upon Christ, who is the proper place and center of rest, Justin. sascic.
amoris ca. 16. p. 171. Proh dolor, quam maxima in creaturis omnibus penuria
est! quoniam earu^ nulla potest praestare suis dilectoribus pacem: pacis
satietate^ minime tribuunt, sed acrius accendant; fatigant quaerentis animum,
non pac^nt; illumque vana promissione deducunt, carent prorsus eo, quod in
ipsis exquiritur, bono.
, and there it may find peace, and rest enough, so that she needs not to move
or seek out for it any more. Noah's Dove could find no rest for the sole of
her foot, till she returned to the Arc, and there she finds a resting
place; so the soul finds no true rest or peace within, till she return to
Christ, and there she finds a resting place; because he rectifies the
judgment, to see that there is contentment enough to be found in him alone;
and that the peace and rest which is so much sought for in other things, is
there only to be had, and no where else; and then he works upon the
inferior faculties, which are apt to raise up mutinies in the soul, and
brings them in subjection hereunto, whereupon follows rest and peace within:
This is that which Christ himself promises Mat. 11.29.
, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest
unto your souls.

2 Again, this peace of contentment, is that in the soul, which calmnesse is
in the sea and the weather; that is, when the winds do not blow, and bluster;
when the waves do not rise and fall, dash and beat one against another; when
that vaste body of Waters does not roar or make a noise, but is still and
silent; so this calmness and peace is then in the soul, when the winds of
distempered passions do not bluster within, nor the raging waves of impatience
and discontent, rise and fall without, nor the motions of the affections grow
exorbitant and irregular, but are framed to such an equal, and eaven tenor,
and moderation, as does qualify and temper all disordered unruly windings and
turnings in them, and give a man leave and liberty to be master of himself,
and to enjoy himself in all occurrences; like as it is with a pair of equal
balance, when they are jogged or suddenly moved, they may rise and fall, and
shake up and down for a while, but after some little agitation, they will
settle themselves in an equal poise, and there stay; even so, where there is
this peace in the sou[e, though unexpected occasions, when they do suddenly
surprise a man, may raise up some commotions in him for a while, yet when he
comes more diliberately to recollect his thoughts, he does at length incline
himself into a settled and resolved contentment: Chap. 21.
Now it is only Christ and the Gospel, only grace and religion that can
work and mould a man in this frame and temper of spirit, because it is that
only that can mortify and kill the inordinate lusts and affections of the old
man: Saint Paul had this peace of contentment, but it was grace and religion
that learned him the same, as himself confesses Phil. 4.11, 12.
, I have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewithal to be content. I can
be abased, and I can abound; every where, in all things, I am instructed, both
to be full, and to be hungry, to abound, and to have want.

CHAP. 21.
The things of Christ and the Gospel, make peace on earth amongst men.

3 TOuching peace with men, this is also an attendant upon the Gospel, and an
inseparable companion of the two former: he that is at peace with God, and
finds the sweetness of peace within his own soul, he cannot but love peace,
and desire to live in peace. There was a general peace through all the world
at the birth of Christ Hieron. com. in Joel. cap. 3.
; the Temple of Ianus, which used always to stand open in time of war, was
then shut up Sueton. in vita Augusti. and Pint. in Esa. c. 2. v. 4.
; a sign, that fair weather and halcion days of peace were to follow after;
and fit it was that it should be so, because the Prince of peace was then
borne, and came into the world. The dew uses not to fall in storms and
tempests, when the face of the heaven is black with Clouds, but in clear and
fair weather, when the sky is bright, and the winds silent, as the
Philosopher observes Aristot. Mete^r. l. 1. c. 10.
no marvel then if it be a calm and peacable season, when Christ the dew of
the morning, was to fall from heaven. When the Halcyon or Kings-fisher makes her
nest in the sea, and brings forth her young, the Mariners Ambros. Hexamer. l.
5. ca. 13. Vbi undosum fuerit mare, positis ovis Halcyonis subito mitescit, and
omnes cadunt ventorum procellae, etc. tantam gratia^ avis minuscula divinitus
indultam habet, ut hos dies nautici praesumptae serenitatis observent, quos et
Alcionidas vocant, quibus nullos motus procellosae tempestatis horrescant.
presume of calm and fair weather; and when the Prince of peace was to make
his abode and habitation amongst the sons of men, it might well presage great
peace toward them: it was the blessed fruit of his birth, that the partition
wall between Jew and Gentile, which Moses set up, was taken down, and both
Nations peaceably united into one people; his coming into the world did not
only erect and set up Jacobs Ladder, a Ladder that reached from earth to
heaven, that the sons of men might have peaceable intercourse with that place,
but also it did prepare and make way for Isaiahs Bridge Isa. 19.23.
a Bridge that should reach from Ashur to Egypt, and from Canaan to them both;
that is, a way and passage for a general peace between nation and nation,
that there might be free and peaceable traffic and commerce amongst them.
That which the Poet speaks of Augustus Caesar, that in his time the rough ages
of the world should grow into a more civil and peaceable agreement, and that
the gates of war should be shut up Virg. Aeneid. l. 1. Aspera tunc positis
mitescent saecula bellis, Claude^tur belli portae, etc.
, the Prophet Isaiah most truly foretells it of Christ, who was borne in the
days of Augustus, that in his time Nation shall not lift up a sword against
nation, neither should they learn to fight any more, but should break their
swords into mattocks, and their spears into sythes Esaias 2.4.
. The world indeed has ever been jealous of Christ and the Gospel, as if
they were enemies and disturbers of her peace. Ahab could put the word upon
Elijah, 1 King. 18.17.
Art not thou he that troubles Israel? and it has ever been the ordinary
course of the men of this world, when they have smarted for their own sins,
to father all their troubles upon the Christians, and true religion. But alas,
they are far wide, and much deceived; for there is not a stronger tie and
obligation under heaven, to link men together in the bond of peace, than the
Gospel is; and what ever may be pretended by some that profess the Gospel,
yet if any be of a troublesome and contentious spirit, a hinderer of peace, or
an enemy to it, either in family, Church, or Commonwealth, sure I am, that he
never learned that from Christ and the Gospel Pacem, qui accepit, teneat; qui
perdidit, reparet; qui amisi, exqui^at; quoniam qui in eadem non fuerit
inventus, abdicatur a Patre, exhaereditatur a Filio, a Spir: sancto alienus
efficitur, respuit n. munus oblatum, qui datae legis contempserit bonu^, nec
poterit ad haereditatem Domini pervenire, qui testamentu^ noluerit observare:
non potest co^cordia^ habere cum Christ, qui discors esse voluerit cum
Ch^istiano. Aug. to. 10. de temp. ser. 67.
: for the wisdom that Christ and the Gospel teaches, is first pure, then
peaceable Iam. 3.17.
: and though there be many other doctrines in the Gospel that are much
pressed, and strongly put on by the Apostle, yet ye shall scarce find such
quickening passages in all the Scripture besides, as when he comes to persuade
unto peace: take one place for all, Romans 12.18.
If it be possible, and as much as in you lies, have peace with all men. It is
possible for a man, and it lies in his power to do much, if he will engage
himself upon it. Now the Apostle presses him, by all that is possible for him
to do, by all that lies within the compass of his power, to bend himself for
peace. Why does he use such moving strains, and pressing incentives, but to
show that above all other duties, men are most backward to this, and have most
need to have it spoken home unto them, as being that which knits all together:
like mortar in the wall, that fastens the stones, and makes them lie firm in
the building. So that the Gospel is so far from troubling or disturbing the
peace that should be amongst men, that there was never any doctrine that did
more strongly conclude for it Aug. to. 10. de temp sermon. 169. Meritum
Christianae virtutis vilescit in cunctis, si unitatem no^ habet pacis, nec
pervenit ad vocabulu^ filii, nisi per nomen pacifici: pax est, quae dat nome^
ingenuum, mutat com condition persona^, ex famulo liberum, filiu^ facit ex
servo, etc. amicu^ facit ex Deo, patrem reddit ex Domino, etc. En filius Dei
esse incipit, qui pacificus esse coepit, non vult filius dici, qui pacificus
noluerit inveniri, negat sibi patrem Deu^, qui haeres pacis esse nequivit.
, nor ever any that were found more peaceable, than those that have been the
most sincere professors of it. It is one of the principal blessings promised
in the new Covenant, Jer. 32.39.
I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever. And
it was fulfilled in the Primitive Christians, as St. Luke has recorded it,
Acts. 4.32.
The multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul. Like
Ezechiels wheels Ezec. 10.
, fashioned so like one unto another, and so framed and set together one within
another, that they seemed to be but one wheel: when one moved, all the rest
went with it; and when one stayed, all the rest stood still. Or like as it is
with the wheels in a clock, though some be greater, and others less, yet such
a proportion and correspondency there is between them, that all finish their
course and motion within the same space of time, they move together, and rest
together, and conspire together, Chap. 22.
to make the clock strike at the appointed hour: even so where Christ and the
Gospel are entertained and embraced, such a peaceable harmony do they work
in the minds of men, that they make them all conspire in one for the promoting
of Gods glory, and the public good. And therefore the things of Christ and the
Gospel are things that belong to this peace.

CHAP. 22.
The things of Christ and the Gosopell should be regarded so much the more,
because they are things that belong to a man's peace.

ANd how should this endeare and ingratiate the things of Christ and the
Gospel to every one, Use 1. To bring men in love with Christ and the Gospel.
seeing they are commended unto him under the sweet and amiable name of peace.
Peace, it is a blessing of unknown worth; it was the end why Christ came into
the world, to purchase and procure this peace for men; 1 Bonum, cum quo sunt
omnia bona. August. to. 10. de te^p. sermon. 166. D^na omnia suae pollicitationis
et praemia, in pacis conversatione Dominus promisit. Vide ibid. ad fratres in
erem ser. 2. D. H.
and therefore does he purposely make choice of this expression, the more to
endeare these things to every one that hears of them; for peace, it is a thing
that is good in it self; and amongst other good qualities which are found in
it, there be three things that do especially commend it unto all:

1. Because it is accompanied with so many other good things that come along
with it, or follow upon it, as safety and security, arts and sciences, wealth
and riches, etc. all which are usual companions of peace, and do most
flourish in times of peace; and whatsoever good things it finds where it comes,
it makes them better; lands and liberty, place and authority, honor and
preferment, all these are good, but far better when they are sweetened with the
name of peace; yea things that are otherwise evil, they are qualified and made
good by it. Prove. 17.1.
Better is a dry morsel, if peace be with it, than a house full of sacrifices
where there is strife, because contentment of mind is worth all; the prison is
a palace, the dungeon a paradise, the house of correction a heaven upon earth,
when it is accompanied with inward peace of conscience.

2 Bonum, sine quo nihil est bonum.
2. It is such a good, as that nothing is truly good without it Chryso. to 2.
in V.T. p. 522. (...).
: though a man have great plenty of outward blessings, yet all lie open to many
hazards, to much peril and danger, if he have not peace with them; and
therefore it is termed the blessing of peace Psalm. 29.11.
: to signify, that all which a man has, though it be never so much, it is
unblessed to him, so long as he has not peace with it.

3 Bonum and jucundum.
3. It is a good that all desire; a good full of pleasure and delight; Psalm.
133.1.
Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity; and there are but few such good things: some things are good and
profitable to the body, as Physic, and other means that procure the health
of it; some things also are good and profitable to the soul, as fasting,
watching, suffering ^fflictions, and those severe exercises of mortification,
which are enjoined in the school of Christ; but no great pleasure or
sweetness in any of them. Some things again, they are pleasing and
delightful to corrupt nature, as voluptuos courses, and other sinful
contentments, but are neither good nor profitable for soul or body: and
therefore where both these concur, it adds much to the worth of the thing.

Now as Saint Austin Aug. ad fratres in eremo, sermon. 2. Quaedam sunt bona, quae
non sunt jucunda, ut jejunia, vigiliae, macerationes, etc. quia caro in his non
jucu^datur: quaedam sunt jucu^da, quae no^ sunt bona, ut co^messationes,
ebrietates, vix poteris in praesenti, unum invenire quod sic bonum et jucu^du^:
cupis tamen illud invenire? persequere pace^, et amplectere eam; haec est enim
sola virtus, quae habet bonu^ et jucundu^.
well observes, both these meet in the blessing of peace: and in these respects
the very Pagans have highly honored the name of peace, who knew little or
nothing more touching the worth of it, than that which was to be seen in this
outward peace amongst men. But to Christians, who know the worth of that hidden
Manna, which no man knows, but he that has it, that is, of peace with God,
and peace of conscience, this should much more endeare the things of Christ,
and the Gospel to them, and make even the very feet of those to seem
beautiful, who bring unto them the glad tidings of peace and of good things:
yea such is the excellency of this peace, that God himself is pleased to make
it a part of his royal title, and to style himself by the name of the God of
peace: and the Son of God seems to glory more in that, than in any other
title, that he is called the Prince of peace. Now as it is amongst Kings and
Princes, when they have diverse lands and territories under their dominions,
they commonly have their name and appellation from that which is greatest; even
so it serves to show the worth and excellency of peace, in that amongst the
glorious attributes of God and of Christ, ye find so often mention made of the
God of peace, and the Prince of peace. And therefore it does not a little
inhance and raise up the price of the things of Christ and the Gospel, and so
should endeare them the more to every one, because they are things that belong
to his peace Aug. to. 10. de temp. ser. 166. Si Christi haeredes esse et manner
voluerimus, in ejus pace esse et manner debemus: concordes n. et unanimes esse
praecepit, dilectionis et charitatis foedera, incorrupta et inviolata mandavit,
etc. pax enim plebis sanitas, gloria sacerdotis, patriae laetitia, et terror
hostium. Ibi. ser. 167. Pax est serenitas me^tis, tranquillitas animae,
simplicitas cordis, amoris vinculum, etc. haec est quae simultates tollit,
bella compescit, co^primit itas, superboscalcat, humiles elevat, discordes
sedat, cunctis est placita, etc.
.

And indeed, if he did rightly weigh and consider of the matter, he would be
more ready to make after them, and to lay out himself in the pursuit of the
same: as Christ said to the woman of Samaria, John 4.10.
If thou had known, thou would have asked; etc. or if he did wisely
ponder the worth of peace, to which they belong, he would not value them at so
low a rate, as many do. Like those brutish Gadarens Mat. 8.34.
, who when Christ came amongst them, they came all out unto him, and besought
him to depart out of their coasts: preferring their very hogs and swine before
those things that concerned the everlasting peace and welfare of their souls.
If the owner of the field did know of the treasure that lies hid in it, he
would not pass it away upon such facile and easy terms, as many times he
does; and so if men did know and steep their thoughts in the meditation of the
transcendent worth of the things of the Gospel, they would not under-prize and
under-value them as they do; nay they would purchase and procure them, were it
with the dearest drop of their own blood. Little do men think what they
refuse, when they make so light account of the things of Christ and the
Gospel: it made Christ to weep over Jerusalem here, with many tears, and
much lamentation, beause she would not know, or take notice of them; and those
tears show, that even tears of blood, if it were possible to shed them, were
little enough to bewail the loss of them: for who can sufficiently express
all that goodness which is here comprehended under the name of peace? It is a
peace that passes all understanding, as the Apostle speaks Phil. 4.7.
. Many have a large understanding, even as the sand on the sea shore; many have
a deep reach, and are able to see far into matters; yet such is the
transcendent worth of this peace, that it does not only surpass the most
sublime and refined understanding of any one, but even all understanding
Guliel. Parisie. de retri. sanct. pa. 303. Exuperat omne^ sensum, etc. vel
incomprehensibilitate sua, ut nullus sensus immensitate^ ejus prout est, et
quanta est co^prehendere possit, vel suavitate su^ quemadmodu^ nullus visus
totam luminositate^ solis capere sufficit, imo radiolo ejus modico impletur;
sic nullus sensus capere sufficit, id est, sentire immensitatem suavitatis
pacis Dei.
: so that when all are laid together, they do not all conceive so much worth
and excellency as is in it: for as it passes all understanding to conceive the
misery of a man that has God for his enemy, and is out of his protection;
because there is no place, no estate, no condition, where he can be safe and
secure, seeing wheresoever he is, he is in the midst of his enemies; for all
the creatures, they are Gods host, they take part with him, and are ready at
his appointment to be up in arms, and to avenge his quarrel, if he restrain
them not: even so on the contrary, it passes all understanding, to conceive
the happiness of him that is at peace with God: for all the creatures under
heaven have a command to do him good: Chap. 23.
the stones of the field are in league with him, and the beasts of the field
are at peace with him Job 5.23.
. Yea his very enemies are under that providence, which makes them to be at
peace with him Prove. 16.7.
: and which is infinitely more, all the glorious attributes of God himself are
engaged, and lie at stake for his good.

CHAP. 23.
The way and means how to get true Peace.

A rule of direction how to get peace.
2 IF the things of Christ and the Gospel be things that belong to every man's
peace, then may this serve as a rule of direction to every one, what course to
take for the obtaining of peace; and that is, to kiss the Son lest he be
angry, to embrace the Gospel, to bid Christ welcome, that shall bring him
peace at last. Peace is that which all would have, and few find, because they
mistake the way that leads unto it Just. fasc. amor. cap. 16. page 101.
Horrendu^ spectaculum, et co^passiva consideratio est, caecu^ sitientem
aspicere, et aquae rivulos quaerita^tem, atque in luti volutabro se mergentem,
ut inde suis suae satiet appetitu^.
Behold, here is the way of peace; if any desire to find it, let him seek it
in this way, and by these particular steps and degrees.

1. Seek it in the right place, in the house of God, where the Gospel is
preached. Hag. 2.10.
The glory of the later house shall be greater than the former; and in this
place will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts. Peace is not a flower that
may be gathered out of every garden; it is not a fruit that grows on every
tree, it is not to be had every where, nor is it to be found any where, but
only in this place, in the house of God. Pharaoh supplied the wants of his
people in the years of famine, but it was from Joseph's storehouse, all the
provision was laid up there, that from thence it might be transmitted to his
people: So God speaks peace to his people that are in trouble, and supplies
their wants with the blessing of peace, but that blessing is laid up for them
in Zion, in the House of God, that from thence it may be transmitted unto
the^; Psalm. 128.5.
The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion; and the reason is, because the means
whereby this peace is wrought, the public Ordinance of God is erected and set
up there: Jsa. 57.19.
I create the fruit of the lips to be peace; that is, the Word preached; for
as the Gospel is a Gospel of peace Gualt. com in loc. Creabo fructum
labi^ru^, id est, praedicationem Evangelii, per quam pax annu^ciabitur,
longinquis and propinquis, id est Iudaeis simul et gentibus.
so the preaching of it, is a preaching of peace, as has been showed.

2 Seek it in the right way, that is, in the way of obedience, in following
the mind and counsel of Christ, and walking according to the rule of the
Gospel August. to. 10. li. 50. Homil^ar. homil 17. Charitas cum fide ipsa te
perducet ad pacem, veram pacem, plenam pacem, solidam pace^, securam pacem, ubi
nulla pestis, nullus hostis, ipsa pax est finis omniu^ desideriorum bonorum.
; for the blessing of peace is promised to such only as walk according to
this rule Gal. 6.16.
: Piety and religion is the way to true peace, and therefore the Apostle joins
them both together, to show that one cannot be had, or enjoyed, without the
other: No peace without holiness; Heb. 12.14.
follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall ever see
God. While Adam kept his garment of innocence and righteousness, he enjoyed
perfect peace, both with God, and himself, and all creatures; but when he cast
away that, he made ship wrack of his peace; peace will not dwell but in the
habitation of righteousness. The Angels sing first glory to God, and then
peace on earth Luc. 2.14.
; to signify that Gods glory must be provided for, before there will be
peace on earth. God has made large promises of much peace* but it is to such
as love his law Psa. 119.165.
All sin is an enemy to peace: it was sin that brake the first league of
peace that ever was concluded betwixt heaven and earth, and while that takes
place, it will not give way to any new agreement, nor suffer any new Articles
of peace to be drawn between God and man. Sin, it is a Schismaticke, that
secretly undermines this blessing of peace; nay, it is a rebel that openly
breaks out against the peace, and therefore no marvel though it banish peace,
where it finds entertainment. Had Zimri peace which slew his Master 2 King
9.31.
? when h Ieoram asked Iehu, Is it peace? he had this answer returned, what
peace Aug to. 10. de temp. sermon. 166. Pax cum bonis, and praecepta Dei
servantibus custodienda est, non cum iniquis et sceleratis, qui pacem inter se
habent in peccatis suis, etc. Pax cum bonis, et bellum cum vitus, semper
habendum est, mala siquidem implorum hominum odio habenda sunt.
so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Iezabel remain and her witchcrafts
are yet in great number 2 King. 9.22.
? Implying, that while a man gives himself leave and liberty to live in any
known sin, and will not be reclaimed, in vain does he expect and look for
peace; for what agreement can there be between light and darkness? what
concord or peace between Christ and Belial?

3 Seek it of the right owner, ask it of God by prayer; he only is the
fountain of true peace, and prayer is the Bucket that draws it from him;
therefore the Psalmist injoynes prayer to be used, as a means for obtaining
peace upon Jerusalem Psa. 122.6.
, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. God creates the fruit of the lips to be
peace, as has been showed, and that is, not only the preaching of the
Gospel, but also, as others interpret it Corn. a Lapid. com. in loc. Dedi
Iudaeis in Babylone, etc. pro fructu and mercede orationis suae pacem. Vide
Hugon. de Sanct. Car. and Adam. Sasbout. in loc.
, confession of sins, and fervent prayer; for these are also the fruit of the
lips; pardon and peace they go together; and as confession of sins, and
earnest prayer to God is a means of obtaining pardon and forgiveness, so also
is it the way to get peace: These are the channels, in which the streams of
peace run, and the Conduits in which they are conveyed; and therefore he
that would obtain peace, he must address himself to the Throne of grace,
and have recourse unto God for it, and that not only in times of trouble, when
fear and danger drives him to God; but also in times of peace and prosperity,
that it may the better appear, that he seeks unto God, not only out of
necessity, as being compelled with his own wants, but rather out of a desire
of entering into a Covenant of peace and reconciliation with him; for he that
will have no acquaintance with God, while all is well with him, has little
reason to expect and look for peace from him, when things go ill with him.
Prayer indeed is the key that opens, and unlocks the door of that rich
storehouse of grace, wherein all blessings are contained, and so makes way for
peace, which is one of the chiefest of them; but yet it must be so qualified,
that it may find acceptance with God: and amongst other qualifications, there
are two mentioned in Scripture; the first by David Psalm. 32.6.
, Therefore shall every good man make his prayer unto thee in a time when thou
may be found; his prayer must be seasonable, he must seek for peace in Gods
time, whiles he offers conditions of peace: the other by the Apostles Jam.
5.16.
, The prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be fervent; and for him that
would set an edge of fervency upon his prayer, when he makes request for peace,
it will be requisite and necessary to know the worth of those things that
belong to his peace; for as in bodily cures the remedy must be known, before
it can be used or applied; even so it is here, the worth of peace must be
known, before it can raise up in the soul a desire suitable to the excellency
of it; and therefore Christ here bewayles the want of this knowledge in
Jerusalem, saying, Oh, if thou had known, etc! implying, that this was the
cause why she made so light account of the things that concerned her peace,
and desired them no more, because she did not know the worth of them; whereas,
on the contrary, the wise merchant Aug. to. 10. ad fratres in eremo. sermon. 2.
H. Nemo est qui non velit pacem habere: interroga omnes si pacem desiderent,
omnes una voce dicent, hoc amamus, hoc optamus, hoc concupiscimus, hoc volumus.
that found this treasure of peace hid in the field of the Gospel, because he
prizeth it highly, that makes him so earnest in the pursuit of it, that he
resolves to have it, Mat. 13.44.
though it cost him all that he has to make that purchase.

CHAP. 24.
How a man may know whether his peace be of a right stamp or no.

Christ and the Gospel, be things that concern every man's peace, hereby then
may every one make trial of his peace, whether it be of a right stamp or no;
many persuade themselves that they are at peace with God, and have true
Characters of peace within themselves, who if they be brought to this
touchstone, will easily be discovered to be such as are deluded with a false
peace, and have little or nothing more in them, than a vain hope, and
confident presumption. When Saul gave it out very confidently, that he had
fulfilled the commandment of the Lord 1 Samuel 15.13.
, Samuel said unto him, What means then the bleating of the sheep in mine
ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear? If the sheep and the Oxen had
been slain, according to the commandment of the Lord, they could not have
been heart bleating, and lowing, as now they were; and therefore this, it was
an undeniable evidence of Saul's guiltiness; so may it be said to many, who
give it out with no small confidence, that they have true peace, peace with
God, and peace within themselves; but if it be so, how comes it to pass that
there is so little of Christ and the Gospel in them August. to. 10. de. temp.
sermon. 169. Sequi Christum est habere pacem, et non sequi quod pacis est, hoc
est habere in magistro, ex part quod dilig^s, ex part quod damnes.
so little meekness? so little mercy? so little patience? so little humility!
so little love and charity? are not these things that belong to their peace?
And therefore let every one bring himself unto this Tribunal, and try
himself by this Touchstone; let him measure the truth and realitie of his
peace, by the truth and realitie of those things that belong unto it; and
amongst other evidences which Christ and the Gospel give in, as testimonies
and witness of this peace, there be these four by which it may be discerned.

1 The time when it is wrought. 3 The means whereby it is wrought. 3 The
manner how it is wrought. 4 The fruits and effects that follow upon the working
of it.
1 Concerning the time when it is wrought; it is not till a man have been
first humbled; God first proclaims war to the guilty conscience, in the
voice of the Law, before he speak peace unto it in the still and silent voice
of the Gospel; he first speaks from Mount Sinai in thundering and lightning,
before his voice be heard upon the peaceable hill of Sion; he first convinces
men of sin, before he reveal unto them the righteousness and peace, which
is brought to light by the Gospel. The King pardons none but such as are first
condemned by the law, because none else have need of it; even so, God speaks
pardon and peace to his people, but it is to such only as have been wounded
and slain with the sense and feeling of their sins; he first pursues them
with legal terrors, before he set open the door of the Sanctuary to them
for ease and refuge: Hag. 2.7.
I will shake all Nations, etc. and the desire of all Nations shall come:
Christ, who is, or should be the desire of all nations, he does not come with
peace and healing in his wings, till their souls be troubled, and well shaken
out of the lap of security, with the fear of deserved punishment, as in
Elijahs vision, the still and soft voice came not in the first place, but when
the earthquake, and the strong wind, which rent the Mountains, and brake the
Rocks, had gone before 1 King 19.11, 12.
: even so it is here Sanct com. in loc. Cum Deus remigrare meditatur in animum,
ex quo fuerat a peccatore relegatus, quia id sit plerunque per poenitentiam,
fulgurat, tonat, et radicitus fundamenta convellit, neque aliter parare sibi
domicilium soler. Vide Gregor. Mag. Moral. l 5. ca. 25. and l. 11. ca 42.
; the spirit of bondage, that apprehends, and arrests the guilty conscience,
and shuts her up in prison, it goes before the spirit of Adoption, which sets
her at liberty, and bears her witness that she has a share and interest in
the covenant of peace, and reconciliation Romans 8.15.
. If then any that was never humbled, that never knew what it was to be under
the guilt of sin, shall persuade himself that all is at peace between God
and his own soul; this is a sign that he deceives himself with a false
peace; for Christ and the Gospel bring the glad tidings of peace to none, but
such as are weary and heavy laden, according to that promise of Christ Mat.
11.28.
, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

2 Concerning the means whereby this peace is wrought, it is the Word and
Prayer, as has been showed: and therefore when God is pleased to speak peace
unto the soul by these means, the Word also speaks peace unto it, and the
eye of the conscience is opened in some degree and measure, to see that the
promise of peace belongs unto her Calvin. Com. ad Roman. c. 8.15. in illa
verba. Ipso n. spiritus una testatur cum spiritu nostro, etc. Intelligit Paulus
spritum Dei, tale nobis testimonium reddere, ut eo duce ac magistro, spiritus
noster statuat firma^ esse Dei adoptionem.
, by reflecting upon her self, and finding those qualifications in her, to
which the promise of peace is made. It is God only that can speak peace unto
his people; Psalm. 85.8.
I will hearken what the Lord God will say, for he shall speak peace unto his
people Moller. com. in loc. Suo exemplo nos docet in calamitatibus, non ad
humana praesidia, sed ad verbum divinitus raditu^ confugere; ut inde vera
remedia petamus, nam extra illud verbum nulla est vera aut firma consolatio.
, etc. He speaks peace, not vocally, but really; his speaking of peace, is a
giving of pardon, and a working of peace; and therefore when David prays for
peace, he makes that expression of it Psalm. 35.3.
, Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. Trouble of conscience, it arises from
the want of Gods love and favor, and therefore it is only the presence and
apprehension of it, that can remove that trouble, and settle peace there: if
darkness be the cause of trouble, it is only light that can make peace: and
so it is here, it is spiritual darkness, occasioned by the absence of the
Sun of righteousness, that breeds all her trouble; and therefore it is only
the light of Gods countenance, shining upon thy soul, that can cause peace to
spring up there; when the face of heaven smiles upon the conscience, and gives
her an inward sense and feeling of the love of God, and of that hidden comfort
which accompanies the state of reconciliation; there is the true Jerusalem, the
vision of peace; it is God only that justifies the penitent and believing
sinner, and peace of conscience is the immediate fruit that follows upon the
giving of that sentence: Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God.

When God pronounces the sentence of absolution in the conscience, he does in
the same breath speak peace unto the soul: and this he does by Christ and the
Gospel; for whenever God seals the pardon of sin to any, it is for
Christ's sake that he does it; the blood of Christ first speaks for him, before
God speak peace unto him; and when he does speak peace unto him, that the
voice of God may be discerned from the delusion of Satan, who lulls men
asleep with a false peace; there be means left for the discovery of it, even
those means by which it is wrought, to wit, the voice of the Scripture, and
the voice of a man's own conscience. God first speaks peace in the rule, which
is the Gospel of peace, by laying out a general description of such
qualifications and conditions, as have the promise of peace made unto them; and
the conscience, by reflecting upon the rule, and a man's own ways, and
comparing them together, does in some measure see that the inward peace which
she feels in her self, is true peace, and of a right stamp, because the
Scripture speaks peace unto her, as well as God, and she finds in her self
some ground and warrant whereupon to apply to her self the promise of peace.
But when a man is confidently persuaded that he is at peace with God, who was
never earnest with God in prayer for the obtaining of it, when the Scripture
does not speak peace unto him, and yet he flatters himself that he shall have
peace, when he builds castles of peace in the air, but does not find in
himself such qualifications to which the promise of peace is made, that is a
sign it is but a vain confidence, and foole-hardie presumption, no true peace.

3. Concerning the manner how it is wrought, it is leisurely and by degrees; in
the orderly working of this peace, the eye of the soul is first enlightened by
the Gospel, to see that there is a covenant of peace, wherein conditions of
peace are freely tendered to every soul that will embrace them; and this lets
every one see to whom the Gospel is preached, that there is a possibility of
obtaining peace, and so sets open a door of hope for him.

Then secondly, God comes to hold a treaty with the soul in the ministry of
the Word, about the terms and conditions of this peace, lets her see what
sins she must forsake, what duties of obedience she must apply her self
unto, if she will have and enjoy this peace.

And then thirdly, God comes to prevail with her by his Spirit and his grace,
to gain her consent, to the conditions that are required.

And then lastly, hereupon there be articles of agreement drawn between God
and the soul, and a conclusion of peace made up, and a covenant of peace
actually entered into. God now begins to speak peace to the soul, and she
begins to find and feel peace in her self, and so continues till either she
fall into new sins, or meet with new temptations, which do again disturb
and unsettle this peace, which is but weak at first, and easily troubled with
doubts and fears; for howsoever this peace be usually more sensibly felt, when
a man first begins with purpose of heart to cleave unto God, than afterward;
yet it is more weakly grounded, and therefore more easily shaken with
temptations: it is the long custom of exercise and experience, that must more
and more establish the heart in the clear evidence and assurance of it: the
conscience may be soon daubed over with untempered mortar, and quickly stilled
with a false peace; but a sound peace, at least in any eminent degree and
measure of it, is not so quickly attained unto. Superficial things are done in
the half of that time that substantial things are a working: a wound or a
sore may be quickly skinned over, but it requires more time to heal it at the
bottom, and to work a perfect cure upon it. So a false peace is soon at the
highest, and comes quickly to her full growth: like Jonas gourd, that comes up
in a night, and then it is so confident and peremptory, that nothing can
unsettle or disturb it: but sound peace, it comes up more leisurely, and
requires longer time before it can grow up to any great height. And therefore
when men are no sooner stepped out of an ill course, and begin to look forward to
that which is good, but presently they are filled with such a measure of peace,
that they make not the least question of their reconciliation with God, nor
fear any danger at all of being deceived: there is nothing that can trouble or
stumble them in that matter: this is no good sign of any sound peace. There is
a generation of men in the world, who as at first they take up a peace upon a
false imagination of an absolute promise made unto them; so they hold it
afterward in the same tenure. And therefore, though they neglect any duty that
God requires, or fall into any sin that he forbids, it does not abate or
diminish any thing of their peace, but as they took it up independently upon
any qualification in themselves, before they either repented of their sins,
or entered into Covenant with God: so breach of Covenant does nothing trouble or
disturb the same; but let such read their doom in the words of Moses, Deuteronomy.
29.19.
He that blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I
walk after the stubbornness of mine own heart; the Lord will not be merciful
to that man, but his wrath and his jealousy shall smoke against him.

4. Concerning the fruits and effects of this peace, where it is wrought.
Amongst others, there be these three which usually do accompany it:

1. He that is at peace with God, it will make him more careful to please
God, more fearful to offend him. An unsanctified life can never be accompanied
with sound peace, because this peace it is sought and obtained in the way of
obedience, as has been showed. The way of peace, and the way of
righteousness, are both one: as righteousness and peace they met in Christ
and kissed each other Psalm. 85.10.
, so do they meet in all true believers: they are inseparable companions in
the kingdom of Christ, and essential parts of it Romans 14.17.
The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, etc.
and therefore one cannot be had without the other.

2. He that is at peace with God, will show it in a loving and peaceable
carriage toward men; because the same spirit which unites men's hearts to God,
and makes them willing to enter into a Covenant of peace with him, does also
link their hearts and affections one to another Aug to. 10. de temp. ser. 169.
Dilectio omnibus votis ac desiderus amplectanda est, quae tot bona potest
habere, quot praemia, custodienda omnibus viribus pax est, quoniam Deus semper
in pace est.
and makes them studious to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
as the Apostle advises Ephesians. 4.3.
And the more nearely their hearts are linked to God, the more firmly are they
united in peace and love one to another. Even as it is in a sphere or circle,
the lines that pass from the circumference to the center, in which they all
meet and are united in one point, the nearer they come to the center, the
nearer they join one to another; and the farther they are removed from the
center, the farther are they distant from one another: Even so it is here, the
farther men are distant from God, the farther are they removed from peace and
love between themselves; and the more nearly that they are joined in a
covenant of peace with God, the more nearly are they linked in a league and
affection of peace between themselves. In heaven there is nothing but peace;
and there be none that are fit to inhabit that place, but such only as are
sons of peace here on earth; and they have a promise made unto them, that
they shall have fellowship and communion with the God of peace both here and
hereafter: 2 Cor. 13.11.
Live in peace, and the God of peace shall be with you.

3. He that is at peace with God, will be at war with all sinful lusts,
because these are traitors, and enemies that undermine his peace; and he that
lives amongst his enemies, if he do not subdue and keep them under, he shall
never be in peace. Now because the inordinate lusts and affections of a man's
corrupt nature, which are enemies to God, and to his own soul, they are not
perfectly subdued here in this life; therefore he that is at peace with God,
must be at war with them. Christ who was the Prince of peace, and came into the
world to settle peace on earth, yet it was a holy and religious peace, not a
sinful peace that was intended by him; and so he would have his Disciples to
conceive of it, Luke 12.51.
Think ye that I am come to send peace on earth? I tell you nay, but rather
debate. When the Children of Israel were come into the land of Canaan, that
they might live in peace there; they must make war upon the Canaanites, and
utterly destroy them: for God tells them, that if they did not drive out the
inhabitants of the land before them, those that remained would be as pricks in
their eyes, and thorns in their sides, and would continually vex them in the
land where they dwelt Numb. 33.55.
. So he that is entered into a covenant of peace with God, he will make war
upon these Canaanites, that is, the remainder of corruptions that are left in
him, because so long as these live, they will be as thorns in his sides, and
pricks in his eyes: they will continually vex him, and never suffer him to
enjoy a quiet and settled peace. When the Prophet foretells the peace that should
come by Christ, he makes this expression of it, Esaias 2.4.
That the Nations should break their swords into mattocks, and their spears
into sythes: and it may be true in a spiritual sense, as the learned observe
Pint. com. in Isa. cap. 2. ver. 4. Nihil aliud est gladios in vomeres converti,
et hastas in falces, qua^ sensus omnes omniaque nostra me^bra, quae sine
Christi gratia in homine slagitioso arma sunt diaboli, mundi, et carnis, quibus
anima nostra transfigitur effici vomeres agrum Domini operibus charitatis
scindentes et arantes, vertique in falces fructus pietatis Deo gratissimos
metentes.
The members of a wicked man, they are swords and spears, wherewith he fights
against God, and wounds his own soul: when by the grace of the Spirit he
mortifies and subdues these, and brings them into a peaceable subjection unto
Christ; then are they turned into mattocks and sythes, instruments of
husbandry, fit for the tillage of Gods field. And this is that which the
Apostle exhorts unto, Romans 6.13.
Give not your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, but give your
selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as
weapons of righteousness unto God. But when a man has a settled confidence,
that he is at peace with God, but has little or no care to please God, or
walk according to the tenor of that covenant that he has made with God; when
he is like the Salamander, that cannot live out of the fire of contention, but
Ishmael-like his hand is against every one, etc. when he is in league with any
sinful lust, and does not make war against it, this is a sign that it is a
vain presumptuous confidence which he has, and no true peace.

CHAP. 25.
Such as are strangers to Christ and the Gospel, cannot have any true peace.

Use 4. Woe to the wicked.
4 IF the things of Christ and the Gospel be things that belong to every man's
peace; then it must needs be a word of terror to all wicked men, who are
enemies to Christ and to the Gospel, because so far forth as they set
themselves against Christ and the Gospel, so far forth they are enemies to
their own peace, at least to all true peace that might be a stay and comfort
unto them in the evil day: for though they make a covenant with death, and be
at an agreement with hell it self; yet that is but a peace of their own making,
a peace that will not hold water in the time of trouble; a peace that will end
at length in a fearful storm; it is a woeful thing for any to be at peace
with his sins, and with the enemies of his salvation Justin. de disci. and
perfect. c. 11. page 64. Nulla cum inimicis spiritualibus pax firmanda, semper
mentiuntur et absque rubore laqueos tendunt. August. to. 10. ad fratres in
eremo, sermon. 2. E. Habe^e pacem cum omnibus, omnium tamen vitia odientes;
habete in cord, in ore, in opere pacem: nam si Cain pacem habuisset in cord,
non i^ruisset in fratrem suum: si Absalon pacem habuisset i^^re, non
impugnasset patrem: si Judas habuisset pacem in opere, non fugisset ad laqueum.
; because so long as he is at peace with them, he is at war with heaven, at
war with God, at war with Christ, at war with all things that might procure
his welfare, and with all creatures that wish or desire his good: yea while he
is at peace with them, he is in the next degree to hardness of heart, and
already lulled asleep in that woeful security, that will one day awaken into
horror and amazement. Mean while it is a sign that Satan has a full,
entire, and plenary possession of all, because the things which he has are in
peace; and if all were not surrendered up to him, there would not be such a
peace. Luke 11.21.
When a strong man armed keeps his palace, all that he possesses is in
peace; when Satan, the strong man, possesses all, and there is no more to be
had; he may well give way to a temporary peace: when the enemy has got all
into his hands, and brought al in subjection round about him, then there must
needs follow a peace: but it is a woeful peace to the captive, when the enemy
has got all, when he can have no conditions of peace, but such only as the
enemy is pleased to give; and such is the peace of all wicked men; it is a
peace that is joined with perpetual bondage and slavery. If the Iaylor be at
peace with his prisoner, it is a sign he has him sure under bar and bolt;
for if once he break loose from him, he then pursues him with hue and cry,
and lets him know, that his former peace is now expired. If Laban be at peace
with Jacob, it is a sign he is content to be his drudge; for if once he begins
to fly away from him, he shall soon hear, that Labans peace is turned into
war. If Pharaoh be at peace with the Israelites, it is a sign they are in
bondage to him; if once they begin to think of their liberty, he is then up
in arms, and has no more thoughts of peace toward them: even so, if Satan
be at peace with any, it is a sign they are wholly his, and it must needs be
a woeful peace, that cannot be had without professed enmity against God; there
is no true peace, but that which has his foundation in Christ, and is wrought by
the Gospel; as far as wicked men are from the things of Christ and the
Gospel, so far they are from all true peace: There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God Isa. 57.21.
the righteous man has peace on every side; peace above him, because he is in
a covenant of peace and reconciliation with God; peace beneath him, because
hell has nothing to lay to his charge; peace within him, because his own
heart speaks peace unto him; peace without him, because he is in love and
charity with all men; but there is no peace to the wicked, no peace above him,
because God is his enemy; no peace below him, because hell has an endless
number of fearful and grievous things to charge him withal; no peace within
him, because his own conscience has a quarrel against him, and is ready to
accuse him of many things; no peace without him, because brotherly love is a
stranger to him, and the way of peace he has not known.

CHAP. 26.
The comfort of such as carefully apply themselves to the things of Christ and
the Gospel.

Christ and the Gospel, Use 5. Comfort to those that are mindful of Christ
and the things of the Gospel.
be things that belong to every man's peace, then may this serve for the
comfort of all those, who are mindful of these things, and to follow and
pursue after them with all their hearts; for what ever account the world may
make of these things, yet they are matters of transcendent worth, and of the
highest concernment; and so they will one day be found to be, because they are
things that belong to their peace; things that will bring that peace at last
which is worth all, and more than all, that possibly can be laid out for it;
for amongst other advantages, it brings these four singular privileges with
it.

1 It gives a man boldness and confidence in his approaches unto God; a man
that is not at peace with God, cannot be so confident that he shall speed in
his suites and requests that he makes unto him; for God hears not sinners
John 9.31.
; and therefore he must needs be more faint, and heartlesse, when he goes
about them; but when a man is at peace with God, this it emboldens him to come
to the throne of grace, and with confidence to plead his interest in the
Covenant: 1 John. 5.14.
This is the confidence that we have in him, that whatsoever we ask of him,
according to his will, in that he hears us: and this is a great privilege,
like as it is with a favorite at Court, who has always the Kings ear, and is
sure of audience whenever he comes, and also to prevail in whatsoever suite
or request he makes; even so it is with a man that is at peace with God.

2 It frees the heart from those armies and changes of fears and doubts, which
a guilty conscience is subject unto, and continually assaulted withal
Chrysostom. to. 3. in V.T. edit. Gr^ecelat. page 36. (...).
. A man that is not at peace with God; he is afraid of every thing, if it be
but the shaking of a leaf, if he do but hear a noise in the dark, it puts
him into a terrible passion and fear, he is ready to think, it is some evil
messenger sent to arrest him, and carry him away to the place of torments: If
he read the face of an angry God in the heavens, in thunder and lightning, etc.
if he hear of dangerous and troublesome times, his heart is ready to fail,
and misgive him, for fear, and for looking after the things that shall come
upon the world; and when he thinks upon death, which is the King of fears,
that is a damp to all other contentments that he does enjoy, that holds him
fast all his life long, as it were in a prison, under continual bondage, as
the Apostle speaks Heb. 2.15.
; but when once he is at peace with God, and finds peace at home in his own
soul, this moderates, and qualifies all those smarting, stinging, perplexing
fears. Psalm. 27.1.
The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? and again Psa.
112.7.
, He shall not be afraid of evil tidings; his heart is fixed, and he trusts
in the Lord.

3 It sweetens al conditions unto a man, and fills him with joy and comfort in
the worst times, even in times of trouble; and when he is under the cross, it
makes him to rejoice in tribulation: a man that wants this peace, he may
rejoice in time of prosperity, while the coasts are clear, and all goes well
with him; but when the times frown, and look sad upon him, then he is
dejected, and cast down; whereas he that is at peace with God, he finds
matter of comfort in all conditions; in his falling, as well as in his rising,
in his ebbing, as well as in his flowing; like the Holy Martyrs that found
matter of joy and comfort in the midst of the flames: Paul and Silas being
fil^ with this peace, they could sing Psalms eve^ at midnight, and that in the
bottom of the dungeon Act. 16.25.
; the Apostles being filled with this peace, when they were rebuked and beaten
before the Council, they went away rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to
suffer reproach for the Name of Christ Act. 5.41.
: the believing Hebrews, being filled with this peace, they endured with joy
the spoiling of their goods Heb. 10.34.
, etc.

4 It makes a man willing to leave the world, and to embrace death; a man that
is not at peace with God, he can never bid death welcome, because it comes as
an enemy to him, and threatens to deliver him up into his hands, who is able to
do him more hurt than all the enemies that he has in the world besides; but
when he is once at peace with God, then he is not afraid to look death in the
face, because he knows he shall make a blessed and happy exchange by it, it
will land him upon the coasts of eternal peace, Chap. 27.
where he shall be crowned with the perfection of peace for evermore; so it was
with old Simeon Luke 2.29.
, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation.

CHAP. 27.
The cause why the things of Christ and the Gospel are hid from men's eyes.

THus far has been spoke of the former part of Christ's speech to Jerusalem;
to wit, his patheticall and passionate wish or complaint: it remains now to
speak of the latter, namely, his positive assertion or affirmation in those
words, But now are they hid from thine eyes, which I will but briefly, and in a
word touch upon, because in substance they are the same with the want of
knowledge, handled before. Jerusalem would not see the things that concerned
her peace, when in the day of grace they were clearly set before her eyes,
therefore now are they hid from her eyes. And so it is still with the men of
the world, because they undervalue, and will not look after the good things of
Christ, therefore are they hid from them. which point, consider with me, 1 How
they are hid. 2 By whom they are hid. 3 Why they are hid.


1 The things of Christ and the Gospel are hid from the eyes of worldly men
three ways.

1 By their natural blindness and ignorance; 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceives not the things that are of God, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned; as he that wants corporal
eyes cannot see corporal things, because they are seen and discerned visibly
and bodily; so he that wants spiritual eyes, he cannot see spiritual things,
such as are the things of Christ and the Gospel, because they are spiritually
discerned; that is, by a spiritual eye, and by a spiritual light; for even as
the Sun, it cannot be seen but by his own light: If a man would set up a
thousand Candles in a dark night, they could not show unto him the body of the
Sun; so the things of Christ and the Gospel, which are spiritual things,
they cannot be seen but by their own light; and therefore so long as this
light is absent, and wanting, they must needs be hid.

2 By a voluntary neglect, when men wink with their eyes, and will not see
them, but lay them aside, and put them behind their backs, lest the seeing of
them should give a check to their present pleasures: Psalm. 81.11.
My people would not hear my voice, Israel would none of me; and therefore
they are said to reject knowledge, because they refuse to look upon the things
of Christ and the Gospel, when they are sufficiently revealed, and discovered
unto them Hos. 4.6.
; they turn their eyes and thoughts upon other objects, that they may the more
easily forget the things that concern their peace; like a man that beholds his
natural face in a glass, and when he has considered himself, he goes his
way, and immediately forgets what manner of one he was Iam. 1.23, 24.
. If a man turn his eyes; and if he shut his eyes against the light, it must
needs be hid from him; even so, when a man turns his eyes and thoughts for
the things of Christ, and the Gospel, by a voluntary neglect, they must need
be hid from him.

3 By the just judgment of God, who orders and disposes of that which is
first willingly admitted in the nature of a sin, that it shall be also much
to their prejudice, and so lie upon them in the nature of a judgment Aug.
praefat. in Psalm. 51. Saul enim rex non ad permanendum electus est a Domino,
sed secundum populi cor duru^, and malum, datus ad eorum correptionem, non ad
utilitatem, etc. Extorsit pop. a Deo habere regem, and datus est ei Saul,
tanquam dati essent illi in manus suas: qui manibus et verbis accersierunt
mortem; in Saul enim figurata est ipsa mors.
or punishment: John 9.39.
I am come into this world to judgment, that they which see might be made
blind: The same thing it may be both a sin, and a punishment, yet so, as
that it be first considered in the nature of a sin voluntarily admitted, and
then as a sin so ordered by God, that it has the nature of a punishment in
it. When Pharaoh said to Moses Exodus 10.28.
, Get thee from me, look thou see my face no more, etc. it was his sin,
voluntarily admitted through his own fault, but so ordered by God, that it was
a judgment upon him, and one of the greatest judgments that ever befell him,
because he will have Moses to see his face no more, God will say Amen to it;
he shall have his will, but he shall have it with a vengeance. If Moses see
his face no more, he shall have no more warning from God, till unavoidable
destruction takes him, as it finds him, and makes a full end of him: even so
when men wink with their eyes, and will not see the things that concern their
peace, it is their sin: but so ordered by God, that it has, in it the nature
of a judgment. If they will needs have them hid, they shall be hid; but hid to
their everlasting prejudice.

2. By whom are they hid? why they are hid by more than one, there be three
several parties that have a hand in the business; they are hid by Satan, by
themselves, and by God.

1. They are hid by Satan, the god of this world; it is he that takes away the
seed of the Word, which was sown in the heart: like the fowls of heaven, that
pick up the seed that is not covered with earth, and fly away with it Mat.
13.19.
. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish, in whom the god of this
world has blinded their eyes, etc 2 Cor. 4.3.
. and this he does by diverting the mind from these things, and turning the
thoughts upon other matters, which are as dust, to blind the eyes of the soul,
or as thick and foggy mists which hinder the sight. If a man's eyes be blinded
with dust, he cannot see the things that are before him, but they are hid from
him; or if a thick and foggie mist come between the eye and the object, that
interposition does hide the object from it, and hinder the sight of it; even so
the god of this world, by interposing impertinent thoughts and objects between
the things of Christ, and the eye of the mind, does thereby hide the things of
the Gospel from it.

Prove 28.13.
2. They are hid by themselves: f he that hides his sins shall not prosper. A
man's sins are hid from God, and from his own eyes, by a voluntary act of his
own, when he does not confess and acknowledge them: so a man hides the
blessings of God, when he will not see God in them, nor take notice from whom
they are sent. Like the swine that gathers the fruit, but never looks up to
the tree from which it falls: and so men hide the judgments of God from their
own eyes, when they will not take notice whose hand and rod, and scourge it is,
and who has appointed it. Like the dog that barks, and bites, and snarls at
the stone, but never looks at the hand that threw it: even so the things of
Christ and the Gospel, they are hid from men's eyes, by themselves, and their
own voluntary act, when they will not steep their thoughts in the meditation
of them. So it is said of the Priests of Israel, that they hid their eyes from
the Lords Sabbaths Ezekiel. 22.16.
because they did not think upon them, to observe them. And so it is said of
the people of Israel, that they had eyes to see, and did not see; and ears to
hear, and did not hear Ezekiel. 12.2.
: to show, that the things of Christ were hid From them, not because they
wanted eyes, but because they were wanting to themselves, and would not make
use of their eyes. It was their own voluntary act, that hid the things of the
Gospel from them.

3. They are hid by God. Mat. 11.25.
I thank thee O Father, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. This God does as a just Judge Aug.
epist. 105. ad Sixth. Obdurat Deus, non impertiendo malitia^, sed non
impertiendo misericordiam, quibus autem non impertitur, nec digni sunt, nec
merentu^, at potius ut no^ impertiatur, hoc digni sunt. Vid. Isid l. 2. sen. c.
5. Prosp li. sent. sent. 47. Aqui. 1. 2. q. 79. art. 3.
; it is an act of his justice, and therefore presupposes a voluntary fault of
the creature going before, because (as it has been showed already) this hiding
is first to be considered in the nature of a sin voluntarily admitted, before
it be considered, as a judgment or punishment justly inflicted. Now God hides
the things of the Gospel two ways:

1. Negatively, when he does not reveal them; when he withholds from men the
grace of illumination, which they refuse, and are unwilling to have: as Elisha
said of the Shunamite, 2 King. 4.27.
Her soul is vexed within her, and the Lord has hid it from me, and has not
told me; where God is said to hide that which he does not reveal, but
conceales or keeps secret.

2. Positively, by giving men up to their own desires: that is, as they desire
to have the things of Christ and the Gospel hid from them, so God sets his
seal unto it, that it shall be so, but little to their advantage that it is
so. Romans 1.28.
As they regarded not to know God, so he gave them up to a reprobate mind, to
do those things that are not convenient.

3. Why are they hid? what is the reason of it?

1. They are hid by the blindness and natural ignorance of men, because they
depend wholly upon divine revelation, and therefore must have lain hid in the
closet of Gods own breast for ever, unless he had been pleased to reveal
them: as Christ said of Peter's confession, Mat. 16.17
Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
heaven; and therefore the things of Christ are compared to a hidden treasure
Mat. 13.44.
: and in this respect amongst others, because all the wit of men and Angels
could never have found them out, if God had not brought them to light by the
Gospel.

2. They are hid by a voluntary neglect, because men have no desire to know
them. They say unto God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways Job 21.14.
. They are willingly ignorant 2 Pet. 3.5.
; they know them not, neither would they know them: they are ignorant of them,
and so they would be: God is not unwilling to bring them to the knowledge of
these things, but they are unwilling to have it. Light is come into the world,
but men love darkness more than light, because their deeds are evil John 3.19.
.

3. They are hid by the just judgment of God, because men deserve to have them
hid: Ps. 81.11, 12.
My people would not hear my voice, Israel would none of me: wherefore I gave
them up to the hardness of their hearts. He that willingly admits a known
thief into his house, he deserves to be robbed: so he that winkes with his
eyes, and will not see the things that concern his peace, when they are set
before him, he deserves to have the^ hid from him.

Use, to see the miserable estate of worldly men.
And this may serve as a glass, to show and represent to the men of this world,
the face and image of their own estate and condition; oh it must needs be
worse than ill with them, whether they perceive it or no, when those things
which are the only things that can do them good, are hid from them, and that
by their own consent, and according to their own desire Salv. de provi. l. 4.
Nos nobis accusan di sumus: nam cu^ ea quibus torqueamur admittimus, ipsi
tormentorum nostroru^ sumus authors. Quid ergo de poenarum acerbitate
querimur? unusquisque nostru^ se punit.
. It is a miserable time with the sick patient, when that Physic, which is
the only Physic that can do him good, is put out of the way, and hid from
his sight, and that by his own order and direction; and so it is here: so does
God deal with the men of the world, because they are unwilling to see the
things that belong to their peace, therefore God hides them from their eyes: he
can sort out a punishment suitable to their iniquities, and make their sin
legible, in the very letters of that judgment that lies upon them. If they will
needs wink with their eyes, they shall have their own mind: God will not open
their eyes by compulsion and constraint. If they would have the things of
Christ and the Gospel hid from them, they shall be hid; but woe be unto them
when these things are hid from them Hieron. com. in Mat. 27.25. Perseverat
usque in praesente^ diem haec imprecatio super Iudaeos, and sanguis Domini non
aufertur ab^is. Lucas Frugen ib. Senserunt tandem ipsi et silii eoru^, etc.
magno suo mal^, etc. dum a Romany sunt funditus eversi, et extirpati.
. If our Gospel be hid (says the Apostle) it is him to them that perish 2 Cor
4.3.
: it is the black character of those that are marked out for destruction, and a
sign that they are in a perishing condition, while the things of Christ and the
Gospel are hid from them: for while a man lies under this judgment, it leaves
him altogether without excuse, because it is not without his own fault, not
without his own desire to have it so; and it wholly disables him from making
any use of those ordinances of God, that are appointed for his good, they can
have no gracious influence into his soul, for the healing of it; so long as
they are hid from his eyes, he can see no light of direction in them, receive
no benefit from them, find no help or furtherance by them, suck no sweetness
or comfort out of them, while they are hid from him; and which adds yet more
to the fullness of his misery, If they be now hid from his eyes in the day of
grace, they shall never be revealed unto him afterward for his good. If they be
showed unto him at the great day, and in the world to come, it shall be for the
further increase of his misery; only to let him see what happiness he might
have had, and is now for ever deprived of: as God has been hid from him here
in this life, so he shall be hid from him for ever: he shall never come to see
his face, or behold the light of his countenance, or enjoy his comfortable
presence, but have his everlasting habitation assigned unto him amongst those
that are cursed from the presence of God for evermore. Oh then take heed
whosoever thou art that hear, what it is to have the things of Christ and
the Gospel hid from thee: take heed I say of shutting thine eyes against the
glorious light of the Gospel, lest God shut them once for all: for he shuts,
and no man opens Rev. 3.7.
. take heed of winking with thine eyes, when the glorious light of the Gospel
shines forth unto them, lest God close them up, and set his seal upon it, and
so hide the things of Christ and the Gospel from thee, that none can reveal
them unto thee any more; but rather open thine eyes, and sleep not in death:
yea pray with the Kingly Prophet, that God would open them, that thou may see
the wonderful things contained in his law: the things of Christ and the
Gospel, they are such as would do even an Angel good to see them: yea the
blessed Angels desire more and more to pry and look into them 1 Pet. 1.12.
: and Christ tells his Disciples, that the sight of them has so much in it, as
may well serve to make a man blessed. Luke 10.23, 24.
Blessed are the eyes that see the things that ye see: for I tell you, that
many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things that ye see, and have
not seen them: so then it is not the least part of thy happiness here in this
life, that thou may see them, and it will be the consummation of thy
happiness hereafter in heaven, to enjoy the perfect sight of them: for what
else is that beatificall vision, wherein the height and top of a man's felicity
does consist, but the seeing of God, and the seeing of Christ, and the things
of the Gospel, in their glory and perfection: therefore see them here, that
thou may see them hereafter. See them now in the day of grace, that thou
may see God for ever in the Kingdom of glory.

FINIS.

