A TREATISE OF THE GROVNDES OF THE OLD AND NEW RELIGION.

DIVIDED INTO TWO PARTS, Whereunto is added an Appendix, containing a brief
confutation of WILLIAM CRASHAW his first Tome of Romish forgeries and
falsifications.

MATH. 7. VERSE. 24. A wise man builds his house upon a rock: a foolish man
upon the sand.

ANNO DOMINI M.D.C.VIII.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
I Desire thy favorable censure and pardon, CVRTEOV^ READER; in regard that
diverse faults have escaped in printing this Treatise, of which, I may justly
excuse and free my self from those of greatest moment, for that the Author
(through most earnest occasions contrary to his expectation) could not be near
at hand, whereby to have had such due perusal thereof as was most meet and
requisite, before it passed through my hands. Moreover, concerning the Preface
in particular, I am to advertise thee, that it is with his direction made more
brief then it was first penned, and that thereby (through the messengers fault
in forgetfulness) the said Preface performs not that which is mentioned in
the third point of the argument before it; which should have been left out. As
thy experience will (I doubt not) move thee to consider with what difficulties
our writers, as also our selves put any thing to the press; so I hope
hereafter their endeauours, and mine also, shall be in such things amended. In
the mean space referring thee to the Errata, I humbly request thee again, not
to blame us altogether, but pray for us.

Your poor Catholic Countriman. THOM. R.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
In which the occasions of the penning and publishing this Treatise, as also
the argument of the same are briefly delivered. Moreover, to free the
Protestant readers mind before hand from obstinacy, three points are proved
even out of writers of the new religion: first, that more of the said religion
condemn every particular persons belief of that profession, then approve it;
secondly, that manifest truths are denied and falsehoods mainetained by the
chief sectaries; lastly, that according to the confession of the same
Authors, our religion and faith is true, theirs false.

IF justly he be judged by our Lord and Savior worthy of reproach (CHRISTIAN
READER,) who minding to build a tower, Luke ^e^. 28. etc.
does not first sit down and reckon the charges that are necessary, whether he
have to finish it, but after that he has laid the foundation, for want of
ability is constrained to leave his work imperfect; I know not how diverse of
this our unhappy time can be excused from blame, who spend all the days of
their lives in laying the foundation of a tower, and never come so far as to
place one stone there-vpon. Our principal endeavor in this world ought to be,
to erect in our souls a tower or spiritual edifice of virtue, the ground of
which edifice is faith; and such is the misery of these our days, 1. Corinthians.
3. verse. 12.
that diverse persons are so far from building upon this foundation gold,
silver, or precious stones, that they do nothing else but always busy
themselves about the said foundation: my meaning is, that they so occupy or
rather vex themselves continually in discussing matters concerning their
belief, that they either remain always wavering without any sure ground of
faith, or at the least if not altogether, verily for the most part wholly
neglect their spiritual progress in virtues of higher perfection. In which
their manner of proceeding I say, they cannot be censured less faulty then he,
who consumes the whole course of his life in laying the foundation of a house
or sumptuous palace, and never goes or seeks to go so far as to build
the walls or any other part of the same. Nay, the first must needs be deemed
much more faulty then this fond builder, because their edifice is of greater
importance, then the setting up of any such material house or palace.

I intend not hereto show by the authority of the holy Scripture, and the
testimonies of the ancient Fathers (both which yield me most plentiful proofs
in this matter) that faith is only the foundation, and not the whole cause of
our justification; neither is there any great need in this place of entering
into any such discourse. For besides that no man according to the rules of
reason, can esteem him a perfect Christian, who does only believe rightly
without proceeding any further (because certain it is that faith of it self
does only perfect the understanding and not the vvil, and that a right
understanding profits little except the will be conformable it is even as
apparent;) moreover, this assertion as far forth as it conduces to my purpose,
seems to be granted even by our adversaries the followers of the new
religion. For they distinguish especially two sorts of faith, See part 2. of
this Treatise chap. 2.
the one they call a faith historical, the other a faith justifying: the first
they confound with that which we hold being joined with hope and charity to
justify us, and this they deny not to be the ground, not the whole cause of
our justification (for this effect and prerogative they attribute to the second
of which hereafter:) wherefore, even according to their doctrine the truth of
that which I have auerred must be admitted.

Notwithstanding, it may be objected against it, that the mysteries and
articles of our faith are diverse, and above the reach of our natural reason;
and therefore that a great time is requisite to this, that the truth of every
one of them be thoroughly searched, and a certain resolution concerning every
point settled. I answer, that this in very deed (if al be true which is taught
by the said followers of the new religion) cannot be denied: for they making
the bare letter of holy Scripture, the only rule and guide of their faith, must
consequently in like sort affirm, that no man can ever come to a certain
knowledge what is to be believed touching the articles of religion, except by
diligent discussion he plainly and infallibly draw the truth from the said
letter of holy Scripture; which if he could by any means compass, yet he
cannot do, unless among other things he read over the whole Bible, confer
one place with another, etc. and so in this study consume almost all the days
of his life.

But according to the truth, God who is goodness it self, has far
otherwise and better provided for those that are desirous to serve him, and
more richly to adorn their souls with virtue. For he has ordained a visible
guide endued with life and reason, and therefore apt to instruct and judge,
whose doctrine and judgment he has warranted from error and falsehood; of
whom every person with divine assurance of truth, in a very short time may
perfectly be taught what he is to believe. For the better effecting of this, he
has also left in her sacred bosom other more particular but divine and
infallible grounds, besides his holy written word, whereby we are to be
directed in faith. And this guide is our holy mother the Catholic Church, the
sacred spouse of Christ and his mistical body.

Now therefore to proceed in mine intended discourse, because it behooves every
man (as appears by that which has bin already said) with all speed to order
that his belief be right, and likewise because this may soon be learned of
the Catholic Church; hence it proceeds, that no treatises touching
controversies of religion are commonly more necessary, then such as declare
what congregation or company of Christians are the said one, holy, Catholic
and Apostolic Church, prove her divine authority, or show what particular
grounds are found in her, by which every person is to be guided in his
belief. The reason of this is plain, because whosoever recurreth to this
Church and these grounds, may soon and with great ease be resolved concerning
al articles whatsoever to him seeming doubtful; whereas if neglecting these he
betake him to the study of particular controversies, as of justification, free
will, merit of good works, the real presence, etc. he may spend many days and
nights, and be nothing the nearer to a settled and sure resolution. Nay, some of
these and other points are so high and difficult, that without recourse to some
general grounds, and the authority of the Church directing al Christians, it
is impossible that by other means, a man should ever assure himself that he
is in the truth.

Neither is this the opinion only of Catholics, but also of some learned
Protestants. And among others M. Field, esteemed by some one of the greatest
scholars of their company, Richard Field in the beginning of his Epistle
Dedicatory before his five books of the Church.
writes thus: The consideration of the unhappy divisions of the Christian
world, and the infinite distractions of men's minds, not knowing in so great
variety of opinions, what to think, or to whom to join themselves (every
faction boasting of the pure and sincere profession of heavenly truth,
challenging to it self alone the name of the Church, and fastening upon all that
dissent, or are otherwise minded, the hateful note of schism and heresy) has
made me ever think, that there is no part of heavenly knowledge more
necessary, then that which concerns the Church. For seeing that controversies
of religion in our time are grown in number so many, and in nature so
intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength and understanding to
examine them; what remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of
such consequence, but diligently to search out, which amongst all the societies
of men in the world, is that blessed company of holy ones, that household of
faith, that spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the pillar
and ground of truth? that so they may embrace her communion, follow her
directions, and rest in her judgment. Hence it comes that al wise and
judicious men, do more esteem books of doctrinal principles, then those that
are written of any other argument; and that there was never any treasure holden
more rich and precious by all them that knew how to price and value things
aright, thou books of prescriptions against Heretics: for that thereby, men
that are not willing or not able to examine the infinite differences that arise
among men concerning the faith, have general directions what to follow, and
what to avoid: Hitherto are M. Fields words. And like as this Protestant
Doctor yields this reason among others, for the publication of his books of
the Church: so in very truth, the same motive has partly moved me to publish
some of my labors to the view of the world. We Catholics have a long time
wished and endeavored, to bring the controversies of these times to certain
general grounds and doctrinal principles, and have fought by all means to
draw our adversaries to this issue to which M. Fields words seem to tend: I
mean, to persuade them to acknowledge a judicial and infallible authority in
the Catholic church, which every Christian may securely follow and is bound
to obey; and then by most sure notes of the same Church delivered by God in the
holy Scripture (which be so pregnant in the old testament it self, August. in
psalm. 30. Conc. 2.
that S. Augustine fears not to affirm that the Prophets have spoken more
plainly of the Church, then of Christ) to search forth whether ours, or any
other congregation of them be the Catholic Church: but those of our side could
never hitherto obtain so much at their hands. And although this man does so
gloriously here extol the judgment of the Church, as it seems touching al
controversies which may arise, in so much as he tells us that men desirous of
satisfaction may follow her directions and rest in her judgment (which they
could not safely and securely do if her direction and judgment could be
erroneous) yet in his fourth book following, he bereaueth her of almost al
such prerogatives, (for he says that general Councels which be the highest
courts of the Church, Field book 4 chap. 5.. thus touching
may err in matters of greatest consequence) and freeth the Church her self
from error, Ibid. and cha. 2. before.
only in certain principal articles of Christian religion: But of these
matters more hereafter. Only this now suffices for my purpose, that according
to his testimony; al wise and juditious men, do more esteem books of
doctrinal principles, then those that are written of any other argument: which
if it be true, I hope the argument both of this my Treatise following, and also
of an other which I have lying by me, will not be ungrateful, but pleasing and
acceptable to al wise and juditious persons. Moreover, an other writer of the
English Church avouches, that in this our last age, Parkes in the Preface to
the reader before his Apology of three testimonies of scripture, etc. printed
anno 1607.
Heresy and Infidelity joining their desperate forces together, labor
mightily to subvert and overthrow all the grounds of Christian religion:
which if it be likewise truly affirmed, a discourse discovering the fountain
of this evil, and establishing such grounds as Heretics and Infidels seek to
impugn, cannot be thought unprofitable.

Only my rashness in undertaking such great matters, and my want of wit and
learning showed in performing them, may seem worthy of blame. But pardon me
gentle Reader it was (as I may say) by chance, both that I entered into
discussing such things, and also that my writings ever came to light. Some
few years since a Catholic gentleman being entered into some communication
with a Protestant minister, requested me to set him down some brief reasons
for the Catholic part, upon which he might stand: I did so, and I
comprehended some twelve reasons in some three sheets of paper, which al were
drawn from general grounds and doctrinal principles. Not very long after, I
giving my self always to the study of controversies, and having no learned
friend at hand with whom I might confer, the more to perfect my self in
such kind of arguments (which without conference or vvriting can hardly be
done) it came into my mind to enlarge my self much more upon the said
reasons. And truly, so much matter occurred unto me being busied in these
exercises, that I thought it meet to divide my twelve reasons into two
treatises: of which, the one I called a treatise of the grounds of the old
and new religion, the other a treatise of the definition and notes of the
Church. Having finished the first, I communicated it to some one or two of my
familiar friends, who were desirous to see it; and so by some means it came to
the sight of some persons esteemed learned and judicious, who thought it might
profit many if it were more common, and therefore were desirous to have it
printed. This was the beginning of my writing in this kind, and thus the one
of these treatises besides my first intention or expectation, is now passed
the print; I trust without any rash presumption or boldness in me, seeing that I
rather have yielded to the desire and advise of men thought to be of mature
judgment, discretion, and learning, then for any other respect have followed
my own fancy or inclination.

Now, to give my reader here a certain taste of the contents of that which I
intend here to publish, as also of my manner of proceeeding, I think it meet
to advertise him, that in it I have principally by apparent arguments proved
two things: the one, that we Catholics ground our faith and religion upon the
divine authority of God, the other that our adversaries (I mean the new
sectaries) build their faith and religion (I take these words in an ample
signification) upon their own judgments. The first is performed in the first
part, in which I have showed such grounds as the Catholics build on, to be of
divine authority: The second in like sort is convinced to be true in the second
part, where I have declared even to the eye, that the followers of the new
religion reject al other such grounds besides the holy Scripture: which also
I have proved them to reject and receive, translate and expound not according
to any divine ground, but as it likes their own fancies; and consequently I
have demonstrated, that in sum they have no other foundation whereon they
build, but this, that their beliefes seem true to their own natural reason.

It may be demanded what proofs I use in these my discourses. I answer in
few words, that I bring forth proofs out of the holy Scripture, I allege
the ancient Fathers and vvriters, such as lived and wrote within the first
six hundred years after Christ, which some Protestants challenge to have
been of their faith and religion, and therefore allow of their testimonies: I
cite moreover the sentences of diverse Sectaries of these our days, who
confess that to be true which I endeavor to prove, not the testimonies of
Anabaptists, Libertines, Tritheists, Trinitarians, or of any others commonly by
Protestants censured to be Heretics; but of such as are usually by all sorts
accknowledged to be writers of their Protestant family, and members (as they
say) of their reformed Churches. In alleging of which sentences of our
adversaries, for the benefit of those that understand not the Latin tongue, I
have observed this as much as I could, that I have taken them out of books
either written in English, or translated into English, that so every person
might easily turn unto them. Neither ought the testimony of such sectaries to
be thought by any man a weak argument: for what proof almost, being not
divine, can be of greater force then the confession of an adversary or enemy,
touching the truth of that which is censured false by his doctors, and the
innocence of him whom he hates and impugneth; or the falsehood of his own
chiefemasters doctrine, and the guiltiness of himself, or such as he loves,
or are of his own brotherhood? And hence it is, that M. Whitakers a Protestant
of no mean fame, Whitaker de Eccles. controuers. 2. cap. 14. page 366.
grants that argument to be strong, which is drawn from the confession of
adversaries. Finally, sometimes I bring forth some natural reasons and
congruences, proving the conueniency of that which is avouched. For we may well
assure our selves (so if I do not forget my self says S. Augustine) that God
has done whatsoever in right reason we shall find to be best. These be the
proofs of mine assertions, and others then these I seldom or never use.

But the better to declare my sincere dealing herein, and also to show the
force of such testimonies of ancient Authors as I allege, I have added before
this treatise a table of al such Councels extant as I find celebrated within
the said first six ages; as likewise of all the writers of those times, which I
find to have left any works commonly alleged in schools to their posterity.
I have moreover noted out of good and approved authors, the year in which
such Councels were celebrated, and in which such writers either flourished or
departed out of this world. Al these things I have performed with as great
sincerity as the want of books has suffered me. And in very deed I may truly
protest, that willingly and wittingly I have wronged no one writer in
misalleaging his words or meaning, be he Catholic, or be he Protestant; be he
Ancient, or be he Modern. It may be some faults have escaped me, but against
my will. Neither does our Catholic cause need any such juggling or false
dealing, the truth is so manifest on our side, and the proofs of the same so
many and pregnant.

But before my reader enter into the viewing of these my discourses, that he
may reap the greater profit of his labor, I must earnestly crave one thing at
his hands, to wit: that if he be of an other religion then is here defended,
before hand he do not harden his heart, and with obstinacy determine not to
change his opinion or practice, whatsoever he hear, read, or understand said
against it, or in proof of an other way. It behooves every Christian to be of
a right heart and a good will. Much is said in the holy Scripture, both in
commendation of the one and of the other. The Prophet David in the Psalms,
often commends them that are recti cord, right in heart, and in particular
inuiteth them to the praise of almighty God. The Angels at the birth of our
Lord did sing this Hymn: Luke 2. v. 14.
Gloria in altissimis Deo, and in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis: Glory
in the highest to God, and in earth peace to men of good will. And who has a
right heart and is of good will? Verily, he that does not obdurate himself
against God, but is desirous and by all means seeks to conform his will to
Gods will, which is the right and strait rule, by which al our thoughts and
actions are to be squared and tried. Of my reader therefore if he be a
Protestant I desire no more, but that he bring his heart and will to this
disposition, if it be not so disposed already; that he be desirous to serve God
in his true Church, and casting off al obstinacy he be indifferent either to
this or that, so that he might be thoroughly informed of the truth. Lastly, that
he humbly crave of God, that if his belief be not right, he will mercifully
vouchsafe to give him grace and means whereby he may find out the truth.

And because I esteem this disposition in that Protestant which intends to
read this Treatise, to be a matter of great moment toward his conversion, I
think it convenient briefly here to touch among diverse others which occur,
some two motives, which in my judgment are very sufficient to draw any man
from obstinacy in the new religion, yea be he of what sect soever, to make him
doubtful of the sincerity of that faith and religion which he professes. Of
these the first shall be, that as many (I may say more) and as virtuous, and as
learned even of the Protestant side, condemn his said faith and religion as
erroneous, as there do approve it as true. For if he be a Zwinglian, a
Caluinist, or an English Protestant, although his temporal Magistrates and his
learned Masters tell him that he is of a sound belief, and a true member of
Christ's Church, yet Luther and all the Lutherans affirm in plain terms and
that with great vehemence, nevertheless deliberately and advisedly, that he
is an Heretic; and consequently, is guilty of that crime which the Apology of
the Church of England part. 1. pa. 28. 29.
Apology of the Church of England avouches to be a forsaking of salvation, a
renouncing of Gods grace, a departing from the body and spirit of Christ. This
not only the works of Luther and the Lutherans, but also of diverse
Sacramentaries (so the Zwinglians, Caluinists, and English Protestants are
commonly called) testify to the whole world. Luther in one place writes thus:
Luther these. 21. cont. Louaniens. and to. 7. in defi^s. ver borum coenae.
We seriously judge the Zwinglians and al Sacramentaries to be Heretics and
aliens from the Church of God. In an other book of the same sectaries he has
these words. Idem. tom. 7 in defens. verborum coenae. fol. 383.
Touching the soul and matters spiritual, we will avoid them as long as we
have a day to live, we will reprove and condemn them for Idolaters, corrupters
of Gods words, blaspheamers, and deceivers; and of them as of enemies of the
Gospel, we will sustain persecution and spoil of our goods, whatsoever they
shall do unto us, so long as God will permit: Thus Luther. Hence also the
Zwinglians of Zuricke complain, that Luther Co^fessio Orthodoxa Eccles.
Tigurinae in praefat. fol. 3. 4.
inueigheth against them, as against obstinate Heretics, and such as are
guilty to themselves of al impiety, as against prophaners of the Sacraments,
and the most vile and pestilent men that go on the ground. By his Ibid. tract.
3. fol. 108.
last confession by them likewise recorded, it appears that he continued in
this mind even to his dying day. And who among all the Professors of the new
religion, is generally preferred by the followers of al sects before Luther?
The Sacramentaries themselves, whom he damned to the pit of hell, most highly
commend him: The Apology of the Church of England a book written by M. Jewel
and approved by the best English Protestants, yea much Martyr ep. ad Iuellu^
prae fixa Apolog. Eccles. Angl.
praised by Peter Martyr, and other foreign followers of Zwinglius and Calvin,
terms him Apology of the Church of England part. 4. page 124. printed anno
1600.
a most excellent man even sent of God to give light to the world. Whitakers
affirms, Whitakers in his answer to Campians 3. reason. page 85.
his name is written in the book of life, and that his memory shall ever be
sacred among al good men. And he adds, Idem in his answer to the 8. reason.
page 259.
that they reverence him as Father. Field a Doctor of the English Church now
living auerreth, Ficl. book 3 of the Church chapter 42. p. 170. See also Whetenhal
a Purita^ in his discourse of the abuses, etc. printed anno 1606. page 64. 65.
he was a most worthy divine, as the world had any in those times wherein he
lived, or in many ages before: whose happy memory (says he) for the clearing
of sundry points of greatest moment in our Christian religion, al succeeding
ages shall be bound to honor. Seeing then that this most excellent man sent by
God to give light to the world, whose name is written in the book of life, and
whose memory shall ever be sacred among al good men, sends forth these
glistering beams of light unto us, that the Sacramentaries are damned
Heretics, Idolaters, blaspheamers, corrupters of the word of God, deceivers,
and enemies of the Gospel: Seeing this most worthy divine, reverenced by our
English Protestants as a father, pronounced this so hard a censure against his
children; what Sacramentary being thus censured, if he will proceed according
to the rules of reason, can do otherwise then mistrust the truth of his
belief? which of the Sacramentaries has deserved or obtained such
commendations of the Lutherans, as Luther has here of the Sacramentaries?
Verily Calvin himself, whose doctrine of the Sacrament our English Church and
most Sacramentaries do now embrace, is most bitterly reviled and condemned by
them al. Nay one of them writes, that Conradus Schlussel. in Theolog.
Caluinist. lib. 2. fol. 72.
God also in this world showed his judgment against Calvin, whom he visited
(says he) in the ^odde of his anger, and horribly punished before the dreadful
hour of his unhappy death. For God with his potent hand (I use his words) so
struck this Heretic, that having despaired of his salvation, having called
upon Devils, swearing, cursing, and blaspheaming most miserably, be yielded up
his wicked ghost: but Calvin died of the lousie disease, worms so increasing
in an impostume or most stinking ulcer about his privy members, that none of
the standers by could any longer endure the stink: Thus Conradus
Schlusselburge a Lutheran reports Caluins death, as he avouches out of
public writings, of which he saw no sound refutation. What Sacramentary then
can justly compare any one of his learned masters with Luther, or think that
Luther erred and some one of them attained to the light of truth: seeing that
Luther had and read the same Scriptures, out of which his masters affirm they
have drawn their doctrine, and used in every respect as good means to come to
the true sense and interpretation of them, as his said masters could use or
prescribe? Unto which I may add, that Luther (as it seems) received some
light from above, if it be true which is affirmed in the Apology of the Church
of England, that God sent him to give light to the world. But if no
Sacramentary can compare any one of his learned masters with Luther, much
less can he prefer himself before him: which nevertheless he must needs
do, if he be obstinate in his Sacramentary doctrine, and as judge pronounce
Luthers belief to be false and erroneous. And thus much of Luthers censure
against the Sacramentaries.

The Lutherans also men very learned, whom the English Protestants (if
Whitakers say truly) Whitakers in his answer to Ca^pians 8. reason, p. 259
embrace as their dear brethren in Christ, pronounce the same sentence
against these Sectaries. And in particular Conradus Schlusselburge even now
alleged, being a Lutheran superintendent of great name and authority, Conradus
Schlusselb. in Catalog. Haereticorum nostri temporis, lib. 1. pa. 1. and 2. and
lib. 3.
places them in the Catalogue of the Heretics of these our days. Luke
Osiander whose Encheridion against us, some English Protestant has of late
corruptly translated into our tongue, in the conclusion of the like book made
against the Caluinists, having recited sixteen of their assertions which he
condemns, afterward writes thus: Lucas Osia^der in Enchirid. co^t.
Caluinianos in co^clus. pa. 267. printed anno 1607. published by him, anno 1603.
Let any godly or friendly reader whatsoever, think what deadly poison Satan
does power unto men under the Caluinian doctrine, by which al Christianisme
almost is overthrown. Most of the rest proceed after the same manner, but I
cannot stand to recite their words. Of al which I conclude, that the faith and
religion of every Sacramentary, is judged false and heretical, by Luther and all the Lutherans. Unto which I add, that if he be an English Protestant, the
Puritans esteem him little better then an Infidel, as appears by their sundry
admonitions to the Parliament, and the book of dangerous positions written by
a Protestant. If he be a Puritan, the Protestants censure him to be Powel in
his consideratio^s. See a Christian and modest offer, page 9. The Suruay of the
pretended holy discipline, etc. page 311.
a notorious and manifest Schismatike, and a member cut off from the Church of
God. Nay, whether he be English Protestant or Puritan, Zwinglius a most
excellent man as well as Luther (as the Apology of the Church of England
avouches, Apology of the Church of England part. 4. page 124.
sent of God to give light to the world; Whetenhal calls him Whete^hal in his
discourse of the abuses, etc. page 75.
the first light set up by God among all the golden candlesticks of Heluetia)
with all his Zwinglians tells him, See Zwingl. to. 2. epist. ad quanda^
Germaniae ciuitatem, fol. 196. and in co^mentaris de vera and falsa relig. c.
de Sacram. and lib. de Baptis. fol. 63.
that he erreth in his faith touching the Sacraments. If he be a Zwinglian,
Caluini lib. de coena Domini, edit. an. 1540. Gallice and Latin an. 1545. and
l. 4. Institut. cap. 15.. 1. etc.
Calvin with all his Caluinists, English Protestants and Puritans tell him the
like. So that be he of what Sacramentary sect soever he please, his faith and
religion receives a threefold censure that it is false, and that from his
own brethren. For first it is condemned by the Lutherans, then by the
Zwinglians and English Protestants if he be a Puritan, or Caluinist; or by the
Zwinglians and Puritans or Caluinists if he be an English Protestant; or
finally by the English Protestants and Caluinists (among whom I number the
Puritans) if he be a Zwinglian. And what wise man will be obstinate in the
defense of such a faith? But what if he be a Lutheran does he avoid this
inconvenience? Truly he is in the very like case: for first he is judged to be
of a wrong belief by all the Sacramentaries; then if he be a strict or rigid
Lutheran, he is condemned by the mild or soft Lutherans; if he be a mild or
soft Lutheran, he is deemed an Heretic by the strict or rigid. Nay Conradus
Schlusselbur. in Catalog. Haereticorum nostri temporis in principio lib. 1. etc.
Conradus Schlusselburge places six sects of his own Lutherans in the
Catalogue of Heretics, of which the one condemns the other; and he gives
the same sentence against them al. But because few or no Lutherans as is
probable, will ever come to the reading of this Treatise, I will not stand to
discuss and prove these things at large and in particular: And therefore
concerning this motive let this suffice.

A second reason or motive, which is sufficient to exclude obstinacy from the
heart of any one of the followers of the new religion, is; that all the learned
and principal sectaries as Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin and others, have
notoriously and grossly erred in some points or other touching religious
matters. The short limits of a preface will not suffer me to declare the truth
of this in them al, wherefore I will exemplify only in the three named, which
be the heads of the rest. And to begin with Luther; did not this great
Patriarch and father of al Protestants teach and obstinately hold, that Christ
suffered on the cross and died according to his divinity? thus he writes:
Luth. in co^fess. majori de coena Domini and lib. de concilijs. part. 2.
If I believe that only the humane nature of Christ suffered for me, Christ is
a base Savior, not of any great price, or value, yea be himself needs a
Savior. Hence Zwinglius exclaimeth: Zwingl. to. 2. in respons. ad Lutheri
co^fess. fol. 458. 469. 470. and in respons. ad Luther. lib. de Sacra. f. 411.
401. 337. etc.
This can by no reasons be explaned or excused. For Luther clearly and
manifestly confesses that he will not acknowledge Christ to be his Savior, if
only his humanity had suffered. He calls him also Marcion, and says he is
guilty of most high blaspheamy against the nature and essence of God, etc. Did
not the same Luther also defend See Luth. l. de captiuitat. Babylon. c. de
Baptis. and lib. cont. Cocblaeu^ anno 1523.
that infants in baptism actually believe? Verily, although M. Field endeavor
to wrest his words Field book 3 chapter 44. p. 179.
to habitual faith, which he says is in infants; yet Luthers discourses admit
not that sense, as will easily appear to the reader. Of which also the doctrine
of his disciples (who even at this present Ke^nitius in examine. council Trident.
can. 13. de Baptis. sess. 7. Zucas Osia^d. in Enchirid. co^t. Anabapt. print.
anno 1607. c. 2. quaest. 2.
affirm that infants whiles they are baptized actually believe) is a manifest
token; and moreover that this was Luthers opinion, it may be gathered out of
Calvin. Instit. c. 16. 19
Calvin and Whitaker. in his answ. to Campians 8. reason p. 243.
Whitakers. Besides this he holds, that the souls departed out of this
world sleep, and are without sense or feeling, neither in heaven nor in hell,
and so shall remain until the day of judgment. But of this point of his
doctrine see more in the second part of my treatise following. I cannot
likewise omit his Luther in sermon. de Sacram. coenae to. 2. f. 112. etc.
opinion, concerning the presence of Christ's humane nature in every place
together with his divinity: of which proceed these words of Zwinglius unto
him; Zwingl. in respo^s. ad Luther. l. de Sacra. f. 401.
If thou shall contumaciously go on in this sentence, that the humanity of
Christ JESUS is essentially and corporally present, wheresoever is his
divinity, God willing we will bring thee to those straights, that either thou
shall be forced to deny the whole Scripture of the new testament, or to
acknowledge Marcions heresy. This I say, in good faith we promise we will do:
thus Zwinglius. And by this heresy defended by the Lutherans of his time,
Calvin Calvin Instit. book 4. chapter 17.. 16. etc. Zwing l. tom. 2. ep. ad
qua^dam Germaniae ciuitate^, fol. 196. lib. de Baptis. fol. 63. etc.
avouches that Marcion is raised up out of hell. The Geneuian divines in the
preface to the Harmony of confessions, published in the name of the Churches of
France and Belgia, term it that unhappy monster of vbiquity, which if it be
admitted (say they) will quite overthrow the true doctrine of Christ's person
and natures: But of Luther enough.

Zwinglius doctrine concerning the Sacraments was most profane; for he made
them only external signs, and denied them any inward effect in the soul:
wherefore as I have before noted, it is worthily condemned and rejected, not
only by Luther and his followers, but also in words by Calvin lib. de coena,
and l. 4. Instit. cap. 15.. 1.
Calvin. Moreover, Zwingl. in exposit. fidei Chrstianae art. 12.
Zwinglius also places Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, Numa, Camillus, the
Catoes, Scipions and other Pagans and Idolaters, with the holy Patriarks and
Apostles in heaven. Of which his assertion Luther discourses thus; Luther. ad
c. 47. Genes.
Zwinglius of late has written that Numa Pompilius, Hector, Scipio, Hercules
enjoy eternal bliss in heaven with Peter, Paul and other Saints, which is no
other thing then openly to confess that he thinks there is no faith, no
Christianisme, etc. He adds much more against him, and of this infers,
that Zwinglius is of that mind that a man doing his best may be saved in any
religion whatsoever; which in very deed is expressly by him taught in Zwingl.
to. 2. in declarat. de peccato Original. f. 118
another place: Nevertheless this doctrine of Zwinglius touching the salvation
of Infidels is maintained by Rodolph. Gualterus in Apolog. pro libris Zwinglij
Rodolphus Gualterus, Bullinger in Germani. co^fess. Eccles. Figurinae.
Bullenger, Simlerus in vita Bullingeri, etc.
Simlerus, Daniel Tossanus, and other Sacramentaries.

But no opinion of Zwinglius is more impious and sacrilegious, then that by
which he makes God the author and cause of sin: In upholding which
blaspheamous impiety John Calvin joineth hands with him. If it were not that I
should exceed the breuity of a preface, I would manifestly convince them
guilty of this crime by their own printed works, published to the view of
the whole world: but I vvil here put off this manner of proof to another
place, and now only confirm the truth of mine accusation by the testimony of
some learned Protestants. Albertus Grawerus, rector of the Lutheran university
of Eislebium in Germany, about the year of our Lord 1597. published a book
with this title: The war of John Calvin, and of JESUS Christ God and man,
that is: An antithesis or opposition of the doctrine of the Caluinists and of
Christ, in which the most horrible blaspheamies of the Caluinists especially
concerning four articles, the person of Christ, the supper of the Lord,
baptism and predestination, are faithfully showed from the eye to the eye out
of their own proper writings and books, and are briefly and soundly refelled
out of the word of God: thus has the title. And this book has been printed
three times among the Lutherans; for I have seen the third edition printed at
Magdeburge in the year 1605. so plausible is it to the Lutheran churches.
Nevertheless it being oppugned and answered by some Caluinists, the same
author replied with an other book unto which he gave this title; Absurda,
absurdorum absurdissima, Caluinistica absurda, etc. The absurd, the most
absurd of absurd, Caluinistical absurd things, that is, an invincible
demonstration, logical, philosophical, theological, of some horrible paradoxes
of the Caluinian doctrine in the article of the person of Christ, the supper of
the Lord, baptism, and predestination of the children of God, written by M.
Albert Grawere Rector of the famous University of Eislebium of the Earls of
Mansfeld, in defense of his Caluinian war, etc. Cum gratia and priuilegio at
Magdeburge an. 1605. hitherto are the words of the title. That which makes
in these books for my present purpose, is that which he delivers concerning
the opinion of Calvin and the Caluinists touching the predestination of the
children of God; for in the forefront of the last treatise, after the title of
the book this Lutheran places this sillogisme: Quodcunque dogma, etc. What
opinion soever makes God the author of sin, is not of God: The Caluinian
opinion makes God the author of sin: therefore it is not of God. For proof
of the minor or second proposition, which is; that the Caluinian doctrine
makes God the author of sin, he refers his reader to the fifth chapter of
his book following; in which in very deed he manifestly proves it by diverse
sentences alleged out of Calvin, Beza, and other Sacramentaries. Perhaps some
man will demand what is this to Zwinglius? I answer, although Zwinglius in
very deed be properly no Caluinist, for he was before Calvin; yet because
now the Caluinists bear all the sway and have almost eaten up the Zwinglians,
as also because the differences between Zwinglius and Calvin were not great
and notorious, it pleases the Lutherans to number Zwinglius among the
Caluinists; yea to call all the Sacramentaries Caluinists. Hence Grawerus among
other Caluinists making God the author of sin, often alleges Zwinglius,
and proves him guilty of the same impiety. They are likewise accused of making
of God the author of sin by Luke Osiander another Lutheran, who having
related and confuted certain their assertions touching Christ, thus begins
the seventh chapter of his book. Lucas Osia^der in Enchirid. cont. Caluimanos
cap. 7. page 198.
But here gentle reader, beyond and above those blaspheamous things which in
the discourses before we heard against the Son of God, out of the opinions of
our adversaries (the Caluinists:) Pandit se vorago and barathrum Caluinianae
doctrinae; a gulf or whirlepoole and a bell of Caluinian doctrine opens it
self. In which (if thou dilligently weigh the matter) God is said to be the
author of sin: and it is so taught by our adversaries concerning election to
salvation, that who shall embrace this their doctrine (tentation assaulting him)
must needs either be cast into despair, or fall into Epicurisme; and hence must
of necessity arise in the hearts of men manifest blasphemy against God: thus
Lucas Osiander, whom an English sectary in his book against us translated,
makes to speak like a very good Caluinist. If any man be desirous to see a
brief sum of the Caluinian and Zwinglian belief, touching this and other
such like articles, he shall find it gathered together in the same place by the
same author, as also by Grawerus in the preface to his second book cited.
Heshusius a third Lutheran writer, esteemed among the learned of that sect,
Co^rad. Schlusselburg. lib. 2. Theolog. Caluinist. page 6. See Clebetius in
victoria veritatis and ruina Papatus Saxonici, arg 15. Conradus Schluss. loco
cit. lib. 1. c. 6. page 25. 26. Beza in Absters. calumni aru^ Heshusij.
and much commended by Conradus Schlusselburge, for this cause exclaimeth
against the Caluinists that they transform God into the Devil. But Calvin is
not only accused of this impiety by the Lutherans, but also by Castalio a
Sacramentary, who disputing of Caluins opinion touching this point, makes a
distinction or difference between the true God and the God of Calvin: these
are his words. Castal. in l. ad Calvin. de praedest.
The false God (that is Caluins God by him described) is slow to mercy, prone
to anger, who has created the greatest part of the world to destruction, and
has predestined them not only to damnation, but also to the cause of
damnation. Therefore he has decreed from al eternity, and be will have it so,
and be does bring it to pass that they necessarily sin, so that neither
thefts, nor murders, nor adulteries are committed but by his constraint and
impulsion. For be suggesteth unto men evil and dishonest affections, not only
by permission, sed efficaciter but effectually (that is by forcing such
affections upon them) and does harden them in such sort that when they do
evil, they do rather the work of God then their own, he makes the Devil a
liar, so that now not the Devil but the God of Calvin is the father of lies.
But that God which the holy Scriptures teach, is altogether contrary to this
God of Calvin, etc. And soon after: For the true God came to destroy that
work of that Caluinian God: And these two Gods as they are by nature contrary
to one another, so they beget and bring forth children of contrary
dispositions, (to wit) that God of Calvin, children without mercy, proud, etc.
hitherto Castalio a man highly commended by Humfred. de rat. interpret. lib. 1.
p. 26. Gesnerus in Bibliotheca.
D. Humfrey and Gesnerus, likewise learned scholars of the Sacramentary sect.
But note that in this his discourse, he well declares the truth of that which
before I related, as said by Heshusius, to wit: that Calvin and his scholars
by making God the author of sin, and ascribing unto him other such like
actions, transform him into the Devil, or rather as Castalio says make the
Devil their God. If any man be desirous to see this more fully and exactly
handled, let him read Grawerus in the book and chapter before cited.

Now touching Calvin in particular, what Christian does not abhor and detest
that his intolerable blaspheamy, by which he affirms our Lord during the
time of his passion, to have feared eternal damnation, to have been forsaken
of God, to have suffered in soul the torments of hell. Let us hear him in his
own words declare his own opinion; These are some of his sentences. Christ
was put in steed of wicked doers as surety and pledge, Calvin Instit. book 2.
chapter 16.. 10. Ide^. in Math. 26. verse. 39.
yea and as the very guilty person himself, to abide and suffer all the
punishments that should have been laid upon them: this one thing excepted,
that he could not be holden still of the sorrows of death (or hell.) His prayer
in the garden was an abrupt desire: he was stricken with fear, and straited
with anxiety in such sort, that among violent fluddes oftentation he was forced
as it were to stagger or waver, now with one, and then with another desire: he
corrected and recalled, that desire upon the sudden passed from him: he
refused as much as lay in him and sought to put off the office of a Mediator:
the vehemence of grief took from him the present memory of the heavenly
decree. Christ's death had been to no effect, Calvin Instit. book 2. chapter 16..
10. Ibid.. 12. Ide^. ad c. 26. Math. v. 39.
if he had suffered only a corporal death: but it behooved also that he should
feel the rigor of Gods vengeance, and that he should as it were hand to hand
wrestle with the armies of the hels, and the horror of eternal death: He had a
more cruel and harder battle then with common death? he saw the anger of God
set before him; in as much as be burdened with the sins of the whole world
presented him self before the tribunal seat of God, he could not but horribly
fear profundam mortis abyssum, the bottomless depth of death or eternal
damnation: Calvin Instit. book 2. chapter 16.. 10.
he suffered in his soul the terrible torments of a damned and forsaken man.
Ide^ in c. 27. Math. v. 46.
When the image or show of the tentation was laid before Christ, as though
God being his enemy he were now destined to destruction (or damnation) he was
stricken with horror: Instit. book 2. chap. 16.
he was fearful for the salvation of his soul. He fought hand to hand with
the power of the Devil, with the horror of death (or damnation,) with the
pains of hell: Hitherto are some of Caluins blaspheamous assertions against our
Lord and Savior. I need not allege any Protestant authors accusing him of
this impiety, for his words be plain, and his books are in every man's
hands. Nay which is worse, some principal English Sectaries follow these his
blaspheamous courses, and uphold his doctrine as Euangelical: Such are Fulke,
Whitakers, Willet, and others. But listen a little what a conclusion may be
drawn out of one proposition taken from Calvin, and an other from the greater
part of our English Protestants. Although diverse notable reasons are assigned
by the ancient Fathers and by the Divines of al ages, why Christ permitted
himself to dread so much the corporal death which he was to suffer; yet Calvin
avouches, that he was a very dastard and a coward, if he feared not eternal
damnation. Let this then be the first proposition made of Caluins words: If
Christ feared not the curse and wrath of God he was more tender and more
fearful then the most part of the rascal sort of men: for thieves and other
evil doers do obstinately have to death, many do with haughty courage despise
it, some other do mildly suffer it; whereas Christ was astonished and in
manner stricken dead with fear of it. How shameful a tenderness should this
have been (says Calvin) to be so far tormented for fear of a common death,
as to melt in bloody sweat, and not to be able to be comforted, but by sight
of Angels? Thus Calvin. The second proposition taken from the English
Protestants is as follows; But Christ feared not the curse and wrath of God,
he never dreaded eternal damnation nor suffered the pains of hell: Now the
conclusion follows; Therefore Christ was more fearful then the most part of
the rascal sort of men; then thieves and other evil doers; his tenderness was
shameful, etc. The first proposition as I have said is almost wholy made of
Caluins own words: that the second is held true by the greater part of
English Protestants, Sutcliffe in his answer to Kellison, chapter 5. page 56.

See Parkes also in the preface to his rejoineder to Lymbomastix


I prove by the testimony of M. Sutcliffe, who tells us that they mislike
Caluins particular opinion concerning Christ's suffering the pains of hell. So
that the conclusion if both Calvin and the English Protestants say true, cannot
be avoided. And thus I think it now sufficiently proved, that Luther,
Zwinglius, and Calvin have fallen into some gross and notorious errors, which
they have mainetained as true and holy doctrine.

I could if it were needful and convenient in this place, show the like
concerning al their disciples, I mean that they grossly have erred and err in
some one point or other concerning faith and religion: but first the followers
of every sect will and do grant this concerning al others, but those of their
own belief. For this the Lutherans confess true of all the Sacramentaries;
the Sacramentaries of all the Lutherans; the English Protestants of the
Puritans; and the Puritans of the English Protestants, etc. which is the cause
and fountain of their bitter inuectiues and books written one against the
other: so that (as I say) if a man will believe them al, they al hold some one
or more absurd and erroneous opinions. Secondly, it is well known to any one
although but meanly read in matters of controversy, and I have partly
declared already before, that most sects do as yet follow the false doctrine
of their Sect-master, as the Lutherans of Luther; the Zwinglians of Zwinglius;
the Caluinists of Calvin: Wherefore, seeing that I must also be mindful that I
write a Preface and not a volume, letting others pass I vvil only say a word
or two in particular touching the English Sectaries, who among al other
members of the new religion, are only like to come to the sight and reading of
this my Preface.

And is it not easily proved, that the principal writers and vpholders of the
English Church have notoriously fallen into error? who of this company whiles
they lived were comparable to Jewel, Fulke and Whitakers? And do not al these
Jewel against Harding art. 17. division 14 Fulke against Martin p. 64 65. in
fine. Whitakers in his answer to Duraeus page 559. added by Stock to his
answer of Campians 8. reason p. 211.
hold that Christ was a Priest, and offered sacrifice according to his divinity
and Godhead? But what follows of this, but that (as Arius affirmed)
according to his Godhead he is inferior to his Father, for no one offers
sacrifice to his equal. Unto this I add, that Fulke upon the Rhemes testam.
Math 27. v. 3. Act. 3 verse. 11.
Fulke and Whitakers in his answer to Ca^pians 8. reason, page 211. 210.
Whitakers openly and stoutly maintain Caluins doctrine concerning Christ's
dreading everlasting damnation: yea although they go not so far as Calvin in
making him if this was not so, more fearful then the most part of the rascal
sort of men, yet the first of them auouceth, that if the fear of bodily pain
and death only had caused that agony in the garden, he had been of greater
infirmity then many of his servants: the other has almost the like sentence.
But above al others Willet in his Synopsis printed an. 1600. co^trouers. 20.
Willet passes in defending Caluins blaspheamies, in so much as a man may well
marvel that his book is suffered to be read among Christians.

But what shall we say of the English Sectaries in general? will any man
endeavor to free them from al error? Verily if none of them have fallen into
error, it follows first, that our Church is the true Church of Christ, and
theirs a Schismatical Synagogue. This I prove after this sort: The Puritans in
their Christian and modest offer (so they term it) of a most indifferent
conference tendered not long since to the Protestant Archbishops, Bishops, and
al their adherents, plainly affirm; that if their Puritan propositions be
denied, and the Protestants have the truth on their side, the Roman Church is
the true Church of Christ. For having set down such propositions as they offer
to mainetaine against the Protestants, among other just considerations (as they
pretend) moving them to make this offer in the sixth place they assign this for
one. A Christian and modest of fer, etc. page 11. published anno 1606.
Diverse of the aforesaid propositions are such (say they) that if the Ministers
should not constantly hold and mainetaine the same against al men, they cannot
see how possibly (by the rules of divinity) the separation of our Churches
from the Church of Rome, and from the Pope the supreme head thereof; can be
justified. And again in the eight consideration, having yielded an other
reason, wherefore they cannot but make opposition to the Prelates, in approving
the propositions above specified, Ibid. page 16.
they add: wherein if they (the Puritan Ministers who make this offer) be in
error, and the Prelates on the contrary have the truth, they protest to all the
world, that the Pope and the Church of Rome ( and in them God and Christ JESUS
himself) have great wrong and indignity offered unto them, in that they are
rejected, and that all the Protestant Churches are Schismatical in forsaking
unity and communion with them: Hitherto are the Puritans words. Hence (which
is a point worthy to be noted) they promise their reconciliation unto us, if
we can prove the falsehood of their assertions, which promise they make not to
the English Protestants. For thus they go on in the first place alleged: And
therefore for as much as in these controversies, the Papists and the Prelates
go hand in hand, the said Ministers do in like manner make the like offer to
the Priests and Jesuits, promising their reconcilement unto that See (of
Rome) if they can either by arguments pull them from the aforesaid propositions,
or can answer such arguments, as they shall propound in the defense of them, in
manner and form before specified in the offer. And therefore it both stands
the Ministers upon to make the aforesaid offer, and the Prelates (except they
will have all the world to judge them to be friends in heart to Popery) to accept
of the same: Thus the Puritan Ministers, and no such offer that I find through
the whole book is made to the Protestants. This then is affirmed by these men,
that if the Protestant doctrine mainetained against them be true, and their
assertions be false, the separation of the new Sectaries Churches from ours,
cannot be justified; yea they avouch that if this be so, that their said
Churches are schismatical. Unto which if we add, that in very deed the
propositions which the Puritans offer to mainetaine against the Prelates, are
false and erroneous (the truth of which assertion is confessed and with great
vehemence defended by all the English Protestants, and further concerning some
of the said propositions very well proved by Hooker, Whitgift, Bilson, Couel,
and others of their company) we shall have our desired conclusion, that
according to the doctrine of the English Sectaries the Puritans and the
Protestants, our adversaries Churches are Schismatical, and that ours is the
true Spouse of Christ.

But I must not here omit by the way to advertise my reader, that in the
judgment of any wise and judicious person, this argument yielded us by our
adversaries, cannot but also be a very strong proof of the truth of our
Catholic cause. For whosoever maturely considers the matter, shall find
that the Protestants in rejecting the Puritan propositions, follow the
prescript and rule of holy Scriptures, the decrees of Councels, and the
tradition of the Church and Fathers. He shall also perceive, that the Puritans
in auouching that which I have related, build upon very good reasons flowing
out of the very nature of the Protestant religion, and taken from the
proceedings of the vpholders of the same in defending it: because out of the
doctrine and practice defended by the Protestants against the Puritans, as also
out of the proofs and reasons alleged for themselves, very strong arguments
may be drawn to confirm the truth of our whole Catholic religion, as will
sometimes appear in my treatise following. And to give here one instance, the
Protestants for the authority of Archbishops bring diverse reasons, and among
others this one, that peace and unity can otherwise hardly be maintained in the
Church. But what faith Cartwright? Suruay of the pretended holy discipline,
chap. 8. page 125.
Truly he affirms as is reported by the author of the Suruay of the pretended
holy discipline, that the Popes authority is more necessary over al Churches,
then the authority of an Archbishop over a province. And this his assertion is
grounded upon very good reason, as I shall more at large declare hereafter.

Now to prosecute mine intended discourse which is to prove some errors in
the English sectaries, here occurreth another argument like unto the former,
not unfit for my purpose. For like as I have already demonstrated, that if they
al say true our Church is the true Church of Christ: so it is also evident,
that if it be so that they al say true, it is also needful there be one
supreme head of the whole Church militant; Suruay, etc. chap. 29. page 372.
for thus I argue. Cartwright a principal Puritan, esteemed by those of his
own sect (as the aforesaid author notes) one of the only worthies of the
world, tells us that the Popes authority is more necessary over al Churches,
then the authority of an Archbishop over a province: but the authority of an
Archbishop as al our Protestants defend, is necessary over a province;
therefore the Popes authority is necessary over al Churches.

It may be objected, that these arguments are taken from persons of sundry
sects, of which the one confesses the other to err. I grant it, but this
notwithstanding they prove, that either some English sectaries err, or
otherwise that our religion by them rejected is true, which suffices my
purpose. Nevertheless, the Protestants themselves do afford us no such
reasons? Truly, if I were not here restrained to the vvriting only of a
preface, I could assign diverse: one I will set down for an example. Field
book 3 chap. 39. page 158. 156. 157. 159.
M. Field in his third book of the Church plainly confesses, that in sundry
Churches of the world (being of the new religion) diverse worthy Ministers of
God were ordained by Presbiters (or Priests sometime of our Church) and had no
ordination from any Bishop. Nay he seems apparently to grant, that none but
Presbiters did impose hands in ordaining Ministers or Superintendents, in many
of the pretended reformed Churches; as namely in those of France and others,
Morton in Apolog. Cathol. part. 1. lib. 1. cap. 21.
which is also insinuated by D. Morton. And therefore both these Doctors teach,
that in time of necessity a Priest or Minister may impose hands and consecrate
a Priest, and consequently also a Bishop or a Superinte^dent Out of this their
doctrine I frame this argument: seeing that diverse Superintendents and Ministers
of the new religion, I may say al at the least of some Countries (for Field
himself excepteth only those of England and Denmark and of some other places,
which places he names not) have had their ordination or orders only from
Priests, it follows, that if Priests have no power of ordination, that is of
giving orders, that such Ministers and Superintendents are no true Ministers
and Superintendents: But Priests according to the assertion of a principal
English Protestant, have no power of ordination, and can give no orders;
therefore such Superintendents and Ministers are no true Superintendents and
Ministers. Of which I also infer, that such Churches are no true Churches,
for they want a true ministry and clergy, without which as Field ibid. page
154. and book 2. chap. 6. page 51.
Field confesses there can be no Church. And this English Protestant is
William L. Bishop of Rochester in his sermon concerning the antiquity and
superiority of Bishops, preached before the King at Hampton Court, Sep. 21. 1606
William L. B. of Rochester, who in his sermon not long since preached before
the Kings Majesty, and afterward printed by his Majesty's express
commandment as the same Bishop In the epist. to the King pri^ted before the
sermon.
avouches, affirms and proves out of holy Scripture first, that the
Apostles kept to themselves ordination (or authority to give holy orders) til
they appointed Bishops unto whom they conveyed it. Secondly, that the Church
of Christ succeeding, would not admit any other but Bishops to that business,
as not justifiable for the Presbiters (I use his words) either by reason,
example, or scripture. And having proved it concerning reason, touching example
he tells us; that C. 3.
not one is to be showed through the whole story Ecclesiastical, that any
besides a Bishop did it; and that if some of the inferior rank presumed to
do it, his act was reuersed by the Church for unlawful, which he proved by an
example. As for scripture he avouches there is none either of holy men, or of
the holy Ghost, which does give such authority to Presbiters: for all the
fathers (says he) with one consent do contradict it. And among others he
alleges S. Ambrose, affirming that it is consonant neither with Gods nor man's
law, that any besides a Bishop should do it. Of the scriptures he writes
thus: No scripture of the holy Ghost, either anagogically by consequent, or
directly by precept does justify it. For analogy, none but the Apostles did
it, or might do it (as before you heard) not directly; for to what Presbiter
was the authority committed as a Presbiter, etc. Thus the Bishop of Rochester
plainly contradicts the other two English Protestant doctors. And hence it
manifestly appears, that either the said Bishop erreth in denying this power
to Priests, or that the said Doctors are false in yielding it unto them: and
consequently it is plain, that some English sectaries fall into error.
Moreover, seeing that the Bishop conuinceth by such good proofs the truth of
his assertion, and the said two Doctors confess some of their Churches to have
no other Pastors, but such as were ordered by Priests or Presbiters, it is even
as apparent, that such their Churches are in very truth no true Church.

But it is now high time that I end my discourse touching this point, yea that
I conclude this my preface. Being therefore the truth of mine accusation that
the learned sectaries, as Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, and others have
notoriously and grossly erred, is so evidently demonstrated by a few instances
which I have related among diverse others which I have omitted; let me now
demand of my christian reader, what reason he has to ground the everlasting
estate of his soul, either upon the judgment of his learned masters, or upon
his own? And first concerning his learned masters he can not deny, but they
have al erred in some point or other; and does not an error in one thing prove
a possibility of erring in others of like sort? But have his captains any
further vvarrant concerning one article, then touching an other? They have not
without al doubt. How does he then know that they have not erred in all
points in which they dissent from the ancient belief of al Christians their
predecessors? He vvil perhaps answer, that he knows well they err not
touching this and that, although their opinions be never so erroneous touching
other points. Lo now he refers al to his own judgment; I join therefore
here with him, and first I ask what more strong vvarrant he has that he
cannot err, then had his learned masters? Is he comparable to them either in
wit, learning, piety, or dignity of vocation? If he be not, then he is much
more subject to error then they, who notwithstanding have grossly and palpably
erred. I add also, that he takes upon him overmuch in judging of such high
matters, and in censuring his learned Doctors when they say true and when they
err. Moreover, I think there is no man living which has not in some things
or others, altered his judgment and varied from himself; insomuch as he has
deemed false some things which once seemed to him true, and judged others
true which once he thought false; which if it be so, what wiseman in matters
of so great moment as are his faith and religion, vvil trust his own
judgment? For wherefore may not he err in one point as well as in an other?
Now if he do err in matters pertaining to faith and religion, what will be
come of his soul everlastingly if he does not alter his course? But howsoever
it be, every follower of the new religion for the reasons assigned, has just
cause to mistrust the truth of his own belief, or which is yet less, not to
be so peremptory and obstinate in his faith, that he vvil not with
indifferency hear or read any thing that makes against it; which is as much
as I now crave of my courteous Reader.

A CATALOGVE OF THE PRINCIPAL COVNCELS WHICH WERE CELEBRATED WITHIN THE FIRST
SIX HUNDRED YEARS AFTER THE BIRTH OF OUR LORD, as also of the holy Fathers and
most famous Ecclesiastical vvriters, who flourished within the said term of
years; gathered out of the works of Cardinal BARONIVS, and other approved
Authors.
A
AFricanum Concilium, celebrated anno 403. Agathense Concilium, celebrated anno
506. Agathias Hystoricus, flourished anno 566. Alexander 1. Papa, suffered anno
131. Ambrosius Episcopus Mediolan. died an. 397. Amphylochius Iconij Episcopus,
flourished an. 394. Ancyranum Concilium, celebrated an. 314. Andegauense
Concilium, celebrated an. 453. Antiochenum Conciliabulum, celebrated an. 341.
Antisidiorense Concilium, celebrated an. 590. Antonius Abbas, died an. 358.
Aquileiense Concilium, celebrated an. 381. Arator Subdiaconus, flourished an.
544. Aransicanum Concilium 1. celebrated an. 441. Aransicanum Concilium 2.
celebrated an. 463. Arelatense Concilium 1. celebrated an. 314. Arelatense
Concilium 2. celebrated about the year 330. Arelatense Concilium 3. celebrated
an. 453. Arnobius Rhetor, flourished an. 302. Athanasius Episcopus, died an.
372. Aruernense Concilium, celebrated an. 541. Augustinus Episcopus Doctor,
died an. 430. Auitus Viennensis, died about the year 516. Aurelianense
Concilium 1. celebrated an. 507. Aurelianense Concilium 2. celebrated an. 536.
Aurelianense Concilium 3. celebrated an. 540. Aurelianense Concilium 4.
celebrated about the year 545. Aurelianense Concilium 5. celebrated an. 552.
B
BArcionense Concilium, celebrated an. 599. Basilius Episcopus Doctor, died an.
378. Benedictus Abbas, died an. 543. Boaetius Senator, died an. 526.
Bracharense Concilium 1. celebrated an. 563. Bracharense Concilium 2.
celebrated an. 572. Brennacense Concilium, celebrated an. 583. Bicharensis
Abbas, flourished an. 590. Byacenum Concilium, celebrated an. 541.
C
CAbilonense Concilium, celebrated an. 582. Caesarius Gregorij Frater, died
about the year 368. Caesarius Arelatensis, died an. 544. Caesar augustanum
Concilium 1. celebrated an. 381. Caesar augustanum Concilium 2. celebrated an.
592. Carpetoradense Concilium, celebrated about the year 463. Carthaginense
Concilium 1. celebrated an. 348. Carthaginense Concilium 2. celebrated an. 435.
Carthaginense Concilium 3. celebrated an. 397. Carthaginense Concilium 4.
celebrated an. 398. Carthaginense Concilium 5. celebrated an. 398.
Carthaginense Concilium 6. celebrated an. 401. Carthaginense Concilium 7.
celebrated about the year 416: Carthaginense aliud, celebrated about the year
418. Cassianus Monachus, flourished an. 433. Cassiodorus Senator, flourished
an. 562. Chalcedonense Concilium 4. generale, celebrated an. 451. Chromatius
Aquileiensis, flourished about the year 410. Chrysostomus Episcopus Doctor,
died an. 407. Claudianus Mamertus, flourished an. 490. Clemens 1. Papa,
suffered an. 102. Clemens Alexandrinus, flourished an. 196. Climachus Abbas,
flourished about the year 565. Canstantinopolitanum Concilium 1. secundum
generale, celebrated an. 381. Canstantinopolitanum Concilium 2. tertium
generale, celebrated an. 553. Constantinopolitanum Concilium 3. prouinciale,
celebrated an. 459. Constantinopolitanum Council. 4 prouin. sub Iustino Imp.
celebrated an. 518. Constantinopolitanum Council. 5. prouinciale sub Mena,
celebrated an. 536. Cyprianus Episcopus Martyr, suffered an. 261. Cyrillus
Hierosolymitan. flourished an. 386. Cyrillus Alexandrinus, flourished an. 444.
D
DAmasus Papa, died an. 384. Didymus Alexandrinus, flourished an. 372.
Dionysius Alexandrinus, died an. 266. Dionysius Areopagita, died about the
year 120. Dionysius Exiguus, flourished an. 527. Diospolitana Synodus,
celebrated an. 415.
E
EGesippus, flourished an. 167. Egesippus alter, flourished an. 330.
Elibertinum Concilium seu Eliberinum, celebrated an. 305. Ennodius Ticinensis
Episcopus, flourished an. 517. Epannense Concilium, celebrated an. 509. Ephrem
Diaconus, died an. 378. Ephesinum Concilium 3. generale, celebrated an. 431.
Epiphanius Episcopus, died about the year 402. Epiphanius Scholasticus,
flourished an. 466. Euagrius Epiphamensis Hyst. flourished an. 594. Euagrius
Ponticus Monachus, flourished an. 389. Eucherius Lugdunensis Episcopus,
flourished an. 441. Eugipius, flourished an. 496. Eulogius Episcopus
Alexandrin. flourished an. 596. Euodius Vzali Episcopus. flourished about the
year 420. Eusebius Caesariensis, died an. 340. Eusebius Emissenus, flourished
an. 341. Eusebius Vercellensis, died an. 371.
F
FAebadius, flourished an. 388. Facundus Hermanensis Episcopus, flourished an.
548. Faustus Regiensis, flourished an. 520. Ferrandus Diaconus Carthagin.
flourished an. 546. Fortunatus Pictauiensis, flourished an. 566. Fulgentius
Episcopus, died an. 529.
G
GAngrense Concilium, celebrated about the year 325. Gaudentius Brixiensis,
flourished about the year 390. Gelasius 1. Papa, died an. 496. Gennadius
Constantinopolit. died an. 471. Gennadius Presbiter, flourished an. 490.
Gerundense Concilium, celebrated an. 517. Gildas Sapiens, flourished an. 500.
Gregorius Baeticus, flourished an. 388. Gregorius Magnus Papa Doctor,
flourished an. 600. Gregorius Nazianzen. died an. 389. Gregorius Nyssenus,
flourished an. 390. Gregorius Turonensis, flourished an. 596. Gregorius
Thaumaturgus, flourished an. 260.
H
HEsychius Hierosolimitan. flourished an. 400. Hieronimus Presbiter Doctor,
died an. 420. Hierosolymitanum Concilium, celebrated an. 51. Hierosolymitanum
Concilium sub Iuuenali, celebrated an. 454. Hilarious Arelatensis, flourished
an. 460. Hilarious Pictauiensis, flourished an. 369. Hilarious Papa, died an.
467. Hyppolitus Portuensis, flourished an. 229. Hispalense Concilium,
celebrated an. 590.
I
IDacius Clarus, flourished an. 381. Ignatius Mart. Antiochen. suffered an.
110. Innocentius 1. Papa, died an. 417. Iornandus sieve Iordanus Histor.
flourished an. 550. Josephus Iudaeus, flourished an. 96. Irinaeus Lugdunensis,
suffered an. 205. Isidorus Cordubensis, flourished an. 420. Isidorus Pelusiota,
flourished an. 420. Iulianus Toletanus Episcopus, flourished an. 686. Julius
Firnicus Maternus, flourished an. 337. Iuuilius Presbiter, flourished an. 430.
Iustinianus Imperator, died an. 565. Justinius Martyr, suffered an. 165.
Iuuencus Presbiter, flourished an. 330. Iustinianus Valent. Episcopus,
flourished an. 548. Iustus Orgelitanus, flourished an. 548.
L
LActantius Firmianus, flourished an. 316. Laodicaenum Concilium, celebrated
an. 318. Leander Episcopus Hispalensis, flourished an. 590. Leo 1. Papa, died
an. 461. Liberatus Diaconus Carthagin. flourished an. 548. Lucianus Presbiter,
flourished an. 415. Lucense Concilium 1. celebrated an. 569. Lucense Concilium
2. celebrated an. 572. Lucifer Calaritanus, died an. 371. Lugdunense Concilium
1. celebrated an. 570. Lugdunense Concilium 2. celebrated an. 587.
M
MArcellinus Comes Histor. flourished an. 534. Maximus Taurinensis, flourished
an. 465. Martialis Episcopus, died an. 74. Matisconense Concilium 1. celebrated
an. 582. Matisconense Concilium 2. sub Guntheranne, celebrated an. 588.
Mediolanense Concilium, celebrated an. 451. Melitus Sardensis, flourished an.
172. Methodius Tyri Episcopus, flourished an. 303. Milleuitanum Concilium,
celebrated an. 402. Milleuitanum aliud, celebrated an. 416. Mimitius Foelix,
flourished an. 211.
N
NArbonense Concilium 1. celebrated an. 589. Narbonense Concilium 2. celebrated
an. 598. Neocaesariense Concilium, celebrated an. 314. Nicenum Concilium 1.
primum generale. celebrated an. 325.
O
OPtatus Millenitanus, flourished an. 368. Origenes, died an. 256. Orosius
Presbiter, flourished an. 414. Oscense Concilium, celebrated an. 598. Osius
Cordubensis, flourished an. 325.
P
PAcianus Barilonensis, flourished an. 388. Palaestinum Concilium, celebrated
an. 198. Palladius Gallata, flourished an. 388. Papias, flourished an. 118.
Parisiense Concilium 1. positum 2. loco, celebrated about the year 559.
Parisiense Concilium 2. celebrated an. 580. Paschasius Diaconus, flourished an.
496. Paulinus Nolanus, died an. 431. Paulinus Aquitanus, flourished an. 412.
Petrus Chrysologus, flourished an. 502. Philastrius Brixiensis, flourished an.
381. Philo Iudaeus, flourished an. 42. Pontius Diaconus, flourished an. 260.
Possessor Africanus Episcopus, flourished an. 520. Possidonius Calamensis,
flourished an. 430. Primasius Episcopus Adrumetinus dictus Vticensis,
flourished an. 551. Proclus Constantinopol. Episcopus, died an. 446. Procopius
Gazaeus, flourished an. 553. Prosper Regiensis, flourished an. 466. Prudentius,
flourished an. 389.
R
RAdegundis Regina, died an. 590. Regiense Concilium, celebrated an. 439.
Remigius Episcopus Rhemensis, flourished an. 535. Romanum Concilium sub
Siluestro, celebrated an. 325. Sub Iulio 1. celebrated an. 337. Sub Damaso,
celebrated an. 373. 382. Sub Siricio, celebrated an. 386. Sub Caelestino,
celebrated an. 430. 431. Sub Leone 1. celebrated an. 449. Sub Hilario,
celebrated an. 465. Sub Faelice 3. celebrated an. 483. Sub Gelasio, celebrated
an. 494. Sub Symmacho, celebrated an. 502. 503. 504. Sub Gregorio Magno,
celebrated an. 595.
Ruffinus Aquileiensis, died an. 410. Rusticus Diaconus, flourished an. 548.
S
SAlonius Viennensis, flourished an. 470. Saluianus Massiliensis, flourished
an. 412. Santonense Concilium, celebrated an. 566. Sardicense Concilium,
celebrated an. 347. Sedulius Presbiter, flourished an 420. Simeon Stelita
Junior, flourished an. 574. Sacrates Historicus, flourished an. 439. Sozomenus
Histor. flourished an. 439. Sulpitius Seuerus, flourished an. 402. Sydomus
Apollinaris, died about the year 484. Synesius Episcopus, flourished an. 411.
T
TAraconense Concilium, celebrated an. 516. Taurinense Concilium, celebrated
an. 397. Tertullianus, flourished an. 210. Theodoretus Cyri Episcopus,
flourished an. 450. Theophilus Alexander, died an. 390. Toletanum Concilium 1.
celebrated about the year 40. Toletanum Concilium 2. celebrated an. 531.
Toletanum Concilium 3. celebrated an. 589. Toletanum Concilium 4. sub Recaredo,
celebrated an. 597. Turonense Concilium 1. celebrated an. 482. Turonense
Concilium 2. celebrated an. 570.
V
VAsense Concilium 1. celebrated about the year 440. Vasense Concilium 2.
celebrated an. 442. Vasense Concilium 3. celebrated an. 463. Valentinum
Concilium 1. celebrated an. 374. Valentinum Concilium 2. celebrated an. 589.
Venantius Fortunatus, flourished an. 566. Victor Capuanus, flourished an. 545.
Victor Vticensis, flourished an. 487. Victor Tunniensis seu Tunnensis,
flourished an. 566. Victorinus Pictaniensis, flourished about the year 297.
Vigilius Tridentinus, flourished an. 480. Vincentius Lyrinensis, flourished an.
434.
Z
ZEno Veronensis Martyr. flourished about the year 258. Zeno alius, flourished
about the year 390.
THE FIRST PART. OF THE GROVNDES OF THE OLD RELIGION.
Chap. the first. Of the first ground of Catholic religion, to wit: that there
is a God, and that God by his providence, governs al things.
BEFORE I come to entreat of the particular grounds of Catholic religion,
which are rejected by our adversaries; I think it not amiss, briefly to
discourse of certain general grounds of the same: which although I confess
to be admitted by diverse new sectaries; yet in very deed by some are denied,
and after some sort (as I will prove hereafter) impugned and overthrown by the
common doctrine of them al.

The Apostle S. Paul, praerequireth the belief of two things principally, in
him that is to come to the service of almighty God: first, that he believe that
there is a God: secondly, that he likewise believe that the said God will
reward those that serve him: Hebr. 11. verse. 6.
He that comes to God (says he) must believe that he is, and is a rewarder
to them that seek him. Wherefore, grounding upon this sentence of the Apostle,
I place the belief of one God, and of his divine providence, for the first
ground of our religion. For a second, I will assign that we ought to believe
God to be a rewarder of our actions in the world to come, of which reward the
Apostle here principally speaks. For the declaration of which, I purpose to
prove the soul of man to be immortal, and that most certainly according to the
deserts thereof, it shall either be rewarded everlastingly in heaven, or
punished everlastingly in hell.

SECTION THE FIRST. That there is a God.
THE ancient Philosophers, led only by the force of natural reason, to
convince this truth reasoned after this sort: we perceive (said they) diverse
motions of natural bodies in the world, but especially of the heavens; which
motions of necessity proceed from some cause and mouer, which mouer either in
essence or virtue motive, depends of some other mouer, or no. If he depends
not, then he is God; If he depend of some other, it is likewise demanded of
that other, whether he be independent or dependent: If the first, then we must
needs acknowledge him to be God, who only in his essence and virtue motive is
independent of al others: if the second, then of him the same question may be
moved, and so of al others, until we come to some one that is independent, and
of whom all the rest do depend, which we must of necessity affirm to be God.

The same also is proved by the diverse sorts and degrees of creatures, as are
first the four elements, fire, air, water, and earth: secondly, things mixed
imperfect, as snow, rain, hail, etc. Thirdly, things mixed perfect, as
stones, and diverse sorts of metals: Fourthly, things which have life
vegetative only, as trees, herbs, etc. Fifthly, things which have life
vegetative, and sensitive, as all sorts of beasts, fowls, and fishes:
Sixthly, a thing having besides life vegetative and sensitive, also reason, as
man, above whom we place the Angels. Wherefore either in this ascent of the
perfections of things, we shall never make an end, (which is most absurd) or
else we shall proceed and come to some one thing most perfect, which of
necessity we must confess to be God.

Moreover the natural inclination of man, to the acknowledging and worshipping
of God proves the same: for no nation under the Sun has ever been found
(although never so barbarous) which has not acknowledged and worshipped either
the true God, or else some other thing, by it so esteemed: yea every man
naturally in his distresses and miseries, flies unto God, and craves help
and succor of his divine Majesty.

But seeing that I write this treatise for the unlearned sort of people,
omitting to discourse at large of these reasons (although most forcible, yea
invincible) I will use especially this argument following, which every man
(although very simple) may for the most part apprehend and conceive, taken from
the admirable constitution, order, harmony, beauty, and greatness of the
world. And first let every man lift up his eyes to the heavens, and behold
those incorruptible bodies: Let him consider, not only the wonderful beauty,
light, and variety, of those celestial orbs: but also their strange order and
motions, and above al their constancy in their said motions, that in so many
thousands of years, as have passed since their first being, they have not
missed or erred so much as one minute of an hour, of their assigned and
accustomed time: From which it proceeds, that Astronomers can so long before
most certainly and infallibly foretell Ecclipses, conjunctions, and such other
accidents of the Planets.

Among all the ornaments of the heavens, the Sun is the most principal. The
body or orb of this Planet by Astronomers, is proved to be an hundred, sixty
and six times greater, then the globe of the earth and water: wherefore if the
compass of the earth and sea, be demonstrated to be about twenty and one
thousand six hundred miles, what shall we imagine of the greatness of the
Sun? If we likewise consider what a small time, the Sun is in rising and
setting, we shall also perceive the motion of this Planet to be most swift; for
the whole body of it although so huge and great, comes wholly to our sight,
and goes from the same in a very short time, so that it must needs move
diverse miles every minute of an hour, although the motion of it, by us be
hardly perceived. The Sun is the fountain of light, and imparteth it to the
Moon and Stars: By the variety of his motions we distinguish times, as
days, nights, months, and years. The approaching and going away of it from
us, makes the spring, summer, autumn, and winter. The Sun with his presence
in the spring, as it were reuiueth beasts and plants, which seemed before
almost dead through his absence: and yealdeth them a fit season for generation,
multiplication, and bringing forth their seeds. Finally, the Sun principally
draws up vapors from the sea and land, which cause rain, by which the earth
is strangely watered, to make it fruitful. Next unto the Sun, the Moon unto
our sight seems beautiful, which gives light unto the nights, when the Sun
is absent. And although she be variable; yet she is most constant in her
inconstancy and alterations. She has a most strange dominion over the sea,
which she draws and alters as it were with herself: for when the moon
ascends, the sea increases; contrariwise, when she descends it decreaseth,
in so much that she causes (as it is probable) the flux and reflux, or ebbing
and flowing of the sea, by which the water is preserved from putrefaction, and
other necessary effects are wrought.

But who can explicate the variety, number, beauty, and strange effects of the
stars? Surely their number is so great, that the Prophet David in the
Psalms, Psa. 146. verse. 4.
does attribute it unto God to number the multitude of the stars: and I doubt
not, but every man in a clear night, beholding the heavens, and remembering
what has already been said, will cry out with the same Prophet, Ps. 18. v. 1
and say. The heavens show forth the glory of God, and the firmament declares
the works of his hands.

Let us descend something lower, and come to the four elements, the fire, the
air, the water, and the earth: and first admire their wonderful constitution.
For they are so tempered and placed in such order, that although they be endued
with contrary qualities, and there be continual combats between them; yet the
one never altogether overcomes or overthrows the other: yea, every one of
them although it has one quality, contrary to that which is next unto it; yet
it agrees with it in the other, and two altogether opposite in qualities, are
not joined together. For example, the fire is hot and dry: the air next
unto it, is hot and moist: the water next unto the air is moist and cold:
and the earth next unto the water, cold and dry. Besides this, that element,
which is most active, has least force to resist the action of others;
contrariwise that which has most force to resist, is least active; as is
apparent in the fire and the earth. I add moreover, that al these elements
have a natural inclination to their proper places: For the earth coueteth to be
under the water: the water to be above the earth, and under the air: the air
to be above the water, and under the fire: the fire above all the rest. And to
this situation (if they be displaced) they move with greatspeede and violence,
as we see by daily experience.

This notwithstanding, to the end that food, place of aboade, increase,
growing, and dwelling may be given to other creatures, the water is separated
from some part of the earth, and certain bounds are appointed unto it, which
it cannot pass.

The air serves man and beast for breath: the lower region of it, by the
reflection of the beams of the Sun, is preserved from that cold constitution
which it would otherwise have, by reason of the water and earth adjoining, and
so made a fit habitation for them to live in: as also fit for the growing of
plants, herbs, trees, and such like senseless creatures. The middle region by
vapors drawn up from the earth and water, is made colder, and in it the said
vapors, through the coldness of the place, are resolved into rain, and show,
by which the earth is most artificially moistened and made fruitful. The winds
which be dry exhalations, toss the clouds from place to place, that al
parts of the earth may receive this benefit: they serve also for passing from
nation to nation on the sea; they purge the air, etc.

Concerning the sea, we may well admire the vastenesse and motion thereof; the
certain limits, within which it is restrained; the infinite number together
with the huge and strange forms of fishes, and their wonderful increase. The
rivers are as it were the veins of the earth: for like as in our bodies, by
the veins, blood, and moisture is conveyed to every part: so is the earth
moistened by the rivers and springes.

The earth it self is divided into hills, dales, and plain ground, that it may
bring forth diversity of fruit for man, and al sorts of cattle, and yield
them fit places of aboade, according to their natures: In it are diverse
precious stones, and sundry sorts of metals, which serve for the use of man.
It is adorned with variety of flowers, trees, fruits, and herbs, far
surpassing al human art and invention; which it continually nourishes, and
receiving seed from such ornaments, like unto a fertile mother, it daily
brings forth with great increase, new fruit; and yields both man and
beast at al times sufficient food: it is also apt for their pleasure and
recreation.

Here I could make a long discourse of the bodies, and nature of brute beasts
and fishes, but I should be ouerlonge; and therefore at this present it shall be
sufficient to wish every man to consider: First, that al sorts of such living
creatures, find sufficient food agreeable to their diverse natures: then, that
every one of them has fit members, and convenient means to come by their said
food: Thirdly, that al naturally know their enemies, and have convenient
means to avoid them: Fourthly, if they be sick, by the instinct of nature,
they know their physic: Fifthly, the same nature gives them knowledge, how
to feed, and bring up their young ones, which especially is perceived in
birds, who at the fittest season, and in the fittest places breed, and most
artificially make their nests: I add further, that they have al sufficient
vestures to cover their nakedness, and to defend themselves from the extremity
of cold: Finally, the bodies of al such creatures are most aptly formed
according to their natures; as of fishes to swim, of fowls to fly, etc.

But what shall we say of man, for whom al these things were created, and who
is the King and most principal of al these inferior creatures? Surely he
yields us diverse points most worthy of consideration. And first let us note,
that although our soul, be a simple and spiritual substance: yet it has three
powers most noble and excellent, which by Philosophers are called the souls
vegetative, sensitive, and reasonable: to the first it appertains to nourish
our bodies, and to make them grow to convenient stature and greatness: The
second, by the use of our five senses, makes us understand and feel things
corporal and particular: By the third we understand things spiritual and
universal. The first is common also to trees and herbs: the second to brute
beasts: by the third we are like unto Angels. I will not stand to discourse of
our five senses, our imagination, understanding, memory and will, because these
things be something difficult, and require long treatises.

Concerning the body of man: consider first, how strangely it is formed in the
mothers womb, in which unto every member is given his due proportion. Consider
also that in it there are above three hundred bones, little and great, which are
so artificially and firmly joined together, and with such admirable
proportion, that no artificer in the world is able to make the like. Neither
are the sinews and veins, by which the joyntes are joined, and nourishment is
conveyed to al parts of the body, and the equal correspondence of the parts of
one side of the body, to the parts of the other side, together with the
aptness of every member to his place, and to the end for which it was
ordained, less admirable. How wonderful strange is the composition of every
particular member, as of the head, eyes, hands, feet, etc.? Verily an exact
description of every such part, would make this section bigger, then the whole
treatise which I intend. I will add only a word or two, of the manner of the
nourishing of our bodies. To make the food which we receive fit for our
stomach, we have in our mouths two sorts of teeth, some sharp to divide it,
others something flat or plain to grind it: with the tongue we remove it
from place to place, when it is sufficiently chawed: through the throat it is
conveyed into the stomach, where as in a pot or caldron by the heat of the
heart and liver it is boiled, and brought al to one kind of substance: from
thence the purest and best part thereof, by subtle and small passages, is
conveyed to the liver; the grossest part, which is not fit for nutriment, is
cast out at the fundament. The liver having received the said substance,
boileth it again and turns it into blood, that which is superfluous it
sends it to other places, as to the spleen and gal: the rest it disperseth
by the veins throughout the whole body, which is partly turned into flesh and
bones; a part of it is sent to the heart, which being there purified, is turned
into vital spirits; some is sent to the brain, and turned into other spirits,
which we call animales.

These considerations are sufficient to persuade every man, that there is one
supreme God, of infinite power and wisdom, who has created, and most wisely
and sweetly disposed al things. Hence the Prophet David cried out unto God in
the Psalm: Psalm. 103. ver. 24.
How high (or wonderful) O Lord, are thy works, thou have made al things in
wisdom: the earth is filled with thy possession or riches. Surely, if we look
into the nature and condition of any one creature whatsoever, we shall not only
see, Eccles. 3. ver. 14. Galen. lib. 3. de vsu partium: and lib. 5. Psalm. 99.
verse. 3.
that (as the wiseman says) we cannot add to, or take anythinge from the
creatures of God: and that God (as Gallen the prince of al physicians, although
a Pagan confesses) has adorned and beautified the creatures of this world,
better then by any art possible it could have been imagined; but also if we
demand of each creature who made it, it will seem to make answer: God made
me, and I made not my self: according as the Psalm says of us men: He made
us, and we made not our selves. Some Atheist perhaps will say, that al creatures
are thus framed and ordered, not by any supreme governor, having understanding
and power to effect such matters, but by chance. I reply, that like as it is
impossible, that a number of letters or charecters cast together, without any
order of sillables, words, or sentences, should make a perfect book,
containing most wise, learned, and methodical discourses: so it is impossible
that the world should be so exquisitely ordered, and things so ordained one to
another by chance, without the wisdom and disposition of almighty God: And
this confutation of this fond assertion, was used long since by Cicero an
Ethnicke. Wherefore, Cicero lib. 3. de natura Deorum.
like as every man would worthily account him a fool, that should say that a
book, containing wise, and orderly discourses, was made by chance, by the
casting together of diverse charecters or letters; or that a house, most
curiously and artificially built, was made without the handy work of any
artificer, by the accidentary concourse of stones, mortar, timber, and other
such like stuff: so we may well esteem him a fool, and void of al reason and
understanding, who denies that the world was created and ordered by almighty
God. Hence the Psalm says: The fool said in his heart, Ps. 13. v. 1
there is no God. And note: it is not said, he said with his mouth, but in his
heart; to signify that this assertion is so absurd, ridiculous, and
blasphemous, that a fool, although he think it true in his heart; yet may be
ashamed to utter it with his mouth.

To the arguments already brought for the proof of this matter, I add, that
this truth is manifestly delivered unto us, in the holy Scriptures; in which is
contained the history of the creation of the world by God, and diverse other
evident proofs, are found of the being of his divine Majesty: This no Atheist
will or can deny. But al of them answer, that the Scriptures contain but
fables, and are of no authority. I reply, that it may easily be showed, that
the authority of these divine books, ought to be great in any wisemans
judgment in the world. It is proved by diverse learned authors: first, by their
antiquity; for no volumes in the world are so ancient as the books of Moses:
and consequently we may infer, that Moses himself the first writer,
received the true history of those things which were done before his own
days, by succession and tradition from his predecessors; for which it makes,
that Abraham the father of the Jews, might well have seen Sem the son of
Noe: Of other things he was an eye witness himself. Secondly, it is proved
by the verity of diverse prophesies, contained in the holy Scriptures, which
were fulfilled long after that the books themselves were written; which is a
manifest demonstration, that such things were foretold by God, who only
knows and can certainly fortel things contingent and depending of man's free
will: of which it follows, that such prophesies and the books in which they
are found, were written by divine inspiration. Thirdly, it is declared by the
wonderful consent of al these books: for although they were penned by diverse
men, in diverse places, upon diverse occasions, and at sundry times; yet no one
of them contains any one thing contrary to the other: Gre. praefat. in Job.
Of which S. Gregory well infers; that the writers hands were the pens of
the holy Ghost. The same is likewise demonstrated by the test money of diverse
miracles, which have been wrought always in the world, for the confirmation
of the doctrine, which is taught us in these books; by the miraculous
preservation of them, throughout al ages; by the admirable consent of the
seauenty two Interpreters, which were appointed by Ptolomie King of Aegipt to
translate them, and sundry other reasons, which I cannot stand to relate.

Neither do the miracles and prophesies above said, and al other such like
effects and actions, only confirm the authority of the holy Scriptures; but
also evidently prove, that there is a God, who only is omnipotent, and can
work effects surpassing the power and virtue of natural and created agents.
Such miracles and prophesies cannot be denied to have been found in the world
in all ages, of which we have any large records; except we will obstinately
reject the authority and testimony of al men. I may join to this, that
although God be but one in essence; yet he is three in persons: for although
the divine essence be but one most pure and simple substance, not divided; yet
the self same is in three distinct persons, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, who are equal and consubstantial one to the other, and in every
place by their essence, presence, and power. This is proved by Divines, because
God must needs understand and love himself: of his understanding the Son is
begotten; of his will, of which is love, proceeds the holy Ghost. And although
during the law of Moses, and in all former ages, this high mystery for some
respects (especially for fear, least that men in those weak days of the
Trinity of persons, should infer three Gods) was something concealed from the
vulgar sort of people; yet it was known and believed by the learned, and is
manifestly expressed in the old Testament it self: see Genes. 1. verse. 26.
where God speaks in the plural number. Let us make man, etc. Genes. 18. ve.
2. where Abraham saw our Lord as three, and adored and spoke unto one in the
singular number: Psalm. 32. verse. 6. where the heavens are said, to have been
made firm by the word of our Lord, and al their power by the spirit of his
mouth. Isa. 6. verse. 3. where the Scraphins are said to have cried unto God,
holy, holy, holy; using the word holy thrice. The like testimonies are, Isa.
34. verse. 16. chap. 48. verse. 16. chap. 61. verse. 1. and in diverse other
places: wherefore this was acknowledged by the learned Rabbi. Ib ba. in ca. 6
De^ter. Rabbi. Abbi. in Thr. Rabb. Ha cadas in c. 9. Isai. Paraphras. called. in
ca. 45. Isai: Rab. Abi. Nuzielin Psalm. 2.
Rabbines of the Jews, before the coming of Christ. The Sibil. apud Lact. li
4 divine. instit. cap. 6. Mercur Tres. Dialog. Prin. Plat: Plotinus, li. de
tribus hipostas.
Sibils likewise made mention of it; and some of the ancient Heathen
Philosophers: And thus much of this matter.

SECTION THE SECOND. Almighty God has care of worldly affairs, and rules al
things by his divine providence.
OTHER Atheists there be, who although they confess that there is a God; yet
they bereave him of his divine providence, and make him altogether careless of
worldly affairs, and consequently attribute the success of al matters, to
fortune and policy. These also are easily confuted by diverse arguments,
conuincinge them of falsehood and blasphemy. And first thus I argue; If God
has no providence and care of worldly matters, either it is because he is not
able to discharge that office, or else because he refuses and will not
undertake the same; for no other cause can be assigned: but either of these
assertions overthrows his divine nature, as is manifest: therefore we must
needs confess that by his providence he governs the world. That the first
is contrary to the nature of God, it is apparent; because God is present in
every place, his power also, and his wisdom and knowledge is infinite: and
consequently, by reason of his presence, he is absent from no creature; by
reason of his infinite power, he is able to do al things, and cannot be
wearied; by reason of his infinite wisdom, he knows how al things are to
be done, and he cannot be ouercharged with the multitude of businesses; by
reason of his infinite knowledge, he knows the nature and necessities of al
creatures, and whosoever affirms the contrary denies God to be God. It
appears likewise that he is able to undertake this government, by the
discourse of the first Section. For who will deny, but he that created al
things in such admirable order is able also to govern, and have providence
over the same? Hence are these words of the Prophet Isay. Isa. 40. verse. 28.
God the everlasting Lord, who created the bounds of the earth, will not fainte
nor labor; neither is there any mean to search out, or comprehend his
wisdom: thus the Prophet. The second likewise is repugnant to the nature of
God, who is infinitely good: for if it be the part of a Prince, if he obtain
or institute a Kingdom or common wealth, to govern the same, and the neglect
of this does impeach his credit in every honest or moral man's judgment: how
can we say that God, who is goodness itself, refuses to have any providence or
care over the world by him created? does it not appertain to a creator, to
preserve and govern his work? what workman neglects the excellent
workmanship of his hands? Hence S. Ambrose affirms, Ambr. lib. 1. offic.
ca. 13.
that it were great inclemency (or cruelty) in God, not to have care over those
things, which he has made. And of this reason I infer, that it is even as
absurd and blasphemous, to deny the providence of almighty God; as to deny
his being: for whosoever denies the first, impugneth the second; because if
the denial of this providence, be prejudicial either to the power or goodness
of God, it is manifest, that it is also prejudicial to his nature, which must
needs be of infinite power and goodness.

This providence may likewise be proved by the first creation and constitution
of the world: for seeing that God then, out of his infinite wisdom and goodness
(as I have before declared) ordained one thing to another, and provided
sufficiently for the necessities of al sorts of creatures; seeing also that his
nature remains the same, it may well be inferred and supposed, that he
continues always the same care. But like as among other creatures, he had an
especial regard of man, in the creation of the world: for besides that he
provided necessaries for his food and apparel, for him also he produced the
beauty and sweet smelles of flowers; the precious stones, musk, diverse sorts
of spices; herbs and roots medecinable; iron, lead, tin, silver, gold, and
other sorts of metals; sugarcanes which yield us sugar; silke-wormes, etc.
For man also he gave the loadstone that quality that the needle, which it
touches turns always to the North poole: So likewise it is evident, that
the eye of Gods providence does principally behold him. Moreover the sudden
change and alteration of worldly estates, as the sudden ruin of most potent
empires, kingdoms, common wealths, cities, and the overthrow of armies, in
the opinion of men invincible: which empires, kingdoms, common wealths,
cities, and armies, having bin miraculously conquered by a few, far inferior
to themselves in strength, are most firm arguments of the providence of God.
So likewise is the strange punishment of wicked men and tyrants, and the reward
of the good not seldom in this world, recorded in all histories; but especially
in the old Testament, which the greatest Atheist in the world cannot deny to
be of great authority: for there we may read, that the Jews, as long as they
served God, enjoyed prosperity; and contrariewise, when they forsook him, fell
into adversity and a thousand calamities. The same may be confirmed by diverse
prophesies both of holy Scripture, the Sibils and others, foretelling such
things unto men, as could not be foreseen in natural causes. The like
argument may be taken from miracles. For why should God either foretell such
things, or work such extraordinary effects, if he had no care of worldly
creatures? Finally al nations be they never so barbarous, have ever
acknowledged the providence of God; which is a manifest proof, that the
acknowledging of this, proceeds from the instinct of nature it self. Eccles.
5. verse. 5.
Wherefore I conclude with this sentence of the wiseman: Do not give thy
mouth, that thou make thy flesh to sin: That is to say: Be not thou
blasphemous in thy words, against the providence of almighty God, to the end
that thou may sin more freely, and say not before an Angel, who is the
minister and executor of Gods providence, there is no providence: least that
God perhaps being angry against thy speeches, overthrow all the works of thy
hands. Hitherto Solomon in the book of Ecclesiastes. And this shall suffice
for the proof of the first ground of true religion, to wit, that there is a
God; and that this God by his divine providence governs the world, out of
which arises the first band, that man has to serve, obey, fear, love, and
praise God above al things. For reason requires that we yield him these
duties, who is the chiefest good thing, and the fountain of al goodness, who
is the Lord, maker, and governor both of us, and al other creatures.

Chapter 2. Of the second ground of our religion, to wit: that the soul of man
is immortal, and that it shall either be rewarded everlastingly in heaven, or
punished everlastingly in hell.
THE immortality of the soul of man, which I assigned for the second general
ground of religion, may briefly be proved by these forcible reasons. First thus
I argue: A thing spiritual, and independent of al corporal substance, which
has no original cause of decay in it self, cannot be corrupted or destroyed
by any corporal agent, or any intrinsecal quality contained in it self: But
the soul of man is spiritual, and independent of al corporal substance, and
has no original cause of decay in it self: Therefore it cannot be corrupted
or destroyed by any corporal agent; or any intrinsecal quality contained in it
self. The truth of the first proposition appears by this, that al corruption
must of necessity proceed, either of some intrinsecal or extrinsecal cause.
And that a thing spiritual, and in his being independent of al corporal
substance, (especially of that which by the Philosophers is called materia
prima; which is the fountain and cause of corruption in the four elements,
and al other things of them compounded) and having in it self no intrinsecal
quality, that can bring it to destruction, cannot possibly perish through any
intrinsecal cause; it is most manifest. And what extrinsecal cause can destroy
a thing spiritual, besides the omnipotent power of God? The second likewise may
easily be proved: For first (besides that the nature of the soul it self has
no contrary oppugning it) it is evident that the principal powers of the same
(I mean the understanding, will, and memory,) depend not in their operations,
of any certain corporal organ or part of the body, as our corporal senses do:
of which it follows that they may be separated from the said body, and
retain notwithstanding after such separation, their operations; and
consequently that they be spiritual: which prerogative if it be granted to the
powers of the soul, it cannot be denied to the soul it self.

Moreover, although the understanding in diverse first operations, craves aid
of the senses, and the sensual imagination; yet it is manifest, that his
principal operations are independent of them. For the understanding discourses
of it self; reflecteth upon his own operations, and knows it self to
know; apprehends things universal; infers one thing of an other; by
things sensible and corporal, it comes to the knowledge of things spiritual,
yea of God himself; contemplateth virtue, and judges that for the love of it,
corporal miseries are patiently to be suffered; corrects the errors of the
senses; knows vice, etc. Al which operations are spiritual independent of the
body, and above the object of our corporal senses. And seeing that the soul
has such operations, it necessarily requires a manner of being, answerable
unto them; that it may not only remain perfect, and incorruptible, after the
corruption of the body, and the separation of it self from the same: but also
then exercise such operations. The soul likewise coueteth eternity, loves
virtue, and hates vice, and is adorned with freewil; which be manifest proofs
of a spiritual and immortal substance.

Further, God has ordained every creature to some end; Neither is any one to
be termed perfectly happy and contented, until it attain to the said end,
and in it as fully satiated, rests. And seeing that the end and perfect
felicity of man, cannot be obtained in this life. For no worldly thing, which
man in this life can comprehend or possess, is able to satisfy his
understanding and will: wherefore, seeing also that every thing is so created,
that at some time or other it may enjoy his end and felicity, the final and
chiefest happiness of man, must needs consist in some thing, which he may
attain unto after his death, and in the world to come; and consequently his
soul is immortal. Some Epicure perhaps will contend, that the final end and
supreme happiness of man, does consist in the enjoying of worldly pleasures:
but this cannot be; both because these never satiate man. For the soul is
never fully contented with the worldly pleasures, with which she is delighted;
yea (not seldom) in a small time loatheth that which before she most desired:
and also, because if this were true, and the soul were mortal, we must needs
condemn God of injustice, who not seldom suffers the wicked to live in such
pleasures, and bereaueth the just of the same; and moreover suffers them to
fall into a thousand miseries and calamities, which he could not in justice do,
if the true felicity of man did consist in the enjoying of worldly pleasures.

The same may be confirmed by the consent of most of the ancient Philosophers,
and generally of al nations; which does manifestly declare, that natural reason
it self is sufficient to persuade any man this truth. I add further, that if
any credit be to be given to holy Scriptures or authentical histories, diverse
souls of men dead, have appeared unto men living. Finally, this appertained to
the manifestation, both of the omnipotency of the power of God, and also to
the beauty of the world, and variety of creatures; that like as God created
some creatures altogether spiritual, as are the Angels: and others altogether
corporal, as are al earthly creatures besides man: so he should create one
creature partly spiritual and partly corporal, in which degree we place only
man. And hence it proceeds that in the book of Genesis, in the history of
the creation of the world we read, that al other living corporal creatures,
being produced and framed of corporal substance; as fish and foul of the
water, and beasts of the earth; Genes. 2. verse. 7.
God inspired or breathed into the face of man the breath of life: by which is
signified, that the soul of man only, among al such creatures, was created by
God, and not produced of any earthly substance; and consequently, that it only
is immortal. And this is also signified unto us by those words of God: Genes.
1. v. 26.27.
Let us make man according to our Image and likeness. For he is like unto God:
First, because his understanding is apt to conceive al things, and therefore
may in some sort, be said to be of an infinite capacity: secondly, because his
will cannot be fully satiated with any thing, but almighty God, who is an
infinite good thing, and therefore also is after a sort infinite: thirdly,
because the will has free liberty, and is not bound to this or that: lastly,
because the soul has a certain natural inclination and desire to
immortality. Al which inclinations and properties of the understanding and will,
prove the soul it self to be immortal.

For the proof of the other part of the title of this Chapter: viz. that the
soul of man most certainly shall be either rewarded in heaven or punished in
hell, after this life everlastingly; I must presuppose two things, as true.
First, that among the actions of man some be virtuous, others vicious. This is
taught us by the law of nature it self; from whence it proceeds, that al
nations have ever esteemed blasphemy, perjurie, murder, theft, adultery, and
such like actions, vicious; and contrariewise, they have judged justice,
chastity, fortitude, and other such like laudable dispositions, to be virtues.

Secondly, I must presuppose that man has free will: which I am not in this
place to prove out of holy Scripture against Heretics: but to show by
natural reason against Atheistes. And therefore I prove it first, because al
nations by the instinct of nature, have ever punished vice, which they could
not have done, had not man free will to avoid it. For no man can justly be
punished for a fault, which he cannot choose but commit. Hence also proceed
Councels of estate in all kingdoms and common wealths, and consultations and
deliberations concerning peace, war, and other matters; what course is to be
taken; how this and that may be composed; how imminent dangers may be avoided
etc. which were al in vain, if it were not in man's power to do this; or that.
Finally, every one finds it true in himself by experience, that it is in his
own power to do or leave undone, any action that he undertakes, and that
nothing does enforce him to do that, which he does, but that he does it of his
own free choice and election.

Out of these two assertions presupposed I infer, that Gods justice has
ordained a heaven and a hell after this life. For it was necessary that man both
by promise of reward, should be allured to virtue, and that by the fear of hell
he should be withdrawn from vice: and also that they, which out of their own
free will with the help of Gods grace, embraced virtue, should have some reward
for the same: contrariewise that they which followed vice, should receive their
just punishment. And seeing that this retribution is seldom seen to be made in
this world (for the just and virtuous are diverse times afflicted even to death;
and the wicked contrariewise even to their end enjoy prosperity.) It is
certain that these things are reserved for the world to come. Further,
because the soul is then separated from the world and the flesh, and
consequently freed from al combats between vice and virtue, we may well
infer, that the soul shall remain for ever in such state, as it is found at
the hour of death. And this might also be proved by holy Scriptures, of whose
authority even against Atheists before: by diverse apparitions recorded in
authentical Authors, which no man can in wisdom and reason reject as false and
forged: and the consent of al nations. Out of this discourse I gather an other
motive or band, that man has to serve God and live virtuously. For seeing that
his soul is to remain for ever, either in perpetual joy in heaven, or in
perpetual pain in hell, according to his deserts, it behooves every one with all
his endeavor to embrace virtue, and eschew vice; because eternal joy, is to
be preferred before any transitory pleasure, and any temporal pain whatsoever
is to be endured, rather then the everlasting. For to use our Saviors words:
Math. 16. verse. 26.
What does it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and sustain the
damage of his soul?

Chapter 3. Of a third principal ground of our faih, to wit: that Christian
religion only is the true worship of God.
I HAVE already proved that there is a God, who by his omnipotent power has
created al things, and by his divine wisdom and providence governs the
same. I have also declared, that the soul of man is immortal, and to be
rewarded or punished everlastingly in heaven or hell, according to his merits or
demerits, during this temporal life. Out of which most true assertions, I have
gathered, that man owes God al duty, both in respect of the excellency of
his divine Majesty, and also for the benefits received at his most bountiful
hands. I have likewise inferred of this, that the eternal estate of our soul,
depends of the well or evil spending of the moment of this transitory life:
that we ought to have a special care to live well and virtuously.

Now, because the ground of all duty unto God, and the fountain of al true
virtue, is true religion, which is defined by Divines to be a virtue, by which
man does give to God worship and reverence: Let us go on and show, where this
supreme virtue is to be found, and what sort of people can lay just claim to
so noble and precious a treasure. And seeing that man is not only taught and
bound by the law of nature it self, to be religious, (from whence it
proceeds that al nations under the heavens, have always adored some God,
true or false:) but also cannot possible without this virtue, attain to the
final end (I mean the everlasting salvation of his soul) I may well affirm
that religion is both a virtue principally to be regarded by mortal men, and
that the exercise thereof, is (as it were) the end wherefore a certain time is
allotted them to live in this pilgrimage; and also that God almighty (supposing
that he will be duly honored, and served by them in this world, and give every
man sufficient means to attain to his chiefest happiness in heaven) cannot
suffer at any time true religion, clean to perish or altogether to decay on
earth. For if this may be, or could ever have been, God may be, or could have
been altogether deprived of his due honor from men: and men likewise void of
al means of obtaining their final end. True it is, that man by original sin,
committed by his first parents in Paradise, straied from this final end, and
deserved everlasting damnation; but the goodness and mercy of his maker
through the merits of our Savior JESUS Christ, and by faith in him, restored
him again although not altogether to his former felicity, yet to possibility
of salvation; and consequently through his grace gave him power to serve God in
this world, and to enjoy him through al eternity in the next. Of which it
follows, that being so that God has always required honor and service from
man, and left him sufficient means to attain to eternal bliss, that he has
always in like manner in some place or other, been duly served; and in some
place or other has preserved true religion.

This therefore being presupposed, I think that no man will, or can deny, but
true religion from the days of Abraham until the coming of Christ, was to be
found among the Jews; yea during some ages immediately before his birth, only
among them, and such as followed their law and institutions. This is manifest,
because God (as I have showed) has ever been religiously worshipped by some
people or other; but no other people can be named, that can make any just
challenge to religion, during some ages before Christ, besides the Jews: it
follows therefore that the Jews had true religion, which may likewise be
confirmed by the testimony of holy Scripture, of whose authority before; by
diverse miracles in them recorded, and sundry prophesies in them contained, now
verified; and other arguments. And hence I bring my first reason for the proof
of the truth of Christian religion, which I affirm to be the true worship of
God. For if it be granted that true religion was in those days among the
Jews, it must needs also be confessed, that it is now among the Christians.
The sequel is evident, because all the Scriptures, ceremonies, figures, and
prophesies of the Jews manifestly prove, that Christ was the true Messiah,
promised to their holy Patriarchs and Prophets: and consequently, that in his
Church only, God is truly honored and religiously worshipped: and to omit
the mistical signification of their ceremonies and figures, the prophesies only
contained in the Scriptures, among them even in those days authentical, will
sufficiently declare this truth. I will run over some of them briefly, because
I need not be long in this matter, seeing it is so excellently well handled, by
the author of the Christian directory or resolution, and others of our nation.

First therefore, Christ was promised by God unto Adam, presently after his
fall, Genes. 31. verse. 15.
when he said to the Serpent or Devil: The seed of the woman shall crush thy
head, and thou shall lie in wait to hurt his seed. Which prophecy was
fulfilled, when Christ by his bitter passion conquered the Devil. Secondly, God
promised unto Abraham and Isaac at sundry times, that al nations on the earth
should be blessed in their seed: Genes. 12. v. 18.22.
that is, that al natitions should come to be blessed through Christ, who
according to his humanity came from those holy Patriarks. The time likewise in
which our Savior was borne, was that, which was foretold for the birth of the
true Messiah: for then the government was taken from the tribe of Judas,
Genes. 49. verse. 10.
and given unto Herod a stranger. Wherefore in those days according to the
prophecy of Jacob, who foretold that the scepter should not be taken from the
house of Judah, until the coming of the Messiah, even the Jews themselves (as
I could easily prove) expected their Messiah. In like sort, Christ came before
the destruction of the second temple of Jerusalem, as was foretold by the
Prophet Aggeus. Agg. 2.
He suffered after sixty two Dan. 9, 26.
Hebdomadas or weeks of years expired, from the building of the said temple,
as was foretold by the Prophet Daniel. He was borne of Isa. 7. v. 14.
a Virgin according to the prophecy of Isay: And that in Mich. 5. v. 1
Bethelem according as it was foretold by the Prophet Micheas. Ier. 31. v. 15
Infants were murdered there about, as it was prophesied by Jeremy. It was
moreover foretold in the book of Numbers, that a Number. 20, 17
star should appear at the birth of the Messiah. In the Psalms, and by the
Prophet Isaie, that Psalm. 71, 10. Isa. 60. v. 6.
Kings should offer up unto him gold and other gifts. By the Prophet
Malachie, that he should be Malac. 3, 1.
presented in the temple. By the Prophet Osee, that he should fly Osee 11. v.
2.
into Aegipt, and be recalled again: by the Prophet Isaie and Malachie, that a
voice of one preaching in the desert, an Isa. 40. v. 3. Malac. 3. v. 1
Angel or forerunner should prepare his way. By the same Isaie, that the
Messiah should Isa. 29, 8. c. 35, 5. c. 61, 1. ca. 53. ver. 4.
work strange miracl^s, and that he should Dan. 9. v. 24. and 26.
die for the sins of the world: which was foretold by the Prophet Daniel by
David in the Psalms, that he should be Ps. 40, 10. Psalm. 54, 14. Psalm. 108, 8.
betrayed by his own disciple. By Zachary that he should Zach. 9, 9.
ride into Jerusalem upon an Ass, and that he should be sold for thirty ca.
11. v. 12.
pieces of silver. By Isaie that he should be Isa. 50, v. 6.
beaten, buffeted, and spit on. By David and the same Isaie, that his body
should be Ps. 37. v. 18.
torn with whips. Moreover by Isaie that he should be Isa. 53, verse. 2. and 12.
put to death among thieves and malefactors. By David that Ps. 68. v. 22.
vinegre should be given him to drink, his apparel 21. and 19.
divided, and lots cast for his upper garment. Al which prophesies and diverse
others concerning almost every particular act and circumsta^ce of any
importance, which was to pass in the life of the true Messiah, were fulfilled
in Christ, as the Evangelists record. But concerning his passion I cannot omit
the prophecy of the Patriarch Jacob, who foretold that the Messiah should wash
his Genesis 49, 11.
stole in wine, and his cloak in the blood of grapes, which our redeemer did
when he washed his humane nature, with which his divinity was cloaked, in his
own blood; which he therefore called the blood of grapes, because it was to be
veiled under the form of wine in the dreadful Sacrament and sacrifice of the
Altar, which Deu. 32.14.
is called in the Scripture the blood of grapes. In like sort the Ps. 106. and
15. verse. 10. Zac. 9. v. 11.
descent of Christ into hell, was foretold by the Prophet David in the Psalms,
the Prophet Zachary, and others. His resurrection Psalm. 15. verse. 9. Ose. 6. v.
3
the third day by David and Osee: His Psalm. 103. and 67.
ascension and sitting on the right hand by the same David: the Isa. 44. verse.
3. Joel: 2. verse. 28.
coming of the holy Ghost, by David, and also by the Prophet Isay, and Joel.
Finally the Genesis 49. v. 10. Ps. 2 v. 8. Ps. 21 67. 71. etc Isa. 2. v. 2. c. 19.
v. 25 27. etc. Osc: 2. v. 1. 24. Joel: 2. v. 28. Mal 1. verse. 11. Zach. 2. v.
11. ca. 8. v. 20. cap. 9. v. 10. etc.
Gentiles were called to his religion, as the Patriarch Jacob, David, Isay,
Osee, Joel, Malachie, Zachary, and all the rest of the holy Prophets had long
before signified. I omit the promises of the Messiah in general, which be
infinite through the old Testament; he that will see some of them, may turn to
these places: Deuteronomy. 18. v. 18. Psalm. 2.88.71. Iere. 23. v. 5. and 33. Ezech.
34. v. 22.23. Isa. 2. v. 2. ca. 4. v. 2. ca. 9. v. 6. ca. 11. v. 1. ca. 35. v.
5. Dan. 9. v. 23. Agg. 2. v. 4. etc. I cannot stand to recite the predictions,
that he should be both God and man, which is most evidently delivered unto us;
Psalm. 109. v. 1. 3. where he is bid sit on the right hand of God, and said to
be begotten before Lucifer was created. Isa. 53. v. 8. where it is said, that
no man can tell or recount his generation. Isa. 9. v. 6. where the Prophet
tells us, that his name shall be God. Iere. 23. v. 6. and cap. 33. v. 16.
where he is called Jehovah, a name in Scripture only attributed unto God, and
in diverse other places. And this was necessary for the fulpaiment of the
ransom of our redemption: for every man naturally descending from Adam, being
a sinner and the enemy of God, and therefore not in case to appease his anger;
his actions likewise being finite, proceeding from a creature, and therefore
not answerable to man's infinite offense against God, it was needeful that he
who was to redeem man, should be the friend of God, and both God and man: that
through his friendship with God, he might be in case to merit reward, and
satisfy for our sins; through his humane nature in case to suffer death and
other afflictions; and through his divine, his actions might be of infinite
price and value. But for the proof of Christian religion, out of the
authentical Scriptures and prophesies of the Jews, this shall suffice. For a
second proof, I allege the prophesies of the Sea Lact. l. 1. divine. insti. c.
5. l. 4. ca. 6. and 15. Aug. lib. 18. de ciuitate Dei ca 23.
Sibils, which living before Christ, by the providence of almighty God,
foretold his coming to the Gentiles, and many particular circumstances,
belonging unto the work of our redemption: as that our Savior should be God;
that he should be borne of a Virgin; that he should cure al infirmities; raise
the dead; walk upon the Sea; suffer for our sins, etc.

The process and increase of Christian religion, yields us a third argument
for the proof of this truth. For our Savior Christ confirmed his doctrine
with supernatural miracles, as is recorded by all the four Evangelists: yea
Josephus lib. 18. de antiquit. c. 4. Eusebius li. 1. histor. cap. 11.
Josephus himself a Jew is a witness of the same, as also of his
resurrection. His Apostles and Disciples after his ascension, wrought the like
miracles; and this gift (according as he fore told) has always remained with
their successors: yea, all the prophesies of Christ concerning things to come,
have hitherto been fulfilled. The Church by him founded, has miraculously
dilated, and spread it self throughout the whole world, not by force of arms,
nor by rhetorical persuasions, but by Gods mighty protection and assistance;
She has been persecuted (as he foretold) but could never be overcome, she
has always had the victory over the gates of hell, and continued glorious to
this day in despite of Emperors, Kings, Jews Pagans, Heretics, and other
enemies, which have sought her overthrow. And here occurreth another argument,
approving the same: to wit, that extreme miseries, and calamities by the just
judgment of God, have commonly fallen upon the enemies and persecutors of
Christ and Christian religion. Let us behold some of them in particular. Herod
Josephus lib. 17. antiq. ca. 10. and lib. 1. de bell. Iudaico: ca. 21.
Ascolonita, who persecuted Christ in his infancy (as Josephus a Jew records)
after great misery endured, went about to murder himself and had effected
it, had not his hand been stayed, by some near about him. Herod Joseph. l.
18. antiq. c. 9. and lib. 2. de bello Iud. ca. 8.
Antipas, who beheaded S. John Baptist, and scorned our Savior a little before
that he was crucified, was first deposed by Caius the Emperor, then banished to
Lions in France, and afterward to the inhabitable places of Spain, where
abandoned by all men, he ended his life. Herod Act. 12. Joseph. li. 19. antiq.
cap. 7.
Agrippa, who put to death S. James the brother of S. John the Evangelist, and
imprisoned S. Peter, was soon after in a public assembly strooken from heaven
with a most horrible disease, and died eaten up with lice: yea according to the
testimony of Josephus, the whole Joseph. ibid. li. 18. cap. 7.
stock of Herod although then most ample, within seauenty years was rooted
out. Pilate, Eutrop. l. 7. histor. Eus. lib. 2. cap. 7. hist.
after great disgrace received from the Emperor, murdered himself, as we read
in Eutropius and Eusebius. The Jews themselves, fell into most Philo: in lib.
de legate. sua ad Cajum. Joseph. in li. de bell. Iud.
extreme miseries, in all places by them inhabited, throughout the whole Roman
Empire, as Philo and Josephus their countrymen being eye witnesses abundantly
testify. Before that the city of Jerusalem was besieged by Titus, son of
Vespasian the Emperor, Ios. li. 2. de bell. Iudaic. c. 17. lib. 6. c. 1.12.8.9.7.
an hundred thousand were slain, and almost forty thousand sold. After the
siege of the city began, Titus crucified every day five hundred of those that
fled out of the city for famine. During the time of the whole war, Ios. lib.
7. de bell. Iudaic. cap. 28.11.17.20.
ninety and seven thousand, were taken captives, and eleven hundred thousand
by one means or other lost their lives. Finally their temple and city was
burnt, and overthrown. The like punishment has fallen upon the Roman
Emperors, who have been Christ's enemies. Nero, who first began the tragedy,
being Sueton. c. 23. Dio. in Nerone.
cast down into great distress, murdered himself. Domitian, hated of al men
for his cruelty, was Suet. ca. 17. Dio. in Domitian.
slain by a private man. Hadrian before that he died fell into such misery,
through diverse diseases, that he Philost. lib. 8.
wished for one that would kill him. Seuerus being often put in danger of his
life, by his own son Antoninus, who as he thought intended also to murder
his other son Geta, taking thought and grief came to his end. Lampridius.
Alexander was murdered in Germany. Trebellius.
Maximinus, Gallus, Volusianus, and Gallienus, received their deaths from their
own soldiers. Eusebius. in hist. lib. 7. cap. 1.
Decius not having reigned two years, lost his life in war against the
Goths. Eus. l. 7. ca. 9. Trebel. and alij Consta^tius in orat. ad sancto.
coetu^ c. 24 see Eusebius. in vita Constable. li. 4. c. 11.
Valerianus by treason was delivered into the hands of his enemy the King of
Persia, who for a time used him for a foote-stoole to go to his horse,
afterward he fleaed him alive, and poudered him with salt. Aurelianus strooken
from heaven with thunder, soon after was murdered by his own company.
Vopisous.
Dioclesianus, and Maximianus Herculeus, because they could not, according to
their endeauours prevail against the Church of Christ, and root out al
Christianity, gave over the rule of the Empire. Of them the Panegir. 4. victor.
first lived so long as a private man, until he saw Christian religion flourish
under Constantine the great, then he died miserably according to Eusebius, but
Victor says that he was reported to have poisoned himself; Eusebius. li. 8. ca.
18. and 29.
Maximianus afterward either was hanged or hanged himself. Gallerius
Maximianus being strooken by God with a most horrible disease, was forced
before his death to recall his own and other edictes, made against Christians.
Maximinus likewise being overcome by Licinius, recalled such edictes in the
East: and taken moreover with a most strange disease, his eyes falling out of
his head, died miserably, confessing that such calamities fell upon him for his
cruelty used against Christians. Licinius was put to death by Constantine the
great. Julian the Apostata in battle against the Persians, strooken from heaven
with a dart, blaspheming Christ as author of his death, yielded up the ghost.
And these were the principal Heathen Emperors that have persecuted our
religion: to whom I add two Arrian Emperors, Co^stantius, and Valens, who
impugned the divinity of Christ, and persecuted Catholics for professing him
to be equal and consubstantial to his Father; Hier. ep. ad Heliodor. Victor
Amianus, and others.
Of them the first died miserably in a country village, marching against Julian
the Apostata: Hie. Ruf and others.
The other having received the overthrow from the Goths, was burned by them
alive in a country house.

These calamities and miseries, as every man must needs confess were
extraordinary, and fell upon these men for some sin or misdemeanour of theirs.
And seeing that commonly they fell upon all the persecutors of Christian religion,
and commonly upon no others, it is evident that their persecution of the Church
of Christ, was the cause of their said miseries and calamities. I could add
diverse other reasons, conuincing Christian religion to be the true worship of
God; as that most wise men, and most profound and deep Scholars, most expert
in all sciences, and most perfect in those languages, which seem most needful
to attain to the knowledge of true religion, have approved and embraced
Christian doctrine. I could also bring another argument, taken from the purity
and sanctity of the said religion, and generally of all the true professors of
the same: others taken from the absurdity of al those, that can make any
challenge to this prerogative, from the testimony of the professors of diverse
other sects, etc. But I should be ouerlong, only I will add against the Jews,
who had the truth among them before the coming of Christ, that presently after
the promulgation of our religion, they fell into most gross and fantastical
opinions: yea held and taught most execrable blasphemies, concerning God
himself, and other matters of faith: as that God does weep, bewail, shed
tears, and knock his breast for sorrow; that he has so punished them, that
he prays upon his knees; that he sinned in taking unjustly light from the
Sun, and giving it to the Moon; that he has been deceived by some
Rabbines; that he studieth the law of Moises; that souls pass from one body
to another; and much other such like damnable doctrine, which every man may see
approved in their Talmud, Se Andraeas Masius in c. 5. Iosue. v. 10. Eugubinus
in Exo. c. 12.
a book as highly esteemed by them al, as the old Testament it self, for they
profess in the title of the said book, that whosoever denies it, denies God
himself. Nay, I add further against them, that in this their Talmud it self,
it is delivered as an ancient and famous tradition, that their Messiah was to
restore them to liberty, on the same month and day of the year, on which they
were delivered from the bondage of Aegipt; which tradition most aptly agrees
to the time on which our Lord suffered, as every Christian knows. And of this
matter, this shall suffice.

Out of the discourse of this chapter, I likewise infer, that no other
religion in the world besides the Christian is true, or does truly worship God,
which is manifest, both because no other follows the precepts and doctrine
of Christ the redeemer of mankind: and also because our Savior abolished al
former laws, except the law of nature; yea he abrogated even the law of
Moises it self, which was received from God; and according to the predictions
of the holy Prophet, instituted one only law, and through the merits of his
bitter passion, established one only Church, which only possesses true
religion, and prescribes according to his institution the true worship of
God: And this I think no man that believes Christian religion to be true, will
deny.

Chapter 4. That among Christians, they only that profess and embrace the
Catholic faith and religion, are in state of salvation, and do truly worship
God.
IN the chapter next before, I have declared that the true worship of God,
and true religion, is only to be found among Christians: now I go further,
and affirm that al Christians cannot truly challenge to themselves these
inestimable treasures; but that they are due only to us Catholics. Before this
I have disputed against Atheistes, Infidels, Jews, and other external enemies
of Christ, and therefore I used not any arguments taken out of the new
Testament, which they with one consent reject: now I am to deal with
Heretics, who pretend themselves to be Christians, but have departed out of
Christ's fold, yet admit of the authority of sundry books, not only of the old,
but also of the new Testament; and therefore against these, I will allege as
occasion shall serve diverse sentences out of the said books by them admitted.
And to proceed orderly in this matter, I will bring my whole discourse to
certain principal conclusions, of which although some be partly already proved
against external Infidels; yet I will briefly prove them again out of the new
Testament, against Heretics.

First therefore, that Christ is the redeemer of al mankind, and that by his
bitter passion and paineful death, he has satisfied for all our sins, if we
please to apply his merits to our souls, 1. Io. 2, 2. 1. Io. 1, 7. 1. Cor. 6.
verse. 20. Ephesians. 2, 13. Col. 1, 14. Heb. 9, 11.
every Christian must needs confess: for this is most plainly affirmed in
the holy Scripture, in which it is said, that Christ is the propitiation for
the sins of the whole world: that his blood does cleanse us from al sins:
and that we are bought and redeemed with his precious blood. It must likewise
be granted by all Christians, that Christ by his infinite merits purchased to
himself a Church on earth: that is to say, established a new religion, and a
new law among men; ordained Apostles, Pastors, Governors of his flock;
instituted new Sacraments, by which his faithful people through his merits
were to receive forgiveness of sins, and his grace in this world, and
everlasting glory if they deserved it, in the next. This likewise even in as
plain words is delivered unto us in the said word of God: in which we read,
that Christ purchased his Church with his blood; Act. 20. verse. 28. Ephesians. 5,
25, and 26.
that he loved her, and delivered himself to death for her to sanctify her,
cleansing her with the lauer of water in the word of life, that he might
present to himself a glorious Church not having spot or wrinckle. And all this
is also manifest by reason: for what other cause can be assigned, of the
incarnation and passion of Christ, but the redemption of man, and the erecting
of a Church and religion, which may guide him to everlasting salvation?

Out of these two assertions I gather a third, to wit: that there is but one
true Chruch of Christ, in which true religion is only to be found among
Christians; and consequently that they only, who are members of this Church,
truly worship God, and are in state of grace in this world, and in the right
way to eternal bliss in the next. And first, that Christ has but one true
Church on earth, it is evident; because he according to his own assertion, is
the way, and the verity, and the life. Ioh. 13. verse. 6.
Wherefore like as there is but one life Christ, who by his bitter passion
redeemed al mankind from everlasting death, and gives man true life in heaven:
so this one life ordained one only way and truth, whereby to attain to the
said life and salvation, erecting one only Church, unto which the fruit and
merit of his passion should be derived. Like as therefore, God made first but
one man Adam and one woman Eve, who were the corporal or carnal father and
mother of the transitory life of al mankind: so he has constituted but one
spiritual father Christ, and one spiritual mother, which is his only Spouse the
Church, who are the spiritual parents of the spiritual life of his true
children. Moreover, like as God has given one only corporal body, although
adorned with variety of members, to one head to be governed: so he has framed
one only mistical body, for one mistical head which is Christ, which he only as
supreme head directs and governs. Cant. 2. verse. 6. Ephesians. 4. verse. 2.
Hence we are told by Solomon in the Canticles, that the Dove of Christ is one
perfect, and chosen to her mother. The Apostle likewise tells us, that there
is one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism; and consequently one Church. Finally,
whosoever affirms that Christ has erected more Churches then one, impugneth
al sense and reason, seeing that unity is to be preferred before division and
discord; and no cause can be assigned, why two Churches should be founded. Of
this it also follows, that out of the one Church of Christ there is no
salvation. For if our blessed Savior by his death established one only Church,
it is evident that they only are partakers of his holy merits, who are members
of that Church, and that they only are in the true way to salvation, who
embrace that doctrine and religion, which is taught and prescribed in the said
Church. Hence proceeds that famous sentence of S. Ciprian, Cipr. de vnitate
Ecclesiae. c. 5.
who affirms that he that is not a member of Christ his Church,
notwithstanding al his good works and endeauours otherwise, shall never come to
enjoy the promised rewards of Christ in heaven: He is an alien, he is
profane, he is an enemy (says he) he cannot have God for his Father, who has
not the Church for his Mother. The same sentence is pronounced almost in the
self same words by S. Augustine, Aug. tom. 9. de Simbol. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Aug. de vnitat. Eccles. c. 19.
who avouches that he shall not have God his Father, who refuses to have the
Church for his Mother. And this in an other place he proves, because no man
comes to salvation, and life everlasting, but he that has Christ his head:
and no man can have Christ his head, but he that is in his body the Church, of
Ephesians. 5. verse. 23.
which according to the Apostle he is Savior. This also moved Lactantius to
discourse after this sort of the excellency and prerogatives of the Church: his
words are these. Lact. lib. 4. divine. Inst. c. vlt.
It is the Catholic Church only (so he terms the Church of Christ) that
keeps the true worship of God, this is the fountain of truth, this is the
house of faith, this is the temple of God: Into which whosoever does not enter,
or out of which whosoever does depart, he is an alien and stranger from the
hope of everlasting life and salvation. No man must by obstinate contention
flatter himself, for it stands upon life and salvation: Thus far
Lactantius. And this was long since figured by the ark of Noah, which only
saved the men in it contained from the general deluge; wherefore in S. Ciprian
we find this sentence. Cipr. de vnitat. Eccles. ca. 5.
If any man could escape that was without the ark of Noah: he also may escape
that is out of the Church. These and such like considerations induce al those
that profess themselves Christians, of what religion or sect soever they be,
to challenge to themselves the true Church of Christ. This challenge is made by
them, that profess the Roman faith; it is made by the Lutherans; it is made by
the Zwinglians; it is made by the English Protestants, by the Caluinists or
Puritans, by the Anabaptists, by the Libertines; it is made finally by all new
Sectaries, and has ever been made by all Heretics, since the beginning of
Christian religion. And although the multitude of challengers, with their false
and painted reasons, make some doubtful who of al these have right and a just
title, to the thing challenged: yet certain it is, and most easily to be
proved, that the first challengers only (who through the whole world are
termed Catholics) have justice and right on their side.

The proof of this would ask a long discourse, of the definition and notes of
the Church; but in this present treatise, I purpose only to declare, that we
Catholics only have true faith, and build our said faith and religion upon
most sure and firm grounds: Contrariewise that al sectaries are bereaved of
this supernatural gift, and build their whole belief and religion upon their
own fancies. Hereafter (if it please God) shall follow a more ample discourse
of the definition and notes of the true Church.

One reason which moved me to take this course is, that the principal
controversy between us and our adversaries, is concerning matters of faith;
which is manifest, because we condemn them of heresy, which proceeds of
mis-beleefe in faith: for he that erreth not in faith may be a Schismatike, but
he cannot be an Heretic; wherefore if I prove that we Catholics have true
faith, and that our adversaries have no faith, the controversy between us and
them, is after some sort decided. An other reason is, because faith does
especially incorporate us in the Church, and make us members of the same: It is
the lincke and glewe, yea the sinnewe which unites and binds us to this
body: It is the root and foundation of al true religion and justification.
Ioh. 3, 18 Marc. 16. verse. 16.
He that believes not, according to the verdict of our Savior, is already
judged, and shall be condemned and damned; Hebr. 11. verse. 6.
without faith (says the Apostle) it is impossible to please God. Wherefore by
S. John Chrysostom, Chrisost. in sermon. de Fide, Spe and Charit.
faith is called the offspring of justice, the head of sanctity, the beginning
of devotion, and the ground of religion. By S. Ciril Bishop of Jerusalem,
Ciril catech. 5.
and eye lighting every conscience, and causing understanding. By the other
Ciril Bishop of Alexandria, Ciril l. 4. in Ioa^. c. 9.
the door and way to life, also a certain leading or bringing home again
from corruption to immortality. With the like titles it is honored Aug. ser.
38. de Te^pore.
by S. Augustine and other holy Fathers. Like as therefore, no material house
or Castle can be erected without a foundation first laid, upon which all the
burden of the work may rest: so no spiritual edifice can be built in the
soul of man without faith, the ground of al spiritual works. Hence S.
Athanasius that great pillar of Christ's Church begins his Creed, which is
received by the whole Church, with this notable and famous sentence. Whosoever
will be saved before al things, it is necessary that he hold the Catholic
faith, which except every man shall keep wholly and not corrupted, without doubt
he shall perish everlastingly. This is the censure of that holy Father. The
reason of this is, because we cannot attain to a certain knowledge of the
first grounds and principles of Christian religion (they being supernatural)
by the force of our natural and weak understanding; wherefore a supernatural
knowledge of them being requisite, it is necessary that this be done by
supernatural faith, which gives us power, and lifting up our understanding,
makes us able to believe them, because they are revealed by God; and of this
necessity and excellency of faith it follows, that without it there can be no
true Church or religion: for how can the true Church or true religion be,
without the ground and foundation of al true virtue and Christianity?
Contrariwise, where true faith is found, there is the principal ground of true
religion; of which I infer, that if I prove the new sectaries to have no
faith, I likewise prove them to have no church nor religion: but on the other
side, if I prove our faith to be true, I prove also that the ground of al
religion is among us, and consequently, that if we build hope and charity upon
this foundation, we are members of the true Church, truly religious, and in
the sure way to everlasting salvation. Let us therefore briefly behold both our
grounds and theirs, and according to the strength or weakness of them,
decide the whole controversy between us. But to proceed the more plainly
and distinctly, I will first add a word or two, of the nature and conditions of
true faith.

Chapter 5. Of the definition and conditions of true faith.
SECTION THE FIRST.
FAITH is a virtue infused by God into our understanding, by the help and
force of which, we give a most firm assent unto al those things, which are
revealed by God to the Church; because they are so revealed. Wherefore,
although a Christian should believe never so firmly, any article of his faith
upon any other ground, then the authority of almighty God who has revealed it:
yet he should not have faith, because faith bids us believe such articles,
not because reason or any other such motive, persuades us that they are true;
but because God (who being the first verity and truth it self cannot deceive)
has so said and revealed.

But for the better declaration of this definition or description, and the
nature it self of faith, let us treat of it a little more at large; and first
show, that the act of faith is a most firm, and certain assent of the
understanding: secondly, that it is of things surpassing the reach of natural
reason, and consequently obscure: Thirdly, that by it we believe such
mysteries, as have bin revealed unto the Church by God: Fourthly, that it must
needs be built upon divine authority: Lastly., that it is necessary that the
articles of our faith be propounded unto us by some infallible authority; and
that the propounder of them is the holy Catholic Church.

SECTION THE SECOND. That faith is a most firm assent of the understanding.
TO begin therefore with the first, that the act of faith is a most firm
assent of the understanding to the thing believed, without any doubt or fear
of falsehood or staggering, the Apostle himself testifies in this his
description of faith: Hebr. 11. verse. 1.
Faith (says he) is the substance of things to be hoped for, the argument of
things not appearing. That is to say, faith is the substance or ground of
hope, a certain argument or conviction, and most firm persuasion of the
understanding, through the authority of God, of things not appearing to our
senses, or not known by natural reason. Verily, that the word argument in this
place, does not signify every kind of argument, but an argument certain and
infallible, the greek word it self which is here used, declares. Wherefore
Aug. tom. 9. tract. 89 in Ioa^. tom. 7. de peccat. merit. and remiss. l. 2. ca.
31. 2. Pet. 1. verse. 19.
S. Augustine in place of the word argument, uses the word conviction;
affirming faith to be a most firm proof and demonstration of things not
appearing. Hence S. Peter having declared, that he saw with his eyes the glory
of Christ in his transfiguration, and heard with his ears the voice of God the
Father, adds these words: And we have the prophetical word more sure. By
which he does insinuate unto us, that the knowledge of holy mysteries by faith
in the Scripture, is more certain then the knowledge which we receive by the
benefit of our senses: Basil. in ps 115. and in moral. reg. 80. ca. 21.
which (perhaps) moved S. Basil to affirm, that no knowledge in us is so firm
and certain as faith. And the reason of this is, because (as I will prove in
the fifth section) faith is built upon the infallible authority of God.

SECTION THE THIRD. Faith is of things incomprehensible by natural reason, and
consequently obscure.
THE Divines most truly affirm, that the object or subject of our
supernatural faith, is God as God; because al things which by it are known
and believed, tend to this, that by supernatural and revealed grounds, we
attain to as full a knowledge of him, as can by us be had in this life.
Wherefore I may well say, that by faith we believe mysteries above our reason,
although none contrary to our reason: for faith only leads reason further
then of it self it can reach, and makes it stoop, and submit it self to the
most certain revelation of God, notwithstanding that he does manifest unto it
mysteries, which in some sort seem to resist our sense and reason. This is
signified unto us in the description of faith, even now alleged out of the
Apostle, by those words (of things not appearing) for like as Romans 8. verse.
24.
hope (according to the same Apostle) that is seen, is no hope. For that which
man sees (says he) wherefore does he hope? So faith of things seen and most
certainly known by natural reason, is not faith. For that which a man sees
and knows, how can he believe? Neither do those words of our Ioh. 20.
verse. 29.
Savior to S. Thomas the Apostle (because thou have seen me, Thomas thou have
believed) make against this. For S. Thomas Greg. ho. 26. in Euang.
(as S. Gregory notes) saw one thing and believed an other; he saw Christ's
humanity and believed his divinity. For this cause further the Apostle above
cited tells us, Romans 10. verse. 17. Hebr. 11. verse. 3.
that faith is by hearing, and that by faith we understand that the worlds
were framed by the word of God, etc. S. Augustine also avouches, that Aug.
tra. 79. in Ioa^.
the praise of faith stands in this, that the thing be not seen which is
believed. Aug. tra. 43. in Ioa^.
For what a great thing is it (says he) if that be believed which is seen?
Again, faith is to believe, that which thou see not; truth, to see that
which thou have believed: yea S. Athanasius plainly tells us, Athanas.
tract. de aduent. cont. Apol. 1. Cor. 13. verse. 12.
that faith conceived of an evident matter, cannot be called faith. Hence it
proceeds that faith is obscure, and cannot be found in heaven, where al
things are seen most clearly. We see (says the Apostle) now by a glass in
dark sort, but then face to face; now I know in part, but then I shall know,
as also I am known. And this obscurity of faith, proceeds as well from the
height, and sublimitie of the mysteries themselves revealed, which are without
the compass of our natural reason: as also from the feeblenes and weakness
of our understanding, which in this life being tied to our corporal senses,
cannot clearly apprehend things spiritual; but only after a dim sort by
things visible, comes to some small apprehension of things invisible. God
likewise would have it so, not only to manifest unto us his own Majesty, and
that he will be believed at his word: but also for man's greater humiliation and
merit.

But although the object of faith so far surpass our reason, and by this
means cause obscurity in our understanding; yet certain it is, that God (if
he would) might have so declared and apparently proved the mysteries of our
faith, that the truth of them might have bin far more manifest then it is:
yea he might have made it so apparent, that no man of sense could have denied
them. As for example: Christ might (if it had pleased him) have appeared after
his resurrection to the whole City of Jerusalem: yea to the whole world; and
by force of miracles, persuasions, and other such like motives, have presently
made Christian faith seem evidently true, to every man's eye. So likewise at
this present it is in his power, to do for the manifestation of the truth of
Catholic religion; wherefore then did he not in old time, and does he not now
proceed after this manner? wherefore leaves he the object of faith (in this
sense also) environed with some obscurity? I answer, that most certain it is,
that every man has or may have if he please, sufficient motives and reasons,
to persuade him to embrace the true religion, and believe the whole sum of
christian doctrine. For God requires only at our hands (as the Apostle
terms it) a reasonable obsequie or obedience. Nevertheless he has not
used, Romans 11.
nor does use al means possible to manifest the truth, that man may merit the
more by co^curring by his free will, aided with Gods grace to the belief of such
mysteries, sufficiently (although not so fully as was possible) proved to be
revealed by God himself. For the more reason and proof that the will has to
persuade her, the less thanks she deserves for obeying; and so much the
less reward shall be reaped by man in heaven, by how much the stronger
arguments he has to move his understanding to believe; because one only
argument infalliblie proving any article to be revealed by God, is sufficient
to make it the object of faith, although the matter seem never so obscure;
yea, although it seem (in some sort) repugnant to the ordinary course and
nature of sensible creatures: and thus much of the second point.

SECTION THE FOVRTH. By true Christian faith we believe such mysteries, as God
has revealed to his Church.
THIRDLY I am to prove, that by faith we believe such mysteries, as it has
pleased the divine Majesty of God to reveal unto his Church; and this
likewise is easily proved out of the foresaid description of faith, delivered
unto us by the Apostle. For what other things are those, which not appearing
to our senses and understanding, faith causes us to believe, but the articles
of our faith? and what do these contain, but such mysteries as God has
revealed to his Church? yet least the perverse humor of any man, might
otherwise understand his words, he has added soon after, that by the faith
by him described, we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of
God: that by this faith Noe built the arc, etc. which effects cannot be
attributed to any other faith, then to that by which we believe the articles of
Christian religion.

But because our adversaries seem so much to impugn this doctrine, let us
prove the same out of other places of the new Testament: and first out of
these words of our Savior to his Apostles, Mar. 16. v. 15.16.
going into the whole world preach the Gospel to al creatures. He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be
condemned: In which (as we see) commission is given to the Apostles to preach
the Gospel. And what Gospel? truly no other, but the whole sum of Christian
doctrine, touching the incarnation, life, passion, resurrection, ascension, and
other articles of Christian belief. This Gospel the Apostles preached, and (as
it was then foretold by Christ in the words immediately following) confirmed
with miracles. And whosoever believes this Gospel and is baptized (if to his
faith his actions be agreeable) shall be saved; contrariewise who believes it
not shall be damned: wherefore, this faith concurreth to our justification, and
consequently is that faith which is required in all Christians. This faith our
Lord and redeemer highly commended and rewarded in the holy Apostle S. Peter,
Math. 16. verse. 16.17. etc.
when as for confessing him to be Christ the son of the living God, he
pronounced him blessed, and promised to build the Church upon him, and to give
him the keys of the kingedome of heaven. This faith and no other was in S.
Martha, when to our Savior saying: I am the resurrection and the life, Ioh.
11. verse. 25.
he that believes in me although he be dead shall live, and every one that
lives, and believes in me shall not die for ever, beleeuest thou this? she
said to him; yea Lord I have believed that thou art Christ the son of God
that art come into this world. And consequently, this is the faith which
makes us live for ever, and preserves us from eternal death. This faith was
in S. Thomas the Apostle, when touching the wounds of our Savior after his
resurrection, he cried out my Lord, and my God. Of which I infer, Ioh. 20. v.
28. etc.
that they are pronounced by Christ blessed, that are endued with this faith:
when he replied to his said Apostle. Blessed are they that have not seen, and
have believed. Act. 2. v. 4.10.13.17.
This faith and no other S. Peter and S. Paul preached to the people, as
appears in their sermons recorded in the acts of the Apostles. This faith S.
Phillip before baptism required in the Eunuch, saying: Lo water, who does let
me to be baptized? S. Phillip answered: Act. 8. verse. 36.
If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may, and the Eunuch replied: I
believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God, upon which confession he
received that holy Sacrament. Romans 4. verse. 22. Ibid. v. 19.
By this faith Abraham (as the Apostle testifies) was justified, for it was
reputed him to justice, that he believed God promising him, that he should be
the father of many nations, and that not considering (to use the Apostles
words) his own body now quite dead, and the dead matrice of Sara, he
staggered not by distrust, but according to the promise of God, expected a
son. This word of faith, the same Apostle (according to his own testimony)
preached to the world, Romans 10. verse. 8.9. 1. Cor. 15. ver. 3. etc. 1. Ioh. 5.
v. 1.4. and 5. Ioh. 3. ver. 36.
that who confesses with his mouth our Lord Jesus Christ, and in his heart
believes that God has raised him up from the dead, shall be saved. This Gospel
he delivered, that Christ died for our sins, that he was buried, and that he
rose again the third day etc. Whosoever (says S. John) believes that Jesus is
Christ, is borne of God: again, this is the victory which overcomes the
world, our faith; who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes
that Jesus is the son of God? Hitherto S. John the Evangelist. And this is to
believe in the son of God, which who does (according unto Christ's words)
has life everlasting. Ioh. 20. vlt.
Finally, to cause in our souls this faith, S. John (as he witnesses
himself, and consequently also the other three Evangelists) wrote his Gospel.
These things (says he) are written, that you may believe that Jesus is Christ
the son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name. Al which
sentences of holy Scripture, and diverse others which I could produce, most
evidently demonstrate, that the divinity, incarnation, passion, and
resurrection of Christ, and other such articles revealed by God unto the
Church, are the object of that faith which concurreth to our justification, and
is the root and foundation of al justice, and true religion. Hence in the
Creed of the Apostles, (which as Aug. ser. 115. de tempore.
S. Augustine censureth it) is a plain, brief, and full comprehension of our
faith; we profess our selves to believe these articles. Of which Creed,
mention is not only in the said Aug. ibi. and ser. 181
S. Augustine; but also in Amb. ep. 81. ad Siricium.
S. Ambrose, Hier. ep. ad Pama. aduersus Joan. Hieroso.
S. Hierome, Leo epi. 13. ad Pultheriam, and ser. 11. de Pass.
S. Leo and diverse others.

If I should endeavor to recite all the testimonies of the ancient Fathers to
the same effect, I should never make an end: for all of them discourse of no
other object of faith then this, and require only in Christians, the belief of
the articles of our faith mentioned. See Ireneus lib. 1. ca. 2. 3. and 4.
aduersus haereses. Tertul. lib. aduersus Praxeam. S. Basil. in orat. de confess.
fidei, where he tells us, that the faith necessary to salvation and
justification, is that, by which we believe those things which God has
revealed. The same is taught by S. Ciril Bishop of Jerusalem: Cateches. 5.
and 18. By S. Leo sermon. 4. de Epiphania.. This faith and no other is explicated
as necessary to salvation, by S. Gregory Nazianzene, orat. in sanctum lauacrum
extrema, and in tract. de fide Nicena: By S. Chrysostom, in duabus homilijs de
simbolo: By S. Augustine, lib. de fide and simbolo, in lib. de Genes.
imperfecto, cap. 1. and in Enchirid. per multa capita, and diverse others: but
of this matter enough.

SECTION THE FIFTH. That true faith is built upon divine authority.
I NEED not use many words for the proof of the fourth point: to wit, that
true faith ought to be built upon divine authority, because this is easily
gathered out of that which has been already said: for if faith be a most
firm and certain assent of the understanding to things above the reach of
reason, and the object of it be the mysteries of our belief; it must needs
follow, that the authority of almighty God (whose knowledge and wisdom are
infinite, and whose sayings are of infallible truth) must cause us to believe
the said mysteries. If any will deny this, I will demand of him, how we can
possibly attain to a certain knowledge of so high mysteries, but by the
revelation of God? and this is that which al Christians commonly profess, when
as being demanded why they believe this and that; they answer, because God
has revealed such doctrine.

I confess, that men are commonly first induced to faith by certain reasons,
which the Divines call arguments of credibility: such are miracles, which
proceeding from God, can give no testimony to falsehood; the authority,
wisdom, learning, and consent of the professors of our religion in all ages
since it began; the strange manner of the propagation of our said religion
being so strict, throughout the whole world by a few fishermen; the
miraculous preservation of our Church, oppugned by so diverse and mighty
enemies; the constancy of our Martirs; the great change to the better, which
our religion causes in those that embrace it; the purity of doctrine and
sanctity of life shining in the Prelates and Children of our Church; the
conformity of our faith with natural reason, in not being contrary to it,
although above it, and other motives, which I have related in the third Chapter
of this treatise, which make the object of faith (in the judgment of any
prudent man) credible, and of which, either one, some, or al, induce men first
to believe. But al these arguments are only inducements to the true act of
supernatural faith, by which the mysteries of our belief are afterward
believed; not for any such reasons, but only because they are revealed by God.
This moved Saint Basil to describe faith after this sort: Basilius in ser. de
fidei co^fess. sieve de vera and pia fide in Asceticis.
Faith (says he) is an assenting approbation of those things, which through
the benefit of God have been preached: thus Saint Basil. Hence I infer, that
although faith and also other arguments, have the same effect in our
understanding; which is, to make it give a firm assent to some verity, which
is done by sundry arguments, especially by such as are called demonstrations:
yet, there is this difference between such arguments and faith, that they do
this through evidence of the matter: faith does it through the authority of the
reuealer, leaving still the matter obscure. And this doctrine is consonant to
that of Divines, who hold the first and supreme verity of God, to be the
formal object of our faith: the sense of which their assertion is, that the
chief reason or cause, on which (as on a foundation) the habit of our faith
relieth and rests, and into which, both it and the assent of it proceeding,
is lastly resolved, is the divine and infallible revelation of God, or (which
is al one) God infallibly revealing some truth by some Canonical writer, or
other lawful definer of faith; of which it follows, that faith of his own
nature does assent to no proposition, which is not propounded by divine
revelation.

SECTION THE SIXTH. Besides the revelation of God, some infallible propounder of
the articles of our faith is necessary: and that they are propounded unto us by
the Catholic Church.
IN the precedent sections of this Chapter I have declared, that faith is a
most firm assent of the understanding, to such mysteries as God has revealed
to al Christians to be believed. Now I must further lay this most certain and
undoubted ground to this, that (according to the ordinary proceedings of God,
besides the revelation by him heretofore made of the mysteries of Christian
belief) by the habit of faith we give assent to the articles revealed: it is
also necessary, that the said articles be propounded unto us by some infallible
authority, assuring us that they are so delivered. This reason it self
teaches us: for seeing that Christ has with-drawne his visible presence from
us, and he himself immediately after a sensible manner instructs no man, but
al by some common rule or means: seeing also that the revelation of such
mysteries is obscure, and no man by the strength and force of natural reason
can assure himself, that such and such articles have been revealed; it was
necessary that God should ordain some infallible authority to be the Mistress
of faith, which might infallibly teach the truth in all such matters doubtful:
neither had he otherwise sufficiently provided us means necessary for our
everlasting salvation. I add also, that although it were so that we were
certain at the beginning of our belief, of such a revelation: yet, that the
weakness and inconstancy of our understanding is such, that without a sure
guide and directour, it easily erreth and straieth from the truth received.
This notwithstanding, we make not this proposition or propounding of such
verities as are revealed by God, any essential part of the formal object of
faith; of which I have spoken before; for we affirm such mysteries in
themselves, before any such proposition, to be credible and worthy of belief:
but because this is unknown to us, we require such a proposition only as a
necessary condition to this, that we infallibly know that they are so
revealed; which must of necessity be known, before that we can actually assent
unto them by supernatural faith.

What infallible authority then have we (without al fear and doubt of
falsehood) assuring us that all the articles of our faith have been thus
revealed by God? Verily no other, but the Spouse of Christ our Mother the
Church, whom our Lord has made our Mistress and guide in such matters.

And truly, that we are to learn our belief of the Prelates and Pastors of
the Church, we are abundantly taught by the sacred word of God. For first, the
Apostle S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans discoursing of this point, uses
these words: Romans 10. verse. 14.
How shall they believe whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a preacher? as though he should say: No man can attain to the
knowledge and belief of the articles of faith, except by some preacher they be
propounded unto him. And that these preachers are the Prelates and Pastors of
the Church, it is manifest; because they are the true successors of the
Apostles, who in the beginning of Christianity, from Christ received authority
and commandment, Mar. 16. verse. 15. Iere. 3. verse. 15.
to teach al nations through out the whole world. For the proof likewise of
this truth it makes, that in the old Testament God promised, that in the new
he would give us Pastors according to his own heart, who should feed us in
knowledge and doctrine. Moreover, like as in the old law he pronounced this
sentence of the sons of Aaron. Malac. 2. verse. 7.
The lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and they shall require the law
of his mouth: so of the Bishops and Priests of the new, who are to enjoy as
great (if not a greater) prerogative, the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 4. verse.
11.
that our Lord has given (and ever will give, as long as the world shall stand)
some Pastors and Doctors in his Church to direct us, that we be not carried
away with every wind of doctrine. And hence proceeds this notable sentence
of the holy Father S. Ireneus, who for Christian religion suffered Martyrdom
about the year of Christ two hundred and five: Iren. li. 3. cap. 4.
We ought not (says he) to seek among others the truth, which we may easily
take and receive from the Church; seeing that the Apostles have most fully laid
up in her (as into a rich treasure house, or place where the Depositum of the
Church is kept: of which hereafter) al things which are of truth; that every
man that will, may take out of her the drink of life. For this is the entrance
of life, but all the rest are thieves and robbers: for which cause they are
verily to be avoided. But those things which are of the Church, are with great
diligence to be loved, and the tradition of truth is to be received: Hitherto
S. Ireneus. We say therefore, that by the Church we learn as certainly, what
mysteries have been revealed by Christ; as we should do by our Lord himself
if he were conversant with us on earth: and the truth of this will be made most
apparent, by the discourse of the next Chapter following.

Chapter 6. Of the supreme and infallible authority of the Catholic Church.
SECTION THE FIRST.
MY principal intent in this treatise, is (as I have before declared) to
prove, that we Catholics only have true faith, and that al Sectaries are
bereaved of this supernatural virtue: wherefore having set down and made
evident, in the Chapter next before, the nature and conditions of true faith,
it remains that I now begin in particular to discourse of these points. And
seeing that it is of the essence of faith, that it be most assuredly built upon
divine authority: let us first behold the grounds of the Catholic Roman
belief, and see whether they are able to make a sufficient foundation for such
a faith, in the followers of that religion; then let us do the like concerning
the grounds of the new Sectaries. But first I must note, that although (as I
have proved before) we must truly say, that we know infallibly the mysteries
of our faith to be revealed by God; because we are so taught by the Church:
yet, that her authority is not limited to the decision of this matter only, for
it extends it self also to the definition of al particular matters of faith,
and may have for her object the verities themselves revealed. It also
condemns heresies and prescribes general precepts of manners touching good
and il: wherefore the ancient Catholic builds upon her authority, not only
his faith touching the point mentioned; but also (in some sort) his whole
belief, and consequently al his internal virtues grounded upon the same. He
relieth likewise on her doctrine for his external carriage, concerning virtue
and vice; and finally accepts al her faith as infallibly revealed by God
himself, who has made her supreme judge of al controversies touching matters
of religion, and assured us that her judgment is not only certain and
infallible; but also (through the perpetual assistance and direction of the
holy Ghost) divine: so that God directs her in all truth, and by her as a
sensible guide, he bestows the same benefit upon us in all things necessary
to salvation: wherefore our whole belief and religion in such sort depends
of her infallible authority, that if this be proved, it conuinceth that to be
true, sincere, and divine.

For no man can deny, but in building upon the tradition, decision, or
definition of the Church, we ground our faith and religion upon divine
authority, if her decrees be Gods, and her doctrine warranted to be his. Let us
therefore endeavor to show this, that so with few words we may decide the
whole question: and to avoid confusion, let us divide the whole discourse of
this Chapter, into the proof of some three or four assertions.

SECTION THE SECOND. The whole sum of Christian doctrine (by word of mouth,
not by writing) was committed by Christ to his Apostles.
FIRST therefore I affirm, that Christ committed the whole sum of Christian
doctrine by word of mouth, not by writing to his Apostles: and ordained that
they should deliver the same to their successors, the Bishops and Pastors of
the Church. This is manifest, both because diverse points of Christian doctrine,
which the Apostles received from Christ, are not recorded by the Evangelists in
their Gospels: and also because S. Luke witnesses, Act. 1. v. 3.
that Christ after his passion and resurrection, showed himself alive to his
Apostles in many arguments, for forty days appearing to them, and speaking of
the kingdom of God: of which his speech little or nothing is recorded. I add
moreover, that not long before his ascension, he gave his Apostles this
commission: Going (said he) teach ye al nations, Mat. 28. v. 19.20.
baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe al things whatsoever I have commanded you.
These places (I say) manifestly prove, that Christ by word of mouth instructed
his Apostles concerning the mysteries and articles of Christian religion, and
according to his instruction, commanded them to teach the whole world. Neither
is there any record extant, that Christ gave them these instructions in
writing, or that he commanded them to set them down and publish them after
that sort: yea if we will not say, that the Apostles transgressed Christ's
commandment, we must absolutely say, that he never bid them do any such
thing, because never any one of them (as I will declare hereafter) set down in
writing the whole sum of Christian doctrine.

No man likewise will or can deny, but that it was the ordination of Christ,
that the Apostles should deliver this whole sum of Christian doctrine to
their successors: for otherwise Christ should have instituted a Church only for
the Apostles days, not to continue to the end of the world, according to the
predictions of the Prophets. And hence this sum of Christian doctrine by the
Apostle S. Paul was most earnestly commended to Timothy. 1. Tim. vlt verse. 20.
O Timothy (says he) keep the depositum (that is, the pledge or pawn left
with thee) avoiding the profane novelties of voices, and oppositions of falsely
called knowledge. He calls it depositum, or a pledge or pawn, because it is
(as it were) a thing laid into the Apostles and Bishops hands, and committed
unto them to keep, which every one of them with great care and diligence
(without any alteration or deprauation) was and is to deliver to his successors
until the end of the world. Vinc. Lir. lib. contra prophanas hoeresum nouitates
cap. 7.
This is most learnedly explicated by Vincentius Lirinensis, who flourished in
the Church very near twelve hundred years since. For this learned Father,
having demanded what the depositum was which the Apostle left with Timothy,
answered thus. This pawn or pledge (says he) is a thing committed to thy
charge, not invented by thee: that which thou have received, not that which
thou have devised. A matter not of wit, but of doctrine; not of private
usurpation, but of public tradition: a thing brought down unto thee, not
brought forth first by thee, of which thou must not be author, but keeper
only; not the founder, but the follower; not a leader, but one which is led:
Hitherto Vincentius Lirinensis. Of this Depositum likewise are these words of
the Apostle in the same Chapter. 1. Timoth. vlt. ver. 13
I command thee before God who quickneth al things, and Christ Jesus who gave
testimony under Pontius Pilate a good confession: that thou keep the
commandment without spot blameless, until the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And so these places are expounded by Tertullian and the rest of the
Fathers: for they are according to their exposition, Tertul. de
praescriptionibus. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 4.
most earnest exhortations to Timothy, to keep unspotted the doctrine
received, and to admit no new thing invented by man's fancy. This moved S.
Ireneus to affirm, that the Apostles have laid up in the Church, as in a rich
treasure house, al truth. Moreover, this sum of Christian doctrine for the
same reason is likewise called, the doctrine of the Apostles: Act. 2.24.
They were (says S. Luke speaking of the first Christians) perseuering in the
doctrine of the Apostles, that is to say: in the doctrine which by Christ was
delivered to the Apostles, and by them preached and published to the world.
Finally, because according unto it, every man is to direct his belief, it is
called by S. Paul the rule of faith, and the form of doctrine: Gal. 6, 16.
Whosoever shall follow this rule (says he) peace upon them and mercy. Again;
let us continue in the same rule. And in the Epistle to the Romans: Phil. 3, 16
Romans 6, 17 2. Cor. 10. verse. 15.
you have obeyed from the heart unto the form of doctrine, into the which you
have been delivered: The like sentences he has in other places. Hence
Tertullian avouches, that the Tertul. de praescr. ca. 13. 22. 27. etc.
Apostles received from Christ the fullness of the preaching of the Gospel, and
that they delivered unto al Christians, all the order of the rule of belief: He
tells us also that Cap. 14.
faith is placed in rule: he bids Heretics be Tertul. de praescr. cap. 22.
silent, and not prate against this rule, and wishes Catholics (if they will
doubt or ask questions concerning matters of religion) to inquire of those
which are of their own company; and concerning such matters as may be called
in question without the breach of the rule of faith. Lastly he adds, that
Cap. 14.
this rule instituted by Christ, has no doubts or questions among us, but
such as Heretics do bring in, or do make Heretics: Thus far Tertullian.
The same rule S. Ignatius the Disciple of S. John the Apostle, affirms
himself to have observed. Do you (says he in his Epistle to the
Phillippians) say and teach the self same, and be of one judgment: for by
this I have observed the rules of faith.

Wherefore I conclude, that Christ delivered a rule of faith, or form of
doctrine to his Apostles, which they confirmed by miracles, and delivered to
their successors; and that the said rule contains the whole sum or corpse
of Christian doctrine.

SECTION THE THIRD. The Church cannot stray from the rule of faith received,
nor err in matters of faith or general precepts of manners, which is proved
first, because the holy Ghost directs her in all truth.
THIS being proved I must now declare, that the Church has never erred, nor
can err from this rule of faith received, and that her judgment concerning
matters of religion, is of divine and infallible authority. The most principal
reason usually brought for the proof of this, is: that God himself (to wit,
the holy Ghost the third person of the most blessed Trinity, who is subject to
no error or falsehood) is the guide and director of the Church in all such
affairs. And this we are taught by Christ, who likewise being God the second
person of the most blessed Trinity, cannot deceive us. For this promise he made
to his Apostles immediately after his last supper, these were his words: Ioh.
14. verse. 16. Ioh. 16. verse. 13.
I will ask the father, and he will give you another Paraclete (that is to say,
an other comforter or aduocat) that he may abide with you for ever: the spirit
of truth. Again, yet many things I have to say unto you, but you cannot bear
them now: but when he, the spirit of truth comes, he shall teach you al
truth. This was the promise of our Savior, and who will say that he has not
been so good as his word? Surely if this promise was not brought to effect,
the breach of it either proceeded of want of power, or of want of vvil in
Christ: but what Christian can imagine, that either of these was wanting in
the Son of God? Hence I gather, that although our Savior (during the time of
his being on earth) both before and after his passion, gave to his Apostles
diverse instructions touching Christian religion; yet, that he left the full and
perfect instruction of them to the holy Ghost, who was to reduce al things
to memory, and to establish them perfectly in faith; and whom his Father was
to send by his mediation, to be the cheifest instructor and guide of his Church
in all truth, to the worlds end. And this was done on the day of Pentecost,
when the holy Ghost in the likeness of fiery tongues, Act. 2. v. 4
descended upon the Apostles and Disciples: since which time (according to the
promise of Christ) he has never departed from the Church, but remained in her
and taught her al truth; which every man must needs confess, that vvil not
accuse Christ of breach of his promise. Wherefore, like as Christ is termed
the head and husband of the Church (as I vvil even now declare) so the holy
Ghost is aptly termed by S. Augustine, her soul. Aug. tom, 10. sermon. 186. de
tempore.
For like as the soul of man directs and governs his body: so does the
holy Ghost the Church. Some man perhaps vvil answer, that Christ made this
promise of the assistance of the holy Ghost to the Apostles only, and not to
their successors: but this assertion is most absurd, and contrary to the
words themselves of holy Scripture. For Christ (as I have noted before)
erected not a Church for the days of the Apostles only: but to continue until
the end of the world, as was foretold by the Prophets, that men in all ages to
come might have a mean to attain to salvation; wherefore those things
which he spoke to his Apostles and Disciples, he spoke also to al their
successors. Ephesians. 4. verse. 11.
For (as we are taught by the Apostle) he has given some Apostles, some
Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and others some Pastors and Doctors,
until the day of judgment. In this sense he promised his Apostles (as we read
in S. Mathewes Gospel) that he would be with them al days, even to the
consummation of the world, that is to say: Math. 28. verse. vlt.
with them and those which should succeed in their place. Wherefore Saint
Hierome expounding that sentence, uses these words: Hier. lib. 4. in Mat.
He who promises that he will be with his Disciples, until the consummation
of the world, both shows that they shall always live: and also that he will
never depart from the faithful. Saint Augustine likewise affirms, Aug. in
ps. 101. co^c. 2.
that he spoke to the Apostles, and signified us. To the same effect Cipr. lib.
4. epist.
Saint Ciprian, and Basi. consti. monast. cap. 23.
Saint Basil tell us, that these words of Christ; Luc. 10. verse. 16.
He that hears you, hears me, were spoken not only to the Apostles: but
also to their successors. Finally, the words themselves of Christ above
cited, are plain: for how can the holy Ghost remain here on earth, with
those Apostles unto whom Christ spoke, for ever; seeing that they lived in the
world but for a short time? Wherefore he remains with their successors, the
Bishops and Prelates of the Church, who have succeeded the first Apostles,
as children their parents; and with these he shall remain as long as the world
shall endure.

For the confirmation of this truth I add, that this assistance of the holy
Ghost in the Church, was long since foretold by the Prophet Isaie. These words
he uses, speaking in the person of God, of the state of the Church in the law
of grace. Isa. 59.
My spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart from thy mouth, and from the mouth of thy seed, and of thy seeds
seed says our Lord from hence forward and for ever. Hitherto the Prophet
Isaie; and what could be said more plain then this? Surely the promise is so
evident, that Calvin him self in his Commentary upon them, grants as much
as we have affirmed. Thus he discourses, expounding the said words: He
promises (says he) that the Church shall never be deprived of this inestimable
good: Caluinus in Isai. cap. 59.
but that it shall always be governed by the holy Ghost, and supported with
heavenly doctrine. And soon after: The promise is such, that the Lord will so
assist the Church, and have such care of her, that he will never suffer her to
be deprived of true doctrine: Thus far Calvin. Finally, Beza his Scholar
confesses, Beza de haereticis a civilly Magistratu puniendis. pa. 69. Ire. li.
1. c. 3. li. 3. c. 4.
that the promise of our Savior of the assistance of the holy Ghost, was not
made only to the Apostles, but rather to the whole Church. Let this therefore
be the conclusion of this argument, that the Church of Christ is directed by
the holy Ghost, in matters concerning faith and religion; in such sort, that
she neither has fallen, nor can fall into any errors. And this was long since
affirmed by S. Ireneus who tells us, that the Church keeps with most
sincere diligence; the Apostles faith, and that which they preached; and
moreover that those Churches in which succession from the Apostles is found,
conserve and keep our faith. Cipr. epist. 55. ad Cor nelium. See him likewise
epist. 69. ad Floreatium.
The same we are taught by S. Ciprian who avouches, that the Church always
holds that which she first knew.

SECTION THE FOVRTH. The same is proved by other arguments.
AN other argument, proving the judgment of the Church to be of infallible
truth, we may take from the love and affection, which Christ bears to the
said Church. For in the Scripture we find, that Christ is the Cant. 4. Ephesians.
1. v. 22. etc.
husband and head of the Church, and the Church his Spouse and body: August. in
psalm. 126.
For (if we believe S. Augustine) he formed her out of his own side upon the
Cross, as Eve our first father Adams spouse, was made of his ribbe; and this
long since he promised to do by the Prophet Osee, in these words: I will
espouse thee unto me for ever: Osee 2. verse. 19.
and I will espouse thee unto me in justice and judgment, and mercy, and
miserations. He also redeemed, purchased, and vvashed her with his own most
precious blood, and made her his spiritual body: wherefore he is present with
her (according to his promise) al days, Math. 28. verse. vlt.
even to the consummation of the world; and no man will deny, but he loves,
cherishes, and governs her as his Spouse and body. Out of which favors and
prerogatives I may very well infer, that he being truth it self, and hating
al falsehood, preserves her from error; this also being a dowry, and
privilege so necessary to her dignity. These considerations moved S. Ciprian
to discourse after this sort of this matter: Cipr. li. de vnitat. Ecclesiae.
the Spouse of Christ (says he) cannot be defiled with adultery; she is
incorrupt, pure, and chaste; she knows one only house, she keeps with a
chaste shamefastness, the sanctity of one chamber: Thus S. Ciprian. To the
same allude these words of S. Augustine, spoken of the Church. This is the
true mother: Aug. tom. 6. conc. ad cath. c. 22.
a mother pious and chaste, adorned inwardly with the dignity of her husband;
not outwardly, shamefully, and dishonestly, painted deceitfully with a
deceauing lie. The promiseS of Christ unto his Church of not erring and the
prerogatives, which he has bestowed upon the same, yield us a third argument.
For listen a little, what a notable and worthy promise he has made to us, that
his Church built upon S. Peter, or (as I may say) his whole Church united to
the supreme Vicar and chief head of the same under himself, shall not fail
or err. These are the words which he uttered to the said Apostle. Math. 16.
verse. 18.
Thou art Peter (or a rock) and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. What could he have said more, for
the certainety of the continuance of the Church, and for her infallible
judgment? For is it not evident, that hell gates do prevail against the
Church, if either she decay, or teach false doctrine? who then can say, that
either the has perished, or erred; except he will accuse Christ of falsehood in
not performing his promise, and make him a liar? Verily Chrisost. hom. 4. de
verbis Isaiae vidi Dominum Epiph. in Ancorato.
S. John Chrysostom affirms, that heaven and earth shall fail before those
words of Christ; thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build my Church. S.
Epiphanius also, alluding to this promise tells us, that our Lord appointed
Peter the first or cheifest Apostle, a firm rock, upon which the Church of
God was built; and the gates of hell (says he) shall not prevail against it:
for the gates of hell are Heretics and Arch-heretikes, etc. the like sentences
I could allege out of the rest of the ancient Fathers. And unto this
testimony of our Savior I could likewise add, that he has warranted the
faith of S. Peter, and in him the faith of his successor the Bishop of Rome,
who is ministerial head of Christ's Church on earth, Luc. 22. verse. 31.
that it shall not fail; and consequently that the body ruled by the head, shall
enjoy the same prerogative: but of this hereafter.

Moreover, our Savior made his Church the supreme judge on earth, of al
controversies touching matters of religion: for it is manifest that from her
judgment he grants no appeal; and that he vvil have her definitive
sentence so firm and inviolable among Christians, that he vvil not have him
accounted one of that number, who shall preuaricate or despise the same. This is
signified unto us in these his words: Math. 18. verse. 17.
If he will not hear the Church: let him be to thee as the Heathen, and the
Publican. In which sentence he bids us, esteem no more of our brother or
neighbor, that contemns or disobeieth the censure of the Church, then of a
Heathen and Publican: of which I gather, that the Church in her censure cannot
err. For if this might be, then we being bound to condemn, whom she
condemns, or to condemn him that vvil not listen and obey her counsel and
precepts, might together with the Church condemn a man without just cause, and
that according to Christ's commandment. It appears likewise out of the said
words of our Savior, that he vvil have the sentence of the Church obeyed;
wherefore he ought in reason to provide, that the said sentence be not
erroneous.

But for the truth of these words of our Lord; and also for the constant
verity of the censure of the Church, it makes first, that diverse falshoodes,
which before her said censure might in times past have bin believed and
defended: yea, were defended and believed by the members of the true Church,
without incurring the crime of heresy, afterward could not be so believed
and defended: as I could exemplify in the Milinary heresy, the opinion of
such as held the baptism of Heretics to be of no force; of others that denied
the authority of some Canonical books, and such like. Secondly, it makes also
for these her prerogatives, that al such as have obstinately maintained any
opinions condemned by the Church for heresies, and consequently have disobeied
her authority and decrees, and been by her adjudged Heretics; have ever by all
antiquity been so accounted, August. in Enchirid. ad Laure^t cap. 5. Tertul.
de pudicitia item li. de praescript. Math. 5. v. 13.15. Luc. 10. verse. 16.
and therefore have not been numbered by the ancient Fathers among Christians:
whose opinions notvvithstanding (if we reject her infallible judgment, by
which they were condemned, and make it subject to error) may be revived and
called again in question, either as wrongfully and injustly censured, or at
the least as condemned by a judge, whose judgment is subject to error and
falsehood. The privileges and prerogatives granted by our Savior to his
Apostles and Disciples, confirm the same: for they are by him called the salt
of the earth, and the light of the world: and being sent to preach, they
received from him this commission and approbation of their doctrine; He that
hears you, hears me: and he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me. Which words
argue an infallible truth, although not in the doctrine of every particular
Bishop and Prelate of the Church: yet in them altogether, when they represent
the whole Church in a Council; or in the whole number of them, although divided
and separated in place. For in these, like as in Christ's Apostles and
Disciples (as I have above declared) the words alleged must be verified,
which cannot be done, if they al in every sense may err. For how can they then
truly be termed the salt of the earth, and the light of the world? and how can
it be true, that he that hears them, hears Christ? But if we had no other
testimony of holy Scripture for this matter, five or six words of the Apostle,
used by him to Timothy in his first epistle, 1. Tim. 3. v. 15. etc.
were sufficient to convince our understanding, and make us yield to this
truth. For in his said Epistle, he terms the Church the pillar and ground of
truth. These things I write to thee (says he) hoping that I shall come to thee
quickly: but if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought to
converse in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar
and ground of truth. What could he have said more evident for the infallible
authority of the Church? the Church (says he) is the pillar and ground of
truth; that is to say, the very foundation and establishment of al verity, upon
which as upon a sure foundation, and an inviolable pillar, a man may securely
build the edifice of his faith and religion: who then vvil say that the Church
is subject to error? These considerations moved S. Augustine, Aug. lib. 1.
cont. Cresconium.
disputing against Cresconius concerning the baptism of Heretics, to use this
discourse: these are his words. Although of this (that the baptism of
Heretics is true baptism) there be no certain example brought forth out of
the canonical Scriptures: yet also in this we keep the truth of the said
Scriptures, when as we do that which now has pleased the whole Church, which
the authority of the Scriptures themselves does commend. That because the
Scripture cannot deceive, whosoever does fear least that he be deceived
through the obscurity of this question, may ask counsel touching it of the
Church, whom without any doubt the Scripture it self does show: Hitherto S.
Augustine. Out of which discourse of his, we may gather this notable rule, that
in all things doubtful, and in all obscure questions concerning faith and
religion, we ought to enquire and search forth the doctrine and belief of the
Catholic Church, and embrace the same, seeking no further warrant of security;
because the Scriptures demonstrate her, and manifestly declare that her
doctrine is true, and may securely be followed without any danger of error.
Unto these arguments brought out of the word of God, reason it self assenteth:
for seeing that for diverse respects, it was convenient that Christ our Lord
should not always converse on earth among us, and in his own person manage
the affairs of the Church, it was necessary that he should leave among
Christians some certain rule and guide, whereby they might direct their faith,
and some judge for the deciding of daily controversies, which might arise
touching matters of religion; whose judgment they might securely follow
without al danger of being deceived. Neither can we imagine that Gods infinite
wisdom foreseing al things and times to come, or his unspeakable goodness and
love to his Church, could order things otherwise. And this infallible guide
and supreme judge is the Church, including the Pope, and other her Bishops and
Prelates. It was also needful, seeing that the Church of Christ was to endure
for ever (I mean on earth until the end of the world) and to be to al persons,
a perfect guide in all ages to salvation, that it should be preserved from false
doctrine and ruin; otherwise it could not at al times have performed these
offices. Our adversaries will answer, that the Church through false doctrine
and superstition has already perished; and not appeared in the world for
diverse hundreds of years: but this I shall refute at large Cap. 5.
in my treatise of the definition and notes of the true Church. For this
present unto that which has been already said in this Chapter, concerning the
continual assistance of the holy Ghost in the Church, and other arguments
proving that she cannot err; I add only, that according to the censure of S.
Augustine: Aug. l. de vnita. Eccles. c. 6. 7 12. and 13. see him also li. 20.
de ciuit. c. 8. and in psalm. 85. and de vtilit. credendi. c. 8.
Whosoever affirms the Church to have been overthrown, does rob Christ of
his glory and inheritance bought with his most precious blood: yea, S. Hierome
goes further and auerreth, that he that so says, does make God subject to the
Devil and a poor miserable Christ. Hier. co^t. Lucifer. cap. 6.
The reason is, because this assertion does (after a sort) bereave the whole
incarnation, life, and passion of our Savior, of their effect and end, which
was principally to found a Church and Kingdom in this world, which should
endure until the day of judgment, and direct men in all truth to salvation.
Wherefore, whosoever affirms the Church to have perished, takes away this
effect and prerogative from his incarnation, life, and passion, and avouches
that at sometimes, man had no means left to attain to everlasting bliss;
which is also repugnant to the mercy and goodness of God. He also makes God
subject to the Devil, in making the Devil stronger then Christ, and affirming
him to have overthrown Christ's Church and Kingdom, which our Lord promised
should never be conquered, as I have above declared. I could add an other
reason, conuincing the Church not to have erred, taken out of Tertullian,
Tertul. lib. de praescr. cap. 28.
who proves it because error commonly brings forth division: for it were a
very strange matter, that diverse nations far distant from one an other;
erring from the truth, should al fall into the self same error; wherefore,
seeing that the Catholic faith and religion in all places is one and the same,
it is like that it does proceed of tradition not of error: but this matter is
already sufficiently proved.

I will therefore conclude, that the Church of Christ is not subject to error,
touching matters of faith and religion; and consequently, that every man may
securely follow concerning such matters, her sentence and judgment. And this
is that high beaten and plain way to salvation, which was long since foretold
by the Prophet Isaias, who prophesying of the Kingdom of Christ, uses these
words. Isa. 35. verse. 8.
And there shall be a path and way, and it shall be called the holy way: and it
shall be so direct that fools shall not be able to err therein: For no such way
can be showed if this be denied. Hence S. Hierome tells us, Hieron. in
dialog. co^t Lucifer. cap. 6.
that we ought to remain in that Church, which being founded by the Apostles
continues til this day.

This also is that, which we are taught to believe in the Creed of the
Apostles, when as we profess our selves to believe the Catholic Church. For
in these words we do not only acknowledge, that we believe that Christ has
a Catholic Church on earth: but also affirm, that we believe, hear, and obey
the same: wherefore in all doubts and controversies touching religion, let us
listen and give ear to this our holy Mother, and obey her sentence, although
it seem never so repugnant to our sense and reason. For she is the rock,
ground, and pillar of truth, let us believe her, and ever remain in her sacred
bosom. And although we receive our faith, and are instructed in religion by
some particular men: yet, let us not doubt, but that we are taught by this
universal Church. For they who instruct us, and deliver our faith unto us, do
this as the officers and members of this Church, and by her order and
appointment: neither do they deliver the said doctrine unto us, as their own;
but as the doctrine of the Church, and as such we receive it, and have
sufficient motives to persuade us that this is true. Wherefore, like as the
action of a member of a man's body, is attributed to the whole (for although
the hand strike: yet, man is said to strike, etc.) so although we be
instructed, and taught by some particular member of the Church; yet, we may
well say that this is done by the said Catholic and universal Church.

These considerations were so forcible even in Luthers understanding, for a
long time after his fall from us, that he found his conscience often troubled
for his disobedience to the Church. In one place thus he writes: Luther tom.
2. l. de seru. arbit.
During more then ten years, I was so moved by authority, conscience,
multitude of Martirs, of Bishops, of Popes, of Councels, of Universities, that
it was incredible that this Troy remaining so long in so many conflicts
invincible, could never be conquered. And in another place: Luther tom. 1. in
propos. suis de viribus hominis.
When I had (says he) overcome al arguments by the Scriptures, this one, (that
the Church is to be heard) at length with most great difficulty, and
perplexity or anguish (by Christ's assistance) I hardly overcame: Thus Luther.
I add also, that our See Hooker in his 3. book of Eccl. policy. 2 7. 9 Bell in
his treatise of the regiment of the Church. page 200. Whitgift and others.
English Protestants themselves disputing against the Puritans, are forced to
acknowledge, that the Church has authority to prescribe orders for her
government, which every one is bound to obey. Yea, Field, Hutton, and Gabriel
Powel, seem to make the constitutions of the Church, equal with those of the
Apostles. For the first of them avouches, that both things which Field book
4. chap. 20. that the Apostles.
the Apostles themselves delivered by tradition, and also such things, as were
delivered by their next after-commers, are dispensable by the authority of the
Church. And how so, if the Church has not Apostolic authority? surely his
reason assigned, is: because the Apostles and Apostolic men did not deliver
them, as reporting the immediate precepts of Christ himself, but by virtue of
their Pastoral power and office; of which it seems plainly to follow, that
he yielding the Church authority to dispense in them, gives her equal
Apostolic power. Hutton in his answ. to a treatise of the Cross in baptism.
page 3. and 59. see also page 9.
Hutton affirms, Ecclesiastical constitutions made by the Church of Christ,
not to be merely humane, but in part divine: And the reason is (says he)
because the Church is ruled by the spirit of Christ, who is the truth. Again:
if you make your comparison between that which God has commanded, and that
which the Church of God has ordained, the difference is not so great as you
would have it. Let Gods commandment have worthily the first place and
pre-eminence in all things, as is meet; but let the ordinances of the Church
be immediately subordinate unto Gods commandment, and ranged in a second
place: not only, because the Church of God hears his voice: but also, because
she is ruled by his spirit, and by the great and precious promises of God, is
made partaker of the divine nature; which (no doubt) does assist them even in
the laws also and constitutions, which are made for order and decency in the
Church. Hitherto are Huttons words.

Powels words are these. Those Adiophora or things indifferent, Gabriel
Powellus in the sibus de Adiaphoris. ca. 2.. 7. and 8
which are well and lawfully instituted and approved by the Church, are after
such sort humane, as they are also divine; and therefore they have authority
more then only humane: yea, they have authority altogether divine. The reason
is, because the Church is governed by the spirit of Christ who is truth.
Again: Ibid. cap. 3.. 6. and 7
God left it in the power and will of the Chruch, to dispose and ordain for her
own conservation, profit, comeliness, order and discipline, al things
indifferent, ceremonies and external rites; which manifestly appears out of
the holy Scriptures themselves, to have been true of the primative Church in
the Apostles days; neither can any man deny it to be true of the present
Church. For seeing that it is the same spirit governing the Church of al times,
why may it not likewise be lawful for the Church to institute laws concerning
external rites, in times ensuing? Thus Powel. And out of these assertions of
our adversaries, I think a prudent man will well infer, that our doctrine
concerning the infallible judgment of the Church in matters of faith (even
according to their proceedinges) is very reasonable, and consonant to holy
Scripture. For seeing that unity and consent in faith, is far more necessary
then unity and consent in ceremonies, and positive ordinances for government;
we may truly affirm, that Christ was more careful for the preservation of
the first, then of the second. Seeing further, that the reasons and authorities
of holy Scripture by them brought, and generally all the promises of our Lord
concerning the direction of the Church, make as much (nay commonly more) for
the first then for the second (for they are principally concerning direction in
truth) we do follow reason and the holy Scripture in maintaining the first,
if they are not to be blamed for their maintenance of the second. Seeing
moreover, that Field and Powel give the present Church in all ages, as great
authority as it had the Apostles yet living, and they were then not only
ordainers of positive laws and orders; but also infallible propounders of true
doctrine, and directors in matters of belief, we have no reason according to
their ground, to deny this prerogative to the same Church in all future times.
Seeing finally, that the Puritans deny the collection or deduction of either of
these prerogatives out of the Scripture, and the Protestants auerre the plain
deduction of one, and for this the Puritans condemn the Protestants; we may
well imagine that the Puritans may err in denying both, and that the
Protestants are to grant the one as well as the other, and consequently, that
the Catholic truth should be embraced by all.

SECTION THE FIFTH. That the testimonies of holy Scripture, and other proofs
brought for the infallible and divine authority of the Church, cannot be
applied to the Church, considered as it comprehends al faithful Christians,
that are and have been since Christ's ascension, or since the Apostles days:
but unto the present Church of al ages.
BEFORE I end this chapter, I think it not amiss to confute two or three
opinions of our adversaries, of which al seem (in some sort) to derogate from
the truth of those things which I have here auerred, and to weaken their
principal proofs. Book 4. chap. 1. 2. 3. 5. and 13.
The one is of M. Field, who tells us that we may speak of the Church three
manner of ways. First, as it comprehends all the faithful that are and have
been since Christ appeared in flesh, including also the Apostles. Secondly, as
it comprehends all that are and have been since the Apostles time. Lastly, as
it comprehends those only that are living at one present time in the world.
In the first signification, he freeth it from ignorance and error concerning
matters of faith; in the second, from error only; and in the third, not from
error in all articles of belief, but in such only as every man is bound
expressly to know and believe: wherefore, Chap. 5.
he applies that promise of Christ above mentioned, that the holy Ghost should
teach the Church al truth, to the Church in the first and second signification.

Another assertion is, that the present Church may be said at al times to be
the pillar of truth and not to err, because it retains always (as Field
speaks) a saving profession of heavenly truth: that is, Chap. 4.. the Church.
Field book 3. chap. 4. and 3.
true doctrine concerning al such principal points as are the substance of
faith, and needful to be known and believed expressly by every man. Hence they
assign some such principal points and articles, which they bind every person
to know and believe, under peril of eternal damnation, and deny as much as the
virtual belief of others to be necessary, which I place as a third absurd
opinion. To confute these assertions, and to clear the truth before proved,
from al clouds of falsehood, which may seem to obscure it, I think it not
amiss in this place, to prove these three propositions. First, that no
testimonies or reasons before brought, can be applied to the Church in those
two first acceptions of the Church expressed by Field: secondly, that the same
testimonies and reasons, prove an infallible judgment of the Church,
concerning every article of faith in general, not touching some principal only:
lastly that to salvation it is necessary, to believe either expressly or
virtually the whole sum of Christian doctrine. And to perform this,
concerning the first in the first place, I demand whether there be or no, any
such Churches now extant in the world, of which the one includes al faithful
Christians that are and have been since the ascension of Christ: the other, al
those that are and have been since the Apostles days? if there be not, then
the promises of Christ cannot be verified of them: if there be, then I ask
further, where they are to be found? Is the Church now in the world that has
been in former ages? Are they that in times past flourished, now members of
the Church militant? They are not without doubt. Wherefore, although these two
diverse considerations of the Church, may be in our understanding: yet, there is
no real object of them, now having any real being in the world, nor ever was
at any one time: and seeing that it is evident that the promises of Christ, are
concerning the prerogatives of some real body or common wealth, having real
being in the world, and not only in our conceit; it is also manifest, that
they were not spoken of the Church in any one of those two acceptions. Besides
this, how shall we sever or distinguish these three considerations of the
Church, really from one another? does not the Church in the first acception
comprehend the same Church, as it is taken in the second and third
signification? does it not (as Field says) comprehend all that are and ever
have been since Christ appeared in the flesh? if so, then without doubt also,
that Church which has bin in all particular ages, and at al particular times
and instances, and is even at this present. We must imagine (if I be not
deceived) the better to understand M. Field his meaning, Vincent. Liren.
aduersus haeres. ca. 28. 29.
as Vincentius Lirenensis seems to insinuate, that the beginning and
progress of the Church since her first planting, has been not much unlike to
the augmentation or growing of a child, from his first birth to his perfect
state or old age. And who can make any question, but in the time of a man's
being, from his birth until his old age, that time also is included, which was
from the day in which he was weaned from his nurses milk, until his said old
age? but if we admit this, how can we choose but confess, that the Church in
the first acception, includes also the same in the second and third? and so I
say, that the last is comprehended in the second: how then can he make the
Church in the first signification, free from error and ignorance, and not in
the second and third? or how can he make it in the second signification free
from error, and not in the third? and to make the matter a little more evident:
I demand of M. Field, whether a man might truly have said, at al times since
the Apostles days, the Church in the first and second signification, is
absolutely free from al error in divine things? if he might not, then nothing
more is attributed to the Church in these acceptions, then to the same in the
last: if he might, then was the present Church in every instant free from such
errors and ignorance. For to insist in the similitude already made, to this
that a man be said to be sound and in health, it is not sufficient that in his
childhood or at some other time, he was so affected: but it is also necessary
that he be sound at that very time, when the sentence is pronounced; and if the
sentence be pronounced of al his whole life, it cannot be true if once he were
sick. In like sort, to this that the Church as it includes al times, since
the Ascension of Christ, or from the Apostles, be said to be free from al
error: it is not sufficient that in the first years, or at some time or other
it was so: but it is also requisite that she be so now, and ever have been
so; otherwise, if she have been infected with error at some one time, the
said error makes the proposition false. And in very deed I cannot see, first,
for what other reason he freeth the Church in the first signification from
ignorance and error; but in respect of the Apostles days, when it enjoied
only (as he says) such priueledges: in like sort, I can see no other reason
why he freeth it in the second acception from error, but this; that at some
time or other, in some place or other, true doctrine has been or is taught in
her, concerning every article of faith. For he makes the present Church, at al
times subject to error, and consequently, he will not give this privilege to
the present Church of al times. And this he seems to confess in those his
words of the eleauenth chapter, where he says, that the Church in the second
acception is infallibly true. Not in respect of the condition of the men of
whom it consists, Book 4. chap. 11.. that the authority.
or the manner of the guiding of the spirit, (each particular man being subject
to error) but in respect of the generality, and universality of it, in every
part whereof in every time no error could possibly be found: that is (if I well
understand him,) that some part or other, at some time or other, was free from
every error, not al; nor perhaps any part from al errors at the same time.
Mark well, what a proper prerogative is finally given to the Church in those
acceptions, in which he does so highly exalt it, to wit; that it was free
from error and ignorance in the Apostles days, and free from error in
respect of the generality and universality of it, because no error could
possibly be found in it in every part, in every time. What improper kind of
speeches be these? can a sick man be said to be sound, because he was found
in his childe-hood? or can he be said to have been ever sound, if once he
were sick? or can he be called a sound man, that has had at one time his
head sound, at another time his arms, and at other times other members,
although he never had his whole body at one time sound together? Besides,
what vveake priueledges are here given to the Church? are they answerable to
the promises of Christ, and other testimonies and reasons above recited, for
her infallible and divine authority? has he bestovved no greater prerogatives
upon his spiritual Body and Spouse? but perhaps these prerogatives redound
greatly to the good and benefit of the members and children of the Church.
Neither this can be auerred true: for what are poor Christians the nearer for
it? how can such a Church be the director of their faith? how shall they know
what faith was preached by the Apostles? and what part taught true doctrine,
and when and which erred in subsequent ages? how shall we understand her
judicial sentence, when controversies arise and are to be decided? surely they
that are past, and are departed out of this world, can perform these things
by no other means, but by their writings left behind them: wherefore, we can
take no other direction, and receive no other judicial sentence from the Church
in the first and second acception, but by such monuments and books, as we have
received from the Apostles, Evangelists, the ancient Fathers and Doctors, and
other our predecessors. And what is this? but to reduce al to the letter of
holy Scripture, and to the works of antiquity, which (as I will prove
hereafter, setting aside the authority of the present Church) yield us no
certain and divine argument; and to give nothing at al to the Church it self,
contrary to all the arguments before made for her infallible authority.
Finally, some of the places of Scripture before aleadged, are expressly spoken
of the present Church, as that: tell the Church; If he shall not hear the
Church, let him he to thee as the Heathen or Publican, etc.

SECTION THE SIXTH. That the same testimonies and proofs, convince an
infallible judgment of the Church concerning every article of faith, not only
concerning certain of the principal.
SECONDLY, that the testimonies of holy Scriptures and Fathers, with the
reasons brought in this Chapter, prove the judgment and authority of the
Church, to be of divine and infallible truth in all points of faith, it is even
as easily showed. For are not the words general? Is it not said that the holy
Ghost shall teach the Church al truth, and that she being the house of God is
the pillar and ground of truth, etc.? And how can these promises be verified,
if in some things she be subject to error? Field book 4. chap. 4.
Some say, these last words of the Apostle are understood of the particular
Church of the Ephesians: but first, it is not like that God bestowed such an
extraordinary privilege upon that Church, as to make it the pillar and ground
of truth: Secondly, the Apostle calls that Church, unto which he here gives
these prerogatives, the house of God; by which words Cipr. l. 1. epist. 6.
S. Ciprian, Aug. l. 7. de baptis. co^t. Donat. ca. 49. 50. 51. Item in psalm.
25. enarrat. 2.
S. Augustine and all the Fathers commonly understand the whole militant Church:
yea, S. Augustine alluding to this sentence, and using the very words of the
Apostle, calls the whole Church 2. Tim. 2. verse. 20.
columnam and firmamentum veritatis: the pillar and ground of truth; and in the
Scripture it self, the whole militant Church is called a great house, as
Field book 1. chap. 11.
Field himself confesses. And because every particular Diocese is a part of
this Church, the Apostle might very well use this kind of speech unto Timothy.
I write to thee, that thou may know how thou ought to converse in the
house of God: although the said Timothy was Bishop only of Ephesus.

Moreover, are we not absolutely under peril of being accounted Heathens and
Publicans, bound to obey the Church? and what reason had our Lord so to bind
us, if in some things her judgment may be erroneous? for how shall we
discern which those articles be, in which she cannot err, and in which she
may err? Further, what profit (if this were so) shall we receive from her
for the preservation of unity, and ending of al controversies? verily, this
assertion is even as prejuditial to the good of unity, as that which affirms
the Church to have no warrant of truth at al. For what dissension and division
would arise of this? might not every man contradict the rule of faith in any
matter whatsoever, and affirm his contradiction to be in a matter of small
moment? who shall judge which matters be of great, and which of small importance?
For example, diverse sectaries tell us, See Couel in defense of Hooker artic. 11.
Fox page 942. etc.
that the question concerning the real presence of Christ in the blessed
Sacrament, whether he be there really and substantially by transubstantiation,
as the Catholics affirm; or together with bread as the Lutherans say; or only
figuratively as is affirmed by the Sacramentaries, is a question of small
importance, not any essential point belonging to the substance of Christian
religion. But how will these men refute Castalio, who adds (if Beza say true)
that the controversies touching the blessed Trinity, the estate and office of
Christ, and how he is one with his father, are concerning no essential points
of Christian religion; certainly they cannot well overthrow his opinion. And
this is that which was in old time, and is at this present affirmed by some,
See Theodoretus lib 2. hist. cap. 18. 19. 21. Trip. hist. lib. 5. cap. 21. and
33.
that so that Christ be believed to be God, it skilleth not whether he be
believed to be equal or not equal, consubstantial or not consubstantial to his
father. Wherefore this assertion of our adversaries, that the rule of faith may
in some points be denied: first, opens the gappe to al dissension, then to al
impiety and overthrow of Christianity: which things be sufficient to persuade
every Christian to abhor and detest it.

SECTION THE SEVENTH. That to salvation it is necessary to believe the whole
Catholic faith, and every article thereof.
CONCERNING the third point which I intended to prove; I affirm, that it is
necessary to salvation to believe and hold, either expressly or virtually, every
article of faith which is propounded by the Church to her children to be
believed: I add those words (expressly or virtually) because I say not, that
every man is bound expressly to know all the articles of Christian religion. For
it is held by us sufficient if the ruder sort know expressly certain of the
principal: as are they that concern the Trinity, and the incarnation, passion,
resurrection, and ascension of Christ, etc. if they virtually believe all the
rest, that is; if they believe (concerning al such points as they are not bound
expressly to know) whatsoever according to the doctrine of the church ought to
be believed; and be of contrary belief in no one point propounded unto them,
and known to be propounded as an article of faith. We differ therefore from
our adversaries in this, that some of them hold a man is not bound to believe
any such articles not necessarily to be known by all; others say a man may err
in them, so long as he sees not apparently his error condemned by Scripture,
or plainly proved false by evident deduction out of those articles, which are
expressly to be known and believed. But the truth of this mine assertion, is
gathered out of that which has been already proved. For if the Church be the
ground and pillar of truth, and cannot err in faith, it is manifest, that al
her belief may safely without danger of error, be received. And moreover,
because God has revealed such articles to the Church for no other end, then
that her children by the belief of them may attain to everlasting bliss, it
is also evident, that every one is bound to believe whatsoever she teaches. I
add also, that whosoever believes not al, has no faith: and that he who
thinks it to be sufficient to salvation, to believe certain principal
articles of Christian religion, although the rest be denied, must needs accuse
the Church of error; and so according to his own opinion, clean overthrow
her. The first is easily proved, because he that believes not God and his
Church in one point, certainly believes them in none. For how is it possible
that he can reject them in any, if he believe their authority to be infallible?
Wherefore, by rejecting their judgment and sentence concerning one article, he
plainly declares that he believes not the rest, because they are propounded
unto him by the Church and revealed by God; but because they please his own
fancy, and in his own judgment he thinks them true and credible: of which
it follows, that he has no faith, which (as I have above declared) makes us
believe the mysteries of our belief, because they are revealed by God. And
this we may gather out of those words of S. James the Apostle: He that
offends in one, is made guilty of al. James 2. verse. 10.
For if by committing one mortal sin, we be said to be made guilty of al,
either because by breaking one commandment, we show our selves not to regard
the rest; or else because one mortal sin, is as sufficient to bereave us of
the grace of God, as a thousand: we may likewise well infer of this, that a
man refusing to believe one article of faith, shows himself not to esteem
of the rest, and by this only is bereaved of true faith, that in very deed he
believes none, and is guilty of infidelity touching al; and consequently, is
no member of the Church of Christ, whose members by faith principally, are
united and lincked together.

Further, that whosoever thinks it sufficient to salvation, to believe
certain principal articles of Christian religion, although the rest be denied,
accuses the Church of error, thus I declare. Galat. 5. verse. 21. Tit. 3.
verse. 10.
The Apostle teaches us, that they that follow and embrace sects or
heresies, shall not possess the Kingdom of heaven: Wherefore, either the
Church erreth, both in defining such articles (as some think not necessary to
be believed) to belong to the object of faith; and also in condemning for
heresies, such opinions as they think may safely be defended: or else such as
despise her censure, and embrace the said opinions, are in state of damnation;
the first (as I have already proved) overthrows the Church, the second is
that which I intend to prove.

But let us declare the truth of my first assertion, out of the holy Scripture.
And first it cannot be denied, but our Savior absolutely, and that under pain
of being censured as Etnickes and Publicans, and consequently under pain of
damnation, commands us to hear and obey the Church: Math. 18. verse. 17.
if he will not hear the Church (says he) let him be to thee as the Heathen
and Publican. And note, that he bids us not believe her only in principal
matters, but in all; making no limitation or distinction. In like sort, in
general terms he tells us, that he that hears his Apostles and disciples
(which must be likewise verified in their successors) hears him, and he that
despises them despises him. Finally, he commanded his disciples to preach his
Gospel, and added that he that believes it not, shall be condemned: which
words cannot be understood only of the principal articles of Catholic
religion; for his Gospel included the whole sum of Christian faith, as I have
proved above.

Hence, diverse in the first ages of the Church have been condemned and
accursed as Heretics, for few errors in faith; yea, some time for one only;
and that in no principal point of belief, as I could exemplify in the quarto
decimani, Epiphan. haeres. 50.
who were so censured for keeping Easter day on the fourteenth day of the
moon, and others: yea, I may well say, that almost al Heretics that ever have
risen, have believed certain principal articles of Christian religion;
wherefore, whosoever thinks it sufficient to believe such articles, opens
heaven almost to al Heretics. Moreover, how shall we know which are these
principal articles? certainly every man will affirm (if this liberty be given)
that the articles by him denied, pertain not to that number. Lastly, this
error is condemned by all the ancient Fathers. S. Athanasius in his Creed
received by the whole Church, affirms, that whosoever keeps not entirely
and wholly without any corruption the Catholic faith, without al doubt shall
perish everlastingly. Theodor. li. 4. c. 17. Hooker. book. 5. of
ecclesiastical policy.. 42. page 88. Greg. Nazian. tract de fide. Aug. lib. de
haeres. in fine.
S. Basil, being requested by the Prefect of Valens an Arrian Emperor, to
yield a little to the time, answered: that they which are instructed in divine
doctrine, do not suffer one syllable of the divine decrees to be corrupted or
depraved: but for the defense of it, (if it be needful and required) embrace
likewise of death. Hooker also a Protestant tells us, that the same S. Basil
for changing some one or two sillables in the verse, Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, was forced to write apologies and
whole volumes in his own defense. S. Gregory Nazianzene has this notable
sentence: Nothing can be more dangerous then these Heretics, who when they run
soundly through al, yet with one word (as with a drop of poison) corrupt or
stain that true and sincere faith of our Lord; and of Apostolic tradition. S.
Augustine likewise having reckoned up eighty distinct Heresies, adds that
there may chance to lurk many other petty heresies unknown to him, of which
heresies (says he) whosoever shall hold any one, shall not be a Catholic
Christian. Finally, Hier. li. 3. Apolog. contr. Ruf.
S. Hierome witnesses, that for one word or two, contrary to the Catholic
faith; many heresies have been cast out of the Church. This is the opinion of
the ancient Fathers. Wherefore, seeing that one only heresy be it never so
small, bereaueth us of faith, and seperateth us from the body of Christ his
Church, which is quickened with his holy spirit; it must needs follow, that
whosoever is infected with any one such heresy, is void of al spiritual life
and in state of damnation, and can have no more life then a man's arm cut off
from his body, or a bough cut from a tree. But of this matter I shall entreat
more at large, Chap. 1. Sect. 4.
in my treatise of the definition and notes of the true Church; where I shall
prove, that the members of Christ's Church, are lincked together by the
profession of the same whole sum of Christian doctrine: and therefore for
this present this shall suffice. And less (I think) would have satisfied any
reasonable man: for seeing that there is but one true rule of belief, Ephesians. 4.
verse. 4.
and one faith (according as we are taught by the Apostle) among Christians;
and this faith is so necessary to salvation as I have proved before: no
wiseman will prescribe himself a rule of faith according to his own erroneous
fancy, and neglect the judgment of the Church, whom truth it self has
warranted, that she shall not err from truth.

Chapter 7. Of the holy Scripture, which is the first particular ground of
faith in the Catholic Church.
SECTION THE FIRST. How the Scripture is known to be Canonical.
THE supreme authority and infallible judgment of the Church, being thus
established and proved, it may well in this place be demanded what particular
grounds, decrees, or principles the Church does deliver unto us, or we find
in the Church, whereupon we may securely build our faith?

For the resolution of this question, I have affirmed in the title of this
Chapter, that the first such particular ground, is the holy Scripture: And
although there be no controversy between us and our adversaries, concerning
the authority of diverse books of the said holy Scripture (for most of them by
us al are confessed to be Canonical) yet, much difference there is between us,
concerning the means by which we know the holy Scripture, and every parcel
thereof to be the true word of God, and who is to be judge of the true sense
of these divine volumes: wherefore, these points are briefly to be handled and
discussed. How then do we know, that the old and new Testament are
Canonical? how can we certainly assure our selves, that the Apostles and
Disciples vvrote the new? what proof likewise have we to persuade us, that
no part of the holy Scripture has been in times past corrupted or depraved?
I answer in few words, that all this is infallibly known unto us, by the
authority and judgment of the Catholic Church, who has adjudged al such
books to be Canonical, and as Canonical received them, and delivered them to
her children. I deny not, but the Scriptures before the definition and censure
of the Church, were true, and contained the certain and sincere word of God:
but this only I say, that this truth and authority, was first infallibly known
unto us by the Church, who adjudged and censured them to be as they are, and
as such commanded al Christians to esteem and reverence them. Neither is this
any ways prejudicial to the dignity and authority of the holy Scripture: for
this notwithstanding we confess, that the said Scripture is of far greater
authority, then the Church or her definitions be; which is manifest, because
although the holy Ghost assist and direct, both the vvriters of holy
Scripture and the Church: yet certain it is, that he has assisted and
directed the first, after a far more excellent manner then he does the
second, because his assistance and direction in penning those sacred books
was such, that every sentence in them contained, is of most certain verity;
but his assistance unto the Church, whether it be in a general Council, or
otherwise in the decrees of the Bishop of Rome, makes only that which the
said Council or Bishop intend to define, of such an infallible truth. Wherefore
then do we prove the Scripture to be Canonical by the authority of the
Church? Surely for no other reason, then because the Church is better known
unto us then the Scripture: For the Church has always been (as I vvil prove
hereafter) most visible and apparent to the whole world; every man also,
before that the new Testament was written, and before that it was generally
received by the Church, might have known the Church (for she was before any
part of it was penned) and consequently by her infallible judgment, every one
might with far more ease and certainety, have come to the knowledge of such
books, then by any other means or industry. Wherefore to conclude, although
the Church makes not Scripture; yet, of her we learn most certainly which is
Scripture. And this is no more disgrace unto Scripture, then it was unto Christ
that the Apostles gave testimony of him, because they were better known then
he. I add also that every one of them, who above al others reprehend this our
assertion, takes upon himself as great authority over Scriptures, as we give
to the whole Church. See part second chap. 5. Sect. 1.
For every new sectarie out of his own fancy judges this to be Scripture,
that to be none, etc. which must needs be in every man's judgment far more
absurd.

This assertion being thus explicated, let us now briefly prove the same: And
first, because we can assign no other means by which we may say, that we
certainly know the Scripture to be Canonical, but the authority of the
Church. And as concerning the old Testament, although we grant that the
authority thereof, was first partly approved by miracles, partly by the
testimony of Prophets, and partly by the authority of the Church in those
days: yet, how do we now infallibly know that it was so approved, and
that it is the self same now that was then approved, but by the relation,
tradition, and censure of the Church?

But let us come to the new Testament, and demand who has received it into
the Canon of holy Scripture? what miracles have been wrought to prove it
Canonical? who does assure us, that it was penned by the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ? and that since their days it has not been corrupted?
Verily, the Church only resolves us of al these questions, and tells us
with assurance of truth, that the said new Testament was written by the
said sacred authors, inspired and directed by the holy Ghost: and that ever
since their days, it has been preserved in her sacred bosom without
corruption. And no other answer having any probability of truth, and
sufficient to satisfy a reasonable man's understanding, can be made. This may
also be confirmed by the continual practice of the Church: For no man can deny
but it was her doing, that the four Gospels of S. Mathewe, Mark, Luke, and
John, See part 2 chap. 5. Sect. 2.
were received, and the Gospel called of Nicodemus, with others rejected. She
has likewise now received as Canonical, diverse books in times past of doubtful
authority: For it is recorded by Ecclesiastical vvriters, and also confessed by
our adversaries, that there has been controversy and doubt in the Church,
concerning the authority of the Eusebius. li. 3. hist. ca. 3. 25. 28. Hier. de
viris illust. in Paulo, Petro etc. Hammer in his notes upon Eusebius lib. 2.
cap. 23.
epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews, the epistles of S. James, S. Jude, the
second of S. Peter, and the second of S. John. How doubtful the authority of
the Euse. l. 3. cap. 28. Hier. epist 129. ad Dardara^.
Apocalipse was among many, every man may see in S. Hierome and Eusebius, and
in the Council of Laodicea, which numbered it not among other Canonical books.
And who has taken up and ended these controversies by declaring these parcels
of Scripture to be Canonical, but our holy mother the Church? Verily this is so
true and evident, that it is confessed even by some of our Observations upon
the Harmony of co^fessions, upon the 1. Section.
adversaries themselves. Thus she received in the first general council of
Nice, the book of Judith, about the year of our Lord 325. if we believe Hier.
praefat. in Iud. Ide^ in prolo. Galeato and in prol. Prouer. and in praefat. in
Judith.
S. Hierome, who before he heard of this decree of the said Council, rejected
the said book; but understanding of it, admitted it forthwith as Canonical.

Let us confirm all this with the testimony of S. Augustine, whom Calvin li.
4. Instit. c. 14. sess. 25
Calvin acknowledges to be the most faithful witness of al antiquity, Beza in
cap. 3. ad Romans v. 12.
Beza calls him the prince of al ancient Divines both Greek and Latin, as
concerning dogmatical points of religion. Gomarus in speculo verae Ecclesiae.
page 96.
Gomarus says that according to the common opinion he is accounted most pure.
This then is one of his notable sentences touching this matter: Aug. contra
epistol. Manichaei quam vocant fundamentum. cap. 5.
I would not believe the Gospel (says he) except the authority of the
Catholic Church did move me thereunto. Those therefore whom I obeyed, saying:
Believe ye the Gospel: why shall I not obey them, saying unto me: Believe thou
not Manichaeus? Choose which thou will. If thou shall say, believe the
Catholics, they admonish me that I believe not you: If thou shall say believe
not the Catholics, thou shall not do well to constrain me by the Gospel to
believe Manichaeus, because I have believed the Gospel it self, through the
preaching of the Catholics: Thus S. Augustine. But here Field book 4. chap. 4.
M. Field in his fourth book of the Church occurreth and says, that the sense
and meaning of S. Augustine in those his words. I would not believe the Gospel
except the authority of the Church did move me thereunto: is, that he had never
believed the Gospel if the authority of the Church had not been an
introduction unto him. I reply, that he vvresteth this holy Fathers words to
a vvrong sense: yea, to such a sense as his discourse it self will not bear;
and for proof of this, I desire no more of my reader, but to mark the force
of the reason used by S. Augustine, which is this. Manichaeus in the beginning
of his epistle, which this most learned Doctor confuteth, called himself an
Apostle of Jesus Christ. S. Augustine requires a proof of his Apostleship;
and urges (if perhaps he allege some authority out of the Gospel) what he
would do to him that should deny the Gospel: whereunto he adjoineth the words
rehearsed. I truly would not believe the Gospel etc. if the authority of the
Church did not move me thereunto. And out of this that the Gospel is believed
by the authority of the Church, he proves that Manichaeus is not to be
believed, because the same authority which commands to do the one,
forbids to do the other: Of which it follows, that if it err in the
last, it may also err in the first; and so no firm argument can be brought
out of it, for the proof of the Apostleship of Manichaeus. Hence S. Augustine
does not say, I had not believed the Gospel, except the authority of the Church
had moved me thereunto, as he should have said if he had meant as Field
pretends; but I would not believe the Gospel, etc. taking his argument from
the motive of his present belief of the Gospel: and in this sense his reason
is of great force, and not otherwise. But that which I say, is yet more
confirmed by that which follows: For S. Augustine adds. But if peradventure
thou can find something in the Gospel, most apparent for the Apostleship of
Manichaeus, thou shall weaken unto me the authority of the Catholics, who
command me that I shall not believe thee; which being weakened, now neither can
I believe the Gospel because through them I believed it. So whatsoever thou
shall bring me from thence, shall be with me of no force: wherefore, if nothing
manifest be found in the Gospel for the Apostleship of Manichaeus, I will
believe the Catholics rather then thee. But if thou bring any thing from
thence manifest for the Apostleship of Manichaeus, I will neither believe them
nor thee: not them, because they have lied to me concerning thee; not thee
also, because thou bring me forth that Scripture which I believed through
them, whom I have found liars. But God forbid that I should not believe the
Gospel. Hitherto are S. Augustines words; by which (I think) every man may
perceive, how greatly M. Field does wrong him. For we see plainly, that he
confesses the authority of the Church, to have been the cause of his present
belief of Scripture; yet not the formal cause, but the conditional, as is
declared before. And all that I have here related out of this holy Father, Aug.
tom. 6. li. cont. Epist. qua^ voca^t fundamenti cap. 5.
may be as well urged against any Sectarie whatsoever of our time, as against
Manichaeus: for whosoever affirms the Church to have erred in condemning any
one of their Heresies, by weakening and overthrowing her authority, weakeneth
also and overthrows the authority of the whole Bible. Neither does that
which he alleges out of Waldensis make any ways for him: for as this learned
man plainly in that very place declares, he understands S. Augustine as I
have delivered: These are his words. Waldensis lib. 2. doctrinalis fidei
artic. 2. ca. 21.
Without the authority of the universal Church, no scripture can be read or bad
for certain: And this S. Augustine understood when he said. I would not
believe the Gospel, did not the authority of the Church move me thereunto: Thus
Waldensis. The point which Field touches, is in his discourse following, but
it makes nothing against us; for he only says that which I have before
delivered, to wit: that by the proposition of the Church, we first come to a
certain and supernatural knowledge of such books as are Canonical, and then
believe the verities in them contained, because they are revealed by God: like
as the Samaritans first believed through the relation of the woman with whom
our Savior talked, Job. ca. 4. ver. 39. etc.
as the propounder of such things as she had heard of our Lord; afterward
through the divine speeches which he used to them himself. That which Field
says before, that S. Augustine (according to the opinion of some Divines)
speaks here of the church, taken for the whole number of believers that are
and have been, since Christ appeared in the flesh, so including the Apostles,
is frivolous: both because S. Augustine never used the words Catholic Church,
after this sort in that sense; and also because the argument had been of no
force; See S. August. in li. 23. co^tra Faustum cap. 9.
unto which I add further, that S. Augustine speaks of that Church, which
commanded him then not to believe Manichaeus, which was the present Church as
appears. Neither can he (as I think) allege any Divine that ever so
interpreted it. For that which he cites in the margent out of Occam is very
impertinent: and thus much of this testimony of S. Augustine.

Hieron. in simbolo ad Damasum
S. Hierome likewise, avouches himself to receive the old and new Testament
in that number of books, which the authority of the holy Catholic Church does
deliver. And this reason so infallibly proves, that these divine books
contain the true word of God, that every one may most assuredly believe it.
For her censure and declaration cannot be false, who by God himself is
warranted from error.

Finally, unto this principal and invincible argument, I might also add the
tradition of the Church, and one consent of holy Fathers, who have delivered to
their successors, and confirmed by their testimony, that these holy books were
penned by the instinct of the holy Ghost; which argument of tradition for the
proof of Canonical books, was used by Serapion, Clemens Alexandrinus and
Origenes, as Eusebius records. Eusebius li. 6. hist. cap. 10. 11. 18.
But this argument is almost the same with the former: for the certainty of the
tradition of the Church, and of the testimony of the ancient fathers, depends
of this, that the Church cannot err. For if we make her judgment subject to
error, her tradition and the whole consent of fathers, may likewise be
erroneous: but supposing the Church cannot err, this argument is of as great
force, but almost the same with the first. And hence I infer against our
adversaries, that no books of the old and new Testament received by the
Church as canonical, are to be rejected; for seeing that the same authority has
approved them al, they are al with like reason to be admitted: neither has any
man more reason to reject one, then another. And thus much of the letter of
holy Scripture.

SECTION THE SECOND. Concerning the sense or exposition of holy Scriptures; and
first that the Scriptures are hard, and receive diverse interpretations.
BUT a far greater controversy there is, between us and the new Sectaries,
concerning the true sense and interpretation of holy Scripture, who is the
judge thereof, and of whom we are to receive it. For the decision of which
difficulty, before I deliver the Catholic opinion, I must briefly prove two
or three conclusions, auerred also by us Catholics.

And first, that the Scriptures are hard, and admit diverse interpretations.
This is insinuated unto us in sundry places of the sacred books: but for
breuities sake, 2. Pet. 3. verse. 16. Aug tom. 2. epistola 119. ad Ia nu. ca.
vlt.
I will content my self with one testimony of S. Peter, who tells us that in
S. Paul's epistles, There are certain things hard to be understood: which the
unlearned (says he) and unstable deprave, as also the rest of the Scriptures,
to their own perdition. The holy Fathers plainly affirm the same. Among the
rest S. Augustine (although a man of rare wit and great learning) affirmed,
that there were far more things in the Scriptures of which he was ignorant,
then there were that he knew. Idem tom. 3. li. 2. de doctrina Christiana cap.
6. Ide^ epist. 3. see him also epist. 1. ad Volusium.
He tells us also, that they that read the Scriptures rashly, are deceived
through many and diverse obscurities and doubts. That through the providence of
God the Scripture is hard, to tame with labor our pride, and to recall our
understanding from irksomnes, unto which those things which are easily found
our, seem base and of no moment. He affirms moreover in an other place, that
the depth and profundity of wisdom contained not only in the words of holy
Scripture, but also in the matter and sense is so wonderful; that live a man
never so long, be he never of so great wit, never so studious, and never so
fervent and desirous to attain to the knowledge thereof; yet that when he
ends, he shall confess that he does but begin. This moved him in the books
of his confessions, to cry out unto God after this sort. Aug. lib. 12. confess.
cap. 14.
O wonderful profoundnesse of thy words! wonderful profoundnesse my God,
wonderful profoundnes! it makes a man quake to look on it; to quake for
reverence, and tremble for the love thereof: Hitherto S. Augustine. S. Hierome
likewise, a man most expert in those tongues (the knowledge of which, makes
most for the understanding of these sacred books) and experienced in the
translation and interpretation of them above others, Hieron. in cap. 5. ad
Galatas
witnesses; that the fruit of the spirit is found in the holy Scripture by
much labor and industry: and in another place he says that the Apocalipse of
S. John, contains as many mysteries as words. The like sentences are found
in the rest of the Fathers.

And this obscurity of holy Scripture is a thing so evident, that diverse, even
of our adversaries themselves (although others will have them easy) are forced
in express and plain terms to confess it. Among the rest the translator or
corrector of the English bible, published in the year one thousand six
hundred, in his preface avouches, that it is a very hard thing to understand
the holy Scriptures, and that diverse errors, sects, and heresies grow daily
for lack of the true knowledge thereof. Diverse others have the like sentences,
some of which I shall recite in the second part of this Treatise: See part. 2.
cap. 5. sect. 4.
yea, almost all the new sectaries by their proceedinges, seem to acknowledge
this truth: for otherwise, what mean they to write such great and huge volumes
or commentaries upon the holy Scripture? But whence arises this difficulty and
obscurity? surely of diverse causes. First, because sundry words of
Scriptures, admit many senses, and the very phrase it self is obscure and
doubtful. Secondly, many sentences in it are prophetical, many parabolical,
many metaphorical, which commonly are full of obscurity. Thirdly, it is proper
to Scripture to have many senses under one letter, as the literal sense, which
is that which the holy writer first intended: and this sense sometimes is
signified by proper words; sometimes by words metaphorical and improper, yea
sometimes the literal sense of the same words is diverse. It has also a
spiritual sense, which is that which is signified by the things under the
letter. And this sense is either moral, which is called also tropological, when
it tends to manners: or allegorical, when it tends to faith, or the Church;
or anagogical, when it tends to heaven or life everlasting. For example, this
word Jerusalem literally signifies the City so called, morally the soul
of man, allegorically the Church militant, and anagogically the Church
triumphant. Al these senses the words of Scripture bear; and diverse of them
not seldom, were intended by the holy Ghost in the same sentence. And what a
difficult matter is it, to discern them? I add finally, that sundry
mysteries delivered unto us in holy writ, are high and above the reach of our
natural reason: Wherefore it is no marvel if the sentences in which they are
disclosed, be hard and obscure. Hence the prophet David desired of God
understanding, Psalm. 118. John. 5. verse 39. Luke 24. verse. 45.
that he might search his law. Our Savior also willed the Jews to search the
Scriptures, opened his Apostles and disciples understanding, that they might
understand the Scriptures, etc: which places plainly convince the Scriptures to
be hard.

SECTION THE THIRD. The Scriptures may be falsely understood: and that every
private man may err in the understanding of them.
IN the second place I must prove, that the Scriptures may be falsely
understood, and that every private man may err in the translation or
interpretation of the same. This follows of that which has been already
said touching their obscurity: for if the Scripture be so obscure (as I have
showed) these things must needs ensue. And verily, that the words of Scripture
may receive false interpretations, 2. Pet. 3. verse 16.
S. Peter above cited plainly avouches, affirming that the unlearned and
unstable (even in his days) depraved the epistles of S. Paul and other
Scriptures, to their own perdition. And it is a thing so manifest, that it
needs no proof: for it is evident, that al Heretics heretofore have
alleged Scriptures falsely expounded, to confirm their heresies, and this I
will declare more at large hereafter. See part 2. cap. 8. sect. 8.
It is apparent also that in these our days some in the world; either
Catholics, Lutherans, Zuinglians, Anabaptists, or Libertines, do not give the
true sense of holy Scripture, because it is impossible that more then one of
these can have the truth, their expositions in diverse points be so diverse and
contrary; August. tract. 18. in Johan. Aug. tom. 3. de Genesis ad littera^ li. 7.
ca. 9. Vincent. Lirin. lib. co^tr. propha. haeres nouitates cap. 2. Barlow in
his relation of the said conference page 61. Se part. 2. c. 5. sect. 1.
yea S. Augustine affirms, that heresies have no other offspring or root,
then that good Scriptures are badly understood. In another place to the same
effect he tells us, that al Heretics read Catholic Scriptures: neither
(says he) are they for any other cause Heretics, then for that not
understanding them truly, they defend obstinately their false opinions against
the truth of them. The same is declared by Vincentius Lirinensis in these
words: Al (says he) take not the Scripture in one and the same sense, because
of the deepnes thereof: but the speeches of it some interpret one way, and
some another way; so that there may almost as many senses be picked out of it,
as there be men. For Nouatus does expound it one way, and Sabellius another
way: otherwise Donatus; otherwise Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius; otherwise
Iouinian, Pelagius, Celestius; lastly, otherwise Nestorius: Hitherto Vincentius
Lirinensis. Hence our King in the conference held at Hampton Court between the
Protestants and Puritans, most discreetly affirmed, that he would not wish al
Canonical books to be read in the Church, unless there were one to interpret
them.

Moreover, that the judgment of every private man (as before) is subject unto
error and falsehood in his translation, or interpretation of holy Scripture, it
is granted by some of our adversaries, and likewise easily proved: First,
because he Scripture it self warranteth no private man's judgment from error.
Nay S. Peter in express terms tells us: 2. Pet. 1. verse 20. Se sect. 5.
following 1. Ioh. 4. verse 1.
That no prophecy of Scripture is made by private interpretation; that is to
say, that no Scripture ought to be expounded according to any private man's
opinion: for the word Prophecy signifies the interpretation or exposition of
holy Scripture, as shall hereafter be proved. The Apostle Saint John teaches
us the same lesson, vvilling us not to believe every spirit, but to prove the
spirittes, if they be of God. And how are we to prove the spirittes? without
al doubt not by our own judgment, which is subject to error; but by
considering whether they be consonant, or no, to the doctrine of the Catholic
Church, or the rule of faith, received by tradition from the Apostles. This
appears by the discourse of the said Apostle following: In which (to confute
Cerinthus, Ebion, Basilides, and other Heretics who denied the divinity,
humanity, or union of two natures in Christ, and to prove their spirits not to
be from God) he sets down the doctrine of the Church concerning those
points; and adds these words. He that knows God, hears us, that is to
say, he that has the knowledge of God by true supernatural faith, hears and
obeieth the Church,

But what do I use many words in a matter so evident, gathered out of our
adversaries own proceedinges? For the holy Ghost teaches men but one truth:
seeing therefore, that there are among the new Sectaries now in the world, so
great dissentions and differences in opinions, concerning the exposition of the
self same words of Scripture; it necessarily follows, that some of them
expound the Scriptures falsely: and seeing that one of them has no better
warrant for his direction in truth, then another; we may well affirm them al
to be subject to error and falsehood. I add also, that every Sectarie must
needs confess, every one of his Captains (I mean Luther, Zuinglius,
Calvin, and the rest) to have erred in some point or other, touching the true
sense of Scripture; for almost no one Sectarie follows any one of these in all
points, and approves al his interpretations: but if we grant them al to
have erred in some points, we may well infer that they are subject to
error in all, because their vvarrant is equal for all.

Finally, if we admit every private man's spirit as a judge in such matters, we
take away al order in the Church and open the gappe to al Heretics. Some say,
that every man by conference of one place of Scripture with another, See
part. 2. cap. 5. sect. 4.
may attain to the knowledge of the true sense: I reply, that every man's
discourse in such points, may be false and erroneous. And it is well known,
that diverse of our adversaries have conferred the same places and have gathered
out of them different senses, which cannot al be true: Yea the same man (not
seldom) at distinst times, out of the same places conferred, infers
distinct conclusions, and alters his belief touching some article or other;
which is a manifest proof, that this conference is no infallible rule: I add
also that experience teaches us that such a conference sometimes increases
the difficulty, See part. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4.
and makes some show of contradiction which before appeared not, as I will
declare hereafter. Others say that by prayer every man may obtain of God the
direction of the holy Ghost, for the finding out of the true sense: But where
has God promised this? Moreover, our prayer is of no force, except we pray as
we ought: And what is more uncertain then this? How then can we certainly
know when God inspireth us? and much less, how can we possibly assure others
that we have such a divine inspiration? Further, diverse have used likewise this
mean, and yet have fallen into error, yea after their prayers, they have had
different inspirations: and one has affirmed himself to have been inspired
by God thus, and another thus, etc. Finally, al Heretics may challenge to
themselves these shifts, for the proof of their own private and false
expositions: wherefore, we must needs find out some other rule more certain.

SECTION THE FOVRTH. That the letter of holy Scripture falsely interpreted, is
not the word of God.
THIRDLY, I am to prove, that a false or wrong exposition erroneously gathered
out of the letter of holy Scripture, or made upon the same; is not the word of
God, but the word of man: yea, sometimes the word of the devil; and
consequently, that the said letter of Scripture so understood, is subject to
the same censure. This is apparent, because the Scripture is the true word of
God in that sense only; which was intended at the penning of it by the holy
Ghost. For example, like as no Catholic Christian will deny, but those words
of Christ: Ioh. 14. verse 28.
The father is greater then I, if we understand them in this sense, that God
the father is greater then Christ according to his humanity, contain the true
word of God: so every Catholic Christian, if they be understood as Arius
expounded them; that Christ according to his divinity, is inferior to his
father, will affirm them to be the word of the devil. Hence proceed diverse
notable sentences of the ancient Fathers, Tertul. de praescript. ca. 17. see
him also cap. 9. Hillar. li. 2. de Triuitat. ad Constantium. Ambros. lib. 2. ad
Gratianu^. cap. 1. Vince^. Lirin. li. aduers. propha. haeres nouitates cap. 37.
Math. 4. verse 6, Hieron. in dial. co^tra Lucifer. See Math 10. Luke 10.
Hieron. in cap. 1. ad Galat.
among the rest Tertullian tells us; that the sense of holy Scripture
adultered, does impugn the truth at much as the style corrupted. S. Hillarie
affirms; that heresy arises of the understanding, not of the Scripture;
that the fault is in the sense, not in the word; that there is not one of the
Heretics, that does not lie and say that he preaches those things in which
he blasphemeth, according to the Scriptures. For hence (says he) Marcellus,
when he reads the word of God, knows it not; hence Photinus etc. they all
speak Scriptures with out sense, they al pretend faith, without faith: for the
Scriptures are not in the reading, but in the understanding, etc. These and
other like discourses has S. Hillary. S. Ambrose is of the same opinion: for
he says, that although the text or letter have no error; yet the Arrian
interpretation has error. Vincentius Lirinensis comparing the Heretics
alleging Scripture against Catholics, with the devils alleging the same to
Christ, discourses after this sort: And if any man ask any Heretic
persuading him such things (that is, to forsake the doctrine and tradition of
the Church) how prouest thou? how declarest thou, that I ought to forsake the
universal and ancient faith? presently he; for it is written: and forthwith he
alleges out of the law, the psalms, the Apostles, the Prophets, a thousand
testimonies, a thousand examples, a thousand authorities, by which being
interpreted after a new and naughty manner, the unhappy soul may be cast down
headlong from the Catholic tower: Thus far Vincentius Lirinensis. But let
us hear the opinion of S. Hierome in this matter, who above all the rest was
conversant in the holy Scripture: these are his words. The Scriptures consist
not in the reading, but in the understanding, otherwise if we follow the
letter, we also may frame unto our selves a new opinion, and affirm that they
who wear shoes or have two coats, are not to be received into the Church: He
adds in another place. Marcion and Basillides and the other heretical
plagues, have not the Gospel of God, because they have not the holy Ghost,
without which the Gospel which is taught, is made humane or of men. He tells
us also, that whosoever interprets the Gospel, with another spirit and mind
then it was written, troubles the faithful and turns the Gospel of Christ
vpside-downe; that we must not think that the Gospel is in the words of the
Scripture. It is not (says he) in the words but in the sense; not in the
superficies or outside, but in the marrow; not in the leaves of the speeches
or words, but in the root of reason. Hence he concludes with these words:
It is a very dangerous matter to speak or teach in the Church, least that by
perverse interpretation, the Gospel of Christ be made the Gospel of man; or
that which is worse, the Gospel of the devil: Thus far S. Hierome. And this
is that which the Apostle himself instructs us of, when he affirms that
the letter kills, but the spirit quickneth: for the virtue and substance of
Scriptures, consists in their meaning and interpretation; and so it is, that
the bare words thereof are no more Scripture without the spirit (that is to
say, without that sense which was intended by the holy Ghost, when they were
written) then the body of man is a man, without the soul: yea, if they be
wrested to a contrary or vvrong sense, they kill and become poison; whereas
rightly understood, they contain divine and heavenly doctrine. And so this
sentence of the Apostle is expounded by S. Augustine, in diverse places of his
works; but in one place among the rest thus he discourses. Aug. de spiritu
and litera c. 4. and 5. and li. 1. retract. cap. 4. Aug. li. 1. ad Simpli.
cianu^ c. 1.
The law of God being read only, and not understood or not fulfilled, does
kill: for then it is called the letter by the Apostle. S. Hierome likewise
approves the same interpretation, and to the same effect in the place above
cited, he has these words: Hier. in c. 1. ad Galat. Epist. ad Nepot. and in
li. 3. Reg. c. 1.
Then the Scripture is profitable to the bearers, when it is not expounded
without Christ (that is to say, not contrary to the rule of faith delivered by
Christ to his Church) when it is not spoken without the Father; when he that
preaches, does not insinuate it without the spirit: otherwise (says he) the
devil which alleges Scriptures, and al Heretics ( according to Ezechiel) of
Scriptures make cushions, which they may put under the elbow of men of al ages:
Thus much S. Hierome. Finally S. Augustine writes thus: Aug. epist. 222.
Love exceedingly the understanding, because the Scriptures themselves (except
they be rightly understood) cannot be profitable unto thee. And the reason of
this is that which I have already touched, to wit: that a false sense or
inrerpretation of the letter of the holy Scriptures, which was never intended
by the holy Ghost, but erroneously gathered out of the words, by a man's
private discourse or deduction, puts (as it were) another life or soul upon
the said letter, and turns it clean another way; wherefore so understood,
it is his word that so expounds it, not the word of God who intended
altogether another sense. Rai. in his conference with Har. page 68.
And hence it is, that M. Rainolds a Protestant affirms, that it is not the
show but the sense of the words of Scripture, that must decide controversies.

SECTION THE FIFTH. The true sense of the holy Scriptures, is to be learned of
the Catholic Church, who is the true judge thereof.
NOW, seeing that the Scripture of it self is hard, and every particular man
may err in the exposition of it: seeing also that the false understanding of it
is so dangerous, and the true sense so sovereign, let us see whether we can
find out any certain and infallible guide, whose judgment we may follow
securely, and without al fear of error in this matter.

I affirm therefore, that like as we receive the letter of the holy Scripture,
from the Catholic Church, and by her censure infallibly know it to be
Canonical: so likewise we are to receive the sense and exposition of the said
letter, from the same our holy mother; and receiving and following the sense by
her approved, we cannot possibly err: wherefore, upon it we may securely build
our faith and salvation. This may be inferred out of those things which have
been already proved: for if the letter it self be not properly Scripture
without the true sense, which is (as it were) the life and soul of the said
letter; and the letter be known unto us by the declaration of the Church, it
must needs follow, that we ought also to receive the sense from the same
Church: But let us prove it out of the holy Scripture. First therefore, we
gather out of the Apostle, that Scripture ought to be interpreted according to
the rule of faith generally received in the Church: his words are these. Romans
12. verse 6.
Having gifts according to the grace of God that is given us, different;
either prophecy according to the rule of faith, or ministry; or he that
teaches in doctrine: etc. Out of which we gather, the prophecy according to
the rule, proportion, or analogy of faith, is one of the gifts which God
bestows upon his Church. And what is meant by the word prophecy? surely
nothing else but the interpretation or exposition of the word of God: this
cannot be denied. And it is confessed by our adversaries themselves, who in
their English new Testament printed in the year 1592. and 1600. in their note
upon those words of the Apostle (Follow charity, earnestly pursue spiritual
things, 1. Corin. 14. ve. 1.
but rather that you may prophecy,) tell us that the word prophecy, signifies
the exposition of the word of God to the edification of the Church. And
although in the said English Bible they will have the word prophecy in the
place cited out of the Epistle to the Romans to signify preaching and
teaching: yet because al preaching and teaching (according to their doctrine)
ought principally to be out of the word of God, it al comes to the sell same
sense. Hence M. Rainolds in the conference held at Hampto^ Court between
Protestants and Puritans, Barlow in his relation of the said conference page 78.
requested; that at certain times there might be prophesying in rural
Deanaries. But how shall we understand those words according to the Analogy or
rule of faith? Truly, the meaning of them is already explicated: for by them we
are taught, that the exposition of holy Scriptures, ought to be conformable to
that rule of faith, which was delivered by Christ to his Church, and by the
assistance and direction of the holy Ghost, has remained in the same ever
since, without corruption, and shall so remain until the end of the world. And
all this may be confirmed by that sentence of S. Peter before alleged: 2. Pet.
1. verse. 20.
No prophecy of Scripture is made by private intepretation: that is to say, no
exposition of Scripture, ought to be made acording to any man's private fancy,
but according to the doctrine and sense of the Church. And by this rule (as I
have before noted) S. John the Apostle and Evangelist, 1. John 4. verse 1. Luke
24. verse. 45.
bids us try our spirits, whether they be of God or no. Moreover, S. Luke
the Evangelist records that our Savior opened his Apostles understanding,
that they might understand the Scriptures. Neither did he only give them the
gift of understanding such diuiue books; but also delivered unto them, the
true sense and meaning of the same, I mean of the old Testament, which only
before the Ascension of Christ was penned. And this gift of understanding the
Scriptures, was perfected in them on the feast of Pentecost: Act. 2.
When the holy Ghost taught them all truth: which gift also the said holy Ghost
imparted, and they delivered to their successors, and so by succession and
tradition the same remains always in the Church. Iren. li. 4. cap. 45.
Tertul. de praescrip. cap. 19.
Hence S. Ireneus tells us, that they conserve our faith and expound the
Scripture unto us without danger, with whom the succession of Bishops which is
from the Apostles, remains. Tertullian likewise, refusing to argue against
Heretics by only Scripture, wills us first to search out who have the true
faith it self; whose the Scriptures are; from whom and by whom, and when and
to whom the discipline by which men are made Christians, was delivered. For
wheresoever (says he) it shall appear, that the truth of Christian discipline
and faith is; there we shall find also the truth of Scriptures, and expositions
and al Christian traditions. Unto these authorities I add, that the obscurity
of the holy Scriptures, and the danger of misinterpreting them being
presupposed, it was necessary that God almighty should prescribe some
certain rule, which every man might follow without danger of error in
understanding them: otherwise, dissension might have risen concerning their
true sense, and consequently, concerning diverse articles of Christian religion;
and every man might and would have expounded them, according to his own
fancy, although never so false and erroneous. And what judge can we imagine
him to have appointed, but the Catholic Church? whom (as I have proved above)
he has warranted from error, whose authority he has made the rule of our
belief, who has the custody of holy Scriptures, and from whom we receive
them, and infallibly know them to contain the true word of God. This finally,
the practice it self of the Church has confirmed: for whenever any
controversy has risen touching the true sense of holy Scriptures, she
(according to the rule of faith in her preserved, and the sense of Scripture
unto her delivered, together with the letter) has defined the truth and
decided the same, as it appears by the condemnation (al Heretics, together
with their false translations, and erroneous expositions of the said
Scriptures. And whosoever forsakes this rule, falls presently into a
laborinth and vast Sea of difficulties, and is always perplexed and inconstant
in his belief: Contrariwise, whosoever embraces this rule builds upon a
firm rock; wherefore I say with the Apostle: Whosoever shall follow this
rule, Galat. 6. verse. 16.
peace upon them and mercy,

Now let us in the last place, confirm the truth of our principal assertions,
concerning the letter and interpretation of holy Scripture; yea, concerning the
whole su^me of christian doctrine, by unwritten tradition preserved in the
Church, by the confession of our Lutheran adversaries of Wittenberg. For they
do not only confess, Harm. of co^fes. sect. 10. page 332. 333. Confession
Wittenb. artic. 32.
The Church to have authority to bear witness of the holy Scripture, and to
interpret the same: but also affirm, that she has received from her husband
Christ, a certain rule (to wit, the Prophetical and Apostolical preaching)
confirmed by miracles from heaven, according unto the which she is bound to
interpret those places of Scripture, which seem to be obscure; and to judge
of doctrines. This may be seen in the Harmony of confessions.

Field book 4. ca. 19. and 20.. The second.
Field also acknowledges in the Church, A rule of faith descending by
tradition from the Apostles, according unto which, he will have the Scriptures
expounded. I conclude therefore, that thus the holy Scripture is a most sure
and infallible ground of faith: for by this means (I mean by the divine
censure and approbation of the Church) we are assured, that both the letter
and sense are of divine authority; whereas the particular or private
approbation of the letter, or interpretation or it made by any private man,
being subject to error, cannot possibly yield us any such assurance.

SECTION THE SIXTH. An objection against the premises is answered, and the
question concerning the last resolution of our faith is discussed.
BUT here occurreth a difficulty of no small moment to be resolved: For in this
chapter I have affirmed, the Canonical Scriptures, and their true
interpretation, to he known by the infallible authority of the Church,
whereas before I proved the authority of the Church to be infallible, by the
testimony of holy Scripture: wherefore, Field book 4. cap. 7.
it may seem that I have made a circle, or (as M. Field calls it) a
circulation.

The full solution of this objection, depends of the resolution of a question,
which to some appears very intricate and hard, to wit: unto what we lastly
resolve our faith, whether to the authority of the Church, or of the
Scripture, or to some humane motives? and therefore this must first be
discussed, before the other can be answered. And in very deed, although al
Catholic Divines be of one consent, and hold that the cause of our belief is
the authority of God, which has revealed such mysteries as we believe: yet
concerning the last resolution of our faith, which is a school question, and
not a matter of faith, I find among them two opinions. The followers of the
first declare the matter thus.

Fiist (say they) every man is induced to believe Christian religion, and to
accept of it as true, by certain humane and prudent motives or reasons which
persuade him, that such doctrine as is taught in the Church according to the
rules of wisdom, is credible and worthy of belief. Such motives among
others, are these which follow.

First, that almost al Nations, and in them an infinite number of men of
greatest authority, principal wit, excellent virtue, and profound learning have
so beleeeued. Secondly, that innumerable multitudes of people of al sorts,
sexes and ages, who were most desirous to please God and know true religion,
and were exemplars or patterns of probity and sanctity, have so earnestly
embraced it, that they doubted not to prefer the profession of it, before
goods, liberty, fame, and life it self: yea, that they chose rather to loose
al these, and endure vvithal most cruel torments, then to depart from it.
Thirdly, that it does (as it were) miraculouslie and by some divine means,
change men (although habituated in vice) upon the sudden to be virtuous.
Fourthly, that the propagation of it has been by divine power: which
appears by this, that a few unlearned and vveake fishermen, teaching such
things as are contrary to flesh and blood, and above al reason; have
overcome, not by force of arms, but by preaching and suffering, the vvisest,
most eloquent, most noble, and most potent men of the world. Finally, that
this religion has been confirmed by an infinite multitude of divine miracles,
recorded by famous authors of al ages, of which if one only be confessed true,
Christian religion cannot be false. By these, and other such like reasons and
arguments, which I have rehearsed before, according to the Psalm: The
testimonies of our Lord are first made (unto well disposed people) over or
exceeding credible.

But although these of themselves, may well make us accept and believe the
truth of Christian religion, by a natural and humane kind of belief, such as
the Devil himself has, and is also in Heretics concerning such articles
which they truly believe: yet can they not alone, cause in us an act of
supernatural faith. For this (as I have proved before) being supernatural, can
not proceed from a natural cause, without some supernatural help. And what
then is done after this persuasion? Verily God almighty yield eth us his
supernatural help, and imparteth unto our soul a divine light of faith, by
which our understanding is made more capable of things so high, then before;
and by which our minds are so divinely lifted up and affected (as it were) by
a divine testimony, that through it, far more strongly then by any humane
motives, we are inclined to believe, and made most firmly to rest in the divine
revelation: and so by this assistance of God, together with the concourse of
our understanding, an act of supernatural faith is produced, by which we
firmly believe the articles of Christian faith, taught and propounded by the
Catholic Church; not for such and such motives as before proved them credible,
but for that they are revealed by almighty God. And because one of these
articles is, that the Church in propounding particular mysteries of our faith,
cannot err; this also is believed among the rest: upon which as a common rule
and guide, we ground our belief, as upon a sure propounder of such things as
we are bound to believe, touching every other particular article. Hence
arises a great difference between us and some of the most learned of our
adversaries, touching the decision of this question: for although we both seem
to admit some supernatural aid, light, or habit to this, that our
understanding produce an act of supernatural faith: yet, we differ much
concerning the object of this act; as also in the motives or arguments of
credibility, which first induce us to accept of the same. For whereas we
include in the first act of faith, into which we are induced by the said
motives, the belief of an infallible guide touching al particular points:
they include no such matter; but for their ground and guide in this act
believed, acknowledge only the letter of holy Scripture: which verily,
although we also in our aforesaid act include; yet we give it no such sole
pre-eminence, as is before declared. And of this follows a far greater
difference, couching the arguments and proofs of our propounder and ground:
for whereas althe arguments of credibility, persuading us that Christian
religion is credible, persuade us also, that the authority of the propounder of
our faith (I mean of the Catholic Church) according to prudence, may be
believed infalliblie: the said arguments are not sufficient in a wise man's
judgment (setting aside the said authority of the Church) to make it credible
unto us, that every book and parcel of holy Scripture commonly admitted, is
canonical and divine; much less, that every particular exposition of
Scripture by every private man accepted, is divine and true. And of this it
proceeds, that they allege no such forcible arguments of credibility, for
the proof of this and that book of Scripture; nor for the truth of their
interpretation of this and that sentence, but for the first, usually fly to
divine illumination only, joined with the majesty of the letter, or some such
thing, which be no such arguments of credibility as I will prove hereafter:
Part. 2. Chap. 5.
and for the last, some of them assign certain rules to be observed, which
(in very deed) are insufficient, as shall likewise hereafter be proved. Hence
they assign no prudent motives, Ibid. c. 8.
which persuade them to concur with the supernatural help of God, to a
supernatural act of faith: 2. Cor. 10. verse 5. Romans 12. verse 1.
Whereas God (although he require of men an humble obsequie or obedience to
faith) yet propounds nothing to be believed, which in the judgment of wise
men is not credible; and therefore also requires a reasonable obsequie. Verily
if there were no other reason to persuade a man the truth of our doctrine, this
only would suffice, that God does usually teach al by some common rule or
mean, which draws men to unity and humility; not every one by private
illumination or inspiration, which is commonly a motive to pride and a
fountain of discord.

But Field urges, Field book 4. cap. 7.
that by this doctrine we lastly resolve our faith to humane motives and
inducements. I answer, that concerning this matter two questions may be
demanded, very much diverse. First, what moves men to accept of the belief of
such obscure articles, as are those of Christian religion? unto which I make
this answer, that unto this they are moved by such prudential or humane
motives, as I have assigned before. Secondly, it may be asked concerning the
formal cause of faith it self, why men now actually believe such obscure
mysteries? And unto this I say, that the cause of their present belief, is the
revelation of God, or (which is al one) the authority of God revealing. And
because they are not sufficient of themselves, supernaturally to believe such
articles as so revealed, their understanding is aided and inclined to this, by
the divine gift of supernatural faith, like as their will by charity, is aided
and inclined to any act of supernatural love; which gift of faith together with
their understanding (as I have said) produces a supernatural act of belief:
wherefore, we assign not humane inducements as the formal cause, but as the
cause of the first acceptaunce of our faith; and as into the formal cause, we
lastly resolve our faith into divine revelation: And so I think this opinion
sufficiently explicated. But before I pass any further, Field ibid. Surely.
Stapheton in his Triplic. contra Whitaker page 188.
I cannot there but advertise my reader, that Field discoursing of this point,
wrongeth D. Stapleton very much. For whereas he accuses him, as though in his
Triplication against Whitaker he should affirm, Other matters to be believed,
because contained in the Scripture; and the Scripture, because it is the word
of God; and that it is the word of God because the Church delivers it so to
be; and the Church, because it is led by the spirit; and that it is led by the
spirit, because it is so contained in the Scripture and the Creed. Stapleton
(in very deed) in this last place has no mention of the Scripture, but of the
Creed only. True it is that he proves against Whitaker out of the Scriprture,
a certain internal motion of God, by which we are moved to assent to this
first proposition (as he says) of our faith: I believe the Catholic Church is
infallibly governed by the holy Ghost, and that she is to be heard, and her
voice obeyed: but this is not to say, that we believe the Church to be led by
the spirit, because it is so contained in the Scripture.

I come now to the second opinion: Others therefore besides this divine
affection or inclination, proceeding from the peculiar assistance of God in the
act of faith, being desirous also to assign some other divine and infallible
reason, moving us to believe; affirm, both that we believe the authority of
the Church to be infallible, because it is so revealed in holy Scripture; and
also, that we infalliblie know the Scriptures to be canonical, because as
canonical they are propounded unto us by the Church. Neither do they (as they
say) in this kind of proceeding, commit any absurd or vicious circle: because
these two things are not motives or reasons of the belief of one another,
after the self same manner, but in two sundry respects; being so, that we
yield the reason why the Church cannot err, by the Scriptures (as by a divine
revelation) approving it. For although we formally believe this, because it is
revealed by God; yet, this revelation we prove by other revelations contained
in holy Scripture: but that the Scripture is canonical, although we formallie
believe because God has so revealed; yet, this revelation we prove not by any
other revelation, but by the authority of the Church, as a condition only
requisite, propounding it infallibly unto us.

To make this assertion a little more plain, we must presuppose the truth of
two propositions, commonly held certain in Philosophy: the one is, that two
causes may for diverse respects, be causes of one another; so say the
Philosophers: the efficient cause is the cause of the being or existence the
final cause; and the final cause of the causality of the efficient. For
example, when a Physician does administer physic to one that is sick, the
final cause or end why he administreth physic, is the health of the patient;
and the administering of the physic, is the efficient cause of the sicke-mans
health. In like sort, when the wind opens a window, it opens it by entering
in, and enters in by opening it, so that the efficient cause of the opening
the window, is the motion of the entrance of the wind, and the material cause
and mean by which the wind enters, is the opening of the window, because
unless the window be opened, the wind cannot enter in. Secondly, it is also
certain that a mere condition necessarily requisite, is no cause: for
example, wood cannot be burned except it be put near, or in the fire; and yet
this approximation (as I may call it) is not the cause to speak properly, why
the wood is burnt but a condition necessary. In like sort, a law does not
bind except it be promulgated; and yet the promulgation is not the cause why
the law does bind, but a condition etc. Now to come to the matter: If two
causes (in some sort) may be causes of one another; wherefore may not we prove
two propositions for diverse respects, by one another?

That these respects be diverse in the proof of the infallible authority of the
Church by Scripture, and of Scripture by the infallible authority of the
Church, it is manifest; because the infallible authority of the Church is
proved by Scripture, as by a divine revelation; the Scripture by the infallible
authority of the church, as by a condition requisite: and that a cause and a
condition be different I have showed. We say therefore, that Christ departing
out of this world, left the whole sum of Christian doctrine with his holy
spouse the Church, and made her the infallible propounder of the same. And
being so that among other articles left, this was one, that she should not err
in executing her office: this also she was to propound, and her children by the
divine precept of God were bound to believe it: Wherefore, if in those days,
before any Scripture of the new Testament was written, a man had asked a
Christian why he believed the mysteries of Christian religion? he might truly
have answered, because they were revealed by God. If he had been further
demanded, how he knew such and such articles to be revealed? he might have
answered, because the Church propounded them to be believed: so that the cause
why he believed such mysteries, was the revelation of God: the mean whereby he
knew them infallibly to be revealed, was the propounding of the Church. If he
had bin urged further, why he believed that the Church in propounding such
matters could not err? Surely he might have said, that this was before
included in the belief of the mysteries of Christian religion in general; and
consequently was believe because God so revealed: but let us come to the
succeeding ages. The Apostles and disciples of Christ whiles they lived, wrote
the holy Scriptures of the new Testament, and left them to the Church; in which
among other mysteries, they confirmed unto us the authority of the Church: and
the Church propounded the said Scriptures unto her children as Canonical. Now
then, wherefore believe we, or how do we prove the Church cannot err? I
answer, by the revelation of God, contained in holy Scripture. If it be
demanded further, how we know such a revelation to be divine? I answer,
not by any other divine revelation; because this is the last, and believed for
it self: but by the proposition or propounding of the Church, which is only a
condition requisite for the belief of it; and yet a divine proof. So that the
reason or cause why we believe the Church cannot err, is the revelation of God
contained in holy Scripture: the cause why we believe such a revelation, is
no other revelation but it self: the mean whereby we come to know that this
revelation is from God, is the proposition of the Church: wherefore, the
respects are diverse, and also the objects of these assertions. The respects,
because when we assign the divine revelations contained in holy Scripture, as
the reason of our belief concerning the infallible authority of the Church; we
assign a reason (as it were) by the cause of our said belief, which is divine
revelation: But when assign the propounding of the Church, as that which
moves us to believe the Scripture; we assign not a reason by the cause of
this our belief, which is divine revelation: but by a conditon infallibly
guiding us, as is aforesaid. The objects also of these two reasons yielded of
our belief, are diverse: For the object of the divine revelations contained in
holy Scripture assigned as the reason of our belief of the Church, are the
verities, or things themselves revealed and believed; but the object of the
propounding or proposition of the Church, requisite for our belief of
Scripture, are the revelations themselves contained in the said Scripture: For
by it we are taught that the Scripture contains divine revelations, and is
the true word of God. And thus much of the second opinion, concerning the
solution of the question propounded, which in truth gives us a very good
method how to answer the cauils our adversaries; and rather adds something
to the former, then is otherwise different from it. For the authors following
this opinion, to this that we believe or accept of Christian faith as true,
require also the aforesaid inducements or arguments of credibility; but
moreover they assign a divine proof or reason built upon divine authority,
which moves us to the said act of belief. For as I have declared, they
affirm that the infallible authority of the Church, which is the general
propounder of al particular articles of faith, is known and proved by holy
Scripture, as by a divine revelation: they add also, that the truth of holy
Scripture is, as certainly known and proved by the authority of the Church, as
by a divine propounder. Neither do I imagine, that the followers or
maintainers of this opinion, do intend to affirm, that in every process of
belief touching any article, it is necessary that we resolve it lastly to the
holy Scripture: for I think, that notwithstanding that which has been said,
if we be asked why we believe the whole sum of Christian doctrine, or any
point thereof? we may well answer, because it is revealed by God: And if
further we be demanded how infallibly and divinely we know it to be so
revealed? we may answer; because it is propounded by the Church.
Nevertheless, the first opinion of it self is sufficient, although this may
seem more exact, especially in Schools. Neither do I or any Catholic
affirm, the knowledge of these points to be neccessary to every faithful
Christian; for it is sufficient, that they believe al such things as are
propounded by the Church, because they are reveled by God, which is done by the
help of supernatural faith. Nay I do not think it is needful that they
expressly know this infallible authority of the Church, as propounder of such
verities, or al such prudential motives, as are before mentioned: But I deem
it sufficient, that they believe such revealed verities, as they are bound to
know expressly; and others virtually, moved thereunto by the authority of their
predecessors, or the asseueration of other faithful people; for this is
sufficieint in them, either for the obtaining, or preserving the gift of
supernatural faith. Let us now see in few words, what solutions may be given to
the objection made in the beginning of this Section.

First therefore, according to the doctrine of the first opinion, touching the
last resolution of our faith; I answer, that in very deed the canonical
Scriptures and their true sense, are known by the infallible authority of the
Church, as by the propounder of such particular matters belonging to our faith
and religion, as we are bound to believe: Nevertheless, it is lawful to prove
the authority of the Church out of holy Scripture, against such adversaries of
the truth, as admit the said authority of holy Scripture; but deny the
authority of the Church. So did S. Augustine against the Manichees, Aug. cont.
epist. Man. qua^ voca^t Fundam. ca. 4. et 5. Id. de vnitate Eccle. cap. 19. et
tract. 13. in Ioa^nem. Field book 4. cap. 7. There is no question.
who approved the authority of miracles, and denied the authority of
Scriptures, prove by miracles the Church, and by the Church the Scriptures.
Contrariwise, against the Donatists who allowed the Scriptures, and boasting of
their visions rejected miracles; by Scriptures he proved the Church, and by the
Church the truth of miracles: but that this manner of proceeding is lawful, it
is granted by Field, and therefore I need say no more.

Secondly, I answer according to the other opinion, that the canonical
Scriptures and their true interpretation, are infallibly proved and known by
the authority of the Church, as by a condition necessary propo^uding them unto
us: but the authority of the Church is proved and known to be infallible, by
the testimony of holy Scriptures as by divine revelations approving the said
authority. And to affirm this (as I have showed) is no more absurd, then to
say that two causes may be causes of one another. Neither do I think this
manner of proof more to be blamed, then the proof of a cause by the effect,
and of the effect by the cause: as of fire by smoke, and of smoke by fire; of
the bigness and proportion of a man's foot by his step in dust or sand, and
of this again by that. Thus also the Philosophers prove a man reasonable,
because he is risible or has power to laugh; and again demonstrate that he
has power to laugh, because he is reasonable: which kind of argumentation is
not called circulation, but a demonstratiue regresse.

Chapter 8. Concerning the second particular ground of Catholic religion, to
wit, Apostolic Traditions.
SECTION THE FIRST. Of Apostolic Tradition in general.
THAT I may the better declare the authority and dignity of Apostolic
unwritten Traditions, of which I am principally to entreat in this chapter, I
think it not amiss to say a word or two of Apostolic Tradition in general:
and although though I shall repeat some things which have been already said;
yet I hope, my reader will pardon me, seeing that a just occasion of so doing is
offered me. I have above affirmed, Cap. 6. sect. 2.
that the whole sum or corpse of Christian religion, was delivered by Christ
to his Apostles, not in writing, but by word of mouth: and that the principal
mean for the entire preservation of it in the Church, without corruption or
deprauation, ordained by God almighty; is the continual assistance and
direction of the holy Ghost, who always remains in the Church, and directs
her in all truth. Of which I now gather, that although never any scripture of
the new Testament had been written; yet, that the doctrine of Christ by
Tradition had still remained the self same, entire and whole in the Church, to
the end of the world. This is so manifest out of that which has been already
said, that it needs no proof in this place: yet, I will repeat a word or two
of that, and add a little more to make it the more apparent. I prove it
therefore, because our blessed Savior never penned the sum of his doctrine
himself: neither is it recorded, that ever he commanded any one of his
Apostles or Disciples in express terms to write, but only to preach and
teach according to his own, and the holy Ghost instructions. And hence it is,
that none of the said Apostles or Disciples wrote any parcel of the new
Testament, presently after the ascension of Christ; and consequently, that the
whole sum of Christian doctrine was published some time, before any such
scripture was penned, and that the Church of Christ was some years without it.
S. Matthew the first Evangelist, Eusebius. in Chronic. anno 41.
published his Gospel (as Eusebius records) some six years after our Saviors
ascension. Hence also it proceeded, that never any one of the Apostles or
Disciples, undertook the setting down in writing of the whole su^me of
Christian doctrine: this is manifest, because the three first Evangelists
delivered unto us very little, touching the divinity of Christ, one of the
chief and highest mysteries of Christian religion. Neither had the fourth
which was S. John the Apostle, any intention to set down all that the other
three had omitted: for he wrote his Gospel directly against certain Heretics,
who denied the divinity of Christ; and that not by the commandment of Christ,
but by the entreaty of the bishops of Asia, as Atha. in sinopsi.
S. Athanasius S. Hipolitus bishop and martyr, Epipha. haeres. 51.
S. Epiphanius and Hieron. praefat. in Mat. et in li. de scriptor. Eccl. in
Joan.
S. Hierome testify. And that al is not by him recorded it is manifest,
because those speeches which our Savior had with his Apostles, during the
forty days between his resurection and ascension, are almost altogether
omitted. Neither did he write this Gospel at the beginning of the Church, but
many years after, to wit: about threescore and six years after our Saviors
ascension. And like as S. John, so did the rest of the Apostles and Disciples,
leave unto us such parcels of scripture, as we have received from them, some
extraordinary occasions moving them thereunto, as I could easily declare and
prove, See. Euse. hist. li. 3. Chrisost. hom. 1. in Mat. Epipha. haeres 51.
Baronius to. 1. au. 45. et 58.
out of Eusebius, Saint Hierome and others.

I know that Field book 4. cap. 20. For first.
Field makes show, as though it were a plain matter that the Evangelists in
their Gospels, S. Luke in the acts of the Apostles, and S. John in the
Apocalipse, Meant to deliver a perfect sum of Christian doctrine, and
direction of Christian faith: but what reason he brings for it of any moment
I cannot see. And besides it is certain, that no one of them intended to set
down al, because no one of them has so done: wherefore, if they have set down
al, (as he affirms) either it has proceeded from some common deliberation or
consultation had among themselves, in which they determined what every one
should rehearse; or else from the disposition and direction of the holy Ghost
who inspired them to write. Not the first, because no man ever made mention of
such a deliberation or consultation, and moreover they wrote upon diverse
occasions, in diverse Countries, and at diverse times, as Ecclesiastical
histories testify. Not the second, because Field himself grants, that
something is vvanting in these books which the Church believes, which would
not have been, if the holy Ghost had intended that al should have been set
down: for he adds, that The epistles of the Apostles were occasionallie
written; yet so (says he:) as by the providence of God, al such things as the
Church believes, not being found in the other parts scripture purposedly
written, are most clearly and at large delivered in these epistles. Mark well
(gentle reader) this doctrine: he told us before that the Apostles and
Evangelists in the Gospels, acts of the Apostles and the Apocalipse, meant to
deliver a perfect sum of Christian doctrine, and direction of Christian
faith: now he tells us, that the Church believes some things which are
delivered in the Apostolical epistles, not being found in the other parts of
scripture purposedly written. Of which I infer, both that the holy Ghost
intended not, that the penners of the Gospels, of the acts of the Apostles,
and the Apocalipse, should deliver a perfect sum of Christian doctrine; and
also, that he thinks the writers of these books to have missed of their
intended purpose: verily this last point seems to me no very sound doctrine.
And besides, how will M. Field prove that the Apostles in their epistles
supplied all this want? especially seeing that the Apostles and Evangelists in
the other books, although intending to write al: yet in his opinion omitted
something, and the authors of the epistles intended no such matter, but vvrote
them (as he says) occasionally: wherefore, there is far greater likelihood
that these omitted something, then they. Further, one Apostolical epistle (at
the least to the Laodicians) has perished, Coloss. 4.16. see 1. Cor. 5, 9.
Chrisost. hom. 9. in Math. et homil. 7. in 1. Cor.
of which is mention in the epistle of S. Paul to the Colossians. And who can
absolutely say, that nothing necessary was contained in it, which is not in any
other part of the new Testament? Finally, Field himself confesses some
unwritten Traditions, as I will declare in the next Section.

What then did the Apostles and Disciples expressly set down in those their
monuments, which are contained in the new Testament? a part only (without al
doubt) of the whole sum of Christian belief, in which part they ratified and
confirmed the supreme and infallible authority of the Church, of whom the
rest was to be learned, and to whose custody they committed their said
monuments: so that the whole sum or depositum, has been kept and preserved
in the Church, not al and only in expres terms in the holy scripture, but the
whole by Tradition; and a part of that whole also by writing, another part by
only Tradition, by which likewise, the said scripture it self came to our
hands. And after this sort the whole corpse of Christian religion, without any
alteration descended unto us. This may be proved by that which has been
already said, concerning the true sense and exposition of holy scripture: Chap.
7. sect. 5.
for (as I have showed) the scripture ought to be interpreted according to the
Analogy or rule of faith, that is to say; according to that belief which the
Church by Tradition has received from Christ and his Apostles: wherefore the
letter of the holy scripture, is not the whole direction of the faith of the
Church; but the faith of the Church, the perfect and full direction of the said
letter of holy scripture: of which it follows, that the faith of the holy
Church might have remained sound and entire by Tradition, although no such
letter had been published. But let us confirm this by the testimony of the
ancient Fathers. Irenae. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Among the rest S. Irenaeus discourses thus: What (says he) if neither the
Apostles had left us scriptures? ought we not to follow the order of Tradition,
which they delivered unto those whom they committed Churches? unto which order
many barbarous nations believing in Christ assent, without letter or incke
(that is, without any written word of God) having salvation written in their
hearts by the holy Ghost, and diligently keeping the ancient Tradition:
Hitherto S. Irenaeus. And note well that he affirms, some to have been
Christians without any scripture, guided only by the Tradition of the Church.
He tells us moreover, that by this order of Tradition from the Apostles, al
Heretics are convinced in such sort, that Catholics shut up their ears,
as soon as they hear them utter any thing repugnant to the said order. Finally
he adds, that all that are desirous to hear the truth, may see in the Church,
the Tradition of the Apostles made manifest through the whole world. And we can
number those (says he) who are instituted Bishops in Churches, by the Apostles
and their successors even unto us, who taught no such thing as these men
(Heretics) dream of. Thus far S. Irenaeus, Tertul. de praescrip. cap. 19.
20. 21,
who suffered martyrdom in the year of our Lord 205. Tertullian also
affirms, that by this rule of Tradition or prescription of Catholic
doctrine, Heretics are to be convinced. And hence it proceeds, that the
Apostle with such vehemency accuses him that preaches other doctrine, then
that which was before received in the Church: Gal. 1, 9.
If any man (says he) euangelize to you, besides that which you have received,
be he Anathema or cursed: to which sentence alludeth Vincentius Lirinensis in
these words. Vincent. Lir. c. 14.
To preach unto Christian Catholics other doctrine then that which they have
already received, no where is lawful, and never shall be lawful: and to accurse
as Heretics those which preach other doctrine then that which before has
been accepted, it was never unlawful, it is in no place unlawful, and never
will be unlawful: Hitherto Vincentius Lirinensis. Contrariwise, for keeping
undefiled this rule or Tradition, the same Apostle highly commends the
Corinthians, saying: 1. Corin. 11, 2.
I praise you brethren, that in all things you be mindful of me: and as I have
delivered unto you, you keep my precepts, (or according to the Greek word)
my Traditions. And because the Church (and above al others the Romans) most
carefully kept these Traditions, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 4.
S. Irenaeus called it the rich treasure-house of Apostolic Traditions:
wherefore, whosoever is desirous to discern a true Christian from a faithles
Heretic, must behold the doctrine of them both, and pronounce him to be the
true disciple of Christ, who by succession and Tradition, has received his
belief from him and his Apostles. For like as a nobleman, or gentleman of
antiquity, is known by his pedigree: so a true Christian is known by the
succession and descent of his Prelates, and faith from them that first received
it from our Lord. Neither does this our doctrine any ways diminish the
authority of holy scripture: for this notvvithstanding we affirm, that the
wonderful providence of almighty God most wisely ordained, that the scriptures
of the new Testament should be written, that he moved the penners thereof
thereunto, and directed them by his divine inspiration: and this both for the
confirmation and preservation of the faith and Tradition of the Church; and
also that the said Tradition might with more ease come to every ones knowledge,
and that every one by such monuments, might learn to discern the true Church,
of which he was to be instructed concerning al matters of faith and religion.
But of our estimation of the holy scripture see more above. Chap. 7.


SECTION THE SECOND. Of unwritten Traditions in particular.
THis discourse being premised, concerning the Traditions of the Church in
general, I come now to discourse of that part of the said Traditions which
are concerning matters, of which there is no express mention in the word of
God, and therefore are called unwritten Traditions.

And first, that both such Traditions are found in the Church, and that the
whole sum of Christian doctrine, is not expressly contained in the written
word of God, I have already declared; Section 1.
because none of the Apostles or Disciples, ever intended to set down in any
parcel of scripture, the said whole sum of Christian doctrine: and also
proved it out of those words of S. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, in which
he tells us, Acts 1, verse 3.
that Christ after his Passion showed himself alive in many arguments, for
forty days appearing to his Apostles, and speaking of the kingdom of God. For
by this relation it seems evident, that our Savior during the time between
his resurrection and ascension, gave to his Apostles diverse instructions which
are not set down in particular in any part of the new Testament: for no
Apostle or Evangelist relates in particular these discourses of Christ. And
they were (without al doubt) concerning the sacraments, their administration,
the government of the Church, and other such like affairs belonging to
Christian religion, which for the most part the Apostles left to their
successors; only by word of mouth and secret Tradition.

This in plain terms is avouched by Epiph. haeres. 61. Apostolico rum.
S. Epiphanius, whose words be these: We must use Tradition; for the scripture
has not al things. And therefore the Apostles delivered certain things in
writing, certain by Tradition. The same truth is affirmed by Basil. de spiri.
sa^cto cap. 27.
S. Basil and the rest of the Fathers: yea, this we are taught by the Apostle
himself, who in his epistle to the Thessalonians, not only commends most
earnestly to the Church written Traditions: but also unwritten. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 15.
Brethren (says he) stand; and hold the Traditions which you have learned,
whether it be by word or by our epistle: Out of which place it is evident, that
some Traditions by the Apostle, were delivered to the Thessalonians by word.
And that here he speaks of such Traditions as we treat of, we are taught by all the ancient Fathers. Among the rest S. John Chrysostom gathers out of
them this conclusion: Hence it is manifest, (says he) that they (videlicet the
Apostles) delivered not al things by Epistle, but many things also unwritten,
and those things likewise are to be believed: Chrisost hom. 4. in 2. Thessa.
It is a Tradition, seek thou no further: thus S. Chrysostom. But that the
Fathers admit unwritten Traditions, it is granted by Whitak. de sacra scrip.
page 678. 668. 681. 683. 685. 690. 695. 696. 670.
Whitaker, Rain. in his conclusions a^nexed to his conference 1. conclu. page
689.
Rainolds, Cart. in Whitg. defense p. 103
Cartwrite, Kemnis. in exam. part. 1. pa. 87 89. 90
Kemnisius, Fulk against pur page 362. 303. 397. Against Marshal page 170. 178.
Against Brist. motives page 35. 36.
Fulke and other Protestants: wherefore, I need not allege any more of their
testimonies. And this is the reason wherefore we have no precept in the new
Testament, to believe or observe those things only, which are expressly
contained in the said volume. Neither do we find, that ever the Apostles or
their followers, commended and delivered to any Church or people the said new
Testament, as a book comprehending in express terms, the whole sum of
Christian doctrine. Nay, it is certain, that for diverse years before the said
book was written, the Apostles delivered al by Tradition and word of mouth.

Further, that the estimation of unwritten Traditions has ever been exceeding
great in the Church, it appears not only by this, that diverse of the ancient
Fathers (as I have showed in the Section 1.
chapter next before) by Tradition have proved what scripture is Canonical and
pleaded the authority of them against diverse heresies: but also by this, that
diverse heresies have been by the testimony of them only condemned and
overthrown. In the first general Council of Nice (as Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 16.
et 18.
Sozomenus reports) the Fathers especially endeavored, that nothing should
be decreed, but that which they had received by Tradition from their
forefathers: S. Ciprian with most of the Bishops of Africa, and Diosinius the
Patriark of Alexandria (men of great estimation in their days) with diverse
other Bishops in sundry prouincial Councels decreed, the baptism of Heretics
to be of no force, and therefore to be reiterated. They confirmed this their
definition or sentence, with many testimonies of holy scripture, seeming at the
first sight of no small force and moment for their purpose: but al these their
decrees were overthrown. And how? surely by the contrary Tradition of the
Church: for see Vinc. Lir. ca. 9. Cipr. ab epist. 70. ad 77. Aug de bapt. cont.
Donat. et co^t. Cresc. Hiero^. co^tra Lucif.
S. Steven Pope of Rome, pleading Tradition against them, condemned their
doctrine as heretical, and pronounced this renowned sentence: Let no new thing
be brought into the Church; let nothing be done but that which was delivered
unto us: thinking it altogether unlawful to transgress the rule of faith, by
succession and Tradition received from the Apostles. This is recorded by diverse
authors of great fame and antiquity.

By Tradition the Pelagian heresy was confuted, as is affirmed by S.
Caelesti. epist. 8.
Caelestinus Pope, and S. Augustine. By Tradition only, the same Aug. de bapt.
li. 2. cap 7.
S. Augustine and others, condemned Heluidius the heretic for denying the
perpetual virginity of our blessed Lady. Yea, Basil. de spir. sa^cto ca. 27.
See Aug. epist 118. ad Ia^. Leo ser. 2. de jeiunio.
S. Basil tells us, that if we reject Tradition, we shall endomage the whole
principal parts of our faith, and without it bring the preaching of the Gospel
to a naked name. I could bring forth diverse other such like examples and
testimonies, were it not that I should be over long.

But how shall we come to the knowledge of these Traditions, S. Augustine gives
us this most certain rule. Aug. to. 7. de bapt. co^t. Dona. l. 4. c. 24. see
ibi. c. 6
That (says he) which the whole Church holds, and has not been instituted
by any Council, but always has been observed, is most truly believed to have
been delivered by no other, but Apostolic authority. Such a Tradition says
the same Aug, de Genes. ad lit. c. 23. et con. Dona. l. 4. c. 24. Orig. in c.
6. ad Romans
S. Augustine and Origenes, is the baptism of infants: Such Traditions
(according to Ba. de spi. sa^ct. c. 27.
S. Basil) are the sign of the Cross, praying toward the East, the words
spoken at the elevation of the Eucharist, with diverse ceremonies used before
and after consecration: the hallowing of the font before baptism, the blessing
of the oil or chrisme, the anointing of the baptized with the said oil, the
three immersions into the font, the words of abrenuntiation and exorcismes of
the party which is to be baptized, etc. What scripture (says he) taught these
and such like things? none truly, al coming of secret and hidden Tradition,
wherewith our forefathers thought it meet to cover such mysteries: Hitherto
S. Basil. It is an Apostolical Tradition as we are taught by Dionis. de Eccles.
hierarc. cap. 7.
S. Dionisius of Areopagus, Tertul. in exhort. ad castita tem c. 11. et de
corona militis cap. 3.
Tertullian, Chrisos. homi. 69. ad populum.
S. John Chrysostom and S. Augustine, to pray and make a memory of the souls
departed in the Mass. It is an Apostolical Tradition says Hieron. epist. 54.
ad Marc.
S. Hierome and Epipha^. haeres. 75. Aerij.
S. Epiphanius, to keep certain appointed fasting-daies, especially the Lent:
the same is affirmed by Aug. epi. 118. ad Ia nu. cap. 1.
S. Augustine concerning the observation of certain holy days, and by Damas.
li. 4. de ortho. fide c. 17. et l. de Imagini. See Ter. de coron. mil.
S. John Damascene concerning the adoration of Images.

These and diverse other such like Apostolic Traditions, are set down by the
ancient Fathers, and are to be found in the Church of Christ. And upon these,
if they be of matters of faith (seeing that they have divine authority both
from Christ and the Apostles, who delivered them to the Church, and from the
Church it self, which being the pillar of truth has accepted and approved
them) every Christian may securely build his faith and belief. If they be
concerning precepts of moral actions, we are bound to obey them, and may do
it with like security: wherefore, Origin tract. 29. in Math.
Origin gives us this learned counsel. As often (says he) as Heretics
allege Canonical scriptures in which al Christians consent and believe, they
seem to say: Mat 24. verse 26.
Behold in houses is the word of truth; but we ought not to believe them, nor
to go forth from the first Ecclesiastical Tradition; nor believe otherwise,
but as the Church of God by succession has delivered unto us. Thus far
Origin, wishing every one in the interpretation and sense of holy scripture, to
follow the Tradition of the Church, as also in the belief of al such matters
as are called in question by Heretics. Unto these proofs I add, that Barlow
B. of Rochester in his sermon preached at Hampton Court Sept. 21. 1606.
Barlowe and Field (two famous English Protestants) admit of certain
Apostolic Traditions. Field book 4. cap. 20. Much contention.
Field tells us that they reject not al unwritten Traditions: yea, he
allows of the rule of Chap. 21.
S. Augustine before mentioned, for decerning Apostolical Traditions from
others, as also does Whitgift in his defense page 351. 352.
Whitgift: But Field adds moreover this other; that whatsoever al, or the
most famous and renowned in all ages, or at the least in diverse ages, have
constantly delivered, as received from them that went before them, no man
contradicting or doubting of it, may be thought to be an Apostolical Tradition:
thus Field. I confess that (this notwithstanding) he affirms, Ibid. cap. 20.
Out of this.
No matter of faith to be delivered by bare and only Tradition. But why not
such as well as those which concern the manners and conversation of men, and
are by him allowed? as for example: Why may we not as assuredly receive by
Tradition, our belief concerning some article of faith, as (to use his own
words) concerning the observation of the Lords day? Ibid. That the Apostles.
Field book 4. ca. 20. Much confession. Ibidem The second kind.
Does not the allowance of these also (according to their common doctrine)
prejudice the sufficiency of holy scripture? But he grants further, that
They receive the number, names of the Authors, and integrity of the parts of
books divine and Canonical, as delivered by Tradition. He admits as a
second Tradition, That summary comprehension of the chief heads of Christian
doctrine, contained in the Creed of the Apostles, which was delivered to the
Church as a rule of her faith. For a third Tradition he acknowledges, That
form of Christian doctrine and explication of the several parts thereof, which
the first Christians receiving from the same Apostles that delivered to them
the scriptures, commended to posterities. Unto which I add that which he has
in the fourteenth chapter of the same book; that without the Creed of the
Apostles named here in the second place, we cannot know the scripture to be of
God: that without the form of Christian doctrine which is his third Tradition,
and the Analogy of faith, we have no form of Christian doctrine, by the
direction whereof to judge of particular doubts and questions, Yea in another
place, of the said form of Christian doctrine he has these words: Ibidem
cap. 19.
We confess that neither conference of places nor consideration of the
antedentia and consequentia, nor looking into the originals, are of any force
in the interpretation of scripture, unless we find the things, which we
conceive to be understood and meant in the places interpreted, to be consonant
to the rule of faith: This is M. Fields doctrine. Out of which I infer
contrary to his own assertions, that according to his own grounds,
Tradition is the very foundation of his faith. And this is evident: For does it
not follow of this, that we receive the number, names of the authors, and the
integrity of books divine by Tradition; that without Tradition, we cannot
know such divine books: and moreover, that if Tradition may be false, that we
also concerning such books may be deceived? Can it likewise be denied (if it
be so, that without the knoweledge of the creed we cannot know the scripture
to be of God, and the creed also be an Apostolic Tradition) that without an
Apostolic Tradition we cannot know the scriptures? Moreover, although that
should be admitted as true, which he avouches and hardly agrees with this, to
wit: Chap. 20. Much conte^tion. See more of this matter part. 2. chapter 5.
sect. 1. and chapter 8. section 4.
that The scriptures win credit of themselves, and yield satisfaction to al
men of their divine truth, which in very deed is false: yet, seeing that the
true interpretation of them cannot be known (as Field says) without the
knowledge of this rule of faith, it follows also apparently, that this rule
must first infallibly be known by Tradition, before that we can certainly
gather any article of belief out of scripture. Neither are these things only
granted by Field; but moreover, he confesses the baptism of Infants to be a
Tradition: and adds, Field book 4. chap. 20. the fourth
That it is not expressly delivered in scripture, that the Apostles did baptize
Infants: and that there is not any expres precept there found that they should
so do. And yet (I hope) that M. Field will grant, that it is a matter of faith
that Infants are to be baptized, lest that he be censured to be an Anabaptist:
which if he do, he must needs confess that some matters of faith are
delivered unto us by Tradition. And whereas he says, This is not received by
bare and naked Tradition, but that we find the scripture to deliver unto us the
grounds of it: It is very certain, that the scripture is so obscure touching
this point, August. de Genes. ad litteram l. 10. c. 23
that S. Augustine affirms, that this custom of the Church in baptizing
Infants, were not at al to be believed, were it not an Apostolic Tradition.
And this obscurity of Scripture is much increased, if we confess with our
adversaries that Infants may be saved without Baptism.

Chap. 20. But they.
But he does object against us, that we prove many things which we will have to
be Apostolical Traditions, by the testimony of holy scripture: I cannot deny
it; yet I say, it is one thing probably to deduce an article of faith out of
the scripture, another thing to be expressly and plainly contained in it. We
only by probable conjectures prove some Traditions out of holy scripture,
especially against Heretics which deny Traditions, and approve the scripture:
Nevertheless, by supernatural faith we believe them, because they are such
Traditions. Book 4. cap. 20. For this.
That which he says, that we make Traditions Ecclesiastical equal with the
written word of God, is one of his ordinary untruths.

Besides this, it is also generally urged against us by our adversaries, that
diverse such things as are affirmed by us to be Apostolic Traditions, are
institutions of men; and they name the time when such things were instituted,
and the author that commanded them to be observed. I answer, that although
touching certain observations and ceremonies, which we affirm to be
Apostolic, there be some decrees of Councels and Popes; yet, that the said
Councels or Popes instituted not such observations and ceremonies, but either
ratified and confirmed them by their decrees, or else caused them to be
observed universally; whereas before, the use of them was not general: or
finally, prescribed to al faithful people, a certain and uniform manner of
observing them; whereas before, although the observation of them was general,
yet they were not generally observed after the same manner in all places. The
truth of this answer appears by this, that we can prove by sufficient
testimonies, such observations and ceremonies to be more ancient, then our
adversaries vvil have their institution. I add also, that all the definitions
and decrees of Councels and Popes concerning matters of faith, are but more
perspicuous explications of that rule of faith, which by Tardition has
descended from the Apostles, as I will declare in the next chapter: wherefore,
it is no absurdity to affirm the like of such constitutions, concerning some
observations and ceremonies; for that some have been instituted and ordained
by the Church, we confess. Neither has she in this exceeded her authority,
because Christ has given her such power, to the end that al things might be
done vniformallie with decency, and (as the Apostle says) according to
order. 1. Corint. 14, 40.
And that she has such Apostilike authority, it is confessed by most English
Protestants, see chap. 6. before section 4. page 50.
as I have above declared.

Chapter 9. Of general Councels, which make the third particular ground of
Catholic religion.
IN the next place I affirm, that every man may securely build his faith and
religion, upon the decrees of a lawful and authentical general Council,
concerning that or those matters which the Council intends to define.

One principal reason conuincing the truth of this, may be gathered out of
that, which has been already said of the infallible authority of the Church:
for I have proved before; not only, that it was necessary for the preservation
of peace and unity, that Christ should ordain in his Church some visible,
supreme and infallible mean, to decide controversies touching matters of
religion: but also, that this prerogative was bestowed by him, upon his holy
spouse our mother the Church. Now, what Court in the world represents the
whole Church, if not a general Council; in which her visible head either in
person, or by his Legates, with a great part of her chief Pastors and Prelates
(who represent not only all the particular Churches of which they have charge,
but also the whole body) are assembled? What assembly is above this? What
decree is so firm and of such eminent authority, as is the definition of such
a Council? Verily, seeing that the authority of the Church is infallible, and
she does in no superior Court pronounce her sentence; it is manifest that
this is the Court, in which al controversies touching matters of faith, with
warrant of infallible and divine truth, are finally decided and ended.

Furthermore, if Christ's Vicar on earth cannot err in matters of faith, or
general precepts of manners, when he teaches the whole Church, as shall be
proved in the next chapter: when (if not in a general Council) does he enjoy
this privilege? If hel-gates cannot prevail against the Church, when (if not
in a general Council) shall we think her so invincible? If the Prelates of the
Church are to be obeyed as Christ: When (if not in a general Council) shall we
hearken unto them, Math. 18. verse 20. See before chap. 6. section 2.
and yield them such obedience? If when two or three are gathered together in
the name of Christ, he is in the midst of them, according to his own promise;
how shall we think him absent from a general Council? If the holy Ghost does
teach the Church al truth; when (if not in a general Council) does he so
instruct and direct her? Finally, if the Bishops and Prelates of the Church in
a general Council may err themselves, how can they (as we are taught by the
Apostle they should) according to the ordination of Christ, Ephesians. 4. verse. 11.
etc.
keep all the whole Church from wavering and error in faith?

Hence the decision of a general Council, has ever had three principal
prerogatives given it, by all allowed monuments of antiquity; which may also
manifestly be deduced out of holy scripture it self. First, that it is (as is
aforesaid) the supreme and last judicial sentence of the Church, from which
there can be no appeal, and which by no means can be made void or recalled.
This we gather out of Atha^. epist. ad Epictetum.
S. Athanasius, the greatest scholar, and the most principal champion of his
age against the Arians, who in an epistle recited also by Epipha^. haeres. 77.
See also Hiero^. epist. 57. ad Damasunt
S. Epiphanius, wondered how certain durst move any question concerning things
defined in the Nicene Council: Much more would he have wondered, if in his days
any man had written as Field now has done, that Field book 4. c. 12. and 5.
after the decrees of a Council has passed, a man may still doubt and refuse to
believe without Heretical pertinacy; yea he avouches, that Councels may err
in matters of greatest consequence. But the same holy Father adds this reason
why he thus meruailed, to wit: because the decrees of such Councels cannot be
altered without error. S. Augustine says, Aug. epist. 162.
A general Council is the last judgment of the Church. Leo episto. 50. ad
Martianu^
S. Leo requesteth of Martianus the Emperor, that those things which are
defined in general Councels, may not be reuersed or recalled: which also the
said L. Nemo. cap. de su^. Trinit. et fide catho.
Martianus ratefied by his Imperial constitution. The same is decreed in the
general Councels of Conciliu^ Ephesinu^ circa fine^.
Ephesus and Conciliu^ Chalcedo^. act 5. can. vlt.
Chalcedon.

Secondly, those are censured by the Fathers and Councels to be Heretics, who
disobey the decrees of such Councels. And first, al general Councels denounce
Anathema to them, and accurse those that shall contradict their definitions;
which they could not do without error upon a mere perswation, without
infallible assurance of divine truth in their said definitions.

That the Fathers of the Council of Nice did so, it is recorded by Athanas.
epistol. ad Episcopos Affricae.
S. Athanasius, and the acts of other such Councels, evidently prove the same
proceedings in them. The judgment of Leo epi. 78. ad Leonem Imp. see bi^ also
i^ epist 77. ad Anatho.
S. Leo was, that they could not be numbered among Catholics that resisted the
Councels of Nice and Chalcedon. Basil epist. 87.
S. Basil willed Catholics to propound the decrees of the Council of Nice, to
those that were suspected of heresy, because by this it would have appeared,
whether they were Heretics or Catholics. August. de baptismo cap. 18.
S. Augustine excuses S. Ciprian from heresy only for this reason, that his
opinion touching the baptism of Heretics, was not condemned by any general
Council. Greg. lib. 1. epist. 24.
S. Gregory denounces Anathema to those that receive not the five general
Councles, which only were celebrated before his days.

Unto this I add, that al Christian Catholic Emperors by their constitutions,
adjudged such as Heretics; and made them subject to the punishment of such
miscreants, that opposed themselves against the definitions of general
Councels. He is wicked and sacralegeous (say Martia^. et Vale^. in edicto ad
Paladium praefectu^. praetorio edicto quod extat act. 3. sinodi Chalced.
Martianus and Valentinianus) who after the sentence of so many bishops does
say any thing according to his own opinion: yea, at al times such as were
condemned by such Councels as Heretics, have been so esteemed by all sorts,
although not so censured before: and not only in that age in which they were so
condemned; but in all ages following. And both these assertions may be proved by
that sentence of our Lord: Math. 10, 7.
He that shall not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen and the
publican. For he that disobeyeth the Church assembled in this supreme Court,
is no longer to be thought a Christian, or to be admitted to any other trial,
but to be esteemed an Heretic, and an Infidel.

Thirdly, by the same Councels and Fathers, the decrees of general Councels are
said to be divine, and from the holy Ghost; of which it follows, that they
are of infallible truth and not subject to error. The Fathers assembled in the
most ancient Councels, avouch the said Councels to be gathered together by the
holy Ghost. Epist. ad Ecclesiam apud Eusebium li. 3. de vita Consta^tini.
Constantine the great calls the decrees of the Council of Nice, heavenly
precepts. Atha^. epistola ad episcopos Affricae.
S. Athanasius writes, that the word of our Lord by the general Council of
Nice, remains for ever. Nazia^. orat. in Athanas.
S. Gregory Nazianzene tells us; that in it, the Bishops were assembled by
the holy Ghost. Ciril. lib. de trinita. et dialog. cum Hermia, et epi. ad
Anasta.
S. Ciril of Alexandria terms the decree of the same Council a divine and
most holy oracle; also the strong and invincible foundation of our faith, and a
faith defined by divine instinct. Leo epistol. 53. ad Anatho. et 54. ad
Martian. et 78 ad Leonem Aug.
S. Leo affirms, that the canons of that Council, and of the Council of
Chalcedon, were ordained by the holy Ghost. Constan. epist. ad Ecclesia^ de
habita Nicaenae sinod.
Receive (says Constantine the great, of the canons of the Council of Nice)
with willing minds this decree, as the gift of God, and a precept in very
deed sent from heaven. For whatsoever is decreed in the Councels of the
Saints, must be attributed to the divine will. Gregor. li. 1. epist. 24. et lib.
2. indict. 11 epist. 10.
S. Gregory said, He honored the four first general Councels as the four
Gospels; Justin. authent. collat. 9. de Ecclesiasticis titulis cap. 1. see
Ruffinus in hist. lib. 1. cap. 5.
We receive their decrees of faith (says Justinian the Emperor, more ancient
then he) as the holy scriptures. Caelestinus epist. ad sinod. Ephesinam.
Caelestinus the Pope affirms, that he believed the holy Ghost to be present
in the Council of Ephesus. And this prerogative of the spouse of Christ, is
also gathered out of those testimonies of the holy scriptures above rehearsed,
proving that the Church is directed in all truth by the holy Ghost: unto which I
join this taken out of the Acts of the Apostles, to wit: that the Apostles and
ancients assembled together in the first Council held at Jerusalem, in their
decision of the matter then in controversy, used this style: Act. 15. verse 28.
It has seemed good to the holy Ghost and us, etc. giving us to understand,
that in holy Councels the resolution of controversies and other decrees,
proceed jointely from the holy Ghost, and the Fathers assembled; and that he
together with them, propounds unto us such things as are decreed. And
because al general Councels ever since, have had the same direction and
assistance of the holy Ghost; they have likewise ever used the same kind of
style.

Of the authority of the decrees of the said first Council, held by the
Apostles at Jerusalem, we are sufficiently informed in the said history of the
Acts of the Apostles: In which S. Luke records, Act. 15, 41. chap. 16, 4.
that when S. Paul and Silas passed through the Cities, they delivered unto
the faithful, the precepts of the Apostles and the ancients that were decreed
at Jerusalem; and commanded them to keep them. And like as al faithful
Christians embraced those precepts: so ever since al Catholics have embraced
the Creedes and Decrees of general Councels; building therein, not upon the
authority of men subject to error, but upon the authority of men directed by
the holy Ghost; and (as I may say) upon the authority of the holy Ghost and
men: For the holy Ghost is chief president in all such general Councels.
Wherefore, although every particular man assembled in the Council (except the
Bishop of Rome) may err in his private opinion; yet, certain it is, that in
such a Council confirmed by the Pope, they have not erred; and upon this every
Christian may securely build his faith and salvation.

Hence the Fathers teach, that we ought rather to die, then to depart from the
decrees of general Councels: Ambros. epist. 32.
I follow (says S. Ambrose) the decree of the Nicene Council, from which
neither death nor sword shall separate me. Hieron. cont. Lucif. Hilla. in fine
lib. de sinodis.
S. Athanasius, S. Hillarie, and S. Eusebius endured banishment, rather then
they would contrary the faith of the same Council: Victor in li. de Vandalica
per secutione.
Victor Affricanus relates the martyrdom of diverse, who suffered for the same
cause.

Moreover, if we make the decrees of a general Council subject to falsehood,
we must needs condemn al such Councels, even the most ancient and best, of
an intolerable error in this, that they propounded things to be believed as
articles of faith, of which it is not certain whether they were true or
false; and made new Creeds or forms of faith, or (at the least) added some
sentences to the old, which they commanded al Christians to embrace, as part of
their belief. For how could they do this, if they could have erred and have
propounded falsehood? Unto which I may also add, that if we bereave such
definitions of divine truth, the condemnation of al heresies condemned in
ancient times, may be called in question; and doubt may be made, whether they
were lawfully and justly condemned or no: and so we shall not only open the way
to al dissension, and division in the Church; but also bereave our selves of a
principal mean, for the condemnation of such new Trinitarians, See Zauchius
in the epistle before his confession. Beza volumine 3. pa. 190. 195. Hooker
book 5. 42.
Arians, Nestorians, and Eutichians, as have in this last age sprung up, out of
our adversaries Euangellical or rather Pseudo-euangellical doctrine.

This forced Beza disputing against such Heretics, to plead the authority of
the Councels of Nice, Ephesus and Chalcedon, Beza epist. The^log. 81 p. 334.
335. Zauchius in his epistle before his confession page 12. 13.
Then which (says he) the Sun never beheld any thing more holy and
excellent, from the Apostles days. He adds, that Although al use of new
words be diligently to be avoided; yet (says he) I so define, that the
difference between the essence and hipostasis being taken away, what words
soever thou use; and the word consubstantial being abrogated (which words were
established in the said Councels) the deceits and errors of these Arians and
Trinitarians, can hardly or not at al be discovered, or their errors so
clearly confuted. I deny also, that the words nature, propriety, hipostatical
union, etc. being taken away, that the blasphemies of Nestorius and Eutiches
can well be refelled: hitherto Beza. Hence also Zanchius a Protestant of no small
fame, vvriteth thus: And because Heretics when they durst not simply deny
these foundations, were ever wont to wrest, and yet do wrest and wring the
same for the most part, by false interpretations, to their own heresies:
Therefore, that the true Churches may be discerned from the conuenticles of
Heretics, we must understand and expound those principles and chief points of
doctrine, in no other sense, then as the ancient Church (agreeably to the
scriptures by common consent, specially in the best approved Councels)
expounded them. For what (to say something for example sake) can be more firm,
certain, and manifestly spoken for the article in the Creed of the person of
Christ, then those things which were determined out of the scriptures, in the
Council at Nice, at Ephesus, Constantinople, Chalcedon? add also, the fifth and
sixth by the godly Fathers, against Arius, Samosatenus, Apollinaris, Nestorius,
Eutiches, the Monotholites. Whosoever therefore teaches concerning Christ's
person, against the determinations of those Councels, certainly they do not
rightly hold this principal foundation of Christian religion: These are the
discourses of Zauchius. The like he has in another place, Zauchius in his
observations upon his confession upon the 25. chap. page 330
where he expressly says, that The decrees of such Councels come from the holy
Ghost, and that he cannot disprove them with a good conscience. Further, if we
weaken the authority of such Councels, we must needs also make weak the
authority of some books of holy scripture, as of the Sea part. 1. chap. 7.
sect. 1. part 2. chap. 5. sect. 2.
epistle to the Hebrews, the Apocalipse, and other such parcels of the written
word of God, of which there was some doubt in the Church, whether they were
Canonical or no, until the matter was defined by general Council. Finally, let
us confirm all that I have here said, by the testimony of Hooker in the preface
to his book of ecclesiastical policy pa. 24. 25. 26. 27.
Hooker, whom our English sectaries commonly esteem as highly as any other. He
then first tells us, that there are but two certain ways of peaceable
conclusion: the one, a sentence of judicial decision given among our selves;
the other, the like kind of sentence given by a more universal authority, and
he means by Councels. The former of which two ways (says he) God in the law
prescribes: and his spirit it was, which directed the very first Christian
Churches to use the second. This he proves by the proceedings of the Church,
touching the controversy about the necessity of circumcision, mentioned in the
Act. 15.
Acts of the Apostles, which after great contention was ended by a Council:
and he demands of the Puritans, whether they are able to allege any just
cause, wherefore they should not condescend absolutely in the matter
controuersed, to have their judgments ouer-ruled by some such definitive
sentence, whether it fall out with them or against them? that so (says he)
these tedious contentions may cease: He adds, that without some definitive
sentence it is almost impossible, that either confusion should be avoided, or
hope be had to attain to peace. Again, To small purpose had the Council of
Jerusalem been assembled, if once their determination being set down, men
might afterward have defended their former opinions: when therefore they had
given their definitive sentence, al controversies was at end, things were
disputed before they came to be determined, men afterward were not to dispute
any longer, but to obey: the sentence of judgment finished their strife, which
their disputers before judgment could not do. This was ground sufficient for
any reasonable man's conscience, to build the duty of obedience upon, whatsoever
his own opinion were, as touching the matter before in question. So full of
wilfulnes and selfe-liking is our nature, that without some defititiue
sentence, which being given may stand, and a necessity of silence on both sides
afterward imposed; small hope there is, that strifes thus far prosecuted, will
in short time quietly end: thus he. And to make this his discourse the
stronger, he likewise alleges the authority of Beza, Beza praefat. tract. de
excom. et presbit.
who (says he) in his last book save one written about these matters,
professes himself to be now weary of such combats and encounters, whether by
word or writing, in as much as he finds that controversies thereby are made
brawles: and therefore he wishes, that in some common lawful assembly of
Churches, al these strifes may at once be decided: Hitherto Hooker. To the same
effect he might also, Luther li. co^t. Zui^g. et Oecola^.
have alleged the testimony of Luther, who considering the wonderful
multitude of dissentions about religion, among his sectaries themselves,
avouched; that for the ending of them (if the world long endure) he saw no
other means, but that they should be forced to have recourse to general
Councels. I could allege the like sentences out of Couel, Couel in his defense
of Hooker See before chap. 6. section 4. 50. 51.
who wishes that some general Council might be assembled for the final end of
al controversies. And hither also tend the discourses of those Protestants, who
(as I have above related) make the constitutions of the Church divine.

But it may (perhaps) be answered by some man, to these testimonies of our
adversaries; that notwithstanding al these their assertions, they make general
Councels absolutely subject to error. I answer and confess, that in very
deed they do so; yet I affirm, that any wise and discreet man, may well
gather out of their sayings alleged, not only that general Councels are
needful in the Church, and that al their division and dissension, proceeds of
their denial of the authority of such Councels: But also that it was requisite
and necessary, that Christ who is never wanting to his Church in things
needful, should make the authority of general Councels concerning matters of
faith, infallible. For otherwise, if they were subject to error, what reason
has man to obey them in matters of such consequence? especially considering,
that diverse such assemblies unlawful, consisting of a greater multitude of
Bishops, then some lawful general Councels, have erred and straied from the
truth. Finally they confess, that the first such Councels assembled in the
first ages of Christianity, erred not: And thus much for the proof of this
matter.

It may (perhaps) be here further demanded, what conditions we require to a
lawful and authentical general Council? I answer briefly; first, that such a
Council must either be called expressly, by the ministerial head of the Church,
or (at the least) with his assent. Secondly, the summon must be general, of al
Bishops throughout the world. Thirdly, although it be not needeful that al be
personally and reallie present: yet, a competent number must appear, that is
to say; some (at the least) out of the greater part of Christian Catholic
provinces: yet, if it be assembled in the East, a small number of the West sent
to supply the place of all the rest, are judged to suffice: Contrariwise, if in
the West, a small number in such sort is sufficient out of the East. Fourthly,
the ministerial head or vicegerent of Christ, must either be present in person,
or by his Legates. And finally, the decrees of the said Council, must be by him
confirmed: and this, both because the head is chief ruler of the body; and
consequently, the body is to do nothing without the assent of the head; and
also, because he has singular privileges granted him by Christ of not erring,
as shall be declared in the next chapter. Hence it proceeds, that no general
Council has ever in the Church been held Canonical, without his approbation,
although the number of Bishops were never so great, as appears by that of
Ephesus under Theodosius the younger: by that of Constantinople under Leo
Isaurus, and diverse others. And out of this discourse I gather, that this
authority of general Councels if we had no other argument, were sufficient to
persuade us, to detest and abhor the condemned doctrine of the new Sectaries.
For the same Church which in the first general Council of Nice, condemned A^ius
and the Arians: the same, which in the second such Council held at
Constantinople, condemned Macedonius and the Macedonians; which in the third
held at Ephesus, condemned Nestorius and the Nestorians; which in the fourth
held at Chalcedon, condemned Eutiches and the Eutichians; which finally, in
other general Councels, has condemned other Heretics and heresies: The self
same Church (I say) directed in all truth by the holy Ghost, has condemned and
accursed Luther and the Lutherans, Zuinglius and the Zuinglians, with al their
followers together with their doctrine, in the last general Council held at
Trent.

But they say that this Council was not laweful, nor the judges indifferent. I
reply, first; that this has been an old cauil of al condemned Heretics:
wherefore, it may lawefully be suspected in these. Moreover, it is sufficiently
proved by Catholic authors, and the matter is evident in it self, that
nothing necessary to a laweful general Council, was vvanting in this:
wherefore, it is received by the whole Church, as Canonical; and therefore no
wise man (seeing that salvation and damnation upon this depend) vvil reject it
upon these men's reports.

They affirm further, that the Church has no authority in a general Council,
to make any new article of faith. To this likewise I answer, that the Church
properly makes no new article of faith: for every decree by her made
concerning such matters, is either in express terms contained in the holy
scriptures: or gathered out of them by infallible deduction, through the
direction of the holy Ghost; or expressly or virtually approved by the
unwritten Tradition of the Church: wherefore, the Church neither has ever
taught or shall ever teach any truth so new, that it was unknown to the
Apostles. For that which by her is defined and propounded, was true before; and
an article of faith, although sometimes not certainly nor generally known
before, to be of such authority or dignity. And that this is our doctrine it is
granted by Field, whose words are these: Field book 4. cap. 12. Our
adversaries.
Our adversaries confess, that the approbation and determination of the
Church, can not make that a truth which was not; nor that a divine or Catholic
truth which was not so before: thus Field. Hence the Catholic divines affirm,
that Christian faith never since Christ's ascension has increased, or been
altered in substance, but only in explanation or explication; because the
Church has ever since, only more plainly and expressly declared her belief:
and authority to do this was needful in her, Vinc. Lir. cap. 28. 29. et 30.
for preserving of peace, and ending of al controversies. This Vincentius
Lirinensis most elegantly declares, by a similitude taken from the body of
man, which has the same members in his infancy, youth, when he is at man's
estate, and in his old age: and although for the diversity of time, they are
less and greater, weaker and stronger; yet the body it self is not changed,
but augmented: so (says he) it falls out in our faith, etc.

They object also, the authority of some Fathers, but principally those words
of S. Gregory Nazianzene, who says (as he is alleged by Whitaker) Whit. in
his ans. to Camp. 4. reason. Abbot in his answer to Hills 9 reason. Nazianz.
epist. 55. or 42. alias 102. ad Procop. Hist. tri. part. li 9. cap. 9.
That he had deliberated with himself, and fully resolved, to avoid Episcopal
conuocations, because he had never seen a good issue of any Sinode. I
answer, that this holy father does not deny the authority of lawful general
Councels, as appears by his testimony before cited, and also by this, that
he was a most earnest defender of the Nicene Council, as is testified by
Ecclesiastical histories, and was himself present, and subscribed to the
second general Council held at Constantinople. He therefore only speaks of
such Sinods, as was celebrated in those days when he wrote that epistle, of
which few were lawful, and none had good success, as appears by that of
Seleucia, Ariminum, Millan, Tirus, Sirmium, Bilson in his book of the
perpetual government of Christ's Church. Chap. 16. page 396. Athan. li. de
sinod. et ad Affrican. see also S. Ambrose epist. 32.
etc. of which in very deed he never saw good issue, and for that cause he
refused to be present to any of them: and this solution is approved by M.
Bilson a learned Protestant, who expressly says, that this Father in these
words condemns not al Councels. They bring likewise against us, certain
words of S. Augustine in his book against Maximinus, where he writes thus (as
Abbot translateth him) But now neither should I produce the Nicene Council,
nor thou that of Ariminum, as meaning to extol it: neither am I held with the
authority of the one, nor thou with the other. I answer first, that although
S. Augustine might have proved out of S. Athanasius, and diverse other
authentical authors, that the lawful Council of Ariminum most notably confirmed
the Nicene faith; and that the Council alleged by this Heretic was but the
supscription of the Bishops to a certain form of faith, by threatening, fear
and affliction, extorted by Taurus the Emperors officer, after that the Council
was finished: yet, in the dispute which he had with Maximinus, the said
Maximinus opposing the Council of Ariminum aganst the Council of Nice, he
would not enter into the proof of the authority of the one, and confutation
of the other; but having most pregnant testimonies of holy scripture, he
voluntarily in that disputation, ceased to urge the authority of the Council of
Nice: and so those his words Neither am I held etc. are understood; for the
sense of them is, I vvil not that now thou be bound to the one, or I to the
other. Verily, that he esteemed highly of the authority of general Councels,
al his works and proceedings testify: yea, his discourse before the words
alleged does prove it, as will appear to the reader. For he says, that in the
Council of Nice, the word consubstantial was by the Catholic fathers
established by the authority of truth, and by the truth of authority. And in
another place he tells us, Tom. 7. de baptismo contr. Donat. li. 7. cap. 53.
that we may securely auerre that, which is confirmed and roborated by the
consent of the universal Church.

Chapter 10. Of the decrees of the supreme visible Pastor of the Church,
which make a fourth particular ground of our faith, and of other grounds hence
proceeding.
IN the three precedent Chapters, I have treated of three principal grounds,
on which with all security we may build our faith and religion: I will now add
unto them certain others, commonly by all Catholics esteemed also to be of
infallible authority. And in the first place, I assign the decrees and
definitions of the supreme visible Pastor of the Church millitant: but for a
full explication and plain proof of this ground, I will divide this chapter
into certain sections.

SECTION THE FIRST. Containing a brief explication or rehearsal of the
Catholic doctrine, concerning the Popes supremacy.
BECAUSE our belief concerning the primacie of the Bishop of Rome, is diversely
slaundered by our adversaries; I think it not amiss before I come to the
proof of it, briefly to explicate what our doctrine is: For true it is, that
our assertion being explicated to them that are misinformed, is half proved.
We hold therefore, that the supreme power which our Savior Christ even
according to his humane nature, received of his Father before his ascension
over al his Church (of which are these his words. Mat. 28. verse 18. Ephesians. 1,
22. 1 Pet. 5, 4. Heb. 5.6.
Al power is given to me in heaven and in earth) was never resigned or given
by him to any mortal creature; Wherefore, as yet he remains supreme head of
his Church, prince of Pastors, and Priest according to the order of
Melchisedech. Nevertheless, because he was to withdraw his visible corporal
presence from the Church millitant, and therefore could not himself decree,
and gives sentence or advise in matters doubtful: like as Kings or Princes not
being resident in their dominions, for the good and peaceable government of
their subjects, appoint Viceroies or Vicegerents: Luke 19. verse. 12.
so he departing from his Church (as the scripture says) into a far
Country, like as he appointed diverse vicars for the administration of the
sacraments: so he ordained one for the government of the whole Church (to wit)
S. Peter, who immediately received such jurisdiction and authority from him;
and therefore during his mortal life, was his Vicegerent on earth, ministerial
head of his Church, and chief governor, Pastor, and Prelate of the same. And
hence proceeds the first difference between Christ and S. Peter, touching
the supremacy over the Church. For although they be both termed supreme heads
of the same; yet the last of them, is subordinate and depends of the first:
and the first only is the supreme independent, the last was the supreme
visible, ministerial and dependent head. Of which it appears, that the
authority and jurisdiction of the second, was nothing prejudicial to that of
the first: for they may stand very well together, seeing that the one was
subordinate to the other. Neither do Christ and his vicar properly make two
heads of the Church, but one: like as a King and his viceroy make not properly
two Kings, but one. For like as the King notwithstanding his viceroy, is the
one chief prince, governor, and head of his country: so is Christ the chief
Prelate and head of his Church. S. Peter was his vicar and vicegerent: and so
is at this present his successor the Bishop of Rome. For the proof of the
truth of this doctrine it makes, that like as Christ in the holy scripture is
called Head of the Church: so he is likewise called Apoc. 17, 14. ca. 19, 16.
King, Lord, 1. Pet. 2, 25.
Bishop, Pastor, Heb. 3, 1. cap. 5. verse. 6.
Apostle and Priect. Wherefore, like as this notwithstanding, others may be
Kings, Lords, Bishops, Pastors, Apostles and Priests: so another may be,
although not absolute; yet subordinate and ministerial head of the Church.
After this sort also our Savior and S. Peter are both rocks: for although
Christ be the chief rock and stone on which the Church was built; yet S. Peter
was the ministerial or secondary rock, made by Christ a rock and the principal
stone next unto himself, in the edifice of his Church: In which sense by S.
Paul and S. John, Ephesians. 2, 20 Apoc. 21. verse 14. Basil hom. de poenite^. quae
est vltima inter varias homilias.

Math. 5. verse 14. Leo sermon. 3. a^niuersario Assumptionis suae.


although Christ be the principal foundation of his Church; yet the Apostles
are likewise termed the foundation of the same. This which I have said, is most
learnedly and evidently declared by the holy father S. Basil in these his
words. Although S. Peter (says he) be a rock, yet he is not a rock as
Christ is: for Christ is the true immovable rock of himself: Peter is
immovable through Christ the rock. For Jesus does impart and communicate his
dignities, not voiding himself of them: but holding them to himself, he
bestows them also upon others. He is the light, and yet you (says he) are
the light. He is the Priest, and yet he makes Priests. He is a Rock, and yet
be makes a Rock: thus far S. Basil. The like discourse we find in S. Leo:
for expounding those words of our Savior, Thou art Peter; thus he speaks
in the person of Christ to the said Apostle. Whereas I am an inviolable Rock;
I the corner stone, who make both one; I the foundation besides which no man
can lay another: yet thou also art a rock, because by my power thou art made
firm and strong, to the end that those things which are proper to me by
power, be made common to thee by participation: hitherto S. Leo. And thus much
of the first difference between Christ and S. Peter, touching their
superiority over the Church.

An other difference between them is, that the authority of Christ was ever
absolute; of S. Peter limited: for our Savior derived not unto him al his
authority, but a part only of the same. Hence it proceeds, that although
Christ instituted sacraments, forgave sins without the use of any sacraments,
etc. yet, neither S. Peter nor any of his successors, ever had any such power
or authority: The reason is, because every man but Christ, has always been
bound to use the means by him instituted, and left unto his Church. Of which
it appears, how false their slander is, who affirm the Pope to pardon
sins by his Indulgences or Pardons: for certain it is, that by such
indulgences no sins are forgiven, but men are only released of such temporal
pain, as is due unto them. It is also confessed by all Catholics, that no man
(as long as he is guilty of mortal sin, and out of the state of grace) can
receive any benefit from any such pardon.

A third difference is, that our Savior being the way, the truth, and life;
yea, the son of God himself, could neither err in judgment, nor in
manners, that is: he could neither have any false or erroneous opinion, in his
understanding; nor sin or err from reason and right, in his will and actions:
Contrariewise, his vicar (although as I vvil prove hereafter) when he teaches
the whole Church as supreme Pastor, cannot err in matters of faith or
precepts of manners, which he prescribes to al faithful Christians and
concern things necessary to salvation; or in those things which are of
themselves good or evil (for he cannot so command any vice, or forbid any
virtue) yet, as a private man or particular doctor, he may err in his
judgment or opinion: he may also offend God most deeply and be damned in
hel-fire. Mat. 24. verse 48.
For if that servant whom his Lord has appointed over his family, (these are
our Saviors words) shall say in his heart my Lord is long a coming, and shall
begin to strike his fellow servants, and eats and drinks with
drunckards; the Lord of that servant shall come in a day that he hops not, and
an hour that he knows not, and shall divide him, and appoint his portion with
the hipocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Thus our Savior
Christ. But although S. Peter in authority and diverse other prerogatives, was
far inferior to Christ, even as man: yet, he was superior to all the rest
of the Apostles. For although all the Apostles received of Christ, orders and
power to use the keys of the kingedome of heaven (that is, to forgive sins)
and also to preach the Gospel throughout the whole world: yet S. Peter only
above the rest received supreme power, authority, and jurisdiction. The
authority of the other Apostles was given them with a certain kind of
subjection to Peter: they were also Christ's legates or ambassadors sent to
the whole world; but they being only Apostles were equal among themselves, and
no one superior over the other. Neither were they ordinary Bishops or Pastors
of the whole world; for of it S. Peter was only the ordinary Pastor.
Wherefore, like as a legate or ambassador, cannot of himself communicate or
delegate his authority to another, or leave it by inheritance to his
successor: so the other Apostles left not al their authority in so ample sort
as they received it, to the Bishops who succeeded them: contrariwise, S.
Peter as absolute prince, having absolute and ordinary jurisdiction under
Christ, left the same to his successor or heir the Bishop of Rome.

This doctrine we receive from the holy father and martyr S. Ciprian, who of
this point discourses thus. Cipr. lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae cap. 3.
To Peter our Lord after his resurrection says; feed my sheep, and builds
his Church upon him alone: and to him be gave the charge of feeding his sheep.
And although after his resurrection he gave his power alike to al, saying: As
my father sent me, so send I you; take the holy Ghost; if you remitte to any
their sins they shall be remitted, etc. Yet, to manifest unity, he
constituted one Chair, and disposed by his authority, the origin or fountain
of the same beginning of one. The rest of the Apostles were that Peter was, in
equal felloweshippe of honor and power: but the beginning comes of unity.
The primacy is given to Peter, that the Church of Christ may be showed to be
one, and one chair: thus far S. Ciprian. In which words he plainly
avouches, that S. Peter had supreme and ordinary authority: the other
Apostles although they had equal and like Apostolic power; yet they were not
equal to him in all prerogatives: this their authority (as I have said) was not
ordinary nor so absolute, but depending and having his beginning of that of
Peter. Ibid. ca 4.
Hence the same S. Ciprian in the self same book, affirms the Church to be
one: like as all the beams of the sun are termed one light, because they issue
from one sun; and many little brooks one water, because they proceed from one
spring; and many boughs one tree, because they have the self same root. And
this sun, fountain, and root, in other places he acknowledges to be the
chair of S. Peter, which is therefore by him called Cipr. l. 1. epist. 3. ad
Cornel. li. 4. epist 8. ad Cornel. epi. ad Iubaianum.
the principal Church from which Priestlie unity has his beginning, and the
matrice or mother, root and head of the Catholic Church. It is also by him
affirmed, that the one Church by the voice of our Lord was built upon one, who
received the keys, etc. I could recite other such like testimonies, but these
in this place shall suffice. And although S. Peter had so ample, and eminent
authority, and for this cause his successors were sometimes honored with the
title of universal Bishop, as appears in the general Council of Council.
Chal. act. 3. et 6.
Chalcedon yet, they seldom or never called themselves so, but rather
following the commandment of Christ (who bid; that Math. 20. v. 26.
whosoever would be greater among his Apostles, should be their servant or
minister) called themselves the servant of the servants of God. Hence are these
words of S. Gregory the great, who is highly commended by Humfre. in Iesuitif.
part. 2. rat 5. p. 624.
D. Humfrey and by another Theodor. Bibli. in orat. ad pri^cipes Germa. See
also Godwin in his catalogue of Bishops in Augustine page 3.
Protestant (although he term al his successors Antechrists) called a very
holy father, and most excellent Pastor; he discourses thus: Greg. l. 4. epist.
32.76.
It is plain to al men that ever read the Gospel, that by our Lords mouth the
charge of the whole Church was committed to S. Peter prince of the Apostles;
for to him it was said: Feed my sheep. For him was the prayer made, that his
faith should not fail: to him were the keys of heaven given, and authority
to bind and loose: to him the cure of the Church, and principallity was
delivered; and yet he was not called the universal Apostle. This title indeed
was offered for the honor of Peter prince of the Apostles, to the Pope of
Rome, by the holy Council of Chalcedon, but none of that See did ever use it,
nor consent to take it. This is a part of the discourse of S. Gregory, writing
against John the Bishop of Constantinople, usurping the title of universal
Bishop: which although some of his predecessors (after some sort and in some
sense) used, when they called themselves Bishops of the universal Church; yet
he therefore disliked, Sixtus 1. epis. 2. Victor 1. epi. 1. Pontia^. epist. 2.
Stepha^ 1. epi. 2. Leo epist. 54. 62. et 65.
because it seemed to affirm, that he who should use it, was himself the only
Bishop of the whole world, and al other Bishops his vicars not his brethren:
whereas every Bishop is head and Bishop of his particular Church, although
subject to the vicar of Christ, and the ministerial head of his whole flock,
the successor of S. Peter. Verily, that S. Gregory's words have no other
sense, it is auerred by Andraeas Fricius de Eccles. li. 2. cap. 10. page 570.
Andraeas Fricius a learned Protestant of Polonia. And that he held himself to
be supreme Pastor of the Church, al his See l. 12. epi. 32. de priuiligio
co^cessomo nasterio S. Medardi In psalm. 5. epist. 38. indict. 13.
books and actions abundantly testify: and of the Church of Constantinople
in particular thus he vvriteth. Lib. 7. epist. 63. ad Joan. Sira cusanum.
Of the seat of Constantinople who can doubt, but it is subject to the
Apostolic See? which both my Lord the most holy Emperor, and my brother
Eusebius Bishop of the same city of Constantinople, profess. And this is the
common Catholic doctrine touching the supreamacie of S. Peter and the Bishop
of Rome.

SECTION THE SECOND. The aforesaid doctrine is proved.
IF I should endeavor to bring forth all the arguments which occur, and are
commonly used by Catholic authors, conuincing the truth of that which has
been here said, this treatise would rise to a great volume, which is
contrary to mine intent; wherefore, I will only touch the principal, and those
very briefly. In the holy scripture we first find, that our Savior at the
first sight of S. Peter, changed his name from Simon, to Cephas or Peter. For
this holy Apostle being brought by S. Andrew his brother unto Christ, He
looking upon him (says S. John the Evangelist) said; Ioh. 1, 42. Hier. in c.
2. epist. ad Galatas.
thou art Simon the son of Iona: thou shall be called Cephas; which word in
the Siriack tongue (as we are taught by S. Hierom) as also Peter in the Greek,
signifies a rock, wherefore then did Christ change this Apostles name, more
then the names of all the rest? for although he called S. James and S. John
Boanerges; Mark. 3.
yet he altered not their former names, but gave them a kind of surname: and
therefore by the holy Evangelists, and the whole Church, they are always
called by their first names, James and John. But S. Peter is commonly called
both by the Evangelists, S. Paul, Galat. 2. Chrisost. in 1. cap. Joan.
and the whole Church Peter and Cephas, or a rock; which (as S. John
Chrysostom very well notes) argues, that some great privilege was granted
to S. Peter above others: for so God for some extraordinary and great cause,
changed the name of Abram into Abraham, and of Jacob into Israel. But what was
this privilege? Verily the name it self imposed upon S. Peter, gives us
notice what it was, for seeing that Christ communicated unto him, one of his
own names (to wit) the name of a rock or stone, which is often times
attributed unto himself in holy write; Isa. 8. et 28. Daniel 2. psalm. 117.
Mat. 21. Romans 9. 1. Cor. 10. Ephe. 2.1. Peter 2. etc.
he also gave us to understand, that he was to communicate unto him the highest
office under himself: and that like as he himself was the principal rock and
foundation of the Church; so this holy Apostle was to be by participation, a
secondarie stone, placed next unto himself in the building of the same, and
through his prayer and warrant, to be made a pillar of truth, not to be shaken
with any falsehood, nor overthrown by all the powers of hell. This is the
doctrine of S. Basil and S. Leo, as we have seen above.

But that the force of this place of scripture against the new sectaries, may
the better be perceived, let us join another unto it, more strongelie
confirming the same truth, and plainly opening the sense of the former. For
after that this blessed Apostle had confessed our Savior to be Christ, the
son of the living God; our Redeemer replying unto him, Mat. 16. v. 18.19.
used these words: And I say to thee, that thou art Peter (or a rock) and
upon this rock, will I build my Church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. And I will give to thee the keys of the kingedome of heaven: and
whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, it shall be also bound in the heavens: and
whatsoever thou shall loose in the earth, it shall be loosed also in the heavens.
Lo, a plain promise made unto S. Peter, both that on him the Church should be
built, and consequently, that he should be made the principal foundation of the
same next unto Christ; and also, that as the vicar of Christ and chief pastor
of his flock, he should receive the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And hence
proceed those words of S. Hierome concerning the first prerogative: Hieron.
lib. 1. contra Pelag. Cipria^. epistol. ad Quirinu^.
Peter was the prince of the Apostles, upon whom the Church of our Lord was
strongly, and firmly founded; which is neither shaken by the fury of any
flood, nor by any tempest. Saint Ciprian that holy Martyr, more ancient then
Saint Hierome, tells us; that our Lord did choose Peter the chiefest, and
upon him built his Church. Which words of his are alleged and approved by
Saint Augustine, in his second book de Baptismo cap. 1.

To these I add S. Basil, and S. Epiphanius, of whom the first avouches
Basil. li. 2. in Eunom. et homilia 19. quae est vlti. de poenitentia.
that Saint Peter for the excellency of his faith, received upon him the
edifice of the Church: wherefore, in another place he calls him the rock
and foundation of the Church. The other vvriteth, Epipha^. in Ancor:
that our Lord appointed Peter, the first or chief of his Apostles, a firm
rock on which the Church was built. The like sentences are found in Leo ser.
2. in Aniuers. assu^ptio. suae.
S. Leo, Nazia^ ^ de mother. serua^d. in disputat.
S. Gregory Nazianzene, Chrisost. homil. 55. in Math.
S. Chrysostom, Ambros. sermon. 47.
S. Ambrose and others: yea, that the Fathers gathered this out of the said
words of our Lord, it is granted by Calu. li. 4. instit. ca. 6. 6.
Calvin and Dan. in respo^s. ad Bellar. disput. part. 1. p. 277.
Danaeus. That he also had a second prerogative promised him in the same
words, of receiving the keys of the kingdom of heaven, as ministerial head
of the Church above the rest of the Apostles, who received them with a certain
kind of subjection to Peter, the Fathers in like sort, even as confidently
testify: And first this is affirmed by S. Ciprian in these words. Ciprian.
epist. 73.
To Peter first of al, upon whom our Savior built his Church, and from whom he
instituted and showed the beginning of unity, did he give this power, that that
should be loosed in the heavens, which he had loosed on earth. Hill. in Math.
16.
S. Hillarie in like sort cries out: O blessed porter of heaven, unto whose
will and arbitriment, the keys of the eternal entry are delivered! Lastly,
Chrysostom homil. 55. in Mathaeum.
S. John Chrysostom and Gregor. lib. 5. epist 32.
S. Gregory, of the delivery of the keys of heaven to S. Peter, infer;
that unto his charge the whole world was committed, and that he was made
Pastor and head of the whole Church.

But when did Christ perform these promises? Verily no man (I think) vvil
be so wicked and blaspheamous as to say, that our Redeemer was not so good
as his word: when then were these promises performed? In very truth after
our Lords resurrection; when as he made this blessed Apostle general Pastor
over al his flock, exempting none, no not the other Apostles themselves, from
his jurisdiction; but committing al both sheep, and lambs to his charge: for
he said to him, John 21. verse 16.17.18.
Feed my lambs, feed my sheep. And verily it is apparent that by these
words, supreme authority under Christ, was given to this Apostle, over all the flock and Church of Christ. For what other meaning can they admit? Every
man vvil confess that it is the part of him that feeds sheep, to provide
them food, which belongs to a superior and governor. What other thing is it
to feed, guide, defend, rule, correct, then to be superior over his flock?
And this also the Greek word used by the Evangelist in this place, conuinceth;
which signifies to feed, by ruling and being superior. Moreover, who can
deny but those words (My lambs, and my sheep) comprehend al Christians? For
the Lambs are the lay sort of people, and such as are not spiritual Pastors
over other; the Sheep are the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, who bring
forth unto Christ lambs. Add also, that all the lambs and sheep of Christ,
without any limitation or restriction, were here committed to S. Peter's
charge: wherefore, no man could exempt himself from his jurisdiction, except
he would deny himself to be a sheep or lamb of Christ. And this may be
confirmed by those words of our Redeemer: I know my sheep; Ioh. 1, 14.
my sheep hear my voice; I yield my life for my sheep. For like as in these
places, the word (sheep) signifies al Christians; so it must needs do in
those words; feed my lambs, feed my sheep. I conclude therefore, that in
these words, all the members or children of Christ's Church, were committed to S.
Peter's charge; and that he was made Pastor of the whole fold and flock of
Christ.

But let us confirm all this by the testimony of the ancient Fathers: S. Leo
of this matter discourses thus. Leo sermon. 3. de Assu^pt. sua.
Of the whole world one Peter is chosen, that he may be preferred and made
superior over the vocation of al Nations, over all the Apostles, and all the
fathers of the Church: to the end that although among the people of God there
be many Priests, and many Pastors, yet Peter might properly rule them al,
whom principally also Christ does govern: Epiph. in Anc orat. Chrisost. lib.
de Sacerdotio.
Hitherto Saint Leo. The same doctrine is taught us also by S. Epiphanius, who
speaks thus of S. Peter. This is he who heard, feed my sheep, to whom the
fold of Christ was committed: S. Chrysostom likewise is of the same opinion,
for he tells us; That our Lord did shed his blood to redeem those sheep,
the care of which be committed to S. Peter, and also to his successors: That
Christ would have Peter to be far above al his other Apostles: That be
appointed him Pastor of his future Church: That he committed to him the care
of his brethren, and the charge of the whole world. He also calls his office
then received Praefecturam (that is) a Lieutenant ship, or office committed
unto him to judge and govern; Ambros. in cap. vlt. Lucae. Ce^tur. 4. col. 556.
1704.
and explicateth it by that place of scripture Matthew 24. v. 45. Who think
thou is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has appointed over his
family. S. Ambrose affirms that by these words feed my sheep, he left Peter
unto us, as the vicar of his love, and that he was therefore preferred before
al, because he only professed such love. Finally, our adversaries confess,
that some of the Fathers honored S. Peter with these titles, Head of the
Apostles, and Bishop of Bishops.

Another argument also out of the holy scripture for confirmation of the same,
may be gathered of this; that S. Peter in the said scripture, is not only
called the first of the Apostles: but also among the rest when they are named,
obtains the first place. He is called the first by Math. 10, 2.
S. Matthew, according as we read in all Greek and Latin copies. The words of
the Evangelist are these: And the names of the twelve Apostles be these, the
first, Simon who is called Peter. He is likewise named first commonly in diverse
places, as no man can deny.

Moreover, it is a thing most certain and confessed by all Christians, that the
old testament was a figure of the new, and that the Church of Christ
succeeds in the true service of God, the sinagogue of the Jews: now, that in
the old law there was always one high priest, no man reading the old
testament can deny, and it is confessed by our adversaries themselves,
especially by the Magde. centur. 1. lib. 1. c. 7. col. 157.
Magdeburgenses, and Calvin: of whom the first write thus. In the Church of
the people of the Jews, there was one only high or chief priest by the divine
law, whom al were forced to acknowledge and obey. Calu. li. 4. Insti. c. 6. 2.
etc.
Caluins words are these: There he appointed one Prelate above the rest, whom
al should respect or obey, that by this means they might the better be kept in
unity: hitherto our adversaries. Like as therefore in the old testament there
was one superior, of whom are those words of God: Deutro. 17. v. 20.
He that shall be proud refusing to obey the commandment of the priest, who at
that time does ministrate to the Lord thy God, and the sentence of the judge:
that man shall die (to wit, a corporal death) which words our Rain. in his
confer. page 251. Whitak. de sacr. scriptura pa. 466. 470. Bilson in his
treatise of the perpetual government of the Church p. 20. Hook. in his preface
page 26. 27. 28.
adversaries understand of his supreme authority, both in causes temporal and
spiritual, without appeal to any higher: So in the new law it was
convenient, that Christ should appoint one high Priest his vicar over all the
Church, whose sentence whosoever despised, he should die spiritually in his
soul, and be accounted no child of the Church. Hence proceed these words of
Ciprian de vnitate ecclesiae.
S. Ciprian: He that withstandeth and resists the Church; he that forsakes
Peter's Chair, upon which the Church was built, does he trust that he is in the
Church? Further, like as the true Church being among the Jews, the high Priest
by the commandment of God, had his seat and principal residence in Jerusalem
their chief city: so the truth being taken away from the Jews and delivered
to the Gentiles, it was convenient that the Sea of the high Priest, should be
placed in Rome, the principal city of the Gentiles.

Reason also proves, that there ought to be one supreme visible governor in
the Church. For seeing that nothing almost is more necessary, for the
preservation and good government of a commonwealth, then a mean and
provision to keep unity in the same; nothing more hurtful, Math. 12. verse 25.
Mark 3. verse 24. Luke 11. verse 18.
then rebellion, sedition, and discord: For every kingdom (as truth it self
affirms) divided against it self shall be made desolate; and every city or
house divided against it self shall not stand: It is certain that our
Redeemer, the wisest and most prudent lawmakers that ever lived in the world,
in establishing his Church or kingdom, which was to be peaceable, glorious,
and everlasting; and which is also his spiritual body (and therefore in that
respect likewise to be united in one) had a principal regard, that the members
of his commonwealth and body, should be lincked together in peace and
concord, and not rent a sunder by schism, division, or diversity of faiths.
Out of which ground I frame this argument: Christ without al doubt ordained a
mean for the preservation of unity in his Church; but unity cannot be
preserved in it without one visible head having jurisdiction over it al:
therefore, Christ ordained one such visible head. And this one head was during
the time of his life, the blessed Apostle S. Peter, who was (as I have proved
before) furnished with all necessary qualities, for the execution and
performance of this high office and dignity: and all the children of the Church
of what condition whatsoever, were bound in matters of faith and precepts of
manners concerning good and evil, to obey him. This reason (as we have heard
Calvin before confess) was that which moved God in the old law to appoint one
Prelate above the rest: And for the superiority of one in the new law, it was
long since assigned by Hieron. aduersus Iouinianu^. Hiero^. aduer. Luciferianos.
S. Hierome, who concerning this matter, uses these words: For this cause
one is chosen among the twelve, that a head being appointed, occasion of
schism be taken away. And in another place: The health of the Church depends
of the dignity of the highest Priest, unto whom, if some certain power exors.
et ab homini. eminens. Cipria^ epist. 55. ad Corneliu^.
peerles and above men, be not given, there will be as many schisms in
Churches, as priests. But long before him the same was noted by S. Ciprian, who
affirms that heresies and schisms rise in the Church of no other cause, then
that the Priest of God is not obeyed, and that one Priest and judge in Christ's
place is not acknowledged. In another epistle he has this sentence: Cip. epi.
4. see him also de vnita. Eccles.
God is one, and Christ is one; and the Church is one, and the Chair is one,
by our Lords voice founded on Peter. There can no other altar be erected, or
new Priesthood be made, besides the one altar and one Priesthood: whosoever
does els-where gather, does disperse. And is it not apparent (except there be
some one superior that may keep unity and uniformity, whom all the rest
ought to obey) that scisme, division, and rebellion will presently ensue? will
not every one believe, do, and change as he pleases? will one conform
himself to another? certainly he will not: of which vvil follow as many
distinct faithes and religions, as there be heads and fancies. And of this we
see most manifest proofs among our adversaries, who for want of one head over
them al, are divided into almost an infinite number of sects, wthout any hope
or mean of reconciliation, Treatise of the definition and nots of the Church
Chap. 3.
as in another place I will declare at large. But let us exemplify a little in
this matter, It is well known, that in this kingdom the Puritans have a long
time by all means endeavored, to conform our Protestant Church to their
Geneuian platform of discipline: but what answer makes a learned Protestant
unto them? Verily he demands of them, Whitgif. in his ans. to the admonit.
pa. 138. 1. And in the defense of his said an swe. tract. 20. p. 702 and tract.
9. c. 1. pa. 481. c. 2. 6. p. 491
Unto which reformed Church, they would have the English Church framed, and why
other reformed Churches should not as well frame themselves unto the form of
the English Church? For (says he) we are as well assured of our doctrine, and
have as good grounds and reasons for our doings, as they have. He adds: I
tell you again, that there is no cause why this Church of England, either for
truth of doctrine, sincerity of public divine service and other policy,
should give place to any Church in Christendom: and sure I am, that we are as
near joined with the Lord our God, as the members are to the body, and the
body to the head: Such is the answer of this Protestant to the Puritans: The
like may the Puritans make un- the Protestants and Lutherans, Zuinglians and
other Sectaries to them both. And this makes them (as I have said) to remain
in deadly discentions: which evil if they would acknowledge one head, would
easily be remedied and removed. This reason among others, moved the ancient
Iusti^. in ora. exhor. Cip. tract. de idol. va nit. Atha- aduer. ido. nas.
orati. Philo l. de co^fus. li^gu. Plat. in polit. Arist. l. 8. ethni. c. 10. l.
12. philos. etc
Fathers (yea the Heathen philosophers themselves) to affirm, that Monarchia
(that is to say the government by one chief head) is the best and chiefest.

Moreover, this preservation of unity in general, is used as a special argument
of great force and moment, by some of our Survey of the pretended holy
discipli^. cap. 8.
English Protestants against the Puritans, in the defense of their Primats,
Archbishops, and Bishops. For they affirm such officers to be necessary in the
Church of Christ, that unity and peace in it be preserved: Field book 3. c.
39. thus then
Because the unity and peace of each particular Church of God (says Field) and
flock of his sheep, depends of the unity of the Pastor etc. Therefore,
though there be many presbiters, yet there is one Bishop among the rest, to
whom an eminent and peerlesse power is given, for the avoiding of scismes and
factions: thus Field. Will. in his Sinopsis controuer. 5. qu. 3. part 2. in the
appe^dix page 237. edit. 1600.
Willets words to the same effect are these. The distinction of Bishops and
Priests, is very necessary for the policy of the Church, to avoid scismes and
to preserve it in unity. And he proves this out of the text of the Apostle
Corin. 14. God is not the author of confusion or disorder: but (says he) to
have a populer equallity among ministers, were the next way to bring in
confusion, if none should be ruled or directed. Wherefore, he adds in another
place, that In the calling of Bishops somewhat is divine; and that it is a
divine ordinance, that among the ministers of the Church there should be a
superiority. For the proof likewise of the same, they bring the testimony of
some Ibid. controuer. 16. quest. 2. p. 726. edit. an 1600.
other learned Sectaries, especially of Jacob Andraeas in epistola contra
minist. Heil derberg.
Iacobus Andraeas. But who sees not, that if a Bishop be necessary over
Priests, and an Archbishop over Bishops, and a Primate over Archbishops, for
the preserving of unity in certain provinces, nations, or kingdoms? that over
sundry Primates one supreme Primate or head is also needful, for the
preservation of the said unity through al nations and kingdoms. Survey of the
pretended holy discipl.
If it be true as Field affirms, that the unity of each particular Church
depends of the unity of the Pastor, how much more does the unity of the
universal Catholic Church, depend on the unity of one universal Pastor over
al? Yea of these things we may well infer, that God who is never wanting to his
Church in things necessary, has ordained some such Prelate. For much easier
it is, to preserve unity and uniformity in one kingdom, without a Primate;
or in one province, without an Archbishop; or in one diocese, without a
Bishop: then it is to preserve the same in all parts of the world, without one
head over al; seeing that those of one kingdom, province, or diocese, live
under the same laws, have the same temporal prince, and by reason of
neighborhood may be joined together in amity and friendship; and so one may
understand the faith and belief of another, and confer together concerning
such matters: which occasions of unity are wanting to those, who are of
several kingdoms or common vvealths. Wherefore, for the sovereignty of one
chief Pastor, we have an express warrant of holy scripture; whereas there
is but little so expressly uttered for the proof of the authority of Bishops,
nothing almost for the jurisdiction of Primates and Archbishoppes. Neither can
this unity be sufficiently preserved by the letter of holy scripture, as it
appears by the daily dissentions of our adversaries, and I vvil at large
declare hereafter. Some of the Sectaries seem to allow of the authority of a
general Council, and to acknowledge it to be a fit mean to end al
controversies; as Hooker in the preface to his book of ecclesiastical policy
p. 24. etc.
Hooker, Couel in his defense of Hooker
Couel, Zauchius in his epistle before his co^fessions p. 12.13.
Zauchius, Sutcliffe in his answer to Kellisons Survey chapter 1. page 42.
Sutcliffe and others. But these may likewise easily be confuted: for it is
evident even by the confession of Protestants, that no good can be done by such
a Council, except one head and superior in the same be granted. About the
year of our Lord 1585. Henry now the French king and a Catholic, then king
of Nauar and a Caluinist, sent his letters to certain Electours and princes of
the Roman Empire, being Lutheran Protestants of Germany, desiring a concord and
reconciliation, between the Lutherans and Sacramentaries, and wishing (as it
should seem by the answer) that some Council might be assembled of the
learned men of both sorts, to that purpose. The said Protestants of Germany
returned answer, that in those days things standing as they did, they
thought it not necessary that such a course should be taken touching a Council:
and why so? Verily, these reasons are by them alleged. This principally (say
they) seems worthy of our consideration, whether now between the divines of
other Churches and ours, any Sinode can be called and assembled. For who of us
will arrogate to himself, to appoint the place, to name the day, to call the
divines of diverse nations? Which (as histories testify) was the proper office
of the Roman Emperors, before the Papal tirannie increased. Now moreover,
who shall have rule or be superior in authority in the Sinode it self? There
can no other have this office, but either one of our side or of our
adversaries: but neither we will suffer a president or chief ruler of the
adverse part, to the prejudice of ours: so neither will they (without doubt)
endure, that one of ours should have that place. But if of both sides some be
appointed, then each one will undertake the patronage of his own part, and so
there will arise dissension between the Presidents. Further, who shall be judge
over those that vary or contend? but let us put the case, or rather feign and
imagine that the Sinod is now called; that it is sufficiently argued on both
sides; that the Presidents have pronounced their sentence; that the
pertinacious and fanatical are condemned and accursed, by the common consent
and suffrage of al: Who then shall bridle and restrain the clamours of the
condemned? their complaints? their accusations? by which they will exclaim that
the proceedings against them have been unjust; that they were not rightly
heard; that judgment was given rather according to affection, then according
to the word of God. Hence will arise new swarms of contentions, and the Sinode
being ended, the Church will enjoy no more quietness, tranquillity and peace,
then was before. Thus the aforesaid Princes of Germany in their letter penned
(without al doubt, or at the least viewed and approved) by their best divines.
The Elector of Saxony, the Elector of Brandeburg, the Administrator of
Magdeburge, Philip Jews Palatine of Rhene, Julius Duke of Brunswich and
Luneberg, Vdalricus Duke of Mechelburg, and Jews Duke of Wittenberge
subscribed unto it. And the letter together with the subscriptions is published
in print by Conradus Schusselburg a famous Lutheran divine, at the end of his
thirteenth book of the catologue of Heretics. How then can any person say,
that controversies may always be sufficiently decided and ended by a Council,
without one head? Are not these reasons most true and apparent? Nay, has not
experience taught us the truth of these things? What success had the
colloquies or conferences, held for the reconciliation or union of Lutherans
and Sacramentaries, between their chief doctors at Malbrun in the year one
thousand five hundred threescore and four, See colloquiu^ Most pelgarte^se
published by Protestants.

David Chitrae. in chron. Saxo. part 3. a^. 1568. p. 440. 441. Johan. Petraeus
admonit. quae docet vita^dos esse Flaccian.


or at Montpelgar in the year one thousand five hundred fourscore and six?
was any unity or concord made between them? nothing less. Neither was the
event of particular assemblies of Lutherans only concerning some difference
found among themselves, any better. In the year one thousand five hundred
threescore and eight, as Chitraeus (himself a famous writer of this sect)
records; was that famous assembly of Lutherans held at Altenberg, concerning
the necessity of good works, and free will: which (as he tells us) was
dissolved without any hope of concord: and (says he) the acts were set out on
both sides; and not only the divines did contend with public inuectiues, but
also most bitter hatred was raised between the Princes themselves, who caused
this assembly. Yea, another Lutheran of the same meeting writes thus: This
whole conference was not only dissolved without fruit: but also the estate of
the whole cause became worse. The like has happened in other of their Sinodes:
For I find it not recorded, that ever hitherto two nations or different
Churches of these sectaries, were united together by any council held among
them. But unto the Lutherans above cited, I add also the authority of
Whitakers; who grants, Whitaker li. de consilijs p. 56.
that without authority no Council can be assembled: And seeing that no one
(according to Protestants) has authority over the whole world, it follows;
that in their judgment no Council can be assembled of all the Prelates of the
world. And out of this doctrine of our adversaries, joined unto that maintained
by diverse of them, concerning the necessity of general Councels, which is
likewise strongly by me proved before, I infer; that it was necessary that
God should appoint some one general visible head over his Church: which
illation is very evident: For if general Councels be necessary, and they cannot
be had without a head, it must needs follow; that Christ who is not wanting to
his Church in things necessary, ordained some such head. Andraeas Fricius de
Ecclesia l. 2. cap. 10. page 570.
Hence Andraeas Fricius although a Protestant, and a man bearing deadly hatred
to the Bishop of Rome, yet thought it needful, that one head should be
appointed over all the euangellical Churches, to keep them in unity, which he
deemed otherwise would never be: and handling that matter, he also truly
answers that common objection of Protestants touching the title of universal
Bishop, out of S. Gregory; of which before. But the Lutherans (as we have
seen) auerre, that it was in times past the proper office of the Roman
Emperors, to call general Councels. I reply; first, it is evident that Christ
bequeathed not this office to the Emperor, both because the office being
necessary in the Church, Christ (if he had so done) should have taken order,
that ever there should have bin some one Emperor over the whole world, to
discharge the same; which (as is evident) he did not: And also, because many of
the Emperors have been Infidels, some Heretics, and therefore in all reason not
capable of any such pre-eminence in the Church. Secondly, it is very well proved
by Catholic authors, that there never has been any one lawful general
Council assembled in the Church, by the Emperor alone, without the consent and
authority of the Bishop of Rome: which I confirm only in this place, by an
Ecclesiastical canon alleged by Socrates; which (as he says) forbids,
Socrates lib. 2. cap. 13.
that decrees be made in the Church without the consent of the Bishop of
Rome. And seeing that this canon was not made by any Council, it is apparent,
that it descended from the Apostles themselves: But of this point enough.

Some of our adversaries deny the Pope to be the successor of S. Peter, because
(say they) S. Peter was never at Rome. I reply, that nothing (not most plainly
expressed in the word of God, or not known by divine revelation) can be more
certain, then that S. Peter lived in Rome, and was Bishop of Rome: for this
is affirmed by all ancient and modern writers, Luther in colloquijs mensalibus
cap. de Antichristo.

Peter 5. verse 13. See Calui^ l. 4. Instit. ca. 6. 15. and Bilson in his
treatise of the perpetual government of the Church cap. 13. Psalm. 47.


besides a few new sectaries. Hence are these words of Luther: Al histories
testify, that Peter was the first Bishop of Rome, but they are mere fables.
And why do our adversaries deny so manifest a truth? truly for no other cause,
but to prejudice and weaken the Popes authority, by which they are condemned.
Neither is there any ancient author, that ever called the matter in question
as doubtful, and the monuments themselves of Rome most evidently convince our
assertion to be true: yea, it is gathered out of S. Peter's own words in his
first epistle, and confessed by the best learned of our adversaries. Others
say, that the privilege of S. Peter mentioned, perished together with him, and
was not derived to his successors. But certain it is, that the virtue of
Christ's promise made to this blessed Apostle, together with his office
descended to all the Bishops of Rome his successors. This I have partly
proved in the second section of the sixth chapter before, where I have
declared, that the promises made by Christ to his Apostles, concerning the
assistance of the holy Ghost in the Church, etc. were to be verified in the
Bishops of the Church, during al ages ensuing. In this place I will only
repeat, that no man of sense will imagine, that Christ building his Church for
ever, provided Pastors and Apostolic officers only for it, during the life
of S. Peter and the Apostles: For certain it is, that like as the same Church,
so the same governors (though not in person, yet in power) are always extant
in the world. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 22. 24. 25. Atha^. l. de sent. Dionisij
Alexandrini. Cipr. l. 3. epist. 13. Athan. Apolog. 2. et in epist. ad
^olitarios. Socrates l. 2. cap 11.
Hence the Bishop of Rome has always exercised his authority, throughout
al Countries and Nations in the world. Pope Victor without any note or censure
of passing the bounds of his authority, about the year one hundred fourscore
and eighteen, excommunicated the Churches of Asia. S. Dionisius Bishop of
Alexandria, was accused not long after before Pope Dionisius, as S. Athanasius
tells us: And neither did the Pope (although himself also a Saint) refuse
the office of a judge, or the Bishopp accused his judgment. S. Ciprian
requested Pope Steven to de pose Martianus Bishop of Arles in France, and to
ordain another in his place. S. Athanasius reports, that he himself being
condemned and deprived of his Bishopric of Alexandria, in the year three
hundred thirty and six, by a false Sinode held at Tirus, and having received
the same censure of condemnation, by such another Sinode assembled at Antioch,
in the year 341. was absolved by Pope Julius, and restored again to his
Bishopric, notwithstanding these former sentences pronounced against him. The
same Pope (if we believe Socrates) restored Paul Bishop of Constantinople, and
Asclepas Bishop of Gaza in like sort to their Churches: who being wrongfully
deprived, appealed to his supreme authority. S. Damasus the Pope about the year
three hundre seauenty seven, restored in like sort Peter Patriarcke of
Alexandria to his seat, from which he was likewise unjustly expelled by the
Arians, as witnesses are Zozomenus and Socrates li. 4 c. 30.
Socrates.

Chrisos. ep. ad Inno. Theodorus Romans diac. apud Pallad. i^ dial. Inno. Papa i^
literis ad Archad. apud Gena. Nicepho. et Glica.
S. John Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople in the year four hundred and
four, being by Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria and other Bishops in a
Council deposed, appealed to S. Innocentius Pope; who not only made void the
sentence pronounced against him: but also excommunicated and deposed the said
Theophilus. Calest. epi. ad Nestor. et ad Ciril ep. 3.
Pope Caelestinus not long after in a Council held at Rome, first of al
condemned the Nestorian heresy, allotting Nestorius him self then Bishop of
Constantinople only ten days, within which if he did not repent, he should
receive the same censure from S. Ciril Bishop of Alexandria, his Legate.
Liberatus ca. 12.
S. Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople condemned in the Pseudosinod of Ephesus,
by Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria and others, appealed to S. Leo the great
Bishop of Rome: So did also Theodor. epist. 113.
Theodoretus Bishop of Cirus at the same time. And diverse other such like
examples might be alleged.

The testimonies of the ancient Fathers approving the same superiority of the
Pope, are almost infinite; but I can not stand to recite them: only this I
note, that almost the same titles of primacie and dignity, were given in
ancient ages to S. Peter and the Bishop of Rome. For like as S. Peter by Eusebius
in Chronic. an. 44. et lib. 2. hist. cap. 14.
Eusebius, is called The first Bishop of the Christians, the greatest of the
Apostles, the prince and captain of the chiefest, and the master of the
warfare of God; by Orig. homil. 2. in diuersos Euangel.
Origenes, The top of the Apostles; by Epipha^. haeres. 51.
S. Epiphanius, Captain of Christ's disciples; by Cir. hierosol. catech. 2.
S. Ciril Bishop of Jerusalem, Most excellent prince of the Apostles; by Ciril
Alex. l. 12. in Ioa^.
S. Ciril Bishop of Alexandria, Prince and head of the rest; by Chrisos. in 1.
Cor. 15. et hom. 11. in Mat.
S. Crisostome Prince of the Apostles, pastor and head of the Church; by Cipr.
l. de unit. Eccles.
S. Ciprian, The head, fountain, and root of the whole Church etc. So the
Bishop of Rome by See Cip. epi. 46. ad Cornel. et li. de unit. Eccle. l. 1.
epist. 3. ad Corn. et ep. 8. ad plebe^ et l. 2. epi. 10. ad eun de^ Corn.
S. Ciprian is termed, Bishop of the most holy Catholic Church; by Amb. in
c. 3. 1. Tim. et epi. 81. ad Siriciu^
S. Ambrose, Rector of the Church of God; by Steph. episco. Carthag. epist. ad
Dama.
Steven Bishop of Carthage, Father of Fathers and chief or highest priest; by
Hieron. praefat. Euangel. ad Damasum.
S. Hierome, highest or chiefest priest; by the general Council of Conciliu^
Chalced. epi. ad Leo^.
Chalcedon, head of the Bishops of the Church, and the keeper of our Lords
vineyard; and by Aug. epist. 157.
S. Augustine, Bishop of the Apostolic See etc. Finally, our adversaries
themselves seem to grant, that al antiquity acknowledge this superiority.
Bucer writes thus: Bucerus in praeparatorijs ad Co^cilium.
We plainly confess, that among the ancient Fathers of the Church, the Roman
Church obtained the primacie above others, as that which has the Chair of S.
Peter, and whose Bishops almost always, have been accounted the successors of
Peter. Ce^tur. 2. c. 4. col. 63. Ce^t. 3. c. 4. col. 8. Cent. 5. c. 4. col.
512. 520.
The Centurie writers, who are commonly accounted the most diligent and learned
Protestant historians, censure S. Irenaeus, S. Ignatius, Tertullian, S.
Ciprian, Origenes, S. Leo and S. Ciril, as maintainers of this supreamacie.
Cent. 4. c. 10. col. 1010. 1249. 1074. 1100.
They note S. Ephrem and S. Hierome, for affirming the Church to be built upon
S. Peter; Ce^t. 5. c. 6. col. 728.
Arnobius, for calling S. Peter the Bishop of Bishops; Optatus, for extolling
overmuch the chair of Peter; Gelasius the Pope, for excommunicating the
Bishops of Alexandria and Constantinople etc. Besides this, diverse of the
Sectaries and among the rest Beza cited in the survey of the pretended holy
disci. c. 27. p. 343.
Beza Cartw. l. 2. p. 507. 508. l. 1. p. 97.
Cartwrighte and Fulk against Sau^d. Rock p. 248. 271. upon the Rhems test. in
2. These. 2, 9. See also Dan. in respo^. ad Bell. disp. part 1. p. 275. 276.
Fulk confess, that the Fathers in the first Council of Nice began the
foundation of the Popes primacy: yea, some of them say it was begun long
before. Their discord concerning the time of the beginning of this superiority
does also testify this, as I could easile show, if it were not that I have
already been ouer-long in this section. Lastly I add, that neither Wicl. in
ep. ad Vrba^. 6.
Wickclif nor Luth. in resollut. prioru^ disput. ad Leon. 10. in declarat
quoru^d. artic.
Luther (who in sundry ages were the first raisers of rebellion against the Sea of Rome) denied the Popes superiority, before that he condemned their
doctrine. For the works of them both are yet extant, written after their fall
to preach novelties: in which they most apparently and plainly, submit
themselves and their doctrine to his censure, and acknowledge his primacy. Of
Luther diverse Sleid. l. 1. fol. 10. Fox act. and mon. p. 404. Osiander in
epist. Cent. 16. p. 61. 62. 68. Cowper in his Chronic. fol. 278.
Protestants testify the same: and this is a manifest sign, that they opposed
themselves against him for no other cause, then that he condemned their
opinions and proceedings.

SECTION THE THIRD. That the decrees of the Bishop of Rome, when he teaches
the Church as supreme Pastor, are of divine and infallible authority; and of
some other grounds of faith, flowing out of these.
HAVING already proved, that the Bishop of Rome is the true successor of S.
Peter, and ministerial head of Christ's Church; it remains that now we see,
what authority and credit is to be given to his decrees. I affirm therefore,
that the Pope when (teaching the whole Church as ministerial head of the same)
he defines any matter concerning faith, and general precepts of vice or
virtue, cannot err: I add those words, when teaching the whole Church as
ministerial head etc. because we confess that the Pope may sin and err in
person, understanding, and private doctrine; and we defend only, that his
judicial sentence pronounced as he is Pope, concerning matters of faith and
precepts of manners, cannot be false or erroneous. And this is evident, first
by the testimony of Christ himself, who unto S. Peter the Apostle used these
words: Simon Simon, Luke. 22. v. 31.32.
behold Satan required to have you to sift as wheat, but I have prayed for
thee that thy faith fail not, and thou once converted, confirm thy brethren.
Mark well those words: Satan has required to have you, but I have prayed for
thee, which argue a singular privilege in S. Peter, of not erring in faith,
above the rest of the Apostles. For satan required to sift them al, and our
Lord prayed for Peter only, that his faith might not be overthrown by any
subtle deceits, open assaults or other practices of the devil. The like is
insinuated by those words following: And thou once converted, confirm thy
brethren: which both prove, that the first part of the sentence was proper to
S. Peter only (I mean that his faith should not fail) and also declare, that
the rest of the Apostles, were by him to be confirmed and strengthened in their
belief. Hence proceeds this sentence of S. Leo: The danger was common to all the Apostles, Leo sermon. 3. de assu^p sua.
but our Lord took special care of Peter, that the state of all the rest might
be more sure, if the head were invincible: God so disposing the aid of his
grace, that the assurance and strength which Christ gave to Peter, might
redound by Peter to the rest of the Apostles: Hitherto S. Leo.

To signify this priuiledg of S. Peter to us, our Savior changed (as I have
before declared) his name from Simon to Cephas or Peter, both which words
signify a rock: Thou art Simon (said he) the son of Iona, thou shall be
called Cephas, which is interpreted Peter or a rock. For how well do these two
sentences answer one another; Thy faith shall not fail, and Thou art a rock.
And upon this rock afterward he built his Church, vvarranting it from ever
being overcome by the devil or his ministers, Mat. 16. verse 18. John 21. v.
17.18. Ambrose in himnis. August. li. 1. retrac. cap. 21.
which he promised to do (as I have above noted) in these his words to this
B. Apostle: Thou art Peter or a rock, and upon this rock I will build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; and performed in those: Feed
my lambs: feed my sheep. Hence by S. Ambrose (as S. Augustine records) S.
Peter is called the Rock of the Church, that is: the very strength and
foundation of it next unto Christ. Neither did our Savior without just cause,
grant this extraordinary priuiledg unto him: for he (as I have also before
showed) for the preservation of unity, and better direction of his spouse, was
appointed by him Pastor of the whole Church, shepherd of his whole flock,
his chief vicar and ministerial head of his body. Unto his charge he committed
both his sheep and lambs, exempting no Christians from his jurisdiction:
wherefore it was necessary, that he should be so directed concerning matters of
faith and religion, seeing that the members are to obey the head, and sheep to
follow and to be guided by their Shepherd, that he should not draw them into
errors, or propound unto them any bad pasture of false doctrine.

Like as therefore God always in the old law, preserved the truth in the
Chair of Moises, wherefore (as I have showed before) al men were bound under
pain of death, to obey the high Priest; and our Savior said: Math. 23. verse.
2.
upon the Chair of Moises have sitten the scribes and pharisees; al things
therefore whatsoever they shall say unto you, observe ye and do ye: so acording
to the assertion of S. Augustine, God preserves the truth of Christian
religion in the Sea of Rome, which is in the new Testament answerable to the
Chair of Moises; although the Bishops of that city were never so wicked men.

I add also, that this was necessary for the condemnation of heresies;
because, although the sentence of a general Council pronounced against any
heresy, cannot be erroneous; yet every man will grant, that such a Council
sometimes by reason of persecution or other accidents, can not be assembled:
yea every man must needs confess, that at no time such a Council can be so
soon gathered, as it is necessary that an heresy springing up should be
condemned. 2. Timoth. 2. ver. 17. Hieron. in cap. 5. ad Galatas.
For the Apostle very well compares heresy to a canker: and S. Hierome, both
to a canker, and also to a spark of fire, a piece of leaven, and a scabbed
sheep; and concludes, that like as a canker (if we will not have it eat over
all the body) is presently to be killed, and a spark of fire in a dangerous
place forthwith to be put out, and a pecce of leaven (if we will not have the
whole past leauened) is to be taken away out of hand from the same; and a
scabbed sheep, is forthwith to be removed out of the flock, lest that it infect
the rest: so an Heretic is presently so soon as he appears, to be cut off
from the body of the Church, and to be cast out of Christ's fold, lest that by
infection he corrupt others, which (as I have said) cannot be so soon effected
by a general Council, as is expedient; although the times be never so calm:
yea, sometimes there is no means to assemble such a Council: And therefore not
without cause God almighty has warranted in such cases, the Popes sentence
from error, that al his whole flock, understanding any new doctrine to be
condemned by his censure, may presently both avoid it, and the authors and
followers of the same.

Finally, in a general Council it self, it is not only needeful that there
be one supreme judge: but also that the sentence of this judge at the least,
joined with the censure and approbation of a part of the Council, be of an
infallible truth and of divine authority. The first part of this assertion is
proved before, and is evident; because otherwise we must needs confess, that
no certain mean is ordained in the Church to end controversies: For the
Prelates assembled in a Council being divided, either part might refuse to
stand to the others judgment. The second also is even as apparent, because
otherwise we have no certain rule, whereby in such a division to know which
part has the truth. We find it true by experience, that the greater part
(which nevertheless according to ordinary courses, should be of greater
authority then the lesser) may err: for so it fell out in the false Sinod held
at Ephesus, about the year of our Lord four hundred forty and nine. Wherefore,
if we should yield this pre-eminence to the greater part, that it must be
obeyed; heresies and false doctrine might be established in a Council, without
any means left us to know, when it does err, and when it defines a truth;
to which I likewise add, that it may fall out that both parts be equal: And
lastly, that we have no warrant in holy scripture, that the one part shall
have infallible directions by Gods spirit, more then the other. And seeing that
we have the most manifest authority of the said scripture, warranting us that
the successuor of S. Peter cannot err, neither reason nor scripture will suffer
us, to deny him this prerogative. But like as I have declared before, the
truth of the first part of this reason, by the doctrine and examples of
foreign sectaries: so I think it not amiss in this place, to show the truth of
the last, by the positions and proceedinges of some nearer home. There came to
my hands of late, a little pamphlet bearing this title. A Christian and modest
offer of a most indifferent conference or disputation about the many and
principal controversies betwixt the Prelates, Printed an. 1660.
and the late silenced and deprived ministers in England, tendered by some of
the said ministers to the Archbishoppes and Bishops and al their adherents.
At the end of this pamphlet, among other objections which these Puritan
ministers as making against this conference, endeavor to solue, this is one:
That they (the said Puritans) when they have been heard to oppose and answer
what they can, page 40.
name no judge, and will not stand to any man's definitive sentence, but will
continue obstinate still. Unto which objection they plainly answer, that they
do not think it lawful in any matter of religion, to setle their consciences
upon the definitive sentence of any person absolutely: yea (say they) If both
sides rest unsatisfied, page 41.
and continue persuaded still, that the truth is on their side, it were impious
for either side in such a case, to commit the absolute determination thereof,
unto the will and pleasure of any man or men whatsoever. They add; that it were
unjust for either side, to require judges either incompetent, or not
indifferent. And their reason is; because as the prelates (except they would
wilfully betray their own cause) might justly refuse such to be judges, as
have in any degree inclined more to the ministers then to them; so may the
ministers in like manner as justly refuse, to stand to the judgment and
determination of such, as incline more to the Prelates then to them: thus they.
How then will they have controversies ended? Surely they tell us, p. 40. 41.
that in desiring (as they do before) that the whole carriage of this intended
conference may be published, they make all the world to be judges thereof: that
it should content any Christianly affected man, that the ministers are content
to offer their defense of these points, to the view of al, to scanne and to
weigh them, and so far forth to judge thereof, as (if their reasons do not
satisfy them) to give them leave to cendemne them of error; which will be (say
they) a judgment heavy enough to them, if notwithstanding they shall still
persist in their former opinions: pa. 41. 42.
and that it is needles to name judges, because his Majesty, the civil
Majestrates under him, and the high court of Parliament (though the ministers
should appeal from them) would in this case judge them and their cause; whose
judgment if it go against the ministers, and it appear to be righteous; the
more they shall neglect the same, and refuse to submit themselves unto it, the
more gross and refractarie they shall show themselves to be, etc. This is the
substance of their answer to the aforesaid objection. And what prudent man
reading these things, will not first judge, that this course is no sufficient
mean to decide matters in question; then, that one supreme judge whose
sentence is of infallible truth, is necessary for the final ending of such
contentions? Who will not likewise infer, that Christ who is not wanting to
his Church in things necessary, has ordained some such supreme judge? And
like as the Puritanes proceed after this sort, so might either side of the
Bishops, if it should happen they should be divided among them selves, touching
any point of religion. But although these things be so; yet we hold not the
Bishop of Rome can rashly define what he please, for he is bound to proceed
maturely, and to use such inquisition, arguments, advise of learned men and
other means, as are necessary for the finding out of the truth of the matter,
which he is to define. Neither can he institute any sacrament, or make any new
article of faith, unknown altogether to the Apostles, or not delivered by them
to the Church, as I have said before of a general Council. Chap. 9.
Only touching these points, he has power more plainly and expreslie to
explicate to the faithful those verities, which the said Apostles either knew
or delivered, and to bring them (as it were) from darkness to light.

Some men perhaps will admit, that S. Peter had a prerogative of not erring in
faith, but will deny that it was ever derived to his successors. This evasion is
fully above confuted: yet here I add further, Chap. 6. sect. 2.
that this vvarrant from error in faith, was more necessary after S. Peter's
departure out of the world in his successors, then before in himself; both
because the chiefest planters and rulers of the Church the holy Apostles and
Disciples, were then likewise, or soon after deceased; and also because
persecution daily increased, and new heresies in greater abundance began to
impugn the rule of faith received. Moreover, our Savior building his Church
upon S. Peter, built it especially upon his faith (not upon his flesh, as some
of the ancient Fathers say) neither so upon his faith, that he built it upon
faith separated from S. Peter, or being in any other person: but upon faith as
being in S. Peter the ministerial head of the Church. Wherefore, although the
flesh of S. Peter be consumed, yet seeing that his office and dignity is in his
successors, his faith also through the warrant of Christ still remains in
them, which is the foundation of the Church, and the firm rock, against
which Hel-gates shall not prevail. And this may be confirmed, because Christ
when he prayed for the faith of S. Peter, obtained and imparted this
prerogative unto him, as his supreme vicar, or by reason of his office:
Wherefore, seeing that the office continues always in the Church, the
priuiledg likewise must always remain in the same. And this is the doctrine
of the ancient Fathers, and their exposition of the places of scripture
alleged. Hence in the third general Council. Ephesians. to. 2. cap. 16.
Council, the Bishop of Rome is called the ordinary successor and vicar of S.
Peter, prince of the Apostles: And the like is affirmed in the Council.
Chalcedon act. 2. et 3.
fourth. This also moved S. Hierome in his epistle to S. Damasus the Pope, to
use these words: Hieron. to. 2. epist. 7. ad Damasum.
I following no chief or principal but Christ, join my self to the communion
of Peter's Chair: upon this rock, I know the Church was built. The same may
be proved by this sentence of S. Augustine, Aug. to. 7. psalm. co^tra parte^
Donati.
Count the priests (says he) from the very See of Peter, and in that order of
Fathers consider, who to whom has succeeded, that same is the rock which the
proud gates of hell do not overcome. Finally, by the chair of Peter,
manifestly showed by the succession of the Roman Bishops, Aug. contra epist.
Manich. ca. 4. et epist. 105.
he seuereth Catholics from Heretics.

Our adversaries barking against this, accuse diverse Popes of sundry errors,
but they are al very well answered by diverse Catholics, and the Popes
manifestly cleared from their false slanders.

I must further note in this place, that although the decrees of the Pope (as
is before declared) of themselves, be of an infallible truth, touching the
matter which he intends to define: yet, that some further authority (if it be
possible) is added unto them, when they are accepted and approved by the whole
Church; for if they so accepted could be false, the whole Church might err,
contrary to that which has been proved before.

I must also add here two grounds more, flowing out of this warrant of the
Popes judgment from error: In the first place are prouincial Councels confirmed
by the Pope, for by such only, diverse heresies have been condemned, as that of
the Pelagians, Priscillianists, of Iouinian and others. The second such ground
is the faith of the Church of Rome, including the Pope, his Clergy and people;
for unto this Church (as we were long since told by S. Cipr. l. 1. epi. 3. et
55. Nu^. 6.
S. Ciprian) infidelity or false belief cannot have access. Hiero^. epist. 16.
c. 3. ite^ li. 3. Apol. co^tr. Ruffinum.
S. Hierome calls it The most safe haven of communion: and likewise
avouches, that The Roman faith commended by the Apostles mouth, will admit no
deceits of Heretics: and that it cannot possibly be changed. Ambr. in ora. de
obitu Satiri circa medium. Ambros. ibid.
S. Ambrose affimeth, that he does agree with the Catholic Bishops, who accord
with the Roman Church. And hence it proceeds that not only he but also Cipr.
epi. 52. Number. 1. ad Antonianum.
S. Ciprian and Hiero^. apol. 1. aduers. Ruffinu^ cap. 1.
S. Hierome anerre, that it is al one to say the Roman and the Catholic faith.

SECTION THE FOVRTH. The opinion of some sectaries that the Pope is Antechrist,
is briefly confuted: and two objections against the premises are answered.
OUR Calui^ ad c. 2. poster. ad These. l. 4. Instit. ca. 7. 24.
Adversaries by diverse means endeavor to overthrow the Catholic doctrine,
delivered and proved by me in this chapter. Nay the malice of some of them
(especially of our Bulle^ger Willet in his Sinop. co^trouers. 2. quest. 5. par.
2. etc.
Puritan brethren) extends it self so far, that they are not ashamed stoutly
to aver, that the Pope is the very Antechrist, foretold by Christ and the
Apostles in the new Testament. But this assertion is so absurd and opposite to
the word of God, and al show of truth; that diverse learned Protestants not
ouer-mastred by their passions, reject it as false; and among the rest Couel in
his defense of Hooker artic. 11.
M. Couel confesses, the Pope to be a member of the Church militant of Christ.
Hooker in his third book of Ecclesiastical policy, 1. page 128. edit. anno 1604.
Hooker also himself in whose defense he vvriteth, of the Church of Rome
uses these words: With Rome we dare not communicate concerning her sundry
gross and grievous abominations: yet touching those maine parts of Christian
truth, wherein they constantly still persist, we gladly acknowledge them to be
of the family of Jesus Christ: Thus Hooker. But a little page 127.
before he discourses thus: In S. Paul's time the integrity of Rome was famous;
Corinth many ways reproved, they of Galatia much more out of square. In S.
John's time Ephesus and Smirna in far better state, then Thiatira and Pergamus
were. We hope therefore, that to reform our selves (if at any time we have done
amiss) is not to sever our selves from the Church we were of before: In the
Church we were, and we are so still. Hitherto are Hookers words; in which he
seems to me, plainly to affirm, both that the Church of Rome is a true
Church, and also that it is no diverse Church from that of the Protestants of
England: which I think this learned man would not have said, if he had
imagined the Pope to be Antechrist. But this confession of our adversaries
notwithstanding, briefly I thus confute the aforesaid untrue and absurd
opinion of others.

In the scripture we find that Antechrist shall deny Jesus to be Christ; who is
a liar (says S. John) but he who denies that Jesus is Christ? 1. John 2.
verse 22.
this is Antechrist which denies the Father and the Son. He shall also
affirm himself to be Christ, and the Jews shall receive him for their true
Messiah as we gather our of these words of our Savior unto the said Jews: If
an other come in his own name, John 5. Iren. li. 5. Ciril catech. 15. Ambros.
in c. 21. Luc. 2. Thessal. 2. verse. 4.
him you will receive. That he shall affirm himself to be Christ we are taught
by S. Irenaeus, S. Ciril Bishop of Jerusalem, S. Ambrose and others. That the
Jews shall receive him as Christ, it is avouched by all the Fathers. Moreover,
Antechrist shall publicly name himself to be God, and covet to be worshipped as
the only God: this is manifest out of these words of the Apostle; He shall be
extolled above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he sits
in the temple of God showing himself as though he were God. These be some of
the properties of Antechrist set down in the word of God: but none of these
agree unto the Pope; for he neither denies Christ, nor affirms himself to be
Christ, or is accepted as Christ by the Jews; finally, he is not worshipped as
God, but worshipeth God: therefore he is not Antechrist. Add also, that
Antechrist shall be but one man, he shall come immediately before the day of
judgment, he shall reign but three years and an half, and that at Jerusalem,
as is evidently gathered out of the same holy scripture, and all the holy
Fathers: by which likewise appears the falsehood of our adversaries assertion.

But to impugn and overthrow the primacy of the Pope, they al make diverse
objections: and although it were a very easy matter here to show the weakness
of them al, yet I should exceed mine intended breuity. I will therefore answer
only two, the one commonly used by them al, and (as they think) of greatest
force, the other much urged by M. Field. Galath. 2. verse 11.
The first is taken out of that place of S. Paul, where he affirms that he
resisted S. Peter in face, because he was reprehensible: the second out of a
decree (as Field says) of the Council of Chalcedon: I will answer (I say)
briefly these, that by the weakness of them, the reader may judge of the
strength of others, which are of less force then these. And to begin with the
first; as in other places so in this, Bibl. anno 1592.
our English Puritan Geneuians falsify the text of holy scripture, to make
it seem the better for them. For whereas the Apostle says, that he resisted
S. Peter in face, that is: publikelie in presence of al, Bibl. anno 1592.
or (as they say in their marginal note) before al men, they contrarying their
own exposition and Bezaes also, in the text make S. Paul say, that he
withstood S. Peter to his face, imagining thereby the more to disgrace the
superiority of S. Peter: for every man knows, that it is not al one to
reprehend or resist a man publicly, and to resist him to his face. This being
noted, let us now first see what the ancient Fathers write, Ciprian epist.
71. ad Quintum Numb. 2. August. li. 2. de Baptism. ca. 1.
concerning this controversy between these holy Apostles. S. Cipran (whose
sentence is also alleged by S. Augustine) discoursing of the said
reprehension, uses these words: Neither Peter whom our Lord did choose the
first, and upon whom he built his Church, when Paul disputed with him of
circumcision, challenged insolently, or arrogantly took any thing to himself,
saying; that he had the primacie, and therefore that the later disciples ought
rather to obey him etc. This and more S. Ciprian: out of which his words we
may gather, that the action of S. Paul was nothing prejudicial in his opinion,
to the primacy of S. Peter. Aug. li. 2. de Baptis. cap. 1.
But was S. Peter in this case vvorthie of blame? S. Augustine thought him
faulty; for thus in one place he discourses: we have learned in the holy
scriptures that Peter the Apostle, in whom the primacie of the Apostles by
excellent grace is so praeeminent, when he did otherwise concerning
circumcision then the truth required, was corrected by Paul the later Apostle:
Tertul. de praescript. cap. 23.
thus S. Augustine. And this opinion long before him was taught by Tertullian,
who tells us, that the Heretics of his days (whose disciples the new
sectaries seem to be) alleged this reprehension of S. Peter, to prove the
Apostles ignorance: but he answers, that the error or fault was of
conversation, and not of preaching or doctrine. Neither does this prove any
thing against S. Peter's primacie, Ciril li. 9. in Joan. Hieron. in proaemio
Comment. epistola ad Galatas.
for we deny not but the Pope of Rome may err in conversation, and be
consequently admonished, by his inferiors. S. Ciril records, that Julian the
Apostata objected the same reprehension against Christians. S. Hierom first
tells us, that wicked Porphiry an Apostata, charged S. Paul of envy and
malepert boldness, and S. Peter of error. Secondly he teaches us, that there
was neither fault in S. Peter nor in S. Paul, which opinion is at large most
learnedly explicated and defended by Cardinal Baronius, in the first tome of
his ecclesiastical annuals. And briefly with him I answer, that although S.
Peter was reprehensible in this sense, that of his action a thing might follow
vvorthie of reprehension; yet in very truth it is certain, that neither S.
Peter nor S. Paul did amiss. For first we must suppose, Acts 15. v. 23. etc.
that although in the Council of Jerusalem celebrated before that time (of
which in the acts of the Apostles) it was decreed, that the Gentiles
converted to Christ, were not bound to observe the old law of the Jews; yet
nothing was there decreed for the freeing of the Jews from the same: yea,
although they were in very deed by the law of grace, released of that burden;
yet for avoiding of scandal, and that the said old law might be buried with
honor, they for some time observed them very religiously. Hence after the
aforesaid Council, the Apostles themselves observed diverse ceremonies of the
old law: Act. 16.3.
for example, S. Paul himself circumcised Timothee; yea after this altercation
with S. Peter, he following the advice of S. James, and the priests assembled
at Jerusalem, Acts 21. verse 26. 1. Corint. 9. v. 20.
according to the law of Moises, purified himself in the temple of Jerusalem.
Thence proceed these his words: I became a Jew to the Jews, that I might
gain the Jews. As it was therefore lawful for the Jews to forsake the old
law, and live as the converted Gentiles did; so also it was lawful for a time
unto them (according as time and place required, especially for avoiding of
scandal) to use the said ceremonies of the old law. This moved S. Peter living
at Antioch with S. Paul, although being the Apostle, unto whom the rest of the
Apostles had committed the especial patronage of the Jews, to live with the
rest as a converted Gentile, and so to transgress the law of Moises. But
certain Jews coming from Jerusalem, where the Christian Jews yet observed
the said law, that being their patron he might not give any scandal, he
retired himself from the rest, and began to live as the strangers did. This
action of his, diverse of the rest of the Jews of Antioch followed: yea, S.
Barnabas himself being S. Paul's companion, took this course among the rest,
which S. Paul being the patron of the Gentiles beholding, he reprehended S.
Peter for his Iudaical conversation, affirming that by his example, he drew al
to observe the law of Moises. This is briefly the history of this matter, as
it is plainly gathered out of the place of S. Paul alleged. Hence it
appears that not only S. Peter's action, but also S. Paul's reprehension was
laweful, and necessary: for S. Peter by his action, removed al scandal from
the Jews: S. Paul also by his reprehension, removed the like from the
Gentiles. And thus much of the first objection.

Field discoursing of the Patriarcke of Constantinople, Book 3. chapter 1.
uses these words: In the second general Council holden at Constantinople, he
was preferred before the other Patriarks of Alexandria and Antioch, and set in
degree of honor next unto the Bishop of Rome. In the great Council of
Chalcedon, he was made equal with him, and to have al equal rites, privileges
and prerogatives, because he was Bishop of new Rome, as the other of old: thus
Field. And upon this ground in the next chapter, Chap. 2.
he enters into a railing and scoffing discourse against the Pope. But (in
very deed) I cannot do otherwise then marvel, that a man of his place and
learning, does not blush to commit such a notorious untruth, to the print and
view of the world: For not to speak of the falsehood of the first part of his
assertion, because it is in some sort impertinent, that which he says of the
Council of Chalcedon is most untrue, repugnant to al antiquity, and not only
contrary to al proceedinges, and the history of the said Council; but also to
the words of the Canon by him alleged. For in it is decreed only, that the
city of new Rome or Constantinople, shall have majesty (like as old Rome) in
Ecclesiastical affairs, et secundam post illam existere, that is, shall be the
second or next after it, and enjoy certain privileges for the ordination of
some Metrapolitans: these are the contents of the Canon. And what more touching
this matter, did the Bishops assembled in that Council, in their Sinodical
epistle desire S. Leo the great then bishop of Rome to confirm, then this?
Concilium Chalcedo^. sessio 12. alias action 16. An. Christi 451. Concilium
Nice. sessio vltim. Co^ci. Chal. action 1. Action 3.
We have confirmed (say they) the rule of the seauenscore and ten holy Fathers,
which were gathered together at Constantinople under Theodosius of happy
memory, which commanded that the Sea of Constantinople (which is ordained the
second) have second honor after your most holy and Apostolic See, trusting
that the Apostolical sunne-beame shining with you, etc. But how can it be the
second and next after, and also the equal with it, as Field affirms? Besides
this, in the Council it self those words of the Canon of the Council of Nice,
that the Church of Rome ever had the primacie, were allowed; and the Legates of
Pope Leo without reprehension or exception taken, said: We have here at hand,
the commandments of the most blessed and Apostolic man the Pope of the city
of Rome, which is head of al Churches, by which his Apostleship has vouchsafed
to command etc. Again, one of them first subscribed (as he said) in the place
of the most blessed and Apostolic universal Pope of the city of Rome, etc.
And in the epistle, all the Fathers write unto him thus: We crave therefore,
that you will honor our decrees with your judgment, and like as we desirous,
have consented in those things which are good: sic et summitas tua: so thy
chiefedome (or pre-eminence above al) will (as it is meet) accomplish them to
his children: hitherto are their words. And what could be said more apparent
for the Popes supreamacie? Do not they acknowledge him to be their chief, and
themselves his sons and children? Gregor. li 4. epi. 32. 36. 38. li. 7. epi.
30. See before in the first section of this chapter.
I could add to this the authority of S. Gregory the great, who lived not
long after this Council; who against the ambition of John bishop of
Constantinople in diverse letters confidentlie affirms, that the title of
universal Bishop by this Council, was offered to Pope Leo.

But Field will urge, that it is gathered out of some Greek copies of this
Council, that by this Canon the Bishop of Constantinople was so made second
after the Bishop of Rome, that equal privileges were given him. I answer,
that these privileges were only concerning jurisdiction, to order certain
Metrapolitans of the east Church, as the Bishop of Rome had the like in the
west. But now suppose I should grant M. Field, that in this Canon the Bishop
of Constantinople, was made in every respect equal to the Pope: what would he
get by this? In truth nothing. For of what authority is this Canon? Surely of
none, for it was cunningly made by the Grecian bishops after the Council was
risen, and the Legates of Pope Leo departed, who also when it came to their
knowledge the next day, resisted them in the next Session: yea, this was never
confirmed by the Pope, without whose confirmation the decrees of general
Councels have never had force; but was by Pope Leo forthwith overthrown and
annulled. Leo epist. 55. 53. 54. 61.
We cancel or make void (says he speaking of that Canon and others then
enacted) the consent of Bishops repugnant to the Nicene Canons: and by the
authority of blessed S. Peter the Apostle, by a general definition we make them
altogether of no force. And this his decree was so highly esteemed in the East
it self, Marcian. l. 12. c. de sacrosa^cta Ecclesia.
that it was confirmed presently by an Imperial constitution, even by the
Emperor of Constantinople: and Anatolius the Patriarcke through whose
ambition and instigation the said Canon was made, was constrained to cease
from such proceedinges, to relinquish that dignity which ambitioussie he
covered, and to take place even after the other Patriarchs; for neither was the
constitution of the Council of Constantinople, which preferred him before those
of Alexandria and Antioch, authentical. Justin. nouel. 131. cap. 2. Field book
3. cap. 1.
Yea Justinian the Emperor after this (even when Rome was most in disgrace and
Constantinople flourished, long before the days of Phocas, from whom Field
would derive the beginning of the Popes superiority) confirmed the primacy to
the Bishop of Rome: and thus we may see, upon how vveake grounds Field does
venture to pass the bounds of modesty.

Concerning the point it self of the Popes infallible judgment, he accuses us
of contrary doctrine, to wit: that we al hold at this day, Field book 3. cap.
45.
the infallibility of the Popes judgment, to be the rock on which the Church is
builded, and therefore build our faith upon the same: whereas the same men
(sath he) that hold this, say also it is no matter of faith to acknowledge or
not acknowledge the infallibity of the Popes judgment. I answer, that the
infallibility of the Popes judgment without the assent of a general Council, is
not the most sure and received rock, on which the Church was built: for this is
the Popes judgment confirming the decrees of a general Council, or (as I may
say) the definition of a general Council, in which the head confirms the
verdict of the body, and both together infallibly define a truth. And in this
sense no Catholic now affirms, that it is no matter of faith to acknowledge
or not acknowledge, the infallibility of the Popes judgment: for it is held
absolutely to be a matter of faith; and consequently, our doctrine touching
these points is not contrary. True it is, Bell. li. 4. de Roman. pontif. ca. 2.
in fine. Stapleton in Relect. scholast. princi. controuers. 3, quest. 4.
that some Catholic doctors (as Bellarmine and Stapleton) think not that
opinion properly heretical, which holds that the Pope as Pope may be an
Heretic and teach heresy, if he define without a general Council (so far
are we from making all the Popes words divine oracles, as some Protestants
falsely pretend:) but nevertheless they deem this opinion to be erroneous,
and most near unto heresy. Neither does this their assertion, contradict that
commonly auerred; that the decrees of the Pope without a general Council in the
sense above mentioned, are a rock or ground of faith: for although the whole
Church has not yet authentically defined, that the Pope after this sort cannot
err? yet the scriptures and other arguments brought in this behalf, are so
plain and forcible, and the consent of al learned and pious men (except some
few) is so consonant and strong for this point, that every man may well admit
his definitions, as a ground of supernatural faith. And so we may truly say,
both it is no matter of faith, to acknoweledge or not acknowledge in this sort,
the infallibility of the Popes judgment in this sense, that the whole Church
has not as yet defined either part to be a divine truth; and yet hold the
infallibility of the Popes judgment to be a Rock of faith in this sense,
that every man for the authorities and reasons alleged, may prudently build
upon it an act of supernatural faith. And thus much of the primacy of the
Bishop of Rome, and his decrees. I have been the longer in this discourse,
Vergerius dialago 1. contra Hosium.
because some Protestants affirm the denial of this supremacy or superiority,
to be not only the foundation of their new religion; but also a good part of
the edifice built thereupon.

Chapter 11. Of the consent of the ancient Fathers, and the general doctrine
of the Catholic Church in all ages.
CONCERNING the testimony of antiquity touching matters of faith and
religion, found in the works of such ancient doctors, as from the Apostles
days have flourished through al ages in Christ's church, and have been and are
esteemed by her, as fathers and masters of christian faith; learned men give us
these rules. First those things which they say (as it were by the way, and
treating of another thing) are to be distinguished from such sentences, as they
pronounce of such matters as they purposlie handle: for their sayings of the
first kind are of small, those of the other of greater authority. Secondly,
that which is said by any one of them but once, is not so much to be
credited, as that which is often and constantly repeated. But principally we
must make a difference, between that which they say in disputation or
contention with their adversaries, and that which is affirmed positiuelie as a
true conclusion, according to the argument of which they treat: for an
authority of the first sort is little to be esteemed, of the latter greatly.
Touching their assertions in general, this is to be observed: First, when the
opinion of any father touching matters of faith, is singular and contradicted
by all, or most of the rest, it is rather to be thought an error then a truth.
Secondly, when one or two only affirm a thing of that subject, and the rest
make no mention of it, their testimonies make a probable, not a certain
argument. Thirdly, what doctrine soever concerning any point of Christian
religion, is commonly found in all the ancient Fathers works, where mention is
of that point, and is held by them as an article of the said religion, and
contradicted by none of the rest without the note of singularity, error, or
heresy imposed upon them by others; such doctrine may well be thought to
pertain to the rule of faith, descending by Tradition from the Apostles, and
is to be embraced as an article of our belief. The truth of this last rule
which touches most my purpose, is gathered out of that which has been
already said; for I have declared, that neither the Church can err, nor the
tradition of Christian faith in it preserved be overthrown or altered: but if
we admit a possibility of error in all such Fathers works touching matters of
such consequence, both of these assertions may be proved false. For an error
in faith found in most of the Fathers without contradiction of any other,
argues an error in all believers, not only of the ages in which those Fathers
flourished, but also in all times ensuing; because that doctrine which is
delivered by most as an article of faith, without any opposition of others, may
well be demed to be the doctrine of all the faithful, who oppose not themselves
against it, and consequently of the whole Church. Wherefore, if that be proved
erroneous, of it we may infer an error in all sorts of christians, and
consequently a change of the rule of faith received by tradition. Moreover,
although we should set aside the warrant of the Church and tradition, from
error; who will think it possible that the Fathers should after this sort
depart from the truth, and conspire in error without any, or (at the least)
without any great contradiction? Is not nouelty commonly discovered and
oppugned? And of this I gather, that their agreement seems an infallible
argument of the truth of their doctrine: yea, that they al held sincerely the
tradition delivered them by their predecessors. And this moved the holy
fathers assembled in general Councels (as appears by the acts of the said
councels) to make great search into the works of their forefathers, and of the
ancient doctors, as also to use them as a principal mean to find out the rule
of faith, by the said tradition preserved in the church. Finally, by their
testimonies to direct very much their definitions and decrees in particular; S.
Athanasius records, Athanas. epist. ad Afros.
that the Bishops who were present in the first Council of Nice, followed the
testimonies of the ancient Fathers: and that the same was done in those of
Ephesus and Chalcedon, the bishops themselves assembled also testify; who
affirm in their definitions yet extant, that in them they follow the holy
Fathers.

Ephesians. 4. v. 11. etc.
Further, we are taught by the Apostle, that Christ gave some Apostles (I use S.
Paul's words) and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other some
Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints unto the work of the
ministry, unto the edifying of the body of Christ, until we meet al into the
unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of God, into a perfect man, into the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ: that now we be not children
wavering, and carried about with every wind of doctrine in the wickedness of
men, in craftines to the circumuention of error: Hitherto the Apostle. In
which his discourse in plain terms he tells us, that Christ appointed
Apostles and other such like officers in his Church until the day of judgment,
for the instruction of his people, and to keep them from wavering in faith and
errors in religion. Of which I infer, that not only the Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, who planted, ruled, and instructed the
Church presently after Christ's Ascension, are to believed and obeyed: but also,
that the like credit is to be given to their successors, who in all ages
following have supplied, and shall ever until the day of judgment supply their
places; and consequently, that they also have been and are directed in all
truth, otherwise they might have wauered and erred themselves, and so have
drawn the whole Church to such inconveniences. Seeing therefore, that the
fathers of the Church in their ages have supplied such places, it must needs
follow, that they have enjoyed the like privileges and prerogatives.
Moreover, the Jews were bound to hear and obey the Scribes and Pharisees of
the old law, as we are taught by these words of Christ: Math. 23. v. 2. and 3.
Upon the chair of Moises have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees; al things
therefore whatsoever they shall say to you, observe ye, and do ye. Who then will
be so impudent as to say, that Christians are not bound to hear and obey the
prelates of the Church? Luke 10. see also Math. 10. and Ioh. 13. Iren. li. 4.
cap. 4.
especially seeing that of them Christ has said, He that hears you hears
me, and he that despises you despises me: which words argue as great truth
in their doctrine, as there is in the doctrine of Christ, who is truth it
self. Hence S. Irenaeus tells us, that we ought to obey those who have
succession from the Apostles, who together with the succession of their
Bishopriks, have received the gifts or privileges of truth. And although these
sentences, are principally verified in the prelates of the Church assembled in
a general Council: yet, they must needs also be confessed true in the whole
body of them, in all ages dispersed through the whole world; and in every one
of them, when he teaches and delivers us the doctrine of the universal
Church.

Finally, the ancient Fathers are most pregnant and faithful witnesses of that
Depositum or sum of Chistian doctrine, which they received from their
predecessors, and delivered to their successors. They are also most
indifferent judges of al controversies after their days arising in the Church,
because they lived before ever any such controversy was moved; and therefore
are partial of no side. Aug. cont. Iulianuni li. 2. c. 10.
Hence are these words of S. Augustine to the Pelagians concerning this
matter: They (he speaks of the Fathers that lived before him) were angry
neither with you nor with us; they favored neither you nor us: That which they
found in the Church they held fast, that which they learned they taught, that
which they received of their Fathers they delivered to their children: Hitherto
S. Augustine. This moved the same holy Father and diverse others, to appeal so
often to the judgment of their predecessors, and to cite their testimonies.
And these arguments in like manner prove, that the truth of faith and religion
always and in all ages, remains among the true Bishops and Pastors of the
Church: and consequently that at al times (even at this present) a man may
securely follow their belief and doctrine. This I say the authorities
alleged testify: for the Church must never err, her prelates are always to
stay us from wavering in faith etc. 1. Cor. 11. verse 16. August. epist. 118.
cap. 5. Ide^ epist. 86. ad Casula^.
And it is moreover insinuated unto us by the Apostle, in these words: But if a
man seem contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Church of God; for as
we see, in them he pleads the custom of the Church against the contentious.
And this moved S. Augustine to term it most insolent madness, to dispute
against that which the whole church holds: he tells us also, that the
custom of the people of God, or the ordinances of our ancestors are to be held
as a law in those things, in which the divine scripture prescribes nothing
certain. S. Hierome is of the same opinion: for in his dialogue against the
Luciferians, he brings in the Heretic affirming, that the consent of the
whole world has the force of a law, although it be in a matter not to be
proved by scripture; Epiphani. haeres. 75.
and makes the Catholic assent to his assertion. The like has S. Epiphanius,
who disputing against Aerius in defense of certain fasting-daies observed in
the Church, uses this argument: The Church received them, and the whole world
in it consented before Aerius was, and they which of him are called Aerians:
the same is affirmed by the rest of the Fathers.

In the last place for a ground of our faith I must add such propositions, as
are deduced out of these most certain grounds, by an evident and infallible
argument. For although it is commonly held, that in a sillogisme of one
proposition of faith, and another known only by the light of natural reason,
the conclusion is not properly of faith, but Theological, that is a conclusion
in divinity held most true: yet, certain it is, See Greg. de Vale^tia in
secu^da secu^dae disput. 1. qu. 1. pu^cto 2.
that a conclusion following in a silogisme of two propositions of faith, is
indirectly (and as the divines say) immediately de fide or of faith: as also
that proposition is, which is inferred by good and evident consequence of a
proposition of faith; because whosoever denies the proposition inferred, will
be constrained to deny the proposition or propositions, of which it is
inferred. But concerning such propositions, the unlearned if occasion be
offered, must crave instructions of the learned.

Chapter 12. Containing the conclusion of the first part.
THESE be the immovable and most firm grounds which we find in the Church of
Christ, whereon we build our faith and religion. Upon these sure foundations
as upon a firm rock, every Catholic builds his belief and salvation. And
although the articles delivered unto us by the Church, be not apparent to our
senses, nor for the most part comprehensible by reason; yet in all such matters
(according to the saying of the Apostle) We make our reason and understanding
captive unto the obedience of Christ, 2. Corint. 10. verse. 5. 1. Corint. 2.
verse. 5.
and acknowledge with the same Apostle, that our faith is not in the wisdom
of men, but in the power of God: And therefore, that in such mysteries above
reason we cannot show our selves more reasonable, then to leave off reasoning.
Genes. 18. verse. 14. Luke 1, 37. Math. 19, 26. Mat. 16, 17.
Verily, we are taught by the scripture, that nothing is hard (much less
impossible) unto God; yea, that al things are possible with him, although with
men impossible. And if scripture had not taught us this, reason it self would
easily persuade us to assent unto it, because by nature he is omnipotent. We
know also, that it is not flesh and blood that has revealed such things unto
us, but God himself, who being eternal wisdom and truth, can neither be
deceived nor deceive: wherefore, although the mysteries be obscure, let us
always be mindeful by whom we are informed of their truth, and not make the
depth of our own capacity, the rule and measure of Gods power, and of our
faith; but believe them. When either the devil or his instruments object any
thing against our belief, let us say with S. Augustine. Aug. sermon. 147. de
tempore. Ambrose in cap. 5. Lucae. Ambr. de Abraham cap. 3.
Why do we wonder? why do we not believe? it was God that did it: and with S.
Ambrose; If we believe not God whom will we believe? If a grau^ ^onourable
personage (I use the same holy Doctors comparison) in this life (especially if
he be of high degree and our better) would scorn to be asked of us a proof
for that which he affirms, how much more ought God to be credited without
proof of humane reason, when he propounds unto us a matter above man's reason
and capacity: thus in effect S. Ambrose.

And how weak and feeble our reason and understanding is, we may easily
perceive by this, that it is not able to comprehend the nature or causes of
diverse things, which we daily behold with our eyes. Hence arise so many
intricate difficulties in natural philosophy, which the deepest wits and most
learned philosophers could never hitherto unfold. For example, what philosopher
has ever hitherto yielded a certain cause without any contradiction, of the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea? Yea, how many things are there in man's body
it self, which move no small difficulties to philosophers? as the forming of
it in the mothers womb, the concoction and distribution of nourishment, the
growing of it to a due proportion and stature, etc. What shall we say of the
five senses, by which our understanding comes to the knowledge of external and
corporal things? how strange is their operation? what great and huge bodies
are together truly represented in the little compass of the aple of the eye?
But I can not stand to discourse of them in particular. If we look up to the
heavens, how can we conceive the huge bodies of the planets, seeming to our
senses so small, their certain and swift motion, and their nature it self most
admirable? And if we cannot without great difficulty and discourse, comprehend
these ordinary matters, how dare we by our weak wit, measure the omnipotent
power of God, and think him able to do no more then we can conceive?

Moreover, if God had not made al things of nothing by his only word, we
should hardly imagine such a creation to be possible; seeing that it is a rule
among natural age^ts, that of nothing nothing is made. If God himself had not
revealed unto us, that in the most blessed Trinity the same simple essence or
substance is in three persons, which therefore make but one God, we should
hardly have believed it; seeing that among us every person has a distinct
substance or essence. If faith did not teach us, that in Christ two natures the
one of God the other of man make one person, it would seem incredible; seeing
that among us e^^^ie nature makes a distinct person. Come a little lower, if
our Savior had not told us, Mat. 19. verse 26. John 20, 19. and 26.
that a camel by the power of God may be made to pass through the eye of an
needle, who would have believed it? If Christ had not entered into his disciples
the doors being shut, who would have thought it possible? If then our
understanding can not naturally comprehend these mysteries, which nevertheless
every Christian must confess to be true, we may very well think with our
selves, that other such like which Heretics deny, may likewise be even as
certain, although our understanding can not reach to the apprehension of them;
seeing that they are no more repugnant to reason then the former, but like as
they above reason, and proceed from the same omnipotent power of God.
Certainly, The works of God (as we are taught by S. Gregory) if they were
comprehensible by reason, Gregor. hom. 26. in Euan.
were not admirable: neither has faith (says he) any merit, when humane
reason yields an experiment, or makes the thing evident; for the less
evidence that our reason has in matters of faith, so that the things be
propounded unto us with sufficient prudential motives proving divine
revelation, the more we merit in believing, according to those words of our
Savior: John 20. verse 29.
Blessed are they who have not seen and have believed.

And therefore concerning those works of God principally, which by faith we
are bound to believe, Chrisost. homil. 21. in Genes.
let us follow the learned advise of S. John Chrysostom, contained in these
his words following. When God does any thing (says he) do not thou examine
those things which are done by human reason, for they exceed our
understanding: and man's thought or imagination can not reach and comprehend the
reason of those things, which are made and done by God. Wherefore it is meet,
that we hearing what God commanded, obey and believe those things which are
said by him, for seeing that he is the founder of nature, he does order and
transform al things as he thinks good: hitherto Saint John Chrysostom.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF THIS TREATISE, SHOWING THE GROVNDES OF the new religion.
In which is proved, that the new Sectaries build their faith upon no divine
authority, but that the ground of al their belief and religion is their own
judgment; and consequently, that they have neither true faith, nor religion.
Chapter 1. That by their doctrine they deny or at the least weaken, the three
principal and general grounds of Christian religion, set down in the three
first chapters of the first part.
SECTION THE FIRST. The number of Atheists among them is great, and of the
causes by them given of this impiety.
IN the three first chapters of the first part of this treatise, I have proved
three principal grounds of our religion, to wit: the being of God and his
divine providence, the immortallity of the soul of Man, and the truth of
Christianity. Now, perhaps the title of this chapter to some may seem very
strange, and my accusation of our adversaries; that by their doctrine they
deny or weaken these grounds, very slanderous and injurious: but I desire no
more credit in this matter, then the reasons I shall bring will yield, which if I
obtain of my reader, I doubt not but I shall free my self of al suspicion of
offering them any wrong.

But first I must declare, that in this section I intend not to accuse all the
new Sectaries of Atheism; for I know very well that they teach and commonly
believe there is a God: neither do I intend to affirm, that the same man can
properly be termed a new sectarie and Atheist; but mine assertion only is,
that a great number of such as are in outward show professors of the new
religion, are (in very deed) inwardly profane Atheists, and that the said
new religion is a very fountain of Atheism. And in proof of the first part
of this assertion, I need not use many words or long discourses: for so it is,
that diverse principal professors and followers of this new belief, confess
and acknowledge a great number of such impious and irreligious persons,
Zauchius in his epistle before his confession. pa. 7.
to be in their congregations. Of foreign sectaries Zauchius affirms, that
among other monsters Atheism has been fetched out of hell, by the ministers of
satan, in some of the reformed Churches. Of our own countrymen Whitg. i^ his
defense tract. 3. cap. 6. page 278. See also Hooker i^ his 5. book of
ecclesiast. policy 2. Mornay i^ his treatise of the proof of christian religion.
Whitgift complains, that the Church of England is replenished with Atheists.
The same complaints have Hedio, Powel, Parks, and others, as will appear by
some of their sentences which I shall relate hereafter. To come therefore to the
second part: seeing that this impiety reigns now more among our adversaries,
then it has done in former ages among Christians, in which such monsters
were not so usually found and commonly seen, it is like that it has some
root and offspring in these days among them, which appeared not in the
religion of our forefathers and predecessors. And what is this root? surely
it is not one, but diverse. And for the first cause of this blasphemy, I
assign their dissension and inconstancy concerning matters of faith and
religion, without any certain ground vvhereon to build their belief, or mean
of ending and deciding such controversies as arise. That their doctrine is
subject to these inconveniences, it shall at larg be proved hereafter. That such
dissension, inconstancy, want of firm ground and mean to end
controversies, may truly be said to be roots and fountains of Atheism, it is
apparent; because of these things may well be inferred an uncertainty of truth
(which is always one and constant to her self) and no divine foundation of
the religion professed, or revelations of the truths preached, because things
proceeding from God (whose wisdom and providence are infinite) cannot be
subject to such absurdities. Hence diverse being first, by the false calumnies
and unjust slanders of their ringleaders, clean auerted from our religion, in
which only a sure ground, an immouable rock of faith, and a firm pillar of
truth are found; then in their new profession, being tossed hither and thither
concerning the articles of their faith, and finding no certain authority
whereon to rest, or firm foundation whereon to build a firm and undoubted
resolution, are brought finally to this, that they think al articles to be of
an uncertain truth, and consequently imagine religion to be but a politic
invention of man, and so become Atheists. S. Hillarie even in his days
complained, Hillar. lib. ad Constantium Augustum.
that the Arian heretics by these means, of Christians made Atheists: these
are his words. Perilous and miserable it is, that there are now so many faiths
as wills, and so many doctrines as manners: whiles either faiths are so written
as we will, or as we will are so understood. And whereas according to one God, and
one Lord, and one baptism, there is also one faith, they fall away from that
which is the only faith, and whiles no faiths are made, they begin to come to
this, that there is none at al: hitherto S. Hillarie. But let us hear certain
Protestants declare unto us the truth of that, which has been here said
touching this offspring of this impiety in their congregations. Relation of the
state of religion used in the western parts of the world. 45. printed at London
anno 1605.
And first a Protestant relator of the state of religion used in the western
parts of the world, discourses thus: The division of Protestants into their
factions of Lutherans and Caluinists, threateneth a great ruin and calamity of
both sides. And soon after having showed how the Lutheran preachers rage in
their pulpets against the others, he adds: The Romans have the Pope as a
common father, aduiser and conductor to them al, to reconcile their jarres, to
appease their displeasures, to decide their difference, and finally to unite
their endeavors in one course etc. to draw their religious by consent of
Councels to an unity or likeness and conformity, etc. Whereas on the contrary
side, the Protestants are as severed bands, or rather scattered troops, each
drawing adverse way, without any means to pacify their quarrels, to take up
their controversies, without any bond to knit their forces or courses in one.
No Prince, with any pre-eminence of jurisdiction above the rest, no Patriark,
one or more, to have a common superintendance or care over their Churches for
correspondencie and unity: no ordinary way to assemble a general Council of
their part, the only hope remaining ever to assuage their contentions, and the
only desire of the wisest and best minds among them. Every church almost of
theirs, has his several form and frame of government, his several liturgy
and fashion of service, and lastly some several opinion from the rest, which
though in themselves they be matters of no great moment, being no differences
essential, or any part capital; yet have they been, are, and will be as long as
they continue, causes of dislike, of jelosies, of quarrels and danger. These
contentions tend mainely to the increase of Atheism within, of Mahometisme
abroad: hitherto are the Relators words. But before him Bullenger a principal
doctor among the Sacramentaries, noted the same effect of these contentions
even in the beginning of this new religion: Bullenger in Firmamento firmo
contra Brentiu^ ca. 1. Mayor i^ orat. de cofus. dogmatum. Head. in epist. ad
Melanct.
for he vvriteth that diverse in his days, were so moved with that vehement and
implacable dissension between the Lutherans and Zuinglians concerning the
Eucharist, that as it were dispairing and being clean out of hope, they said
they would believe no more then they pleased. Major in like sort, a Lutheran of
no less same confesses, that diverse were so moved with their scandals and
dissentions, that they doubted whether there were any true Church of God extant
in the world, or no. Unto these I add Hedio a third sectary, who having
complained that there are almost one hundred twenty and eight errors among the
professors of the Gospel, and that they fall to Atheism and neglect of
religion, affirms that they assign their dissension to be the cause of these
evils. But concerning their Atheism he also afterward uses these words:
The Popedom is rejected, and names are not given to Christ: The youth has
almost nothing of God. And what shall we say of our Church of England? has
not the dissension among Protestants and Puritanes brought men to the same
pass? Parkes in the epistle dedicatorie before his Apology of three
testimonies of holy scripture, etc.

Hillar. l. aduersus Constantium.


Verily Parkes a Protestant writer, having discoursed of such contention here
at home affirms, that by it settled minds are distracted, the parts of the
same body dismembered, and religion it self brought to be a matter of mere
dispute and altercation, not without fear (says he) that it befall unto us, as
it did to the builders of Babel, or to the brethren of Cadmus. He has also
these words: These contentions are no small preparatiues to Atheism, in that
we may now say as Hillarie said of his time; that there are so many faiths, as
will, and so many doctrins as manners of men, whils either we write them as we
list, or understand them as we please: in so much that many are brought even to
their wits end, not knowing what to do. Amidst al which miseries and mischiefs
the Papists insult and triumph, to se those that profess themselves brethren,
to be at such deadly fewd among themselves: thus Parks. To the same effect
writes Powel, who avouches; that through this dissension together with other
inconveniences from it flowing by him recited, Many for want of knowledge are
wrapped in ignorance, do not call upon God, but fly God. Many fall into an
Epicurian contempt of religion, and are oppressed with despair. And thus much
of the first root of Atheism among our adversaries.

A second reason of the multitude of atheists among them, I deem to be the
liberty which they give to every person, to examine sundry of the high
mysteries of Christian religion, by the rule and measure of their own feeble
understanding; and according to their own fancies to frame interpretations of
scripture. For this liberty the principal Sectaries having taken to themselves,
they have consequently (as Tertullian long since noted in Heretics) both by
example and otherwise given the same to every one of their followers. Tert. de
praescript. c. 42. Calvin lib. 4. Instit. cap. 17. 20.
For example, Calvin tells the defenders of the real presence, that howsoever
they cry out that they be touched with reverence of the words of Christ,
whereby they do not figuratively understand those things that were plainly
spoken: yet, that this is not a pretense rightful enough, why they should so
refuse all the reasons which they object to the contrary. And what reasons
brings he and others against it? Their common arguments are: that the same
body cannot be at the same instant in sundry places; that so great a corporal
body cannot be in so small a room; that the accidents of bread and wine cannot
be without a subject; that it repugneth to the nature of a body to be wholly in all, and wholly in every part of the Host. But who sees not that by this manner
of proceeding and arguing, they give occasion to Atheists to impugn the truth
of the B. Trinity, the presence of God in all places, the incarnation of Christ,
the resurrection of our bodies, the immortallity of our souls, and other such
like articles? For like as they affirm the real presence to be impossible,
because the same body cannot be at the same instant in sundry places: so may
an Atheist argue, that it repugneth that the self same nature without any
distinction should be in three distinct persons, or that the self same bodies
being once corrupted should rise again. Nay it is certain, that some of our
late adversaries have in very deed, pleaded this argument of impossibility
against the B. Trinity. Moreover, Theodosius Schimberg. epist. praefixa
scriptis Joan. So^meri. Thedorus Dorchius li. Germanico quo defe^ dit dogmata
Francis. Dauidis.
like as they impugn the real presence, because so great a body cannot be in
so small a place, nor the accidents of bread and wine without a subject, nor
the body of Christ wholly in the whole, and wholly in every part of the Host etc.
So may an Atheist dispute against the incarnation, that it is repugnant that
two natures should be united in one person, because no substance can be without
a proper subsistence, which is even as natural unto it, as inherence is to an
accident; against the presence of God in every place, and the spiritual nature
of the soul, because neither God can be wholly in the whole, and wholly in
every part of the world, as they may falsely imagine; nor the soul of man
wholly in the whole, and wholly in every part of his body. And although these
arguments (in very deed) overthrow not the truth of these mysteries and
articles of our belief, yet are they even as hard to answer, as any of those
which our adversaries bring against the real presence. Wherefore, like as for
the aforesaid reasons they reject the one as false: so do they give occasion
to Atheists for the like reasons to reject the others. And upon this ground of
measuring al things by their feeble understanding, built those sectaries in
Germany, Iacobus Curio in rebus chronolog. anno 1566. p. 151 impress. Basil.
who as Iacobus Curio a Protestant reports, laughed Moises to scorn, for
giving Adam and his progeny an age which exceeds the measure and vvarrantize
of nature; and this is the next step to Atheism. And because the
Sacramentaries much more then the Lutherans, rely upon natural reason in
matters of faith, hence perhaps it proceeded, that Brentius a Lutheran (whom
Jewel calls a most grave and learned man) foretold, Jewel in the defense of
the Apol. part 4. c. 19.20. 1.

Brentius in recognit. etc. in fide, et in Bullengeri Coron. de anno 1564.


that it would in short time come to pass, that by the Zuinglians the heresy
of Nestorius would be brought again into the Church, and nothing more would
remain of the articles of our religion, but Paganism, Talmudisme or Iudaisme;
and Mahometisme would be brought into the Church.

Thirdly, sin (which now through these sectaries licentious doctrine
abounds among them, as I will declare in my treatise of the notes of the
Church) brings them also to Atheism: for besides that continual carnal
pleasures dull and darken the understanding, and make it unapt to conceive the
articles of our faith; custom and delight in sin, breed also a desire of
sinning without restraint or scruple of conscience, which desire makes them
unwilling to think of spiritual matters, and moves them to accept of any
persuasions whatsoever, be they never so absurd, disprouing those articles of
our faith, which usually move men to fear of punishment due to sinful actions.

In the fourth place I add their blasphemous doctrine against God, by which
they make him a tirant, in commanding us to do things which are not in our
power, (for they That this is their doctrine I will prove at large in my
treatise of the definition and notes of the Church.
hold his commandments to be impossible) and damning us everlastingly for
not performing that, which he knows us not able to do. They make him
likewise (as I may say) a devil, in being the cause of our sin and
wickedness; of which crime Calvin is accused by diverse Heshusius l. cui
titulus est Aliquot errores Caluini. Petr. Vermelius a zuinglian in lib. 2.
Reg. cap. 6.

Grawerus in bello Ioa^nis Caluini et Jesus Christi. pri^ted an. 1605. et lib.
qui inscribitur Absurda, absurdorum, absurdissima, Caluinistica absurda.
pri^ted also an. 1605


Protestants of great fame. And this last assertion made one apprehended at
Mets in France, an Atheist (as Duraeus co^tra Whitak. i^ confut. respo^. ad
10. ratio. page 432.
Duraeus records) who being brought before the Magistrates, and demanded how
he came to be of that blaspheamous opinion? answered, that he learned it out of
Caluins Institutions. For (said he) reading there that God is the author of
sin, I thought it better to deny that there is a God, then to acknowledge a
God so wicked: thus he. And (in very deed) Basil in bomil. Quod deus non est
auctor malorum.
S. Basil tells us, that it is the same madness to deny God and to make him
the author of sin. An other of our adversaries named Historia Dauidis Georgij
printed at Antwerpe anno 1560. published by the Protestants of Basil.
David George affirmed himself to be Christ, and oppugned our Savior and his
Church with this argument: If the doctrine of Christ (said he) and his Apostles
had been true and perfect, certainly the Church by them planted could not
have perished; for Jesus said, that hell gates should not prevail against it.
But it is manifest and known to al men, that the Church has perished, and
that Antechrist has now for many ages reigned over the whole world:
wherefore, the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles was false and imperfect.
This he argued against his own brethren the new sectaries, who affirm that
the Church of Christ was overthrown.

And although the same assertion brought not Sebastian Castalio (a man much
commended by some Humfred de rat. interpret. lib. 1. page 62. 63. Zuingerus in
Theatro. Gesnerus and others.
Protestants) so far; yet every man may see by his own writing, that it made
him very doubtful, wavering, and perplexed in faith: in so much as he plainly
professed, Sebastian Castalio. i^ his praeface of the great lat i^ Bible
dedicated to K. Edward the 6.
that he could not see how the oracles or prophecies of the old Testament
concerning the glory and continuance of the Church, have been hitherto
fulfilled in the new: and in very deed it is evident, that they have not
been verified if our religion be condemned as false.

SECTION THE SECOND. Of our adversaries doctrine concerning the immortallity of
the soul, heaven and hell.
BUT far greater is the number of those among the new Sectaries, who deny
the soul of man to be immortal. And first Luther himself may not only be
truly accused of laying a certain foundation or ground of this damnable error,
but also (if we take his words as they sound) to be a maintainer of the same:
for whereas it is commonly held by all Christians, that the soul of man is
created by almighty God, when the body in the mothers womb is apt to receive
it, Luther favors that erroneous opinion of Tertullian very much, and
seems to approve it, which defends the soul of man to have his being from
his Parents, and consequently, Luther in disput. Theolo. habita Wittenbergae
a^no 1545. Thessi 31.
denies it to be created of God: his words are these. They (says he) who
deemed the soul to be extraduce, that is, by generation produced, seem not
altogether do have dissented from scripture; yea, these will more easily defend
the propagation of original sin then they who think otherwise: vt nihil sit
quod dicitur, so that it is nothing which is said: the intellectual soul
creando infunditur, in the creation of it is infused, et in fundendo creatur,
and in the infusion of it is created: who proved this or who will prove, that
the like may be said of every other soul? what difficulty can hinder God from
producing the intellectual soul, both of nothing and also of corrupt seed?
thus Luther. Ce^tur. 5. c. 4. Dress. de partibus humani corporis etc. cap. de
origin animae.
And in this he is followed by the Century writers, who note the denial of this
in S. Augustine as an error: and of the same opinion is Dresserus also. But
what is this, but to make no difference between the soul of man and the
souls of brute beasts? does not Luther make the generation of al these alike?
nay what other thing is this, but (according to the common received opinion of
philosophers) to make the soul mortal? Surely it is usually held in schools,
that whatsoever is produced by natural generation, is mortal and corruptible:
And no doubt but if the generation of man and beast be granted to be alike,
occasion is offered to infer also like corruption of them both. Besides this,
hither tends the opinion of Luther touching the state of souls departed,
during the time between their departure out of this world, and the day of
judgment: for what happiness or action does he attribute unto them before the
general doom? none certainly, for he avouches that they sleep; and how? his
words shall declare, which are these. To. 4. Luth. ad c. 9. Ecclesi. v. 5. et
10. Luth. enar. in Genes. c. 25. fol. 351. et in cap. 26. fol. 392. 393. Ibid.
in cap. 49. verse. 22.
The dead sleep and understand nothing of our affairs etc. they feel
nothing, they lie there dead neither numbering days or years: but being waked
they shall seem to themselves to have slept but for a moment. Again, The
sleep of the soul in the next life is more profound or sound, then in this.
Moreover, The Saints are in peace and rest, not in the kingdom; they sleep
and know not what is done: thus Luther. And for the place where the souls so
sleep, he seems to assign the grave; for he adds in another place. It is
a strange thing truly, that God makes us like unto beasts by sleeping, waking,
eating: for the soul of man sleeps all the senses being buried; and our bed
is as it were our grave, in which nevertheless is nothing paineful or
troblesome: so the place of the dead has no torments, but as it is said they
rest in peace. in c. 25. Genesis
He adds in the same place, that the sleep of the soul is so pleasant
without passion of desire, that it hops, fears, or feels nothing. In
another place above cited, he doubts whether the souls of the wicked go
presently after death to hell or else sleep: hitherto are Luthers words. And
by this assertion, Sleida^ lib. 9.
Sleidan affirms him clean to have overthrown our doctrine concerning
prayer to Saints and Purgatory: yea, Calui^ in prefat. li. de psichopamichia.
Calu. i^strust. or co^tr libert. ca. 11. et 22.

Articles of the family of love pri^ted London an. 1579.


he himself by his own words in the places cited, seems to have embraced
it to no other end. Calvin likewise insinuates, that this opinion pleased
diverse good men of his sect upon the same motive. And hence proceed both the
Libertines, who (as Calvin reports) deny altogether the immortallity of the
soul, and deride the hope of resurrection: and also the Familists, who make
the souls of al mortal, those of their own sect only exempted. But what
difference is there between Luthers opinion, and that of the Libertines?
certainly very little: and in this matter I will admit Calvin for a judge,
Calvin in Psichopamichia pa. 536.
who discourses thus: They who confess the soul does live, and together
bereave it of al sense, do truly feign a soul which has nothing of a soul,
or pull the soul it self from it self, seeing that the nature of it, without
which it can by no means have being, is to move, to feel, to be quick, and
to understand, and (as Tertullian says) the life or soul of the soul, is
sense: hitherto Calvin, who truly says that Luthers sleeping of the soul,
does impugn and overthrow the very nature of the soul. But let us moreover
behold Luthers own words, in which be may he thought in plain terms to deny
the immortallity of the soul: Luth. tom. 2. opera^ impres. Wittenbergae an.
1546. in assert. art. 27.
I permit nevertheless (says he) that the Pope make articles of his faith: and
to those that are his faithful: such as are bread and wine to be
transubstantiated in the sacrament; the essence of God neither to beget nor to
be begotten; the soul to be a substantial form of the body of man; himself
to be the Emperor of the world, and the king of heaven and an earthly God;
the soul to be immortal, and al those infinite monsters contained in the
Roman dunghill of decrees, that like as his faith is, such his gospel be and
such his faithful: thus Luther. And these words I have translated word for
word, as they are found in his book here cited in the margent, and although
none of his scholars in their public writings that I have seen, absolutely
and plainly make the soul of man mortal; yet, that this doctrine is thought
true by diverse of their company, it is avouched by Brentius, who himself being
a famous Lutheran of this point writes thus: Brentius ad c. 10. Lucae.
Although there be no public profession among us, that the soul does die
together with the body, and that there is no resurrection of the dead; yet,
that most impure and most vain life which the greatest part of men does lead
plainly shows, that they do not think there is any life after this: such
words also are let fall by some, as well by those that are drunck among their
pots, as by those that are sober in familiar conferences: thus Brentius. Hither
also tends the doctrine of Illiricus and his followers, commonly called
Substantialistes or Flaccians, concerning original sin. For they affirm this
sin to be the very substance of man, and say; that the said substance and
soul of man by the fall of Adam was transformed, changed, and corrupted. This,
diverse sentences gathered out of the works of the same Illiricus by Conradus
Schlusselburge himself a Lutheran, manifestly declare, of which some are as
follows: Conradus Schussels. in catalago haereticorum lib 2. pa. 207. ex lib.
Illirici de occas. vitand. errorem etc.
The Devil transformed mentem et rationem, the mind or soul and the reason,
into another form. The Devil turned vp-side down the very essential form it
self of the soul, took away the first essential form most good, and put
another in place of it most bad. Death by sin changed the substance of man;
man lost his essential form etc. These and other such like assertions (I say)
tend to the overthrow of our belief concerning the immortallity of the soul:
because, if these be true it must needs follow, that the soul of man is
corruptible, and consequently, of it self mortal. Beza epist. 5. page 55.
Hence Beza against this Protestant writes thus: That Ismael Illiricus has
published a book of original sin, a book not only foolish and ridiculous
but also execrable, to wit: which manifestly lays the foundation of the
doctrine of the mortallity of the soul. For if the essence of the soul can be
corrupted (as is avouched by Illiricus) truly it may die and perish: and who
can endure this assertion? thus Beza. Now if that be true which M. Field
auerreth, shall be justified against the proudest Papist of us al, that none of
the differences between Melancton and Illiricus (except about certain
ceremonies) were real: if Beza does not wrong Illiricus we may also censure
Melancton to be guilty of the same crime. But I think M. Field will hardly be so
good as his word.

And like as this hidden and secret denial of the immortallity of the soul, is
plainly by him confessed to reign in their sinagogues: so a man out of their
principles, proceedings, and behavior, may likewise gather the same secret
denial of the being of God, and of his divine providence, of which before. But
what say these sectaries touching heaven and hell? Luther verily writes thus:
Luther ad ca. 9. Ionae.
What hell is before the last day of judgment I do not yet certainly know, for
I esteem it as nothing or false, that there is a certain place in which the
souls of the damned now are, as the painters express, and those which serve
their belly preach: The devils are not in hell. Again, Idem ad cap. 25. Genes.
The Papists say the first place of hell is that of the damned, which is a
punishment of everlasting fire: but whether the souls of the wicked are
punished presently after death, I cannot affirm. It appears that they sleep
and rest, but I affirm nothing. He adds in another place, that the hell in
which the rich man's soul was buried Luke 16. was nothing else, Idem in sermon. in
Euangel. de Diuite et Lazaro.
but a remorse of the conscience it self, which (remorse) wants faith and
the word of God, in which (conscience) the soul is kept, buried, and shut up
until the last day, after which man both in body and soul, shall be cast
headlong down into the places of hell. In like sort he auerreth the bosom of
Abraham or heaven, before the day of judgment to be nothing else but the word
of God, in which (says he) the faithful rest, sleep, and are kept until that
time. Calvin expounding the word Topheth which is read in the thirtith chapter
of Isaias, Calvin in Isa. 30. verse. 33.
has this discourse: By Topheth (without doubt) be understands hell, not that
we ought to dream of any place in which the wicked are included, but be
signifies their miserable condition, and extreme tortures and torments: for
the Papists (so he terms the school Divines) are foolish and ridiculous,
who subtillie dispute of the nature and quality of that fire, and in
explicating it diversely, vex themselves. These gross imaginations are to be
hissed out, seeing that we understand the Prophet to speak figuratiuelie:
hitherto are Caluins words. And thus we see that Luther denies any souls to
be in hell or heaven, before the day of judgment: and that Calvin denies both
the place and fire of hell: but of this point enough.

SECNION THE THIRD. Of our adversaries impious assertions concerning Christ,
and Christian religion.
I Come now to the third principal ground, to wit: the truth of Christian
religion. And first I affirm, that generally all the sectaries of our time,
weaken this ground by that their common principle, by which they avouch the
holy scripture to be the only rule of faith among Christians: for hence
principally proceed Anabaptisme, Zauchius in his epistle before his co^fes.
Beza volumi ne 3. 190. et 255. Hipor. Method. p. 5. Bez. l. de beret, a civilly
magistr. punie^d. see hi^ also in ep. theolo. 81. p. 334.
Libertinisme, Arianisme, Samosatenisme, Marcionisme, Eutichionisme,
Nestorianisme, which as Zauchius a Protestant reports, have been fetched out
of hell by the ministers of Satan in some of the reformed Churches. Yea Beza
himself confesses, that most foul and impudent errors of ancient
Archeretiks being renewed and polished, are in these our days by fanatical men
recalled from Hell. Upon this ground they build, who reject the words Trinity,
Consubstantial and the like, without which (as Beza confesses) the truth of
the highest mysteries of Christian religion cannot be explicated, nor the
aforesaid heresies soundly confuted. And to discourse of these matters a little
more in particular: have not diverse new Sectaries in plain terms oppugned
the truth of Christianity? It cannot be denied. And to omit that which is
credibly reported of Bucer, Posseuinus in biblio. selecta part 1. l. 8. c 8.
that dying he professed the Messiah was not yet borne, I will only report
things known to the whole world. And first, what shall we say of Franciscus
David, Ederus ibid. c. 16. Francis. Daui. i^ These. 69. Posseui. ib. c. 14. et
16.
who of a Catholic became first a Lutheran, afterward a Caluinist, lastly a
public denier of the blessed Trinity; made Christ a pure man, willed al to
bury the Gospel, and to return to Moises, the law, and circumcision;
affirmed, that the truth of the words of Christ and the Apostles, was to be
tried by the law of Moises, and by other books of the Prophets of that law,
which only (said he) In dispu. Albana Act. 3. di ei. In defensi. negotij de non
inuoca^d. Christo fol. 21.
ought to be unto us the rule of manners, life, and divine worship. The same
man being wished by some of his friends, at the least to confess Christ to be
our Savior, answered; What shall I confess him a Savior who could not do so
much as save himself? Neither did this blasphemy die with the author, for
his Co^futat. indicij Polonicaru^ Eccles.
disciples succeeding him met as Jews on the saturdaies, and rejecting the
Gospels, read the prophecies of the old Testament. The divinity of Christ was
likewise denied before by Seruet. lib. 1. de trinitat. fol. 7. et 47.
Michael Seruetus, first also a Lutheran, then as some say a Caluinist; and at
the same time and afterward, by Georg. Bla^drata in disp. Albana act. diei 6.
Ochimus in dial. 2. de trinit^ So^mer. aduersus Petru^. Carolu^ l. 1. c. 4. de
filio etc. Aelianus li. Germ. Math. Ia.
Georgius Blandrata, Lelius Sozinus, Bernardinus Ochinus, Ioannes Sommerius,
Nathaniel Elianus, Christianus Francus, and other such like blaspheamous
companions, who were professors of the new religion: unto whom I also add,
the Articles of the family of love art. 24.
brethren of the family of love.

But a far greater number of the new gospellers, denied Christ to be equal
and consubstantial to his Father; the captain of whom was Vale^t. Gentil. in
protessibus. Calu. aduers. Gentil. Beza in prefat. ad dictu^li. Caluini.
Valentinus Gentilis, a disciple of Calvin, whom followed Matheus Gribaldus,
Franciscus Lismanius, and an infinite number of others, especially in Polonia:
yea some, and that not without cause, join unto these Melancton and Calvin
himself, of whom Mela^ct. in locis an. 1535. Witte^b. et Basil. an. 1541.
the first affirms, something of the divine nature, or some divine nature to
be in Christ, and auerred him according to his deity, to have been made
inferior to his Father. The Sea Calu. ad c. 14. Genesis in Harmo. Euang. ad c. 22.
Mat. v. 44. et ad c. 26. Mat. v. 64. Lib. aduers. Vale^t. Ge^til. refut. 10.
ep. 2. ad Polonos etc.
second affirmed also this last; and besides, made Christ a Priest according to
his divinity, placed him in the second or next degree to his Father as his
vicar; avouched the the name of God by excellency only to pertain to the
Father, him only and properly to be the creator of heaven and earth; made the
Son subject to his Father, and inferior to him according to his divinity,
Stancarus contra Calui^. K. 4. see him also li. de trinitat.
etc. And all this is justified by Stancarus himself a Protestant, who unto
Calvin writes thus: What devil (O Calvin) has seduced thee to speak with
Arius against the Son of God, that thou might show him to be deprived of
his glory, and now to ask to have it given him, as though he had not always
had it? That Antechrist of the North whom thou do impudently adore,
Melanchton the Gramarian has done this. And he concludes: Be ware (O
Christian reader, and especially al you ministers) beware of the books of
Calvin, and principally in the articles of the Trinity, Incarnation, Mediator,
the Sacrament of baptism, and predestination, for they contain wicked
doctrine and Arian blasphemies: insomuch as the spirit or soul of Seruetus
burnt, according to the Platonist, may seem to have entered into Calvin.
Again, All the Churches, Stancarus de trinitat. K. 8. See Simlerus in praefat.
lib. de aeterno dei verbo.
which those men call reformed by the Gospel and the Son of God, and hold the
faith of Geneua and Zurick concerning Christ, are Arian; neither can this be
denied which I have above demonstrated: thus Stancarus. Ioannes Modestus
another Protestant wrote a book in the German tongue with this title; A
demonstration out of the holy scriptures, that the Sacramentaries are no
Christians, but baptized Jews and Turks, Tubingae anno 1587. in quarto.

About the same time another book was published by Phillipus Nicholaus a
minister, with this title; A detection of the ground of the Caluinian sect,
common with the ancient Arians and Nestorians, in which is demonstrated, that
no Christian can join himself to the Caluinists, except be together undertake
the defense of Arianisme and Nestorianisme: Ioa^n. Schuts in l. 50. causa ru^
causa 48. Co^rad. Schlus selb. in prefa. theolo. Caluinist. impsess. Francof.
an. 1592. and 1594. Ibid. l. 1. art. 2. fo. 9. et 10. Fol. 9.
Tubingae anno 1586.

A fourth calls Mahometisme or Turcisme, Arianisme and Caluinisme, three
brothers and sisters, three pair of hose of the same cloth.

A fifth man, more famous for learning then all the rest, and in dignity a
Superintendent, who as he protests had read over and over the Sacramentaries
works, in the fear of the Lord, for the space of three and twenty years,
avouches; that the Caluinists do nourish Arian and Turkish impiety in their
hearts, which does not seldom at fit times openly disclose it self. And that
the Caluinists do open the window and door to Arianisme and Mahometisme, as
(says he) our divines by their public books have showed: And this he proves
by the example and testimony of one Adamus Neuserus a minister, who of an
Arian became a Turk, and wrote a letter from Constantinople to one of his
acquaintance in Germany, anno 1574. Iulij 2. In which he used these words: No
man that I have known in these our days, became an Arian which was not before
a Caluinist, Seruetus, Blandrata, Alciatus, Franciscus David, Gentilis,
Gribaldus, Siluanus and others. Wherefore, he that fears lest that he falinto
Arianisme, let him beware of Caluinisme: thus he.

Grawerus a sixth Lutheran, being a writer of these our days, in the preface to
his book by him called: The absurd, the most absurd of absurd Caluinistical
absurdities, etc. pronounces the like censure against Calvin and his
scholars. For having discoursed of this matter, at the length he uses these
words to his adversary. Grawer. praefat. Apologet. i^ Absurda absurdoru^
absur dissima etc. printed anno 1605. quar ta Spongia.
Go thy ways now and say that Arians come not forth of the Caluinists
school. And for proof of this, he also reports the same example of Adamus
Neuserus, which also (says he) Adam Neuserus in time past a Caluinist and a
divine of Heidelberge confessed, that he knew not one in his time made an
Arian, who was not first a Caluinist, as Franciscus David, Blandrata, Siluanus,
Gribaldus and others.

A seaue^th man as greatly renouned for learning as any already named,
discovers another foundation of Arianisme, or rather of Iudaisme: his book is
entitled as follows; Caluinus Iadaizans, Calvin Iudaizing or playing the
Jew, that is (says he) the Jewish glosses and deprauations, by which John
Calvin has not abhorred after a detestable manner, to corrupt the most famous
or excellent places and testimonies of holy scripture, concerning the glorious
Trinity, the deity or godhead of Christ, and the holy Ghost; but especially the
prophecies af the Prophets of the coming of the Messiah, his nativity,
passion, resurrection, See h^^ also in praefat. tractat. de trinit.
ascension into heaven and his sitting at the right hand of God. There is also
added a confutation of the deprauations, by Eugidius Hunnius doctor of
divinity, and professor in the university of Wittenberg, Wittenbergae anno
1593. and again 1604. In his epistle dedicatorie he accuses Calvin, that by
his foul deprauations he has wrested the scriptures horribly, from their true
sense another way, to the overthrow of himself and others. And he adds: To
make this more fully known I will adjoyne diverse testimonies, which that
Calvin by his wily deceits has weakened and made unprofitable, to repress the
Jewish perfidie, and the Arian infidelity. I think it good also (says he) to
add moreover those deprauations, by which he wrappeth or covers the most
noble prophecies of the Prophets touching the Messiah, with Jewish corruptions;
and has not only most highly despised and laughed to scorn, that holy
interpetations of Ecclesiastical writers both ancient and modern: But in many
sentences has not feared, wickedly to mock or shift the holy explications of
the Evangelists and Apostles themselves: which if I do not demonstrate to the
eye, especially when I shall come to those prophecies of the Prophets, let me
never hereafter be credited in any thing whatsoever: hitherto are his words.
In his book he discovers this manner of proceeding of Calvin in his
Commentaries upon the scripture, touching these places among others. In the
first chapter, Genesis 1. verse. 1. Genesis 19. v. 24. Psalm. 2. v. 7. (alleged by S.
Paul Acts 13. v. 33. and Hebr. 1. v. 5. cap. 5. v. 5.) Psalm. 33. alias 32. v.
6. (concerning which see him also in the first book of his Institutions chap.
13. 15.) psalm. 44. alias 45. v. 7. etc. (cited by the Apostle Hebr. 1. v. 8.)
psalm. 68. v. 19. (alleged by the same Apostle Ephesians. 4. v. 8.) Michae 5. v. 3.
( see Math. 2. v. 6.) Isai 6. v. 3. etc. In the second chapter he recites his
horrible Commentaries upon these places; Genesis 13. v. 15. and concerning the
nativity of the Messiah; Hieremy 31. v. 22. Aggeus 2. v. 8. touching S. John
Baptist Isai 40. v. 3. (alleged, Math. 3. v. 3. Mark. 1. v. 3. Luc. 1. v. 4.
John 1. v. 23.) of Christ's preaching, Deutr. 18. v. 15. (cited Acts the third,
21. 22. Act. 7. v. 37.) Isai 61. v. 1. (alleged by Christ himself, Luc, 4. v.
18.) of his coming to Jerusalem, Zach. 9. v. 9. (cited Mat. 21. v. 5. John.
12. v. 15.) of his Passion, Genesis 3. v. 15. Zach. 13. v. 7. (alleged by Christ,
Mat. 26. v. 32. Mark. 14. v. 27.) Zach. 11. v. 12. (cited by S. Mat. 27. v. 9.)
Isa. 50. v. 5. et 6. psalm. 8. v. 6. (see the first to the Corinthians, 15. v.
27. Hebr. 2. v. 7.) psalm. 22. (alleged by S. Math. 27. Ioh. 19. v. 23. Heb. 2.
v. 12.) Isa. 63. v. 1. (see Apocal. 19. v. 13.) of Christ's resurrection, psalm.
16. v. 8. (cited by S. Peter, Act. 2. v. 25.) Ibid. v. 10. (alleged, Act. 2.
v. 31. cap. 13. v. 33.) Osee 13. v. 14. (cited, 1. Corint. 5. v. 54. Hebr. 2.
v. 14. (touching his ascension, Zachary 14. v. 4. and his sitting on the right
hand, psalm. 110. v. 1. (cited diverse times by Christ and his Apostles.) These
and other such like places Calvin (as this Protestant doctor plainly shows)
has perverted and weakened with his blaspheamous and Jewish glosses, of which
places diverse were by our Savior etc his Apostles themeselues expounded, as
prophecies of Christ and his religion, but not so well and litterallie (if we
vvil believe Calvin.) And this his abominable fault is likewise noted by
Conradus and Grawer (...) before named. Conrad. in theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. c.
6. fol. 38. Grawerus in praefat. Apol. in absurda ab surdoru^ etc.


I could add the like discourse touching some plain proofs of the divinity
of Christ, contained in the new testament, but I should be over long; yet one
for an example of therest I will not omit, which is touching those words of our
Lord, John 10. In disp. Alba^. act. 2. di^i.
I and the Father are one: upon which Calvin puts this blasphemous gloss.
The ancient writers or Fathers abused this place, to prove Christ
consubstantial to the Father: for neither does Christ dispute of unity of
substance, but of the consent which he has with the Father: thus Calvin. And
this his gloss was alleged by the new Arians or Trinitarians in defense of
themselves, in a disputation had between them and other Sectaries.

The aforesaid Hunnius answers also very well, two objections which may be
made in defense of the said Calvin; the one, that he approves sometimes the
Euangelical and Christian sense of such testimonies; the other, that he
impugneth in his works very earnestly, the Trinitarians and enemies of
Christ's divinity. To the first he says, Calvin Iudaizans cap. 2. p. 112. 113.
anno 1604.
that Calvin observes this order in expounding such prophecies; first by his
Jewish glosses, he weakneth and bereaueth them of what force he can, and
shakes the very foundation: and this done, he adds something concerning the
sense assigned by the Evangelists and Apostles; yet so (says he) that he will
have the first be thought the principal, and the other (as it were) besides the
matter. And although in his answer to the second, he does not plainly say that
Calvin nourished Arian impiety in his heart, and that nevertheless he impugned
it sometimes in outward show, that he might the better and with less
appearance of infidelity, sow the seeds of the same heresy, which every man
would have abhorred if they had proceeded from an open enemy of Christ: yet he
affirms al those enemies of Christ before mentioned, to have issued out of
caluins schools, and uses these words. Page 172.
Away also with that brag touching Seruetus, Gentilis, and the companions of
their wicked acts Alciatus, Blandrata etc. sharply repressed by Calvin; for it
is likewise long since known to the Christian world, out of what schools and
Churches those cruel monsters issued: neither is it obscure, that this kind of
mocking and shifting the scriptures which is used by Calvin, is a grateful and
wished help to the devil, by which the force of one testimony after another,
is shaken in the hearts of men until he bring them (thinking nothing less) to
the butte of Arian heresy: thus Hunnius. And hence also it is, Jacob. Andrae.
i^ praefa. refut. Apol. Danaei.
that Iacobus Andraeas a^^ ^^heran of no less fame affirms: that it is not
to be marueiled, that very many Caluinists in Polonia, Transiluania, Hungaria
and other places, fell to Arianisme, some also to Turcisme; unto whose impiety
(says he) this Caluinian doctrine prepares the way. I will add a word or two
for the confirmation of this whole discourse out of Hooker, who discoursing
against our English Puritans for their dislike of the Creed of S. Athanasius,
and the verse Glory be to the Father, and to the Son etc. and having affirmed
that the weeder of heresy grown ripe, do often in the very cutting down
scatter such seeds, as for a while lie unseen and buried in the earth: but
afterward freshly spring up again, no less pernicious then at the first,
Hook. book. 5. of Ecclesiastical policy 42. page 89.
uses these words. Which thing they very well know, and I doubt not will
easily confess, who live to their great both toil and grief, where the
blaspheamies of Arians, Samosatenians, Tritheits, Eutichians, and Macedonians
are renewed: renewed by them, who to hatch their heresy, have chosen those
Churches as fittest neasts where Athanasius Creed is not heard. By them I say
renewed, who following the course of extreme reformation, were wont in the
pride of their own proceedinges to glory, that whereas Luther did but blow
away the roof, and Zuinglius batter but the walls of Popish superstition, the
last and hardest work of al remained; which was, to raze up the very ground
and foundation of Popery, that doctrine concerning the deity of Christ, which
Satanasius (for so it pleased those impious forsaken miscreants to speak) has
in this memorable Creed explaned: hitherto Hooker. And mark well those words
( who following the course of extreme reformation, and have chosen those
Churches as fittest neasts etc.) for by these he plainly seems to tax the
Caluinists or Puritans, who so extremely seek reformation, and besides
dispersed themselves into Polonia and Transiluania, where they raised some, if
not al, and maintained other of these Heresies. But of Calvin and some
Caluinists according to the judgment of learned Protestants I need not say
more. Only I add this as a thing most certain that Calvin wrote far more
plainly of these points in his epistles to his disciples of Polonia then he
did in other his works. In one of them he says: Calui^ epist. ad Polonos
page 946. In epist. 2. sieve i^aamonit. ad Polonos.
One God that is the Trinity; you believe in God, that is in the Trinity: that
they may know thee one God, that is the Trinity. We reject this, not only as
unsavory, but also as profane. Again, Although by the ancient Fathers this
sentence of our Lord: The Father is greater then I; was restrained to the
humane nature of Christ, yet I doubt not to extend it to the whole complexum,
or person of God and man. And thus much of our adversaries doctrine touching
Christ and Christianisme.

SECTION THE FOVRTH. That in like sort they weaken the principal proofs of the
said three grounds.
BESIDES this, the Sectaries by their doctrine diminish and shake the credit of
the most forcible reasons, which are alleged for the proof of the aforesaid
grounds. And first I have already showed, how Calvin by his wicked glosses
endeauoreth to overthrow the force, even of those prophecies of the old
Testament, which are alleged by Christ and his Apostles for the proof of
Christianity; to which I add, that they nor only bereave the Church of al
infallible means to prove the scriptures to be Canonical, as I will declare
hereafter: but also, Cap. 5. sect. 1.
by their rejecting of certain books received by us into the Canon, partly
under pretense that they have been sometimes among christian Catholics of
doubtful authority, partly because (as they imagine) they contain
contradictions; they seem to give others license upon the same pretenses, to
pronounce the same censure against other books which they admit: but of their
rejecting books because their Canonical truth was sometimes doubted of, Cap.
1. sect. 2.
I shall elsewhere in a more convenient place discourse. Let us therefore here
only declare by a few examples, what may follow of their alleging of
contradiction, which is the second pretense. And first it is well known, that
they Fulke upon the Rhems testamet Luke Libr. 1. Machab. cap. 6. li. 2. c. 1.
et 9. item l. 1. c. 4. lib. 2. ca^
impugn the authority of the books of the Machabees, because (as they say)
they find in them contractio^s concerning the death of Autiochus Illustris,
the purgation of the temple made by Judas Machabeus etc. The like arguments
they bring against the books of Tobie, Judith, and others: which if we admit,
wherefore may not some person of an Atheistical humor by the same manner of
arguing, deny and reject most of the Canonical books contained in the Bible? As
for example, the book of Genesis, because in the first chapter of it we
read, Genesis 1. v. 14.
that the sun and moon by which days, nights, and years, are also there
said to be distinguished, were made on the fourth day, which seems to implie
contradiction; because, if it be so that days and nights are divided by these
planets, as it is there affirmed, and we see by daily experience; 2. Reg. 23,
11. 1. Par. 11, 13. according to the new sect. Samuel 2. Chronic. 1.3. Reg. or
1. of Kings 7, 15. 2. Par. 3, 15.
how could there be three days and nights before these planets were made?
also the second book of the Kings or the first of Paralippomenon, because
that feeld which in the one is said to have been full of lentiles, in the other
is said to have been full of barley. Moreover, the third book of the Kings or
the second of Paralippomenon; because in the first we made, that the two great
brazen pillars made by Solomon, were of thirty eight cubits in length: but in
the second of Paralippomenon the length of them is said to have been thirty
five cubits; yea, between the new Tetament and the old, and between the
Evangelists themselves in the new, such contradictions in outward show may be
espied: For S. Matthew tells us, Math. 1, 8.4. Reg. 8, 24. cap. 11, 1. et 2.
ca. 12, 21. cap. 14, 21.
that Ioram begat Ozias, whereas in the fourth book of the kings which our
adversaries call the second, it is written that Ioram was father to Ochozias,
Ochozias to Ioas, Ioas to Amasias and Amasias (not Ioram) to Ozias otherwise
called Azarias. Luc. 3. v. 36. it is said that Arphaxad was father to Cainan,
and Cainan to Sale; but Genesis 10. verse. 34. Arphaxad is said to have begotten
Sale. Matthew 1. verse 16. the father of Joseph our blessed Ladies husband is
called Jacob; Luke 3.23. Mat. 10, 10. Mark. 6, 8. Mat. 26, 34. Luke 22, 34.
Mat. 26, 74. Luke 22, 60. John 18, 27. Mark 14, 30.68. et 71. Mark 15, 25.
John 19, 14.
whereas S. Luke names him Heli. The same Saint Matthew reports that our
Savior sending his Apostles to preach, forbad them to bear a rod or staff in
their hands; whereas S. Mark writes, that he bad them take only a rod or
staff. Our Savior (if we believe S. Matthew and S. Luke) told S. Peter that
before the cock did crow, he should deny him thrice, and so it was done
according to the same Evangelists and S. John. But S. Mark reports the words
of our Savior to have been, Before the cock shall crow twice thou shall thrice
deny me; and writteh that the cock did first crow presently after his first
denial, and again after his third. The same S. Mark affirms that Christ was
crucified at the third hour; but S. John tells us, that it was about the
sixth hour before he was condemned by Pilate, Matthew 27. verse 19. Ieremias the
prophet is named for Zacharias. Add also, that our Savior himself foretold
(as S. Matthew writes) that he was to be in the heart of the earth three days
and three nights; Mat. 12, 40.
yet every man knows, that he yielded up his sacred soul into the hands of
his Father, about three hours after noone on the friday, and rose again on
the sunday morning very early: wherefore, although we grant that his soul
was in the heart of the earth, and his body in the grave during part of three
days, yet we shall very hardly find out three nights. Acts 9, 7.
Neither is S. Luke in the acts of the Apostles, altogether free from this
show of contradiction: for albeit in the history of the conversion of S. Paul
he say, that the men that went in company with him to Damascus, Act. 20, 10.
heard the voice of Christ speaking unto him, yet in another place he relates
the words of the same Apostle affirming, that they heard it not. Finally the
Apostle S. Paul himself whose epistles our adversaries so highly esteem,
seems to contradict some parts of the old testament: For example, he
affirms ( Galat. 3. verse. 17.) that between the time of a certain promise
made by God to Abraham (Genes. 12.13. or 22.) and the law given to Moises,
there passed four hundred and thirty years; whereas it is plainly gathered
out of the history of Genesis, that between the time of the said promise and
the going of Jacob vvithal his family into Egypt, there passed at the least one
hundred and threescore, of which Jacob (not then borne) lived about one hundred
and thirty ( Genes. 47. verse. 9.) unto which if we add four hundred and
thirty, during which the children of Israel remained in Egypt, as the express
word of Exodus (chap. 12. verse. 40.) tell us, and is insinuated ( Genes. 15.
verse. 23.) between the aforesaid promise and the law given, we shall find at
the least five hundred ninety years, not only four hundred and thirty, Hebr.
9, 4.
as S. Paul reckons. In like sort, the same Apostle in his epistle to the
Hebrews, seems to contradict the third book of the Kings (which our
adversaries call the first) and the second of Paralippomenon; for he affirms,
that in the arc of the old testament was a golden pot having Manna, and the
rod of Aaron that had blossomed, 3. Reg. 8, 9.
and the tables of the testament: But in the books of the old testament
alleged we read, that no other thing was in the arc, but the tables of the
Testament. 2. Paral. 5. verse 10.


Diverse other such like sentences, in words seeming to contain contradictions,
may be found in these and other books of holy scripture, which as I have
said, may move Atheists with as great reason to impugn the authority of the
said books, as our adversaries do by the like arguments the books of Tobie,
Judith, the Machabees, and other by us received and by them rejected. Perhaps
they will answer, that the seeming co^tradictions which I have assigned, are in
very deed no contradictions, and that the places in appearance contrary may
very well be reconciled. I reply and confess, that in very truth so it is;
for all those places by our interpreters, are very well saved from contrariety
and contradiction. And it is manifest, that the same holy Ghost who inspired
all the writers of holy scripture, cannot contradict himself: and these
difficulties of holy scriprure are only to tame our understanding, and
increase our merit. But like as these places are brought to accord: so likewise
are those and even with as great case, which they allege to disprove the
authority of those books which they reject and we receive. Neither can an
Atheist desirous to impugn both, discern any difference: wherefore I
conclude, that by this manner of proceeding they weaken the authority of the
whole Bible, and offer an occasion to Atheists of rejecting the whole.

Unto this I may adjoine, that Beza rejects, or (at the least) doubts of
the truth of the whole history of the adulterous woman, recorded in the eight
chapter of S. John's Gospel. And why so? Beza in cap. 8. Joan.
he yields these reasons. The great variety of reading, makes me doubt of
the whole matter. To speak opinion, I do not dissemble that to be by me
worthily suspected, which those ancient writers with so great a consent,
either rejected or were ignorant off. Furthermore, that the story reports
that Jesus alone was left in the temple with the woman, I know not how probable
it is, and that it writes that Jesus wrote with his finger in the ground,
seems to me nouum et insolitum a thing strange and not accustom, neither can
I conjecture how it can fitly be explicated: thus Beza. But if these reasons
be sound and sufficient, the same may justly be pleaded against diverse other
parcels of holy scripture, and consequently Beza by this his manner of
arguing, weakneth the authority of the same.

Secondly, they laugh and scoff at the ceremonies used in the Catholic
Church, by which they induce their followers to think even as basely, of diverse
ceremonies prescribed by God in the old law. Leuit. 16. verse. 21. etc.
As of that for example, that the high Priest should put both his hands upon
the head of a live goat, and confess over him the sins of the childeren of
Israel, and then should send away the said goat into the desert, bearing upon
him al their iniquities. The like may be said of the water of aspertion, with
which the unclean were sprinkled, which was made of running water; Numer.
19.
the ashes of a red cow burned, scarlet, cedar, and bishop, and a thousand
other ceremonies far more reprehensible in an Atheists judgment, then those
which in our Church they call Idolatrous and superstitious. I add also that by
the same rule, they give an Atheist license to scoff at diverse actions of the
old Prophets: as of that of Ahias Selonites, 3. Reg. 11. verse 29. 1. of Kings
who to signify to Jeroboam that he should be king of ten Tribes of the
twelve, Cut a new cloak which he wore into twelve pieces, and delivered him
ten of them: yea, by the same rule he may also laugh at diverse precepts of God
himself to the said Prophets: As for example, at that of God to Ezechiel,
Ezech. 4.
when he had him take a brick and draw in it the figure of the city of
Jerusalem: he commanded him likewise to sleep on his left side three hundred
and ninety days, and and in the mean time, to eat daily a certain
quantity of bread made of diverse sorts of grain, and baked in the dung of
bulls: then to take a rasor and shave off all the hair of his head and beard,
Ezech. 5.
and by weight to divide it into three parts; of which, the first part he
willed him to burn in the midst of the city; the second he willed him to
choppe with a knife; and the last he willed him to scatter in the wind. And
truly I see no reason in the things themselves, why an Atheist should think
himself more vvorthie of reprehension for scoffing at these actions, then our
adversaries for running the like course against our ceremonies. Nay I add
further, that by their scoffing at our ceremonies, they offer evil persons an
occasion to scoff at certain ceremonies, used even by our Lord himself, and
recorded by the Evangelists; I will exemplify in one particular. Calvin
calls our ceremony of touching with spitle the nostrils and ears of one
that is to be baptized, before baptism, Calui^ de Eccle. reformat. Willet in
his a^swere to the Apolog. epist. sect. p. 106. Mark 7, 33. John 9, 6.
absurd and ridiculous, and Willet calls it an interpretiue toy: But who does
not see that this may be a motive to others, to pronounce the same censure
against certain like actions of Christ? as that, when healing a man deaf and
dumb spitting he touched his tongue: or that when giving sight to a blind
man, He spit on the ground and made clay of spitle, and spread the clay upon his
eyes. I could produce other such examples.

Thirdly, I have declared above, that miracles proceeding from God himself
who can neither deceive nor be deceived, are a principal motive to induce us
to believe the supernatural mysteries of our faith. But the authority of these
also is weakened by our adversaries: for although they cannot deny, but that
Job. 14.12. Mark. 16, 17
Christ bestowed upon his Apostles, and their successors the gift of working
miracles; yet, because such miracles in every age since the first beginning of
christianity, have bin done by those of our church as testimonies of their
doctrine, and sanctity of life; they either See Abbot i^ his ans. co D. Hills
sixth reason. Fulk upon the Rhems testam. 2. These. 2.9 Willet in his Sinop.
controu. 2. qu. 3.
deny that such miracles were ever wrought (notwithstanding that they are
recorded by all historians, yea even by eye witnesses of the same of great
credit) or else they attribute the working of the^ to the devil, or to natural
causes. The first two shifts are used by the Ceturiat. in singulis fere
Centurijs. Cent. 5. c. 10. col. 1393.
Ceturiators, who among the rest of S. Martins miracles written by S. Sulpitius
Seuerus an author of great credit and renoune, and a disciple of the same S.
Martin whiles he lived, give this ce^sure; that either they were false, or else
that S. Martin was a conjurer. The same devises are approved by Calu. in prae
fat. Inst. Fox p. 204. col. 2. Number. 7. Hasti^gs in his Apolog. against the
Waraw. encou^t. 2. See also Sutcl. in his ans. to Kellisons Survey cap. 11. p.
99.
Calvin, Fox and others. The third is added by Sir Francis Hastings. But every
man may easily perceive, that the same shifts may be used by an Atheist for the
overthrow of al miracles whatsoever, although expressed in the scripture it
self, and wrote by Christ and his Apostles. for example, in the life of S.
Martin mentioned written by Sulpitius Seuerus, we read that S. Martin raised 3.
dead men to life, cast devils out of men possessed, that a woman was cured of
an issue of blood by touching of his garment etc. These things say the new
sectaries are either fables devised by the said author, or done by the power of
the devil or by some natural causes: wherefore may not then Atheists say, that
either it is a fable that John 11. Act. 9. Math. 9. v. 20. etc.
Christ raised Lazarus and others, or S. Peter Tabitha, or that our savior
cast out devils, or that a woman was healed of an issue of blood by touching
the hem of his garment; or else that these things were done (as the Jews said)
by the power of Beelzebub prince of the devils, or by the application of some
natural causes? Surely, he will have as little regard of scriptures as they have
of the works of Sulpitius Seuerus, and therefore if they grant it of the
miracles of S. Martin, and others, he will affirm it of all the rest although
mentioned in the said scriptures. In like sort August. lib. 22. de ciuit. cap.
8.
S. Augustine in his books de ciuitate Dei (which no man will deny to be of as
great authority as any other of his works) Sermo de diuersis 31. 32. 33.
epist. 103.
and else where, relates diverse miracles wrought by the relics of S.
Steeuen the first Martyr: as that by touching them a blind woman received her
sight, that a Bishop by carrying them in procession was cured of a fistula, and
that two by praying in the place where they were reserved, were cured of a
palsy. And both S. Ambrose and S. Augustine do the like, Ambr. sermon. 5. de
Sa^ct. et l. 7 ep. 53. 54. eau. Romanae. Aug. l. 9. confess. c. et l. 22. de
ciu. c. 8 etc. Lib. 4. or 2. Reg. cap. 13. Act. 19. v. 12.
concerning the relics of S. Geruasius and Protasius martirs; as that a blind
man was cured by touching of the beire or coffin whereon the relics were
carried: which miracles with the same answer are rejected by our adversaries.
But who sees not that an Atheist may with the like reason, reject the miracle
which was done by the relics or dead body of Elisaeus? by the touching of
which (as we read in the books of the Kings) a dead man was raised to life;
and others wrought by napkins and handkerchers which had touched the body of S.
Paul, which are said to have done miracles in the acts of Apostles. The like
discourse might be made concerning the cure of Naaman Sirus, by washing
himself seven times in the river of Jordan at the commandment of Elizeus the
prophet: 4. Reg. 6.
the said Prophets making of the iron of an hatchet to swim upon the water
of the said river, and diverse other miracles recorded both by holy writ, and
the monuments of ecclesiastical writers of al ages: against al which, our
adversaries offer an occasion to Atheists to pronounce the self same censure.
Moreover, whereas the apparitions of souls departed (according to the
judgment of all the learned both ancient and modern) yields a most strong
proof of our souls immortallitie, these Sectaries deny that ever there have
been any such apparitions; and consequently, seek to bereave us of this
important argument: their words are so plain that this cannot be denied.
Luther himself writes thus: Luth. in explicat. Euangelij de Diuite et Lazaro.
Idem in Eua^. dominicae 24. a Trinitate.
No man's soul ever since the beginning of the world has appeared, for neither
does God permit it. Again, There is no doubt but it is wholly the Devils work
or doing, Quic quid vspiam est spirituum apparentium, whatsoever is any where
of souls or spirits appearing. Zuinglius is of the same mind: for these words
he has in his answer to one Valentinus. zuing. resp. ad Valentinu^ comparem.
Those things which thou babblest of the apparitions of souls, are vain and
idle: for the souls which are separated from their bodies, are in heaven or in
hell. Those which dwell in heaven never come down, those which are in hell cannot
be delivered: the like has Bulli^ger decad. 4. ser. 10.
Bullinger and others.

Finally, their denial of freewil and the merit of good works, do weaken the
proof of the immortallity of the soul, the doctrine of the Apostle that god
is a rewarder of our actions, and consequently of the proof also of heaven and
hell, as every man will confess: and therefore I conclude the whole discourse of
this chapter, that these Sectaries Church is a seminary of Atheism, and that
by their doctrine they shake and even overthrow the very grounds of al
religion: which their assertions being supposed as true, they can neither
prove nor defend, against Atheists and enemies of Christianity.

Chapter 2. The new Sectaries debase the true Christian faith, and in place of
it, extol a presumptuous faith by themselves invented.
OUR adversaries do not only (as I have now showed) overthrow or at the
least weaken, the principal grounds of al religion; but also in some sort
destroy the very nature of faith it self, by which we first come to a
supernatural knowledge of God. Chap. 5.
For whereas in the first part of this treatise I have proved, that faith which
concurreth to our justification and salvation, and is the ground of religion,
and the foundation of spiritual life in this world, to be a virtue infused by
God into our understanding, by the help and force of which we give a most
firm assent unto al those things, which are revealed by God to his Church,
because they are so revealed: the followers of the new religion (I think
partly because, as I have noted in the chapter next before, they have weakened
the authority of miracles, which is the principal supernatural proof of such
mysteries) debase and as it were despise this faith, and in place of it
magnify a new invention of man, a Chimerical kind of faith, full of
presumption, which has neither ground in holy scripture, nor in any approved
author; but is repugnant both to the word of God, and the authority of al
antiquity.

For they distinguish two especial kinds of faith: the one (say they) is
historical, See Calui^ Institut. book 3: 9. and 10. Calu. l. 3. Instit. c. 2.
7.
by which we believe the blessed Trinity, the incarnation, passion, death,
resurrection and ascension of Christ, and other articles of the Creed; the
other is a justifying faith, which Calvin defines to be a steadfast and
assured knowledge of Gods kindness or benevolence toward us, which being
grounded upon the truth of the free promise in Christ, is both revealed to our
minds and sealed in our hearts by the holy ghost. Calui^ ibid. 16. see Luth. i^
sermon. domi^. 2. quadrages.
In explicating this more at large the same Calvin affirms that there is none
truly faithful but he, who being persuaded with a sound assurednes that God is
his merciful and loving father, does promise himself al things upon trust of
Gods goodness; but he who leaning upon the assuredness of his own salvation,
does confidently triumph upon the devil and death. Hence proceed these words
of Luther: Luth. in c. 2. ad Galatas. See certain quest. and ans. touching the
doctr. of predest. printed between the new and old testam. of the years
1593. and 1601.
Believe that Christ will be thy salvation and mercy, and so it will be
undoubtedly. Our adversaries works are full of such sentences. And that they
prefer this second kind of faith before the first; yea that they attribute unto
it our whole justication, it is apparent in all Luc. Osia^d. i^ Enchirid. co^tra
Anabaptistas cap. 2.
their discourses of this matter. Our Notes upon the Eng. test. pri^t. an. 1592
and 1600 in 1. Cor. 13, 2. Willet co^tro. 19. page 877
English sectaries call the first an historical faith and make it common to
devils: but Calvin discourses after this sort. Calu. lib. 3. Institut. cap.
2.9. and 10. Ibi. l. 39. etc.
Many indeed (says he) believe that there is a God, and that the history of
the Gospel or other parts of scripture are true etc. but this image or shadow
of faith as it is of no value: so it is not worthy of the name of faith.
Wherefore according to Calvin, although we believe the Trinity and al other
articles of our faith never so firmly; yet if we believe not that undoubtedly
God is our friend, and that we shall most certainly be saved, it profits us
nothing: d Yea (says he) who impugn this doctrine slanderously speak:
against the spirit of God, horribly rob God, foully stumble in the first
principles of religion, feign a Christianity that needs not the spirit of
Christ, and show a token of miserable blindness: hitherto Calvin. But if we
believe this without any other thing, we are secure of our salvation:
wherefore, Luther has this exclamation. Lut. de cap tiu. Babi. c. de bapt. et
i^ ser. sic deus dilexit mundum
Thou see how rich a Christian man is, who although he will be cannot by never
so great sins loose his salvation, except he refuse to believe: for of this
belief he speaks. I intend not here to confute the asurd assertion of our
adversaries, that faith only does justify, which they understand of this their
presumptuous faith; for this controversy belongs not to this place: only I
will add a word or two in disproofe of their said faith, and so make an end of
this chapter. First therefore it is apparent, that this faith was never heard
of in the world before Luthers days: for there is no description or mention
of it in the holy scripture, nor in any author more ancient then himself, as
I could easily demonstrate by yielding the true sense of al those testimonies,
which are by them brought forth for the confirmation of this their doctrine.
Yea Melanchton himself Luthers scholar seems to confess, that it was an
invention of that age; Melanchton in praefat. in 2. tom. Luth.
for he tells us, that Luther learned his opnion of an old Friar of his own
order, when as yet he lived in his cloister, who alleged for it a certain
sentence of S. Bernard nothing (indeed) to the purpose: wherefore it is very
probable, that this old Friar gathered his opinion out of certain words of S.
Bernard by himself falsely understood, which Luther upon coffeehouse taking
from him, began to confirm by the authority of holy scriptures by himself
falsified and corrupted, or else wrested to a new and strange sense.

Secondly, it is also manifest that this faith altogether destroieth hope, for
how can hope be together with an assurance and certainty of salvation? It
also takes away al fear of sin, damnation, or loss of the favor of God
which is so highly commended in his holy word; Phil. 2. v. 12.
insomuch as the Apostle himself bids us work our salvation with fear and
trembling. Nay farther, whosoever is endued with this faith cannot say our
Lords prayer: for he that is assured that his sins are forgiven, and thinks
this assurance necessary to his justification, cannot in conscience pray for
the forgiveness of his trespasses or offenses, as Christ himself taught us to
do. Moreover, this faith is a lying and false faith, which I prove after this
sort: The power of justifying which is in this faith according to Calvin and
the rest of his brethren, consists not in the worthiness of the work which
is to believe, as before has been signified: See Willet in Sinopsis
controuers. 19. part. 2. page 827.
neither does it justify as our work, for so they confess it to be a sin;
but when this work of faith is in us, then God of his only mercy through the
merits of Christ does justify us, and Christ's justice is made ours: so that
faith in their opinion, is only the instrument by which we apprehend Christ's
justice, and his justice is made ours. Now thus I argue: Either before they
believe themselves to be just and Christ's justice to be theirs, they are just
in very deed and Christ justice is theirs, or no? If these things be true
before, then they are not justified by this faith: If they be not, then their
faith is false. For they believe that which is not true; because it must needs
be granted, that this faith being as it were the instrument by which their
justification is wrought, is before their justification; and consequently,
they believe themselves ^^st before they are just. Moreover, how does this
doctrine stand with other their positions? for do not they hold, that every
one of the elect being predestinate from al eternity is the friend of God, and
just as soon as he has his being in his mother womb? Do not they auerre,
that the children of the faithful are sanctified for diverse generatio^s? If
they do not maintain these propositions as true, why deny they the necessity
of baptism, affirming that infants may be saved without it? Why do they make
it only a seal of justice, not the instrument or cause of justification or
sanctification? Is it not also a common principle among Protestants, that God
does never hate whom once he loved, or love whom once he hated? these things
truly be so apparent that they cannot be denied. But if they be granted it must
needs also be confessed, that every one of the elect (who only can according to
their doctrine have justice) were ever just, and never can be wicked. Of which
it consequently follows that they are just before they can have actual faith,
and consequently that by faith they are not justified.

I add also, that according to their own ground nothing is to be believed,
but that which is expressly contained in the scripture, or manifestly gathered
out of the same: And where does every man find in the Bible that most
assuredly he is just, elect and shall be saved? verily no such thing is found?
wherefore they do contrary to their own rule in believing it. Finally, I
have declared above, that faith to be a true Christian faith and to concur to
our justification, by which we believe the articles and mysteries of
Christian religion; wherefore, seeing that there is but one such faith, this
faith of our adversaries cannot have that prerogative.

And hence I infer, that these Sectaries by disgracing and neglecting the
true Christian faith, and esteeming so highly of a forged devise of Luthers or
of his masters an old Friar, overthrow in effect al Christian faith and
religion, or at the least give their followers a just occasion of contemning
the belief of such mysteries, as every Christian is bound to believe. Some
man (perhaps) will seek to free our English Protestants from this doctrine,
because in their public administration of baptism, they cause the minister
to demand only of the child, whether he believe the article of the Creed, and
make no mention of Luthers and Caluins strange justifying faith, which (as it
is like) they would not have omitted, if they had thought the justification of
the child wholly on it to depend. I answer, that in very truth for the reason
alleged, they may seem to be of that opinion. See the questions and answers
concerning predestination, pri^ted in those Bibles before the new test.
Nevertheless, if the Bible printed with notes in the year 1589. 1592. and
1600. be by them allowed and approved, every man may see that they agree with
other sectaries in this matter. I add also, that is they hold justification to
be wrought by any other faith then this newly devised, they disagree from their
principal captains and al their Abbot in his answer to Hill reason 3. page 96
Perkins in his reformed Catholic, touchi^g justification of a sinner.
brethren, touching the article of justification; which (as they say) is the
very ground of Christian religion. But our adversaries say, that according to
S. James the devils believe and tremble. I grant it, but the faith of devils is
a natural and a kind of historical faith, grounded upon natural reason and
discourse, much like unto the belief of Heretics: Our habitual faith is a
supernatural gift or habit infused into our souls, by which our understanding
it lightened, lifted up, and made able and apt to believe things revealed by
God: our actual faith is an act of our understanding, proceeding also from the
said habit or light by which such things are actually believed because they
are for revealed. Moreover, their faith is with despair and hatred; ours may
be joined with hope and charity: wherefore, there is a great difference
between our faith and theirs; and our Sectaries do very evil in making no
distinction between them.

Chapter 3. That our adversaries deny the infallible authority of the Church,
and affirm it to have erred and perished.
IN the sixth chapter of the first part of this treatise, I have affirmed and
proved the church of Christ to be the chief pillar and ground of truth, in
which is preserved entirely and sincerely that corpse, sum, or depositum of
Christian doctrine, which was by Christ delivered to his Apostles, and by them
to their successors; and that through the perpetual assistance of the holy
Ghost she cannot err or perish: and consequently, that of her we ought and may
securely learn, not only what articles of faith have been revealed by God to
his Church; but also what concerning every particular point we are to believe,
and what to avoid: and that in following her doctrine and judgment we cannot
be deceived. But because the professors of the new religion cannot show a
continual succession of their faith, religion, and church in any one corner of
the world, since the Apostles days: yea, because they cannot name one for
every hundred years that was of their Church and belief, they are forced to
say that the Church erred for some ages, and was for a time clean overthrown.

Luth. in Comitijs Wormat. an. 1522.
Luther first affirmed this to have fallen out, during the time between the
Council of Constance and the first preaching by him of his new doctrine, to
wit, for the space of some hundred years. Soon after, Authors repetit.
confess. Augustanae.
some of his followers affirmed the Church to have erred three hundred years
before Luther. And of this opinion seems Fox in his protestation to the
Church of England.
John Fox, who tells us; that al was turned up side down, al order broken,
true doctrine defaced, and Christian faith extinguished in the time of Pope
Gregory the seventh, about the year 1080. and of Innocentius the third about
the year 1215. After this, Luth. to. 7. l. co^tr. Papatum. Idem in captiu.
Babil. et in supputat. mundi.
Luther attributed six hundred years to the Apostasy of the Church, and last
of al one thousand: of which opinion is also Calui^ ep. ad Sadoletu^ et in
prophetas mi nores passim.
Calvin. But al of them agree, that for some ages the visibie Church altogether
erred; and that for a certain time, there was in the world no true preaching
of the word of God, or lawful administration of the Sacraments.

Hence we read in the Apol. of the Church of England par. 4. p. 124.
Apology of the Church of England, that truth unknown and vnheared off, at
that time began to give shine in the world, when Luther and Zuinglius sent of
God began in preach the Gospel: the like sentences are found in the works of
Calu. i^ resp. ad Sado. p. 185. 176. l. 4. Inst. c. 18. 1. et 2. c. 1. 11. c.
17 12. et 3.
Calvin, Bez. in praef. test. noui ad principe^ Condens.
Beza, Mela^ch. i^ locis comun. 1. edit.
Melanchton, Will. in sinops. co^trou. 2. qu. 2. p. 61. edit. a^. 1600.
Willet and others. And although some of them assign an invisible church,
which (as they say) flourished in all ages: yet this they cannot prove, because
a thing invisible and unknown cannot be proved; and besides it is nothing to
the purpose, because we treat of the infallible authority and continuance of
the Church visible. And certainly although we should confess, that such an
invisible Church was in the world, and preserved in itself always the truth
(which is most false, and shall be confuted in my treastise of the definition and
notes of the church:) yet it must needs be granted, that it was done
invisibly; and consequently, this Church could not direct the whole world in all truth.

But that they accuse the whole Church of error, it will sufficiently appear
in the next chapter; where I will declare, that they attribute errors in faith
to general Councels, which be the supreme assembles and highest courts of the
said Church. And it is sufficiently purpose at this present, if they grant the
Church to have erred in any one point: for a possibility of error in one
article of faith, proves a possibility of error in all; and consequently,
takes from her al infallible authority, and makes her a fallible and
uncertain ground.

Chapter 4. They reject al particular grounds of faith above assigned, and
proved to be found in the Church of Christ, besides the holy Scriptures.
LET us now descend to the particular grounds of faith, which we have above
proved to be found in the Church of Christ. And although our adversaries denial
of the infallible authority of the Church, and her assistance by the holy
ghost, on which the certainty of al such particular grounds depends (as I
have showed before) be a sufficient proof, not only that they reject them but
also that (according to their doctrine) they have no infallible mean to know
what articles have been by God revealed to his Church; yet, let us declare the
matter more in particular and at large.

But concerning unwritten traditions, the decrees of the Pope, the doctrine of
the Roman Church, yea of the whole Church of Christ, I need say nothing;
because they al with one consent and voice exclaim against these grounds as
superstitious, frivolous, and of no moment. The difficulty therefore is only
concerning holy Scriptures, general and prouincial Councels, and the uniform
consent of Fathers; of which, the first is challendged by them al, the other
two by some of them only: I will begin with the two last.

And concerning general Councels, Luther lib. de Concilijs.
Luther does not only reprehend the first council held by the Apostles at
Jerusalem, of which we read in the Act. 15.
acts of the Apostles, and affirm that the decrees thereof bound no man in
conscience: but also calls the Fathers (which afterward assembled themselves
in Councels) sicophants and flatterers of the Pope. In particular, he calls
the Canons of the first general Council of Nice, celebrated in the days of
Constantine the great Emperor (whom our Barlow in his relation of the
conference held at Ha^pt. Court p. 69.
King by no means will have appreached of Popery) bay, straw, wood, stuble;
and demands whether the holy Ghost has nothing else to do in Councels, but
to bind and burden his ministers with impossible, dangerous, and unnecessary
laws: such (according to him) were decreed in that Council; I think he means
concerning the chaste and single life of Bishops and ministers. The like
censure he pronounces against al other general Councels; and concludes his
discourse in that place, that more light is brought to Christian doctrine by
that Catechism which children learn, then by all the Councels. In another
place he adds: that Luth. in prologo li. contra statuta Ecclesiae.
he will not have his doctrine judged by any, neither by Bishops nor by all the
Angels, but that be will by his doctrine judge the Angels. Calvin gives leave
to every private man, to examine the decrees of Councels by the exact rule of
holy scripture. Calvin book 4. Instit. cap. 9. 8. and 11. see also 9.
Let no names (says he) or authorities of Councels, Pastors, Bishops, hinder
us, but that we may examine the spirits of al men by the rule of the word of
God. He likewise calls the Fathers of the first general Council of Nice, Idem
lib. de vera ecclesiae reformatione opuscul. page 480. see him also book 4. of
his Instit. chap. 9. 10.
Phanatices (that is) men phanatical or deluded by the devil: Bez. in praefat.
noui test. anno 1565.
Beza tells us that in the best times, such was partly the ambition of
Bishops, partly their foolishnes and ignorance, that the very blind may
perceive satan verily to have been President of their assemblies: the like
censure is pronounced by Musculus, Vrba^. Regi. 1. part. operu^ de eccl. fo. 51.
Vrbanus Regius and others: The ministers of the church of Scotland in the
confession of their faith write thus: Co^fess. of the faith of Scotl. pri^t. at
the e^d of the harm. of co^fess. p. 19. See the said Harmony of co^fessio^s
sect. 1. page 14.
Without just examinatin we do not receive whatsoever is obtruded unto men
under the name of a general Council; for plain it is, that as the men
assembled were men, so have some of them manifestly erred, and that in matters
of great weight and importance. So far then as the Council proves the
determination and commandment that in gives, by the plain word of God, so
soon do we reverence and embraces the same: hitherto the confession of
Scotland. Out of which their words as also out of the like assertions of
others, I gather; that our adversaries commonly give no more creditte to
general Councels, and consequently to the whole church of Christ, which they
represent, then is to be given to the worst, and meanest man living; yea, then
may be given to the devil himself. For these may also be believed, if they
prove that true which they affirm by the authority of holy scripture, which
they al require as necessary before the decree of council be believed. Secondly
I gather, that according to their assertions we may likewise lawfully examine
these their sentences or decrees, whether they be according to the rule of
scripture or no, (for they were also men subject to error:) and moreover,
because we find them not so (as appears by that which has been already
said) we may also reject them as repugnant to the said scripture. The like
leave they give in like sort to those of their own company; yea, to every
private man whatsoever concerning al their canons and constitutions: wherefore,
their followers or subjects are not to be reprehended according to these
opinions and decrees, if they examine their sentences and canons by the word of
God; and reject them, if in their conscience according to their own judgment,
they find them not conformable to the same.

But what an absurd thing is it, that a few ministers should presume to
pronounce so severe a censure against such ancient, venerable, and learned
assemblies, highly of esteemed by all true Christians in all ages even since the
beginning of Christianity? whence will they have these errors to have
proceeded? Certainly, they must needs attribute them either to ignorance, or
malice of the Bishops and Prelates assembled. But are they either for number,
learning, or piety to be compared with them? They are not without doubt, as will
easily appear unto any learned man, that shall with any difference read the
Ecclesiastical histories, and view the works of both sides. Neither have
ministers being combred for the most part with wives, children and such other
impediments, that opportunity of giving themselves to study and devotion as
the ancient Bishops had, who lived a chaste and single life, and gave them
selves altogether to spiritual affairs, and were commonly very holy men:
Wherefore, seeing that they also lived nearer to the Apostles days, it is very
probable, yea certain, that they better understood and knew the true sense of
the word of God, then these new Sectaries do: and seeing that their sanctity
was so great, malice could no ways blind them. Verily any indifferent man,
if the matter were put to his censure (although those ancient Fathers had
enjoyed no farther warrant of the assistance of the holy Ghost then these new
Gospellers do) would rather imagine truth to be with them, then with these:
But our adversaries allege for themselves, that every particular man assembled
in a general Council may err. I answer, that true it is that every particular
man (the Bishop of Rome being excepted) is subject to error: but seeing that
the Popes judgment joined with the assent of the whole Church in a general
Council, is infallible, and in such a case cannot be erroneous; and no general
Council is of supreme force without his confirmation: it follows, that the
decrees of a laweful general Council cannot be false. The reason wherefore the
confirmation of al Councels depends so much of the Popes authority, is,
because he is ministerial head of the Church of Christ, and consequently the
body must needs have his assent and confirmation, before the constitutions by
it made be of force, and certainly known to be free from error and falsehood.
Finally, our Protestants of England concerning general Councels have decreed
as follows: Articles of faith agreed upon in the Conuocations of the years
1562. and 1604. art. 21. See Fulk upon the Rhe^s testament Matthew 8, 14.
Whitakers in his answer to Campions 4. reason in English pa. 110. Field book 4.
of the church chapt. 6. page 228.
General Councels (for as much as they be an assembly of men, whereof al be not
governed with the spirit, and word of God) may err, and sometimes have erred,
even in things pertaining unto God: wherefore, things ordained by them as
necessary to salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be
declared that they be taken out of holy scriptures: The like censure is
pronounced by their principal divines. And M. Field tells us, that Bishops
assembled in a general Council may interpret the scripture, and by their
authority suppress al them that shall gainsay such interpretations, and subject
every man that shall disobey such determinations they consent upon; to
excommunication and censures of the like nature. Out of which his assertion it
is evident, that according to the providence and wisdom of almighty god,
general Councels should not be subject to error in such matters; for otherwise
men might be forced and that according to his ordinances, to obey such general
Councels erring and propounding false doctrine. But this notwithstanding, the
same Field in another place concludes, Lib. 4. cap. 5. page 204. Luther tome
2. lib. contra regem Angliae fol. 342.
that Councels may err in matters of greatest consequence.

Of the testimony of the ancient Fathers thus writes Luther: in his book
against king Henry the eight of England. In the last place Henry brings in
for the sacrifice of the Mass the saying of the Fathers. Here say I, that by
this my sentence is confirmed: for this is it which I said, that the
Thomistical asses have nothing that they can bring forth, but a multitude of
men and the ancient use. But I as against the sayings of the Fathers, of men,
of Angels, of devils, oppose not the ancient consent, not a multitude of men,
but the Gospel, the word of the one eternal majesty: Here I stand, here I sit,
here I remain, here I boast, here I triumph, here I insult, over the sayings
of men be they never so holy: insomuch that I pass not if a thousand
Augustines, a thousand Tertullians did stand against me. Tome 5
The like sentence he has in his famous commentary upon the epistle to the
Galathians, his words are these. Some will say unto me, the Church during so
many ages has so thought and taught, all the primitive Churches and doctors
most holy men, much greater, and more learned then thou art: Who art thou that
dare dissent from al these, and obtrude unto us a diverse doctrine? When
Satan thus urges and conspireth with flesh and reason, the conscience it
terrified and despaireth, unless constantly thou return to thy self, and
say; whether Ciprian, Ambrose, Augustine, or Peter, Paul, and John, yea an
Angel from heaven teach otherwise, yet this I know for certain, that I
counsel not men humane but divine things. Again, No other doctrine ought to
be delivered or heard in the Church, but the pure word of God, (that is) the
holy scripture: let other doctors or hearers together their doctrine be
accursed. Hitherto Luther confessing (as we see) the whole primitive Church
and all the ancient Fathers, to contrary his doctrine; and yet rejecting their
authority, and obstinately persisting and obdurating himself in his heretical
opinions.

Zuinglius to. 1. i^ explanat. artic. 64. fol. 107.
The same course runs Zuinglius who discourses thus: The Papists say, who
shall discuss the controversies and dissentions which are at this present in
the Church? Who shall judge of them? Who shall pronounce sentence? I answer the
word of God; neither will we allow of any other judge. They affirm, we deny
the Mass is a sacrifice: who shall be judge of the controversy? I say the one
and only word of God. But presently, thou beginnest to cry out, the Fathers,
the Fathers, for the Fathers have so delivered and writ thus. But I relate to
thee neither fathers nor mothers, but require the word; by this only it ought
to have been proved that the Mass is a sacrifice: thus Zuinglius. The opinion
of Calvin is consonant to these; Calu. in praefat. Instit. ad regem Galiae.
Item book 3. Instit. chapt. 4. 38.
Al things (says he discoursing of the works of the ancient Fathers) are ours
to serve us not to overrule us. Again, Those things which every foot occur in
the works of the old writers or Fathers touching satisfaction, move me but
little: for I see that diverse of them (I will say simply as it is) almost al
whose works are extant, either have erred in this matter, or have spoken over
crabbedly and hardly. Our English Protestants have sufficiently declared their
opinion touching the authority of the ancient Fathers, by pronouncing so hard
a censure against general Councels, as we have heard. Whitak. contra Sander.
page 92.
Hence Whitaker one of their principal Champions uses this discourse: If you
argue (says he) from the testimonies of men be they never so learned and
ancient, we yield no more to their words in cause of religion, then we
perceive to be agreeable to Scripture: neither think your self to have proved
any thing, though you bring against us the whole swarm of Fathers, except that
which they say be justified not by the voice of men, but by God himself: this
is Whitakers doctrine. Whitakers in his answer to Campians 2. reason p. 70. see
him also in his answer to the 6. reason page 159.
In another place he discourses thus: We are not the servants of the Fathers,
but the sons. When they prescribe us any thing out of the law and divine
authority, we obey them as our parents: If they enjoyne anything against the
voice of the heavenly truth, we have learned not to hearken to them, but to
God. You as vassals and base servants receive whatsoever the Fathers say,
without judgment or reason, being afraid (as I think) either of the whip, or
the halter, if every thing they speak be not Gospel with you: thus Whitakers
defends his rejecting the ancient Fathers, and vpbraideth us for our high
estimation of the same. But concerning the fathers opinions of particular
points, he tells us, Ibidem in his answer to the 5. reason page 129.
that Ciprian wrote something of repentance very unseasonably and
indiscreetly; and not be alone, but all the holy Fathers of that time (says
he) were tainted with that error: That is, all the Fathers of the third age
after Christ; for S. Ciprian suffered martyrdom in the year two hundred
threescore and one. Of prayer to Saints he has these words: Prudentius I
grant, Ibidem. page 140. 141.
as a poet sometimes called upon the Martirs, whose acts he describes in
verse; and the supertitious custom of praying to Saints had now taken deep
root in the Church, which as a tirant haled sometimes the holy Fathers into
the same error: thus he of the beginning of the fifth age, when Prudentius
flourished. Lastly, Ibid. p. 132.
he defends the first sentence of Luther before alleged. Abbot in his answ.
to Hill reason 10. p. 371. Horat. lib. 1. epist. 1. see also Morton in Apologia
Catholica part 1. lib. 1. cap. 8.
With Whitakers agrees Abbot, who touching the Fathers thus delivers his
opinion unto us: Where there is just cause, we as men Nullius addicti jurare in
verba magistri, bound to stand to the opinion of none, but of the holy Ghost,
we decliningwise do leave them: But where they subscribe to the authority of
God, there we subscribe to them, defend them, and refuse not to be tried by
them, so far as we may by any holy and learned men, of which sort we hold them,
but yet still know them to be men: hitherto George Abbot. And note, that these
men pretending that they follow the ancient Fathers as far forth as they
follow the law, or divine authority or the authority of God, endeavor to
make show of an opposition or contrariety, between the written word of God and
the Fathers, in all points in which they forsake them; whereas (in very deed)
the Fathers understood and followed the scriptures better then they do, and
the opposition is not between the scriptures and the Fathers, but betweeene
the Fathers and the Scriptures expounded by these Sectaries; which scriptures
so expounded, they make a rule whereby to know when the Fathers are to be
followed, when to be forsaken.

Our Puritans in this point (at the least in words) got far beyond our
Protestants. He who is desirous to understand their opinion, may read the
seven and twentieth chapter of the Suruay of their pretended holy discipline,
written by a Printed anno 1693.
Protestant; in which he shall find it set down at large. And among others,
Cartwright is there accused the places of his books being cited, for tearming
the seeking into the Fathers writings, Page 331. 337. See also chap. 4. p. 64.
a raking of ditches, and the bringing in of their authorities, the moving and
summoning of hell. Parks in his preface to his ans. of Limbo mastix pri^ted anno
1607. Henry Jacob treatise p. 1. 3. 54. 81. 68. cited by him in the marge^t
see also says he Bilsons sermons pa. 323. and the answer to M. Broughtons
letters p. 17.
Parks also a later writer tells us, that If you allege the ancient Fathers
against them, they will tell you roundly, that their opinions are nothing else
but the corrupt fancies and vain imaginations of men, toyish fables, fond,
absurd, without sense and reason; and some (says he) stick not to call the
Fathers of the latin Church, the plague of divinity.

Unto al these proofs I add likewise, that our adversaries confess all the
ancient Fathers to have been of our belief, touching every article now
controuersed between us and them (as I vvil prove in my treatise of the
definition and notes of the Church) and yet reject their doctrine as erroneous
and repugnant to the word of God: wherefore, they must needs confess all the
Fathers to have erred, and so reject their authority. Finally, none of them will
grant that any consent of Fathers whatsoever, be it never so general touching
any point, is of it self a sufficient ground of faith without the testimony
of holy scripture, which is enough for my purpose. But it may be objected by
some, that diverse of these sectaries allege in their works the holy
Councels and Fathers abundantly, not only against us, but also against their
own brethren dissenting from them in faith or things belonging to religion, I
answer that true it is that they so do allege the holy Councels and Fathers:
But do they make their testimony an infallible ground? they do not
certainly. For although they approve their doctrine in some points, yet in
others they presently reject them. The Centuriatores being Lutherans,
Centuriat. 4. page 242. In every Centurie, cap. 4.
allege the Fathers against the Sacramentaries for proof of the real
presence: but they reject their testimony when they affirm this sacrament to
be a Sacrifice. In like sort, our Protestants against our Puritans allege the
authority of S. Epiphanius and S. Augustine, condemning Aerius for an Heretic,
because he acknowledged no distinction between a Bishop and a Priest: See
the Survey of the pretended holy discipline. Whit gift in his defense, and
others.
but they reject the authority of the same Fathers in the self same places,
condemning the same Aerius as an Heretic for denying sacrifice and mass for
the dead: wherefore it is manifest, that they only (as Calvin says) use the
Councels and Fathers to serve their own turns, not to be ouer-ruled by them.

In defense of our English Protestants in particular, it may first be said,
that M. Jewel in his challendge, does challendge to their religion, all the
Councels and Fathers of the first six hundred years, allows of their
authority and offers to be tried by their censure. I answer first, that
this challendge made by M. Jewel is not general, touching al points
controuersed between us, but concerning a few only and those not of greatest
moment. Secondly I say, that M. Jewel did this only to make a show among the
common people, as though his religion had been ancient, not that he intended
to do as he promised (to wit to subscribe to our religion) if this challendge
could be showed false. This appears to be true, both because he maintained
his vain challendge with so many thousand lies and untruths, set down by
Catholic authors to the view of the whole world (as for example, doctor
Harding in his Rejoinder to M. Jewels reply touchi^g private mass printed anno
1566.
Harding anoucheth that the number of his lies in five of the six and twenty
articles of his reply, to the said doctor Hardings answer to his Apology, In
his epistle to the reader.
discovered by himself and others, amounts to a thousand and odd) and also
because the falsehood of his said challenge being showed by diverse learned of
our side, he never was so good as his word. Humfred. in vita Iuelli.
Hence is this complaint of doctor Humfreis: Jewel has granted you (he
speaks to the Catholics) over much, and was to sore an enemy to himself,
that rejecting the mean by which he might more firmly and easily have vpholden
his cause, he spoiled himself and the Church; for what have we to do with the
Fathers, with flesh and blood? Or what does it appertain unto us what the
false sinode of Bishops (so he terms the ancient Councels) do ordain or
decree? thus much D. Humfrey.

Secondly it may also be alleged, that Field a late Protestant writer allows
of diverse other rules or directions of our faith, besides the holy scripture;
Field book. 3. chap. 33. 1.
and of the Fathers in particular he affirms, that they reverence and honor
them much more then we do. I answer, that (in very deed) Field makes a
great show of allowance of the testimony of antiquity, and may perhaps seem
to one that looks not well into his words, to approve the authority of of the
ancient Fathers as far forth as any Catholic, whereas (in very truth) there
is no such thing. And to make this matter manifest let us briefly behold his
rules assigned, whereby (as he says) we are to judge of particular things
contained within the compass of Christian faith, Field book 4. chapt. 14.
which are as follows. First, the summary comprehension of such principal
articles, as are the principles whence al other things are concluded and
inferred; these are contained in the Creed of the Apostles. Secondly, al such
things as every Christian is bound expressly to believe, which are rightly said
to be the rule of faith. Thirdly, the Anologie, due proportion and
correspondence, that one thing in this divine knowledge has with another.
Fourthly, whatsoever books were delivered unto us a written by them, to whom
the first and immediate revelation of divine truth was made. Fifthly, whatsoever
have been delivered by all the Saints with one consent, which have left their
judgment and opinion in writing, book 4. cap. 5.
because (says he in another place) it is not possible that they should al
have written of any thing, but such as touch the very life of Christian faith
generally received in all their times. Sixthly, whatsoever the most famous have
constantly and uniformly delivered, as a matter of faith no man contradicting,
though many other Ecclesiastical writers be silent and say nothing of it.
Seueanthly, that which the most and most famous in every age constantly
delivered as matter of faith, and as received from them that went before them,
in such sort that the contradictors and gaine-saiers were in their beginnings
noted for singularity, novelty, and division; Ibid. cap. 7.
and afterward in process of time (if they persisted in such contradiction)
charged with heresy. He adds else where, that this consent of the most
famous must be touching the substance of Christian faith: And unto these his
three last rules I add, that which he has in the second chapter before in
these words. Book 4. c. 2.
Though al whose writings remain, have not written of a thing; yet if all that
mention it do constantly consent in it, and their consent be strengthened by
universal practice, we dare not charge them with error: yea though their
consent be not strengthened by such practice, if it be concerning things
expressed in the word of truth, or by necessary and evident deduction to be
demonstrated from thence, we think that no error can be found ill al them
that speak of things of that nature, (that is of matters of substance, as in
the fifth chapter) if in every age of the Church some be found to have written
of them. But in things that cannot be clearly deduced from the rule of faith,
and word of divine and heavenly truth, we think it posible that all that have
written might err and be deceived: hitherto Field. And these are the rules
which he prescribes to be followed in our judgment, concerning truth and
falsehood in matters of our belief: but that none of these besides the holy
scripture (of which hereafter) according to his own doctrine, are sufficient
in all matters of faith to make an infallible or prudential ground of belief,
it is easily proved. And to begin with his three first: how will he prove that
they be infallible? how can he show them to be of divine authority, if the
present church in all ages (as he says) may err, and it be true which he
affirms, Field book 4. chapter 20. Thus having. Ibidem The second kind.
Calvin book 2. Instit cap. 16 18. Hu^n. i^ theseb. de coloq. cum po^tis.
ineu^do these. 54.
that it is not safe in things concerning faith to rely upon traditions? are
not the two first rules at the least, received by tradition? surely he
confesses it himself. Further, do not some of his brethren call the creed of
the Apostles in question, and make it a doubtful matter whether it were
delivered to the Church by the said Apostles, or no? he that knows not this
let him read Calvin and Hunnius. Is it in like sort agreed upon among our
aduersaties, what articles every Christian is bound expressly to believe, and
which are contained in the rule of faith? It is not without doubt: and I verily
think, that scarce any one learned Protestant will admit that every point,
which is assigned by M. Field in the fourth chapter of his third book.
Moreover, how obscure is the Analogy or proportion, which one thing in matters
of faith has with another? and generally, what man will admit these three rules
or any one of them, as sufficient to make an end of al controversies in the
Church? In very deed, although they were al admitted by all sorts as true; yet,
very few articles can be gathered out of them by such evident deduction, as is
able to convince the understanding of al men; and consequently, they are no
general and sufficient directions for all points of our faith.

Neither are the three last rules of themselves (at the least as they are
delivered by Field) of any greater force or sufficiency. First, because Field
does not only make the present Church in all ages subject to error (for he
freeth it only from damnable and pertinacious error: Field book 4. chap. 13.
and book 1. c. 10.
) but also affirms, that a right judgment of men by their power of
jurisdiction maintaining truth and suppressing error, may be wanting in the
Church; and that sometimes almost al may conspire against the truth, or consent
to betray the sincerity of the Christian profession: yea, that most part of
those that hold great places of office and dignity in the Church, falling into
error or heresy, may depart from the soundness of the Christian faiths; so
that truth be maintained by some few, and they molested, persecuted, and
traduced as turbulent and seditious men, enemies to the common peace of the
Christian world: thus Field. Which doctrine if we admit as true, what authority
shall we leave to the Fathers works? will not a possibility of error follow in
them al? it cannot be denied: but I need not dispute any longer of this matter,
for Field himself of these his three rules of belief vvriteth thus. Field
book 4. cap. 14.
These three latter rules of our faith (says he) we admit not, because they
are equal with the former, and originally in themselves contain the direction
of faith; but because nothing can be delivered with such and so full consent of
the people of God as in them is expressed, but it must needs he from those
authors and founders of our Christian profession. Hitherto Field: in which
words he expressly grants, that these rules originally in themselves are no
directions of faith. And truly, although we could not overthrow them by his
own sayings, this only would suffice (according to the Protestant grounds)
to prove them to have no divine or infallible authority, that he brings no
one sentence of scripture, or other proof for their truth, but only this bare
reason; that nothing can be delivered with such full consent, but it must needs
be from the founders of Christianity. For if that be thought or affirmed
possible which he deemeth impossible, what force or strength will be left to
his rules? but every man may also perceive, that if we admit his assertions
even now related, concerning the error of the Church and her Prelates; we must
needs also grant, that it may be all the Fathers have conspired in error. For
if all the Fathers of the present Church at any time, yea although assembled in
a general Council, may and that in matters of greatest consequence (as he
says) err: Field book 4. chap. 5. and 12.
who sees not that it is a thing possible, that in all ages they have al erred?
This notwithstanding, let us now look a little into the words themselves of
these three last rules, and behold concerning what articles of belief they
are: as also, what conditions are required in them as necessary to this; that
out of the Fathers works (according to Fields opinion) we may gather any
article of faith. The first of them, which is the fifth in order as the words
themselves tell us, requires that the matter belong to the substance of our
faith: by which words he does abridge and limit the authority of the Fathers,
to be of force (according to this rule) only concerning certain principal
articles by him set down, which every man (as he says) is bound expressly to
know and believe. He prescribes also in this rule, that the consent be
general, that is: not only of all that have written of that matter; but of all that have left any monuments of learning to their posterity, that al make
express mention of it and without contradiction of any other; and that this is
his mind he plainly declares, in the second and fifth chapter before.

But what error or heresy is there, which contentious persons either will not
deny to pertain to the substance of our faith, or that all the monuments of
antiquity do positiuely contradict, or which Heretics cannot confirm by
some, or at the least by one sentence of some ancient writer? Verily, if they
draw and pull the holy scriptures in such sort to their private fantasies,
that no sect will be persuaded but that they favor the false opinions in it
maintained: much more may they deal so with the writings of their predecessors
which be far more in number, and not also penned as the scriptures are by
divine inspiration.

The second rule of the three last (if M. Field will not have it to contradict
that which I have added at the end of them, out of the second chapter before)
must he understood according to it; and then how uncertain it is I will even
now declare: but if we take it as the words sound it cannot be universal for
the decisions of al points, at the least in the judgment of al men; for all
matters are not delivered as matters of faith, constantly and uniformly by the
most famous Christian writers, and that without contradiction: yea a man of a
perverse humor although in very deed it were so, yet by wresting and false
understanding of ssuch authors, would make appearance of the contrary. The last
may be confuted as insufficient of it self for the same reasons: for it
requires that the point be of the substance of faith, etc. The addition out of
the second chapter requires universal practice, and necessary and evident
deduction out of the scripture, or the rule of faith; and (as it seems) that
it be a matter of substance, that in every age some be found to have written
of it, etc. which be things intricate and not easily to be proved in every
matter co^trouersed. But to make al these rules more obscure, he adds in the
fifth chapter; that the writings of the ancient may be much corrupted, so that
the consent of antiquity cannot always easily be known: Field book 4. cap. 5.
Vincent Liriuens. cap. 39.
yet (says he) there will be ever some means to find out and descry the
errors and frauds of the corrupters. And so he affirms himself to
understand that of Vincentius Lirinensis, that the judgment of antiquity is to
be sought out at the very first rising of heresies, and not afterward when
they are grown inueterate; for that then they will corrupt the monuments of
antiquity. Finally, these three rules are not sufficient to direct any man
whatsoever whether learned or unlearned, to an infallible truth in all articles
of faith: for seeing that every private man, yea the whole visible present
Church is subject to error, and al her greatest Prelates to heresy, according
to the doctrine of M. Field, one man cannot build his faith upon another
judgment, no not upon the judgment of the whole present visible Church:
wherefore, if we proceed according to M. Fields rules, it is not sufficient to
cause true faith in us, that others tell us that the Fathers and writers of
former ages say this and that, but we must our selves read over the works of
al such Fathers and authors. And how can the unlearned do this? Yea, if a man
be never so learned he cannot do it, although he do nothing else but read all the days of his life, and when he has done al, he is almost never the nearer;
for he cannot deny but he may be deceived in his judgment, and consequently his
faith is but an opinion. And thus we see, that although Field make a great
show of yielding great authority to the Fathers; yet (in very deed) he
bereaueth them almost of al, partly by rejecting their testimonies concerning
al other matters but certain principal and substantial points; partly by
requiring such a general consent, as can hardly be proved concerning the
principal articles themselves; partly by his doctrine concerning the error of
the whole Church, and partly by other means.

Let us therefore Conclude, that al our adversaries reject al particular
grounds of faith, which are found in the church of Christ, besides the holy
scripture, and make them al subject to error and falsehood. And this is almost
in flat terms confessed by our English Protestants, who in the Apology of
the Church affirm; Apology of the church of England part 2. page 58.
that In the scriptures only man's heart can have settled rest, and that in them
be abundantly and fully comprehended al things whatsoever be needful for our
health. The same doctrine was established in their conuocations held at London
in the years 1562. and 1604. where we find these words: Holy scripture
contains althinges necessary for salvation, Article 6.
so that whatsoever is not read therein nor proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of the faith, or
be thought necessarily requisite to salvation. Hence Will. in his Sinops. p. 38.
Willet affirms, that the scripture is not one of the means, but the sole,
whole and only means to work faith: And this is the common doctrine of them
al as will appear in the next chapter. But in it as in other points, the
Sectaries of our days follow the steps of the ancient Heretics: for they in
like sort (as it is recorded by ancient Iren. l. 3. c. 2. Tertull. de
praesript. Ciprianus de unit. Ecclesiae. August. l. 32. co^tra Faustu^, et lib.
2. co^tra Maximinu^. Hooker i^ the praeface to his book of Ecclesiastical
policy pri^ted an 1604. p. 36.
authors) rejected the authority of Traditions, Councels, and Fathers, and in
matters of controversy appealed to the scriptures only: Yea, in this they
conform themselves to the Anabaptists, whom they censure to be Heretics of
this age: for they also (as Hooker a Protestant records) admit no other
disputation against their opinions, then only by allegation of scripture.

But they object that every one of the Fathers was subject to error. I
confess it; but yet God according to his promise (as I have above declared)
was so to direct and govern them, that they should not al err: wherefore,
they were not men guided altogether by their own judgments and having no
surer rule; but men directed by the holy Ghost, of which their consent in one
true doctrine is a most manifest token. And whiles these professors of the new
religion contemn and reject these men's authority, what greater authority do
they bring us? Surely none so great; for they bring us only their own
opinions, and perhaps the testimony of their chief ringleaders, who were and
are men directed only by their own judgments and fantasies, of which their
dissension and diversity of doctrine is even as an apparent proof. They say
that they bring us the authority of the word of God: but the Fathers embraced
and reverenced the word of God more then they do. Neither is the controversy
between the word of God and the Fathers, for these two were never repugnant the
one to the other, as the new Sectaries would have it; but between the new
Sectaries themselves and the Fathers, who of them expound the word of God more
truly, as it vvil appear by my discourse ensuing: Wherefore, seeing that none
of them are to be compared with the Fathers, neither for learning, sanctity of
life, nor any other good and virtuous condition, but are in every wise-mans
judgment, far more subject to error then they of whom they make themselves
judges; we are not to be blamed, if we prefer the translation and
interpretation of holy scriptures, left unto us by the said ancient fathers,
before theirs.

Chapter 5. They build not upon the holy Scripture, and first, that the bare
letter of holy Scripture only, is not a sufficient ground of Christian faith
and religion.
SEGTION SHE FIRST. In which this is proved, because by Scripture the Scripture
it self cannot be proved Canonical. It is also argued, that according to the
sectaries grounds there is no Canonical Scripture, and some principal reasons
(especially inspiration of the spirit) which they allege for the proof of
such Scripture, are refelled.
OUR adversaries (as I have showed) have already bereaved themselves of al
Catholic grounder of religion, except the holy Scripture. And this ground
their Captains even now cited, not only challenge to themselves as wholy and
properly theirs, but also seem to make the only foundation and pillar of
their new belief and doctrine. But seeing that they willingly deprive
themselves of al other grounds, we must of necessity deprive them against
their wills of this: for it is a thing most manifest and easily to be proved,
that they build not upon the Scripture, but upon their own fancies and
judgment. And first I must here presuppose as certain, that they deny the
Church to have any extraordinary authority, for the true translation or
interpretation of holy Scripture, and that they admit of no Tradition of the
true sense thereof, preserved always in the same Church together with the
letter. This is apparent, by their making the church subject to error; by their
denying her authority; by their rejecting al unwritten traditions, among which
we number the true exposition of the word of God; by their daily inuenting of
new and strange interpretations, in former ages unheard off; by their rejecting
the testimonies and expositions of the ancient Fathers; and by their alleging
no other authority for their own expositions, but their own judgments.
Hence it is affirmed, Harmony of confess. sect. 1.
in the confession of Heluetia, that the interpretation of Scripture is to be
taken only from her self, and that her self may be the interpreter of her
self, the rule of charity and faith being her guide. And in the confession of
Wittenberge, that the true meaning of Scripture is to be sought in the
Scripture it self, and among those that being raised up by the spirit of God
expound Scripture by Scripture. I add also, that their expositions being
diverse and opposite, they cannot al descend by Tradition from the Apostles, and
seeing that one of them has no more reason to challenge this tradition then
another, we may in like sort deny it to them al: wherefore, that which they
make the only ground of their faith and religion, is the bare word of holy
Scripture interpreted by themselves; and of this their ground because the
matter is of great importance, I purpose to discourse something at large. And
first I will show in this chapter, that the bare and naked letter only of
holy Scripture, is not a sufficient ground of Christian faith and religion.
Then in the chapters following I will prove, that although we should grant the
letter to be a sufficient ground: yet, that their bibles contain not the true
letter. Thirdly, that although this were also granted, yet that they build not
upon the letter contained in their own Bibles. Lastly, that in translating and
expounding the holy Scriptures they follow their own fancies and judgment,
and that they have no other certain and infallible ground: Calvin de ve ra
Eccles. reform. ratione page 473. Apology of the Church of England page 58.
Articles of faith agrreed upon the co^uocations of the years 1562. 1604.
I come to the first.

It is a common maxim or principle among al new Sectaries, that the
scriptures only contain al things necessary to our salvation; and that
nothing is to be believed or necessarily to be observed, which is not expressly
taught, commanded, or allowed in the same; or (as some of them add)
manifestly gathered out of them. Harmony of confess. sect. 1.
In controversies of religion (says the confession of Heluetia) or matters of
faith, we cannot admit any other judge then God himself, pronouncing by the
holy scriptures what is true, what false: what is to be followed, or what
avoided. Al things ought to be tried by the rule and square of holy scripture,
says the French confession. Al things which are needful to be known to
salvation, are contained in the Prophets and Apostles writings, says that of
Wittenberg. And out of this ground they argue against unwritten traditions,
ceremonies, positive laws of the Church, etc. But that this doctrine is false
even according to their own proceedings (supposing that to be true which they
affirm concerning the infallible authority of the Church, to wit: that it is
not expressed in the said scripture nor out of it deduced) it is an easy
matter to demonstrate to every man's eye: for first this authority of the
Church being set aside, by what Scripture can they prove the Scripture it
self to be Canonical. And seeing that I am to discourse of this argument, and
their assertions be intricate; I will not only prove, that according to this
ground they have no canonical Scripture: but also absolutely, that by no other
means they give it any infallible or divine authority. First therefore, I may
very well frame this argument against the whole Bible, out of their aforesaid
ground: Nothing is to be believed but that which is expressly taught in the
written word of god, or manifestly gathered out of the same: but that the Bible
is canonical Scripture it is neither taught in the written word of God, nor
manifestly gathered out of the same; therefore it is not to be believed that the
bible is canonical Scripture. The major or first proposition contains their
aforesaid ground: the minor or second is approved by Hooker, who writes thus:
Of things necessary the very chiefest is, to know what books we are bound to
esteem holy; which point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to
teach. And this afterward he confirms with this reason: For (says he) if
any one book of scripture did give testimony to al; yet still that Scripture
which gives credit to the rest, would require another Scripture to give credit
unto it: neither could we ever come into any pause whereon to rest our
assurance this way; so that unless besides Scripture there were something
which might assure us that we do well, we could not think we do well, no not
in being assured that Scripture is a sacred and holy rule of well-doing: thus
Hooker. And this argument is of such force, that it has constrained some of
them, and among the rest the said Hooker in his treatis. of laws of
ecclesiastical policy, book 1. p. 84. book 2. 4. p. 100. 102 Zauch. in his
confession c. 1. Brent. in prolog. Kemn. in exam. Council. Tridentini.
Hooker, Zauchius, Brentius, and Kemnitius, to fly from Scriptures unto
tradition for the proof of this matter: yea, Hook. book 3. 8. p. 146. See
Whitak. contr. Staple. l. 2. c. 4. page 298. 300.
some of them affirm, that this only tradition concerning canonical Scripture,
is to be rejected. Observations upon the Harmony of confessio^s published by
those of Geneua fol. 593.
Others, and among them the Geneuian doctors affirm, that some books (of which
there was heretofore some doubt among the ancient doctors of the church) were
received as Canonical by the common consent of the whole Catholic Church, and
therefore that they are not to be refused. But who sees not; First, that these
men bewray the weakness of the aforesaid general ground, concerning the
sufficiency of holy Scripture alone: then that if the tradition of the Church,
yea the Church it self in her judicial sentence (as they al affirm) may err
in one point, that it may also err in all others of the same quality; and
consequently, that the authority or tradition of the Church, cannot infallibly
argue the Scriptures to be of divine authority? Calvin instit. book 1. cap. 7.
1.2.4. et 5.
Calvin answers, that the holy books of Scripture by them that have the
spirit, are easily discerned from others by themselves, as light from
darkness, and sweetness from sowrenes or bitterness. And this his opinion is
embraced by diverse, and among the rest by Whitakers, Thomas Rogers, and Field,
and therefore is with some diligence to be refelled. But before I enter into
the confutation of it, I must affirm as certain, that al these authors
require in every man to this, that assuredly he believe the holy scriptures to
be from God, a supernatural inspiration of the holy ghost. That Calvin does so,
his sentences hereafter alleged plainly declare. Whit. i^ his answ. to
Campians first reason, page 47.
Whitakers having affirmed, That it is even as evident the scriptures be from
god, as that the sun is the sun, or that god is God; and also said, that
there are in the books themselves proofs enough to demonstrate it: yet finally
concludes, that the inward and hidden testimony of the spirit must be bad,
that men may firmly rest in the scriptures. Again; Then only do we attain a
certain and saving full assurance, when the same spirit which writ and
published them, does persuade our hearts of the credit of them. Rogers writes
thus: Rogers i^ his discourse upon the articles of faith agreed upon in the
conuocations of the years 1562. 1604. art. 6. p. 31. 32. printed anno 1607.
We judge these books before mentioned Canonical, not so much because learned and
godly men in the Church, so have, and do receive and allow of them; as for
that the holy spirit in our hearts does testify that they are from God, they
carry a sacred and divine authority with them, and they do also agree in all
points with the other books of god in the old testament: hitherto are his
words. Field book 3. cap. 44.. The error.
Field (if I do not mistake him) differs only from others in this, that
whereas most of them reject al supernatural habits in our souls, and attribute
our believing to supenatural inspiratio^s of the spirit: he acknowledges a
supernatural habit of faith, which he calls also a potential ability, Book 4.
c. 13. This judgment.
the light of divine understanding. Book 4. c. 8. Thus then
and the light of grace. And moreover, he does explicate himself a little more
in particular then others: for he distinguishes two sorts of things believed,
Book 4. c. 8. The school men.
whereof some (says he) are such as are believed and never known, as all the
matters of fact that are reported in the Scripture, which we can never know by
the immediate evidence of the things themselves; but mediatly, in that we know
they are delivered unto us by him that cannot lie: Others are first believed,
Ibidem Thus then.
and afterward the understanding being enlightened and the heart cleansed, they
are discerned of us to be true. And he concludes, that in things of the first
sort the formal reason of our faith or inducing us to believe, is the
authority of God himself, whom we do most certainly discern to speak in
the word of faith, which is preached unto us. But in things of the second
kind, he vvil have the said formal reason to be the evidence of the things
appearing unto us, being enlightened by the light of grace: this is the opinion
of Field. But in which of these two sorts of things he places the knowledge
of the authority of holy Scripture, I cannot so plainly as I would discern
by his words: this only I gather as certain out of his discourse, Book 4. c.
7. Thus then
first that the principal cause of our knowledge and belief concerning the
Canonical books proceeds from the habit or light of faith? For this al his
assertions insinuate, and principally these. The spirit induces, moves and
persuades us to believe. By the light of divine understanding, Chapt. 13. This
judgment. Chap. 7. Thus then. Chapt. 8. Thus then. Chapt. 8. Calui^ book 1. of
Institut. chap. 7. 4.
we judge of al things etc. Secondly he affirms in plain words, that
besides the habit of faith or light of divine grace, are required some reasons
or motives, or some reason or motive, by force whereof the spirit setleth the
mind in the persuasion of the truth of things, which were formerly doubted
of. And this reason (as we have heard him say before) in some things is the
evidence of the things appearing unto us, in others the authority of God. He
explicateth himself more plainly by these sentences of Calvin. If we bring
pure eyes and perfect senses, the majesty of God presently presents it self
unto us in the divine Scripture; and beating down al thoughts of contradicting
or doubting of things so heavenly, forces us to obey. Again, After we are
enlightened by the spirit, we do no longer trust either our own judgment or
the judgment of other men, that the Scriptures are of God: But above al
certainty of humane judgment we most certainly resolve, as if in them we saw
the majesty and glory of God; as Moises saw in the mount, that by the ministry
of men they came unto us from Gods own most sacred mouth. Thirdly, We find a
greater light of understanding shining unto us in this doctrine of faith, then
is found within the compass of nature, (a I find not these words following
in Calvin.
satisfaction touching many things, which humane reason could not satisfy us
in, a joy and exultation of the heart, such and so great as grows not out of
nature:) hitherto Field out of Calvin. He adds, that this makes us assure
our selves the doctrine which so affects us, is revealed from God: That they
are the only people of God and have the means of happiness, where this
treasure of heavenly wisdom is found; that these books are the richest jewel
that the world posesseth, and ought to be the Canon of our faith; which this
people delivers us, as received from them, to whom these things were first
of al made known and revealed: thus Field. And this is the common doctrine of
diverse of our Sectaries.

To overthrow this opinion I must first lay this ground: To move us to believe
any article of Christian religion ordinarily, besides the habit of faith or
some supernatural illumination of the spirit, some other reasons or motives
must of necessity concur, by force of which our understanding may be
persuaded, that the thing propounded is credible, and according to prudence
may be believed. This may be proved by authority of Scriptures; for if no such
motives are necessary, to what end did our Lord during the time of his being
here on earth, work such strange miracles? Surely of them he says: John 5, 36.
John 10, 25. John 15, 24.
The very works themselves which I do, give testimony of me that the Father
has sent me. Again, The works that I do in the name of my Father, they give
testimony of me. Finally, If I had not done among them works that no other man
has done, they should not have sin: Out of which places I may well infer,
both that our Savior propounded his doctrine with sufficient arguments of
credibility; and also that if he had not so done, the Jews generally had not
offended God in refusing to believe it, which is expressly affirmed by S.
August. tract. 91. in Ioa^ne^.
Augustine. I add generally, because unto the learned sort it was otherwise
sufficiently proved, and therefore they had sinned although Christ had done no
miracles; yet not so grievously. This caused him likewise, Mark 3, 15. Luk 9
and 10. Mark 16. v 20. See also v. 17. and 18.
to give his Apostles and disciples power to do miracles: and they (as S. Mark
reports) after his asce^tion- going forth preached every where, our Lord
working withal, and confirming the word with signs that followed. Moreover,
commonly all that are said in the Gospels to have believed, believed upon some
credible motive: as the Centurion Luke 23. the Lord whose son was cured at
Caphernaum, John 4. verse 46.53. and diverse others. And so those words of S.
Romans 10.14.
Paul are understood: How shall they believe him whom they never heard, and
how shall they hear without a preacher? that is: without one both expounding
the rule of faith unto them and also propounding such reasons as are sufficient
to move them to believe.

This also all the Apostles practiced, as appears by their sermons recorded in
the acts of the Apostles. Nay further in the old Testament, as it is evident by
holy Scriptures and granted by our Mela^cht. in corpo. doctri. Germa. et in
examine ordi nand. cap. de definit. etc. Oecolampad. in Isa. 23, 21. Aug. lib.
1. ad Simplicianu^, quest. 2. Lib. de spirit. et litt. c. 34. Freder. Staphil.
l. de concord disci. Luther, Petrus Paladius l. de here is. Calvin in Inst.
contr. Liberti. c. 9.
adversaries, the Prophets that were extraodinarily sent, confirmed their
mission by miracles; and why so, if not to yield men sufficient prudent motives
to believe them? Hence are these words of S. Augustine: It is commanded that
we believe to this, that having received the gift of the holy Ghost, we may be
able to work well by love: but who can believe except he be touched by some
vocation, that is: by some testification or testimony of things. Again, A
reasonable soul cannot believe by her freewil, if there be no vocation or
perswation unto which it may believe: hitherto Saint Augustine. Finally, the
truth of this appears by the ordinary manner of proceeding of God with
mortal men, which is not altogether by internal illuminations, as the
Swencfeldians, Libertines, and some Anabaptists dream; but by some common and
external rule: and seeing that according to the Apostle he requires of us only
Romans 12, 1. Field book 4. chapt. 7. Thus then.
a reasonable obsequy, service, or obedience; it can not be said, that he
commands us to believe any thing which is not propounded unto us, and made
credible by prudential motives. In this sense I take Field, who tells us (as
I have partly set down before) that three things concur to make us believe
that, whereof we are doubtful: the light of divine understanding, as that
whereby we apprehend the things of God: the spirit, as the author of this
illumination; and the reasons and motives by force whereof the spirit induces,
moves, and persuades us. And in particular he affirms, that it is not
sufficient for Stapleton to say that he believes the Church to be guided by
the spirit, because the spirit moves him so to believe: but says it is
moreover necessary, that he declare those reasons or motives by force whereof,
the spirit setleth his mind in the persuasion of the truth of those things he
formerly doubted of.

Some man perhaps will object, that no miracles (or at the least very few) are
now wrought in the world; whereupon it may seem to follow according to
this discourse, that Christian Catholic religion is not now sufficiently
propounded as credible. I answer, that although God does always cause his
true religion to be sufficiently propounded in such sort, that any wise man
may prudently embrace it, and believe it true: yet (as is above insinuated) he
does not in every respect make it so credible as is in his power to do, and
that for our greater merit and humiliation. And from this it proceeds, that
among Christians miracles are not now so frequent, as they were in the
primative Church; because they have now not only other sufficient motives,
which may persuade al men of the truth of their religion; but also sufficient
prudential reasons and marks, by which they may discern the true Church from
al false sinagogues, as I have partly declared before, and will declare at large
in my treatise of the definition and notes of the Church.

This then being thus proved, let us behold what prudential arguments our
adversaries bring to prove the Scriptures to be canonical, by force of which
the spirit, induces, moves, and persuades them to believe them. Field (as I
even now related) assigns two motives of our belief, which are causes of
it in two distinct sorts of things: the one, the evidence of the things
appearing unto us; the other, the authority of God himself, whom we do
most certainly discern to speak in the word of faith which is preached unto
us. Calvin seems to assign the majesty of God, which presents it self
unto us in the divine Scriptures. Rogers says: The Scriptures carry a divine
and sacred authority with them, and agree in all points with other books of the
old Testament. But that none of these motives are sufficient to persuade a
prudent man, that these books are according to the rules of wisdom, most
certainly to be accounted divine and canonical, it is easily proved. For first
if they were so, it would follow that every prudent man reading these books,
by this only according to prudence should be moved to give every one of them
this prerogative; but this experience among our adversaries themselves (who
are at variance touching some books whether they be canonical or no) proves
false: therefore these motives are not sufficient.

Field book 4. chapt. 7. There is.
Moreover, No man (as Field tells us) proves a thing doubtful by that which
is as much doubted of, as it self: For this (says he) is, as if one taking
upon him to be a lawgiver whose authority is doubted of, should first make a
law and publish his proclamation, and by virtue thereof give himself power to
make laws, his authority of making the first law being as much doubted of as
the second. Well then this being supposed true, let us see whether the truth of
al such motives as are assigned by our adversaries, moving them (as they say)
to believe the holy scripture, be not as obscure as the divine truth of the
Scripture it self. And first this appears in those which are brought by
Rogers: for it is even as obscure a matter and as hardly to be proved, that
generally all the books of Scripture and every sentence of them, carry an
extraordinary or divine authority with them above al others, as it is that they
are Canonical; so is likewise their agreement with the books of the old
testament: wherefore letting them pass, let us behold whether this be not also
true in such formal reasons of our faith, as (according to Calvin and Field)
move us to believe. And first, whence proceeds that evidence which Field
vvil have in some things believed to appear unto us? Are the articles of our
faith evident in them selves? this he denies of some: for, Field book 4.
Chapter 8. The opinion.
We confess (says he) that faith may rightly be said to be a firm assent,
without evidence of many of the things believed in themselves; but the medium
by force whereof we are to believe, must be evident unto us, as Durandus does
rightly demonstrate: thus Field. But can he make it good, that any such
articles are in themselves evident unto us, as they are the object of our
faith? It is plain that most of them, yea almost al considered howsoever, have
not so much of themselves in respect of our understanding, as evidence and
certainety of credibility, that is: they appear not so certain and credible
unto us, as a prudent man would believe them, setting aside the medium or mean
supernatural, by which they are propounded. But if we consider them precisely
as they are the object of our faith, they al have no other evidence then divine
revelation, as is proved before; which is always obscure. What then is this
medium or mean according to Field? Is it any humane conjecture, motive, or
probability? This cannot be according to his own doctrine, as appears in the
same place and the chapter before. Nay in another place he tells us, Book 4.
chap. 20. Much contention.
that the books of Scripture win credit of themselves, and yield sufficient
satisfaction to al men of their divine truth: and therefore he seems to
exclude al external proof. Is it then any thing contained in the things
themselves? Neither can this be said: for every thing contained in the things
themselves and belonging to their essence, is as obscure as the things
themselves be; and consequently, no such thing contained in the things
themselves, can be such a mean to manifest themselves unto us. And what
accident he vvil assign in the articles of our faith, making them manifest
unto us, I cannot imagine. Secondly, I cannot see how this assertion of Field
does agree with that his common principle, Field book 4. chap. 13.8. book 3.
chap. 42.
auouching that the Scripture is the Canon and ground of their belief, and
that they rest in the determination of the word of God, as in the rule of their
faith: For how can this be, if the evidence of the things appearing unto us, be
sometimes the formal reason of our faith, as is in like sort by him auerred.
But to make this discourse a little more manifest, let us demand a question or
two in particular of M. Field, and see how he vvil resolve them according to
his doctrine delivered. I ask therefore of him, why he believes there be
three persons and one God, two natures in Christ and one person, and the
resurrection of our bodies? Will he answer that the evidence of the things
appearing unto him, is the formal cause of his faith, or inducing him to
believe these mysteries? If he do not, he contradicts his own doctrine: If
he do, he contradicts both al sense and reason, and also himself making the
Scripture the ground of faith; except he affirm these mysteries to be evident
not in themselves, but in the medium or mean, by force whereof they are
believed: For which medium if he will be constant to himself he must assign
the holy Scripture; which Scripture, he must say is believed through the
authority of God himself, whom we do most certainly discern to speak in
the word of faith, which is another cause of belief assigned by him, for such
things as we believe and do not know: so that this authority of God is the
last motive, not the holy Scripture; and what other process he will make I
cannot perceive. But what does he and Calvin understand by that other reason,
which he terms The authority of God himself, whom we do certainly
discern to speak in the word of faith which is preached unto us; and Calvin,
The majesty of God which does present it self unto us? What is this authority
and majesty of God? and how do we so certainly discern it. Verily for my
part, I am so far from knowing how to discern it, as I cannot well imagine
what they mean by it; yet, if I be not deceived they affirm, that the
authority of God or his majesty is seen in the letter of holy Scripture,
which moves us by a supernatural and most infallible assent, to acknowledge
it to be his holy word. But first this is said gratis, and without any ground
or reason: for what authority or majesty can a man discern in such books as
our adversaries receive as Canonical, more then in those which they reject? For
example, what appears to us more divine in the books of Ecclesiastes, then
in the books of Ecclesiasticus? surely nothing; much less, so much as may be
an infallible and known mean to move us to believe the one as divine, and to
reject the other as Apocriphal.

Moreover, how do we know that this representation of divine majesty, or
this divine authority, which as we conceive does represent it self unto us,
is not either some illusion of the Devil, or some strong imagination of our
own proceeding only from some affection, which upon some other motives we
bear to such and such books of Scripture? Truly we have great cause to fear
that it may proceed from some such affection, seeing that Luther, and most of
al his Lutherans confess, all the Sacramentaries generally to be deceived in
such their apprehensions, concerning the epistle to the Hebrews, the epistle
of Saint James, the Apocalipse of S. John, and other parcels of Scripture. And
why not concerning others as well as these? Unto which I add, that they
commonly make their doctrine a rule whereby to try which is Scripture and
which is not, as I vvil demonstrate hereafter, and appears by the causes
assigned by Luther, which moved him to reject the epistle of Saint James. It
may also be objected against this their doctrine, that of it it seems to
follow, that no man can be assured of the divine authority of any other books
of Scripture, then of those which he has read himself, or heard others read:
For first no man can possibly prove to another that in reading such and such
books, he did discern in then the authority of God himself speaking, or that
the divine majesty did in them present it self unto him: wherefore unto this,
that a man may judge of holy Scripture, he must himself read, or hear the
words and sentences read, and this he must do before he can have any faith.
For seeing that they make the Scripture the rule and ground of their belief,
the Scripture must first be known before they can believe: and seeing that no
one book contains al things necessary to be believed, but such things are
dispersed through al, it is necessary that he know the whole Canon of
Scripture; and consequently, that he read or hear it al rehearsed sentence
by sentence. And what a Laborinth is this? how can the unlearned that cannot
read, do it? Nay how many Protestants in the world have ever performed it?
Wherefore I conclude, that this rule or mean how to know holy Scripture, is
neither easy, plain, certain, nOr universal. Perhaps it may be thought by
some, that Field assigns the evidence of the things appearing unto us in
holy Scriptures, as the formal cause of our belief concerning their authority:
but this cannot be, both because our belief concerning their Canonical
authority, seems to be concerning a matter of fact, to wit: whether they
were penned by the instinct of the holy Ghost or no; as also because a great
part of them rehearses matters of fact, which Field denies to be known by
the authority of God himself, whom we do certainly discern to speak in the
word of faith. Field book 4. chapt. 15.
Add likewise that by his confession they are obscure, which obscurity partly
(as he says) arises through the high and excellent nature of the things in
them contained, which if we admit, the things contained in the Scripture, be
no good mean for us to come to the knowledge of Scripture. And moreover,
certain it is that the evidence of things contained in the Scripture, is no
more manifest unto us, then the Scriptures themselves: and therefore for this
reason also, it cannot be any good Medium to prove these Canonical. Field and
al his fellows, to al these reasons objected against them seem to answer,
that in very deed these motives of themselves are not sufficient, to persuade
every man of the divine truth of these books: yet, that they are fully
sufficient to persuade him that is endued with the habit of faith, or has a
divine illumination or inspiration of the spirit, and comes to read the
Scriptures with pure eyes and perfect senses; yea Calvin in his whole
discourse touching the knowledge of canonical Scripture, seems altogether to
fly to divine inspiration, whence proceed these his sentences. Calvin Ins^it.
book 1. chap. 7. 4. and 5.
The manner of persuasion (touching the divine truth of Scriptures) must be
fetched even from the secret testimony of the holy Ghost: They do disorderly,
that by disputation travail to establish the perfect credit of the Scripture.
The word of God shall never find credit in the hearts of men, until it be
sealed up with the inward witness of the holy Ghost. They whom the holy Ghost
has inwardly taught, do wholly rest upon the Scripture: Though by the only
majesty of it self it procures reverence to be given to it; if then only it
thoroughly pearceth our affections, when it is sealed in our hearts by the holy
Ghost: hitherto are Caluins words.

I reply, first that this takes not away the necessity of reading, or hearing
read every sentence of these divine books, before we can know them to be
Canonical, or discern what we are bound to believe. Secondly of this it
follows, that before a man can discern whether any book be Canonical or no,
he must not only have faith or a supernatural light of the holy Ghost: but must
also, most assuredly and infallibly know himself to have such a faith, or
such an illumination. And how will they make us believe this, and also persuade
us that the Scripture is the ground and rule of our belief, which likewise
they even as earnestly teach? can pure eyes, perfect senses, and the light of
faith be had without knoweledge of that, which is the very ground and rule of
faith? Must not the ground be known and had, before we can attain unto that
which is built upon the said ground? If it must, and the whole Canon of
Scripture be the ground of our faith as they say; then must the whole Canon of
Scripture be infalliblie known, before we can have such faith; and
consequently, the light of faith cannot be a mean, whereby we are to come to
the knowledge of the said Canon of Scripture, or any parcel thereof. But
because al Sectaries usually both in this and other points, seem most to
rely upon the inspiration and illumination of the spirit; by which (as they
say) al matters are made evident unto them, and they are assured of the divine
truth of them, although to others not enlightened the same matters seem
doubtful, from whence it proceeds that Field affirms themselves to rest in
the light of divine understanding, Field book 4. chapt. 13. This judgment.
as in that whereby they judge of al things: Let us confute the certainety of
this illumination or inspiration, concerning such particular points,
especially touching the knowledge of divine Scripture, a little more at large.
And first thus I argue: If there be such a certain illumination or
inspiration, either God by this illumination or inspiration, does so teach and
direct every man concerning every article of faith, that they cannot err; or
some men only, and those only touching some articles. That he does not so
direct al concerning al articles, it is evident and confessed by our
adversaries; who acknowledge some to be Heretics, as the Anabaptists and
Swencfeldians; others to err, as diverse of sundry sects etc. That he does not
likewise direct some concerning al points, it is evident; for there is no one
Sectary can be named but has erred in some point or other, especially if we
admit the judgment of other of his brethren to be true: yea Calvin himself
confesses that every man is subject to error, Calu. i^ 1. Cor. 2. v. 15. See
and no man is exempted from it. But every one (says he) as he is regenerated
according to the measure of grace given him, does judge truly and certainly but
no further: thus Calvin, of the same opinion are others. Lubbertus de
pri^cipijs christian. dog. p. 563. Hiero^. Zauchius de script. page 411. 412.
If some only be so infallibly directed, and those only concerning some
articles; first it follows, that god has not sufficiently provided for the
direction of men in matters of belief, for he has prescribed and given no
certain guide in all points, or certain mean to know when their direction is
infallible concerning any, and when it is not. Of which it may secondly be
inferred, that no man can assure himself that he is at any time concerning any
point infallibly inspired: which uncertainty is also increased not only by
this, that the devil does oftentimes (as the Apostle says) transfigure
himself into an Angel of light; 2. Corinthians. 11. verse. 14.
but also, by the experience of the fall and error of diverse of their own
company, and that by their own confession concerning some, when they thought
themselves to be inspired by the spirit; as it falls out in the Anabaptists
and diverse others. Nay in all the Lutherans if we believe the Sacramentaries,
and in all the Sacramentaries if we may give credit to the Lutherans; but
certainly in one side or other of these, because their opinions or
illuminations be opposite: but we may well say on both, because one brings no
stronger proof for his illumination then the other. What wise man then will or
can build his faith, upon such an illumination or direction? Besides this,
Part. 1. chap. 7. Sect. 3.
I have showed in the first part of this treatise, that no private person or
Prelate of the Church, is ordinarily so directed by the holy Ghost that he
cannot err; of which it follows, that no man ordinarily has such a divine
inspiration. I add also, that God does ordinarily proceed in the government
and direction of men, by common rules and directions not by private and
particular, and not without cause: for the first causes charity, unity, order
and humility; of the other springs enmity, division, confusion and pride;
which reason is touched by Hooker a wise and learned Protestant, Hooker book 5.
of Ecclesiastical policy 10.
who rejects such private inspirations of the spirit. And hence it is that
the Prophet Ezechiel says: Ezechielis 13. verse 3. August. tract. 45. in Joan.
Woe to the foolish Prophets, who follow their own spirit, and see nothing.
Finally, the ancient Heretics (as S. Augustine does testify) boasted of such
illuminations: There are innumerable (says he) who do not only boast that
they are videntes or Prophets, but will seem to be illuminated or enlightened
by Christ: but are Heretics. And thus much against the infallible truth of
illuminations in general.

Let us now apply some of these general reasons, to the knowledge of Scripture
by illumination in particular, and also urge them a little further. First
therefore I demand, whether this illumination concerning the authority of
Scriptures, be common to al, or particular to some? If common to al, it
consequently follows that al men reading the Scriptures, are thus
infalliblie and super-naturally inspired of their truth: but that al men are
not thus generally and infallibly led to the knowledge of such divine books,
it is apparent by our adversaries dissension, not only from the ancient
fathers; but also among themselves touching this very point. For did none of
the Fathers judge such books Canonical, as al Protestants commonly reject? it
cannot be denied but they did: for it is evident, Field book 4. chap. 23.
council. Carthag. 3. canon. sess. 47. See also S. Aug. de praedest. cap. 14.
Cap. 8. sect. 1.
and plainly gathered out of Field himself that the third council of Carthage
in which (as he truly says) S. Augustine was present, numbered the books of
Tobias, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and of the Machabees in the Canon.
Do they also among themselves al admit and reject the same books? nothing
less. Luther and his Lutherans reject some, which Calvin, our English
Protestants and others, avouch to be Canonical: and this shall at large be
proved hereafter. But they vvil say this inspiration is particular only to
some, that are enlightened by the spirit, or as Calvin insinuates, only to the
elect: Calui^ Instit. book 1. chap. 7. 5.
and this seems to be their common opinion. Against which I oppose; first
that of this would follow, that there is no certain rule in the Church,
whereby al men may come to a certain knowledge of Gods word: which assertion
is very absurd, especially if the written word of God be the only rule of
faith as they contend. Secondly, the Scripture yields us no warrant for a
divine assurance of any such inspiration, that there is any such in the Church.
They will say that diverse sentences of the word of God plainly approve it, but
the contrary is already showed: and besides this is to fall into a circle, by
proving the truth of Scriptures by divine inspirations, or illuminations; and
the truth of this again by Scripture. Thirdly, it cannot be proved by
Scripture, that this inspiration (if there be any such) is particular to some,
and not common to al. Fourthly, although we should grant this to some, yet no
man can by any warrant of Scripture or prudential ground, assuredly know that
he has such an inspiration; especially considering first, that diverse
sectaries have been deceived and falsely pretended such inspirations, as
appears by their contrariety. Nay I may further add, that either al
Protestants are now deceived in their judgment concerning certain books, or
else that S. Augustine with the whole Council of Carthage erred touching them in
times past, as appears by that which is said a little before; and no man will
deny but an error in either of these, gives a man just cause to mistrust his
own illumination. For certain it is, that S. Augustine was guided by the
spirit, as far forth as any Sectarie. Secondly, his judgment may also grow
doubtful out of this, that the same man may have (as they say) a divine
inspiration touching one book, and be deceived touching another; Stock and
Whitakers in the answer to Duraeus, the first reason. page 48.
for so says Stock out of Whitakers, who tells us, that Al things are not
revealed to al alike, and that al have not the same measure of the spiritte:
Out of which he draws an excuse of the Lutherans, if they believed well of
some, and rejected not well other books of Scripture; and this likewise
seems to be gathered out of Calvin above cited. Fiftlie, others have no
means to know who receives such an inspiration; and consequently, it only
profits the man himself who has it, and no other person: this cannot be
denied; for Luther boasted of the spiritte as far forth as Calvin, yet they
disagreed concerning the Canonical books, and were of different faiths. And
what reason have we, either to grant or deny this inspiration more to the one
then to the other? or what arguments can be brought by the one which cannot be
used by the other? yea of this I infer further, that neither of them had any
such divine inspiration; for seeing that both were not inspired with the holy
Ghost, and one of them had no stronger proofs for his inspiration then the
other, we ought to give no more credit to the one then to the other: and seeing
that we cannot believe them both, we cannot according to reason credit either
of them. And in very deed, neither of them is able to bring any certain reason
or authority, able to persuade any other that he has a supernatural
inspiration, showing that this and that is holy scripture. Finally, of this
whole opinion follow two other great inconveniences or absurdities: first, it
gives every man license to reject and admit books of holy Scripture, out or
into the Canon at his pleasure according to his fancy; for there is no Sectary
but may allege the majesty of the letter, the evidence of things contained in
it, pure eyes, and perfect senses, the light of grace or internal inspiration,
for the proof of his own particular opinion concerning canonical Scripture,
and that with as great probability as any other Sectary be he Lutheran,
Sacramentary, or of what other sect soever: Neither can this refel him, unless
they refute themselves. In like sort if he deny these proofs to any book
whatsoever, no man can convince him of error: and of this may follow without
any certainty, almost as many opinions of this matter, as there be heads.
Secondly, by this allowance of an inspiration, for the proof of the letter of
canonical Scripture, the way is opened to the allowance of private inspiration
also, for the knowledge of the true sense and exposition of the same; which is
denied by Field, Field book 4. chap. 16.
and is in very deed a very fountain of discord and confusion. But what proofs
can they bring for the one, which cannot be applied to, yea not as well prove the
other? And these reasons (as I imagine) moved the authors before named, to fly
from this private inspiration to Tradition and the authority of the Church.
Unto whom in my judgment, I may add the whole Protestant Church of England,
who in their sixth article agreed upon in their conuocations of the years 1562.
and 1604. affirm, that in the name of holy Scripture, they understand those
Canonical books of the old and new Testament, of whose authority was never any
doubt in the Church: for they seem to make the authority and Tradition of the
Church, the mean and rule whereby to know the divine Scriptures. Field book
4. chap. 14.
Yea Field himself in another place tells us; that we cannot know the
Scriptures to be of God, without the knowledge of such principal articles as
are contained im the Creed of the Apostles: Of which it may seem laweful to
conclude against him, that some other thing is necessary besides divine
inspiration, and other motives above by him assigned. The Lutherans of
Wittenberg confess the Church to have authority to judge of doctrines,
Harmony of confess. sect. 10. p. 332. Author of the treatise of the scripture
and the church, c. 15. p. 72. see also c. 19. p. 74. 75. Bulle^ger in the
praeface before that book.
according to that; Try the spirittes whether they be of God. Another
Protestant (in a treatise of the Scripture and the Church, highly commended by
Bullenger) plainly tells us, that we could not believe the Gospel, were it
not that the Church taught us, and witnessed that this doctrine was delivered
by the Apostle: and thus much against this opinion.

But it may be here objected against us, that we also according to the second
opinion delivered in the first part of this treatise, concerning the last
resolution of our faith, allow a supernatural gift or light; by the concourse
and help of which we firmly assent to Christian belief as revealed by God;
and that therefore there is no cause, wherefore we should so earnestly impugn
the like assertion in others. I answer, that there is great difference
between us and our adversaries concerning this point: for whereas I have
showed, that they require a particular illumination and immediate instruction
from God himself, concerning every particular book and sentence of holy
Scripture; yea, touching the exposition of every sentence as I vvil declare
hereafter; and by no prudential grounds or arguments of credibility, are
ordinarily induced to this persuasion: But seeing that diverse of their own
company, and those of the principal, thinking themselves to be inspired, have
erred, have rather according to prudence just cause not to stand upon such
illuminations. We assign the the light of faith for the belief of a common
guide and general directour and so require not a particular instruction for the
belief of this and that particular matter; but having believed the said
general guide, of it receive infallible and divine instructions, what
particulerlie is to be believed. Neither do we this without any prudential
motive, or credible reason, but induced thereunto by most strong arguments of
credibility; R^chardus de S. Victore l. 1. de Trinit. cap. 2.
insomuch as we may well say with Richardus de sansto Victore, that If we be
deceived God has deceived us. Neither are we by this persuaded arrogantlie to
follow a private rule, which is a fountain of dissension, and contrary to
the usual proceedings of God; but humbly to submit our selves and our
understanding to the authority of a general guide, which is a preservative of
unity, and according to the common courses of that heavenly King.

But before I pass from this matter, I must needs have a word or two with M.
Field in particular, who requires more then humane inducements or motives, as
reasons, by force whereof we are persuaded first to believe: Field book 4.
chap. 7. and 8.
and seems to require a divine reason or testimony, conuincing that which is
believed to be of divine authority, and so to impugn the first opinion of
Catholics concerning the last resolution of faith, Part 1. chap. 7. sect. 6.
delivered in the first part of this treatise. For whereas the followers of
that opinion, assign humane motives as the first inducements to our belief,
or as causes why we first accept of the same, and bring no other external
proof that the mysteries of our faith are revealed by God: book 4. chap. 8.
The opinion
he exacteth of us a divine proof of this, these are his words: The opinion of
the ordinary Papists is, that the things pertaining to our faith are believed,
because God reuealeth and delivers them to be so, as we are required to
believe, but that we know not that God has revealed any such thing but by
humane conjecture and probabilities: so weak do they make our faith to be
grounded: thus Field. Concerning which his imputation, I must first request my
reader if he be any thing moved by these his words, to turn to the explication
and proof of the Catholic opinion set down before in the first part of this
treatise, Chapt. 7. sect. 6.
because I think it needless to repeat one thing twice. Secondly, I cannot
but wish him also to note, how diversely Field reports our opinions: for
although he plainly here affirm, that our ordinary opnion is, that the
articles of our faith are believed, because God reuealeth and delivers them
to be so, yet in another place he writes thus. Our adversaries fall into two
dangerous errors; the first, Book 4. c. 6.
that the authority of the Church is Regula fidei et ratio credendi, the rule
of our faith and the reason why we believe: The second is, that the Church may
make new articles of faith. And like as he himself in the words even now
alleged, freeth us from the first of these dangerous errors: Book 4. chap.
12. Our adversaries.
so likewise in another place he freeth us from the second. But as concerning
my present purpose, out of his aforesaid words I gather; that if he will not
fall into the same fault for which he blames us, he must not only assign such
a divine formal cause of his belief concerning every point, as we teach the
revelation of God to be: but also add some divine proof, proving this formal
reason to be divine, and not only humane probabilities. And what such divine
proof does he assign? surely none that I can find; he tells us in deed,
that in some things the evidence of the things appearing unto us, Book 4.
chap. 8. thus the^.
and in others the authority of God discerned to speak in the word of faith,
is the formal cause of their faith, or inducing them to believe. But I find no
divine proof, no not so much as a wise reason; I add moreover not so much as
a foolish reason, brought neither for the one nor for the other: nay he
expressly tells us, Book 4. chap. 20. Much contention. see also chapt. 7. Thus
then. Book 4. chap. 7. Surely. See hi^ also There is etc.
that The books of Scripture win credit of themselves, and yield sufficient
satisfaction to al men of their divine truth; wherefore he seems, contrary to
that which he had said before, to require no other reason by force whereof the
spirit moves him to believe the Scripture, but the Scripture. Neither should
he only bring a divine proof for these matters, but also to show the
certainty of his supernatural illumination, of which al these depend. And
how will he do this? vvil he prove it by Scripture? This cannot be done, least
that he fall into a circle, and according as he makes the Psalm say of the
wicked, Run round til he be giddie, and be at the end where he was when he
began: for by this illumination he is come to the knowledge of Scripture, and
consequently it must not be proved out of Scripture; and what other divine
proof he will assign, for my part I cannot imagine. Neither can he say, that
this illumination is believed for it self: for then he both grants that
something must be believed without divine proof; and also, that al things are
not believed because they are contained in the Scripture, and consequently,
that the Scripture is not the only ground of our faith. Many places of
Scripture are alleged out of the written word of God by our adversaries, to
prove the certainty of private illuminations: and seeing that I can not stand to
give the true sense of them, I desire my reader only to consider in general,
that such sentences as they allege (if they prove any thing for them, and are
to be understood as they pretend) prove the judgment of every Christian man,
or at the least of every spiritual man to be infallible: which being false, as
appears both in the ancient Fathers, and also in themselves; we may well
infer that they have some other sense.

Field affirms, that Saint Augustine in a certain place does fully agree
unto his opinion, showing that the authority of the Church, is but an
introduction to the spiritual discerning of things divine. I answer, that
Saint Augustine in the chapter by him cited only affirms, that because al men
are not capable at the first, to understand the sincere wisdom and truth
taught in the Church, God has ordained in it two motives which may first move
them to seek it, to wit: miracles, and multitude of believers. Aug. de
vtilitate credendi cap. 16.
Authoritas (says he) praesto est, quam partim miraculis, partim multitudine
valere, nemo ambigit: The authority of the Church is at hand which no man
doubts, partly through miracles, partly through multitude to be of force viz.
to move men.

Field to make this sentence seem the better for his purpose, Book 4. c. 8.
translateth the word (valere) stands upon: and makes Saint Augustine say,
that the authority of the Church stands upon two things etc. but how truly
every grammar scholar may discern. That which he alleges out of Hugo de
sancto Victore, is as little to the purpose, but (as I think) far more falsely
translated: for if in the English immediately following the Latin in the same
different letter, he does intend a translation of the Latin going before (as
every man vvil judge he does) he deals in it most corruptly and untruly,
and so I leave him for this present.

SECTION THE SECOND. In which the same argument is prosecuted, and two things
principally are proved. First, that the new Testament receives small
authority (if we believe our adversaries) by this that it was written by the
Apostles and Disciples, because they accuse them of error. Secondly because
they confess the text of Scripture to be corrupted.
HAVING evidently confuted in the section next before, the chiefest and most
common reasons, by which the Sectaries of our days endeavor to prove the
divine authority of holy Scripture, let us now behold such other reasons as
may be brought according to their principles, and together insinuate some other
their assertio^s which diminish the credit of these holy books. And to pass
over (as a thing manifest) that the authority of (...) new Testament cannot
sufficiently and infalliblie be proved ^uine, by the testimony of the old;
some perhaps will say, that the authority of the old is confirmed and ratified
by the new. But how is the new it self proved to be Canonical? which
prerogative if we deny it, the old will receive but little credit from it.
Peradventure they will answer, that they know the new to be Canonical,
because it was written by the Apostles and Disciples of Christ inspired by
the holy Ghost. I reply and demand, first, how they can prove this to be true
by canonical Scripture? What canonical Scripture for example (if we deny the
said Gospel to be Canonical) tells us that S. Matthew the Apostle wrote that
Gospel, which we term S. Mathewes Gospel? Secondly, although we suppose it to
be true, that the Apostles and Disciples were the authors of the new
Testament, yet how can they prove that in penning it they have not erred? What
canonical Scripture have they for this? Certainly our adversaries make al
their successors subject to error; wherefore it seems, that they will not be
very scrupulous to grant it of the Apostles and Disciples themselves.

Luther tom. 5. in c. 1. ad Galath. fol. 290. Act. 7. v. 14. Luther in cap 46.
Genes.
But do they not moreover in express terms, condemn them of error? Who can
deny this? Luther himself (after that he had affirmed that he would not
submit his doctrine to the censure of the Fathers, no not to the censure of
S. Peter nor S. Paul, nor of any Angel from heaven) adds in defense of this
his action, that S. Peter did live and teach besides the word of God. In
another place, in plain terms he accuses S. Steven of error in following
the 70. Interpreters, who as he says, erred concerning the number of those
that went down into Egypt. Nay moreover, discoursing of extreme unction,
Luth. de captiuita. Babil. c. de extrema unction. Luther i^ Isai 64. Martyr in
1. Corinthians. 2. fol. 46. Centur. 1 lib. 2 c. 10. Col. 1600. 180.
he tells us; that Although the epistle said to be of S. James, were in deed
and truly his; yet he would say, that it was not lawful for an Apostle of his
own authority to institute a Sacrament: By which he seems plainly to
confess; that the Apostles in their Apostolic writings were subject to such
faults: finally he tells us, that S. Paul 1. Corinthians. 2. verse. 9. does finely
wreth or wrest a certain sentence of the Prophet Isay; but Peter Martyr
avouches, that he mistook the Hebrewe word. Hence the Centuriatores his
scholars, note certain Naeui or lapsus (so they term them) that is,
freckles or moles and falls of S. Peter, S. Paul, and S. James Apostles; as
that of S. Peter at Antioch for which he was reprehended by S. Paul, of which
also Calu. in ca. 2. ad Galat. et in Mat. 26.
Calvin; that of S. James at Jerusalem, in persuading S. Paul to purify
himself according to the law of Moises in the Sea also the same Calvin
touching S. Paulin 2. Cor cap. 1. and S. James in cap. 21. Act. Act. 21. v. 15.
etc.
temple; and lastly they accuse S. Paul of error, in yielding to the
persuasion of S. James. The same is affirmed by Brentius and diverse others,
concerning S. Peter and James, and the whole Church of Jerusalem: Brent. in
Apolog. co^fess. Wittenberg. c. de co^cilijs.
Both S. Peter Prince of the Apostles (says he) and Barnabas also after the
holy Ghost received, and together with them the whole Church of Jerusalem
erred, Galat. 2. of the same opinion are other sectaries. Bulle^ger in
Apocalip. 19. and 22.
Bullenger has the like stuff touching S. John. Do not also Beza and our
English Protestants themselves seem to confess, that Luc. 3. v. 36
S. Luke in his Gospel erred, in making Arphaxad the father of Cainan, and
Cainan of Sale; whereas in the book of Genesis, Arphaxad is said to have been
the father of Sale? For if S. Luke did not err, why do Beza in his translat.
our Protestants in their Bible printed, anno 1595. authorized to be read in
Chur.
they (notwithstanding that al copies both Latin and Greek in this accord)
thrust out of the text these words, who was of Cainan; and make S. Luke say
that Arphaxad was the father of Sale. Add unto this that Musculus in locis
communibus cap. de Iustificat. number. 5.
Musculus no mean Sectary, to the Catholics objecting the authority of S.
James against justification by faith only, makes this answer: that he
whosoever he was, although the brother of Christ and a pillar among the
Apostles, and a great Apostle above measure (as Gal. 2. v. 9. 2. Cor. 12, 12.
S. Paul says) cannot prejudice the truth of only faith. Molinae. in union
quat. Eua^g. par. 64
Another of them testifies, that certain of his learned brethren limit and
restrain those words of Christ: He that hears you hears me, that Christ
only is to be heard, that is to say: that his word only is to be preached; that
the Apostles were subject to error in going beyond their commission, and
therefore that they are not to be heard, but when they relate unto us the very
words of Christ. Thus he vvriteth upon the said sentence; These words (he
that hears you, hears me) limit that Christ only be heard, that is: that
his word only be preached, as most learned Philip Melancthon expounds, etc.
For so expounds John Brentius, saying: That Christ when he says: He that
hears you, hears me, speaks not of al words of the Apostles whatsoever,
but of the prescribed commandment of their embassage. Thus Carolus Molinaeus.
From this opinion Call. l. 4. Inst. c. 8. 4. and 7.
Calvin himself seems not much to dissent, whose words are these: The
Apostles in their very name show how much is permitted them in their office,
that is: if they be Apostles that they should not babble what they please, but
should deliver truly his commandments by whom they were sent: and soon
after he plainly insinuates, Modrenius lib. 2. de Eccles. cap. 2.
that he would have Christ only heard. Further, one Fricius a very learned
Protestant tells us, that although he should grant that S. James gave the
communion under one kind only, yet that his authority is not to be admitted
seeing that Christ said: Eat and drink. Clebetius in victoria veritatis et
ruina papatus Saxoni. argume^to 5.
Clebetius one of the chief ministers of the County Palatine of Rhene,
grants to his adversary; that S. Mathewe and S. Mark in their gospels
contradict S. Luke: but says that he has two against one, and that S. Luke
was not present at the last supper (concerning the history of which, the
controversy was between him and his adversary) as S. Matthew was, and
therefore that he deserved less credit. Finally, Zuinglius being impugned for
denying prayer for the dead, and pressed with the authority of Fathers
(especially of S. Chrysostom and S. Augustine, who derive this custom from
the Apostles) answered thus. Zuing. tom. 1. Epicherae. de can. Missae fol. 186.
See him also tom. 2. in Eleuch. co^t. Anabap. fo. 10.
If it be so as Augustine and Chrysostom report, I think that the Apostles
suffered certain to pray for the dead, for no other cause then to condescend
to their infirmity: hitherto Zuinglius; in which words he confesses that the
Apostles wilfully suffered some to err, which could not be done without
error in themselves. And out of al these assertions of our adversaries, in
which they either accuse the vvriters of holy Scripture of error, or make them
subject thereunto, I infer; that the new Testament may contain errors,
although we should grant it to be written by the Apostles and Disciples of
Christ.

But let us also add, that although we should grant them that the Apostles
and Disciples could not err in penning these sacred books: yet that it is a
hard matter for them to prove, that the new Testament since their days, has
not either through negligence or malice been corrupted. For had not the
Catholics their enemies, by their own confession the keeping of it for the
space of diverse hundreds of years? how know they then that the said Catholics
to serve their own turns, have not corrupted it? Surely they confess their
own brethren to have falsified it within few years, in diverse places:
wherefore, one sect rejects the translation of another. Do they then think
us and our predecessors, more sincere then they are themselves? Perhaps some
ignorant man will say, that it has been always in the custody of those of
their religion; but it is certain; that they cannot possibly assign any
succession of men of their profession, that could always keep it. I demand
also (if any man will needs say that there were such men, although invisible in
the world, and mentioned off by no Author of any one age since the Apostles
days) whether they were Lutherans, Zuinglians or Caluinists, or of what
other sect? If they were Lutherans, how do the Zuinglians, Caluinists, and
other Sectaries know that they kept it sincerely and truly? if they were
Zuinglians, how do the Lutherans know the same? The like question I demand
concerning other Sectaries, and none of them I think will be so absurd, as to
say that al these sects have ever been in the world.

But let us see whether they do not plainly confess, that the text of
Scripture it self has been corrupted. Beza in praefat. noui Test. anno.
1556. et Annota. in 1. Luc. v. 1.
Although Beza prefer the vulgar Latin edition which we use, before al other
translations, and confesses that the old Interpreter translated very
religiously; yet both he and all the professors of the new religion, prefer
the Hebrew of the old Testament and the Greek of the new, far before it. And
as concerning the Greek translation of the old by the 70. Interpreters, Luther
in ca. 40. Genesis. Mu^st. in bibl. Hebraicis. Act. 7. v. 14. Calui^ in Antid.
Sinodus Trident. sess. 4. page 372.
Luther and Munster plainly condemn it of error; and the first of them in
particular affirms, the text alleged of it by S. Steven in the seventh
chapter of the acts of the Apostles (as he cites it) to be erroneous, our
Latin bibles are also censured by Calvin to be most corrupt: wherefore, they
always where they can translate the Hebrew of the old and the Greek of the
new; rejecting as it were, the Greek of the old and the Latin of the new: but
that both the Hebrewe of the old and Greek of the new be corrupted, it is
manifest by their own confession. And first it cannot be denied, but that they
some times correct both the Hebrewe and Greek text: as for example, in the
Hebrewe psalm 22. whereas the Hebrewe word for word ought thus to be
translated, As a lion my hands and my feet; they translate according to the
Greek and vulgar Latin thus: They have peirced my hands and feet. The examples
of the Greek in the new which principally pertains unto Christians, are
almost infinite: I will only set down a few out of Beza and our English
translatours. If then the Greek text be not corrupted, wherefore do these
translatours (whereas Hebrews 9. verse 1. the Greek text has the first
tabernacle) read the first covenant? Again, Romans 11. ver. 21. they translate
not according to the Greek text, eruing the time; but according to our vulgar
Latin, serving our Lord. Apoc. 11. verse. 2. their translation is not according
to the Greek, The court which is within the temple; but according to the
Latin, The court which is without the temple. 2. Tim. 1. verse. 14. they add
the word (but) out of the Latin. James 5. verse. 12. they forsake the Greek and
follow our Latin, reading, Least you fall into condemnation. In these and other
places they correct the Greek text, and consequently confess it to be
corrupted. But as touching Beza in particular I should make a long discourse,
if I should recite al such places as in the Greek he accuses of corruption.
Act. 13. verse. 20. He calls it a manifest error, that in the Greek we read
four hundred years (as he says) for three hundred. Act. 7. verse. 18. He
makes a whole Catalogue of corruptions. In S. Matthewes Gospel (as he
confesses in his Preface to the new Testament) he corrected diverse errors;
and sundry other such testimonies he gives of the corruption of the Greek
text of the new Testament. But does not he moreover besides these his general
corruptions (which he thinks perhaps not done of malice) also suspect, that
we have even of malice willingly and wittingly falsified the Scriptures? verily
he does. And to bring fourth three or four examples to prove this his
assertion. Beza in annotat. noui Testament. an. 1556.
Math. 10. verse. 2. the Greek text has: The first Simon who is called Peter.
But what says Beza? he tells us, that he thinks the word (first) to have
been added to the text, by some that sought to establish Peter's primacy.
Again, Luke 22. verse. 20. according to the Greek text we read; This is the
Chalice, the new Testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you. In which
sentence the Relative (which) according to the Greek, is not governed by the
Noune (blood) but by the word (Chalice) to signify unto us, that the blood of
Christ, as the contents of the Chalice, or as in the Chalice was shed for us.
But what says Beza? he affirms it to be most probable, that the words
(which is shed for you) being sometime but a marginal note, came by
corruption out of the margent into the text. Act. 7. verse. 43. the Greek has;
Figures which you made to adore them: It may be suspected says Beza, that
these words (to adore them) as many others, have crept by corruption out of
the margent into the Text. 1. Cor. 15. verse. 57. He thinks that the Apostle
said not Victory, as it is in all Greek copies, but Contention: And thus much
concerning the corruption of the text of holy Scripture.

And out of this discourse it is evident, first that our adversaries cannot
prove by Canonical Scripture, that the Scripture it self is Canonical;
secondly, that they cannot prove that the new Testament was written by the
Apostles and Disciples of Christ; thirdly, that although this be admitted, yet
that they cannot prove that the said Apostles and Disciples in penning it did
not err; lastly, that they cannot prove the Scriptures to remain sincere and
not corrupted: yea I have declared, that they confess that the Apostles and
Disciples were subject to error, and that the Hebrewe and Greek text which
they esteem above al others, is corrupted. Out of al which positions so
manifestly proved, I conclude; that the bare words of Scriptures are not a
sufficient ground of Christian faith and religion. And although this argument
concerning the whole Bible, and in particular touching the new Testament, be
invincible and insoluble; yet, a far greater difficulty there is according to
their ground mentioned, that nothing is to be believed, but that which is
expressly contained in the Scripture, or gathered out of the same concerning
those books of Scripture, which have long after the Apostles days been in
the Church of doubtful authority (of which before) and yet are now received by
our adversaries into the Canon. For what one sentence of the word of God
removing al doubt, declared their authority to be divine? Surely after the
doubt had of them, there was no Scripture written; and before, the matter in
the said Scripture was not decided: wherefore, if we allow the Scriptures only
to be a sufficient judge of such controversies, our adversaries themselves
contrary to their own proceedings, must of necessity be forced to confess
such parcels of Scripture, to be as yet of doubtful authority. And this is not
only granted by Brentius in confess. Wittenberg. cap. de sacra Scriptura,
anno. 1552.
Brentius and certain other Lutherans, who acknowledge those books of
Scripture only to be Canonical, of whose authority there was never any doubt
made in the Church: but also may seem to be confessed by our countriman M.
Whitaker, who touching the Epistle of S. James received tells us, that he
does Whitaker against Campian, reason the first, p. 28.
not enquire how justly that might be received in a succeeding age, which once
was rejected; yea, our whole Church of Conuocat. Lon. an. 1562. and 1604. ar. 6
England allows of the position of Brentius in Apolog. confess. Wittenb.
Brentius, even now mentioned. Wherefore, these sectaries must reject out of
the Canon (if they vvil be constant to themselves) not only the Epistle of S.
Geneuain obseruat. upon harmony of co^fess. sect. 1.
Paul to the Hebrews, the Epistles of S. James and S. Jude, the second of S.
Peter, and the second and third of S. John, together with the Apocalipse, whose
authority (as is confessed by the Doctors of Geneua, by Brentius, and all the
Lutherans, yea as it is recorded by diverse Fathers as I have showed before, nay
further as it is granted by Thomas Rogers an English Protestant, Thomas Rogers
upon the 6. Artic. Propos. 4. pa. 31. See also Whitaker before cited, and the
disputat. had in the Tower with F. Campian in the 4. days co^feren.
in his discourse upon the Articles of Religion of the year 1562. and before
him by Whitakers and others) has been sometimes doubtful; but also certain
other parcels of Scripture by them likewise received, as I could declare out of
diverse approved Authors. The Doctors of Geneua to prove the books named to be
Canonical, fly to the authority of the Church; for they will have them admitted
as such, because they were received and acknowledged as Canonical, by the
consent of the whole Catholic Church; although some doubt were made of them
sometimes by the ancient Doctors: but this according to their own ground, is
to give them no divine authority, as I have already noted.

And before I end this section I cannot but add, that I would wish M. Rogers
(whom I even now named) to look a little better into his books, if hereafter
he chance to publish any with such approbations, as he does pretend in the
beginning of this: For I cannot see but writing in defense of the sixth Article,
he overthrows the same, by granting that which I have alleged him
confessing. To make this a little seen unto him, thus I argue: In the name of
the holy Scripture, we do understand those Canonical books of the old and new
Testament, of whose authority was never doubt in the Church; (These are the
words of the Article): Page 26.
but of some books of the new Testament, there has been doubt in the Church
as appears by those M. Rogers words (Some of the ancient Fathers and
Doctors accepted not all the books, Page 31. propos. 4.
contained within the volume of the new Testament for Canonical) therefore all the books contained in the volume of the new Testament, are not understood in
the name of holy Scripture. This conclusion necessarily follows of the
premises granted, as every man sees; and yet is directly contrary to the
last words of the same Article, Page 26. Page 31. propos. 4.
in which they profess themselves to receive and account as Canonical, all the
books of the new Testament, as Rogers himself affirms.

SECTION THE THIRD. The same is proved, because every Christian is bound to
admit and believe certain propositions, neither expressly contained, nor
(according to some men's judgments) so evidently gathered out of the holy
Scripture.
SECONDLY it is apparent, that the bare letter of holy Scripture, and
conclusions out of it manifestly deduced by every private man, setting a side
the authority of the Church (as above) are not a sufficient ground or rule of
Christian belief and religion; because every true Christian is bound to admit
and believe, certain propositions concerning the mysteries and articles of our
faith, which are not expressly contained in the letter, nor (as some of them
think) so evidently deduced out of the same, especially if we allow of our
adversaries Commentaries. The first is easily proved; for where do we find in
the whole Bible the words, Trinity, person, and consubstantial? and yet most
of the Professors of the new religion vvil not deny, but that every Christian
under pain of damnation, is bound to believe and admit in express terms
these propositions following: There is a Trinity, there be three persons in the
blessed Trinity; the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are consubstantial
the one to the other, and such like: yea Beza himself confesses, that without
the use of these words, Beza lib. de hereticis a civilly magistratu puniendis,
page 51. also in Ep. Theol. 81. page 334. 335. See part 1. chap. 9.
the truth of those mysteries cannot be explicated, nor the deniers of them
confuted; And it is manifest, that whosoever rejects these words does open
the gappe to Iudaisme, Arianisme, and Turcisme. But some of them fly to
deduction out of Scriptures; and answer, that although the words are not
expressly found in the Bible, yet that the mysteries themselves are expressly in
it contained and delivered; and conseqnently, that the words aptly signifying
the said mysteries, and deduced out of the word of God it self, may very well
and conveniently be used. I reply that this is not sufficient: for every
private man's deduction is subject to error, except it be by an infallible
argument, and every proposition be most evidently true, in that sense in which
it is alleged: wherefore, such deductions as our adversaries commonly use,
make no articles of faith: Secondly, the collections themselves of these high
mysteries, (by reason of the obscurity and diversity of senses of the holy
Scripture) are not seldom obscure; and therefore those collections which to
some seem evident, by others are judged false. Hence the collection of those
very mysteries which I have named, by diverse of our adversaries is denied; as
by Valentinus Gentilis and his followers, Valent. Gentilis in co^fess. apud
Calvin, page 930. and in Prothes. Pastor. Breme^sis, in hist. Vale^t. Gentil.
who affirm the three persons to have three distinct natures or essences, and
the Father to have been before the Son, and the Son before the holy Ghost;
Who make also the one inferior to the other, etc. The same collection is
likewise denied by Seruetus and his disciples, Seruetus li. de erroribus
Trinitatis.
who acknowledged no distinction of persons in God, made Christ a pure man, and
denied him to have been before his incarnation. Finally, by Georgius
Blandrata, Paulus Alciatus, and other Scholars of these men, who Greg. Paul.
apud Hosium in judicio and ce^sura de adoranda Trinitate. See Hooker book 5.
of eccles. policy,. 42.
affirmed that Luther began to pull down the roof, they raised: the
foundations of Popery; who condemned all the ancient Councels and Fathers
reverenced by all Christians, of Beza epist. Theolog. 81.
tritheisme or making of three Gods; termed S. Athanasius, Sathanasius;
avouched the blessed Trinity (which most blasphemously they called Cerberus
and the tripartited God) to be an invention of his; and called the Fathers of
the first Nicene Council, blind Sophists, Ministers of the Beast, slaves of
Antechrist, bewitched with his illusions, etc. yea, some of these new
sectaries went so far in this matter, that they forsook Christ altogether,
and became Turks: among whom were Simlerus in praefat. lib. de aeterno Dei
filio. Gregor. Paulus lib. de Trinitat. Volanus in parauesi ex epist.
Blandratae in co^fut. judicij Polonicarum ecclesiaru^. Of Neuser. this is
testified by C^nr. Schluss. in Catal. haeret. lib. 11. de Seruetianis.
Bernardinus Ochinus, Alamannus, Georgius Blandrata, Adamus Neuserus, Johannes
Siluanus, Gregorius Paulus, and Andreas Volanus, al Ministers of great name and
fame. Franciscus David denied Christ, and willed al men to return to the law
of Moises and circumcision, and so to become Jews. And do not all the new
sectaries by their common doctrine, offer an occasion of al these blasphemies
and apostasies? Surely they do; both by leaving no evident, certain, and
sufficient rule by which such men may be confuted, and attributing over much
to the sufficiency of the bare letter of holy Scripture, and also by rejecting
certain words and propositions of ours, as manifestly gathered out of the
holy Scripture: as the words Trinity, person, and consubstantial, and the
propositions by them declared. For out of these grounds some of the preciser
sort of them argue, that we ought not to admit into our belief, or use in the
explication of out faith, any words not contained and expressed in the word of
God. For (say they) the Scripture being so sufficient, wherefore should we
use any words invented by man? what need have we of any strange deductions,
or any other thing? If these words be admitted, we may even as well admit the
word, transubstantiation, and other new inventions of the Papists, etc. thus
the preciser sort and the enemies of the blessed Trinity dispute. And to
discourse a little more at large of the word, transubstantiation; Ask an
English Protestant what reason he has to reject it? He will answer, both
because it is not found in the Scripture, and also because the thing by it
signified (to wit, the changing of bread and wine into the body and blood Of
Christ) is not collected out of the same. Demand likewise of an Arian why he
admits not the word consubstantial? He will answer, because neither the
word it self is used in holy writ, nor the thing signified thereby, (to wit:
that the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are of the same substance) truly
gathered out of the same. Behold the answer of both is one, and certainly the
reason yielded serves both alike; for like as the word transubstantiation, so
the word consubstantial is not found in the Scripture, but both these words
have been appropriated by the Church, to signify more distinctly and plainly
mysteries expressed truly in the word of God, but not so plainly: wherefore,
if one of them be rejected, the other cannot be received. They say, that the
thing signified by the word transubstantiation, is not in express terms to
be found in the Scripture. I reply, that like as the real presence by the
confession of their own brethren the Lutherans, is so plainly delivered unto
us by the Evangelists, that it cannot be denied (which nevertheless by them is
utterly rejected:) so likewise is transubstantiation. And like as if we admit
of their translations, and interpretations of holy Scripture, neither the real
presence, nor transubstantiation is out of them gathered: so in like sort,
neither is the mystery signified by the word consubstantial gathered out of
the said Scripture, if we admit the translations and interpretations of the
Arians. Yea I dare boldly affirm, that if we allow but of Caluins
Commentaries upon the Scriptures (which some of our Hooker in the preface to
his book of eccles. policy page 9. Couel in his defense of Hooker.
English Protestants so highly esteem) that neither of these mysteries are
expressly contained in the word of God. For like as with our Sacramentaries he
expounds it against the real presence: so with the Arians he expounds it
against the divinity of Christ. Part. 2. chap. 1. sect. 3.
And this (as I have noted before) is very well declared by diverse Protestants,
especially by Aegidius Hunnius in a book which he set forth with this title:
Calvin playing the Jew, that is to say; the Jewish glosses and corruptions by
which John Calvin abhorred not after a detestable manner, to corrupt the most
noble and famous places of holy Scripture, and testimonies of the glorious
Trinity, the Deity of Christ, and the holy Ghost, etc. printed at Wittenberge
anno 1593. Also by Conradus Schlussenbergius, in his second book of the
divinity of the Caluinists, and diverse others. But if we reject al heretical
interpretations, both these mysteries are expressly contained in the Scripture;
and therefore our adversaries have no more reason to refuse the word
transubstantiation, then they have to refuse the word consubstantial: and by
rejecting the first they give occasion to the Arians to reject the second,
because they have no greater proofs for this then we have for that. And hence
it appears, how vveake a ground the naked letter of Scripture is, and what
small force deductions out of it, commonly made by every private man's discourse,
have; and consequently, what a feeble foundation they build their salvation
upon, who have no other ground.

SECTION THE FOVRTH. The insufficiency of the bare letter of holy Scripture is
proved by other arguments, especially by this; that the true interpretation
cannot be infallibly gathered out of the letter.
LET us add unto these reasons, that although we should grant to our
adversaries, that the bare letter of holy Scripture is sufficiently proved true
by the Scripture it self (which assertion notwithstanding I have demonstrated
to be false) yet, that an other argument for the proof of the insufficiency of
the said letter, may be taken from the doubtful, obscure, and diverse senses of
the same. Part. 1. chap. 7. sect. 2.
For (as I have proved before in the first part of this treatise) the
Scriptures are hard and admit diverse translations and interpretations, and
there may be gathered out of them both honey and poison, both true and false
doctrine. I know that Luther affirms, Luth. praefat. in assert. art. a Leone
10. damnatorum.
the Scripture to be of it self a most certain, most easy, and most manifest
interpreter of it self, proving, judging, and enlightening al things. I do
not also deny but Brentius in Prol. cont. Petrum de Soto.
Brentius seems to be of the same opinion; but against these I oppose Field,
book 4. chap. 15.
M. Field, who of this point vvriteth thus: There is no question but there are
manifold difficulties in the Scripture, proceeding partly from the high and
excellent nature of the things therein contained, which are without the
compass of natural understanding, and so are wholly hidden from natural men,
and not known of them that are spiritual without much travail and studious
meditation; partly out of the ignorance of tongues, and of the nature of such
things, by the comparison whereof the matters of diune knowledge are
manifested unto us: Hitherto Field. Chap. 18.. between. The reason,. Thus
having.
He further alleges and approves that of Sixtus Senensis, affirming the
litteral exposition of Scripture, to be in deed the hardest of al other. And
this notwithstanding, upon it he vvil have the allegorical, tropological, and
anagogical senses founded, of which a man may infer great obscurity of them
al. This also may be proved out of Illiric. in his clauis scriptur. de causis
difficul. script and remedijs remed. 2.
Illiricus a famous Lutheran, who (as Field, book 4. chap. 19.
Field testifies) discoursing of the difficulties that are found in
Scriptures, and how they may be cleared, shows; that nothing is more
necessary for the understanding of Scripture, then to be rightly taught the
general principles and axioms of divinity, out of which flow and on which do
depend, whatsoever things are contained in the Scripture. Kemnit. in examine.
Co^c. Trid. sess. 4.
Kemnitius an other Lutheran, acknowledges in the Church such a gift of
interpreting the Scripture, as is the gift of doing miracles, not common to al
but peculiar to some. The Centur. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. col. 52.
Century writers avouch, that the Apostles thought the Scriptures could not be
understood without the holy Ghost, and an interpreter: yea, Luth. in colloq.
conuiual. titu. de verbo Dei: see him also l. de Council. and praefat. in psalm.
Luther himself seems to have recanted his former opinion before his death;
for two days before he died (as his disciples record) he pronounced this
sentence. No man can understand the Bucolica of Virgil, except he be five
years a shepherd: no man can understand the Georgica of Virgil, except he be
five years a husbandman: no man can understand the Epistles of Cicero, except
he have lived in some famous common wealth for 20. years. Let every man know
that he has not sufficiently tasted the holy Scriptures, except he have
governed in the Church for an hundred years, with the Prophets; as with Elias,
Elizeus, John Baptist, Christ and the Apostles. Thus Luther, and the like he
has in other places. And all this may be confirmed by this, Chap. 8. Sect. 7.
that al Heretics have ever alleged Scriptures for proof of their heretical
assertions, as I will hereafter declare. Yea Osiander a professor of the new
religion tells us, Osiander in co^fut. scripti Melancthon. contra ipsum
editi, and l. cot. Nicticorace^.
that among the Confessionists only (so he terms those that follow the
confession of Auspurge) there are twenty different opinions concerning the
formal cause of justification, and that every one is affirmed to be deduced and
proved out of the word of God. I argue therefore thus: The rule and ground of
Catholic faith ought to be one (that is not diverse) certain, and manifest:
but the bare words of Scripture alone cannot be such a rule, because the
Scriptures are obscure, may be falsely and erroneously interpreted, etc.
wherefore the sense of them is not one, certain, and manifest: therefore, the
bare words of Scripture are not the only rule and ground of Catholic faith.

Math. 26. verse. 26. See chap. 8. Sect. 3.
Let us declare this by an example: The Catholic understands those words of
our Savior; This is my body, one way: the Lutherans an other way: the
Zwinglians a third way; and the Caluinists a fourth way as I vvil show
hereafter. I demand now of our adversaries, how in this sentence and a
thousand other such like, the bare words of Scripture are a plain, and
certain rule, whereby the truth of any one of their interpretations may
infallibly be known? Can the words speak and interpret themselves, or do
they sufficienty decide the controversy? This they will not grant, because they
are plain for the Catholic part. Yea Calvin himself confesses, that Christ's
words are so plain, (although to make his words accord with his doctrine, he
flies to certain chimerical conceits) that except a man will make God a
deceauer, Calvin lib. 4. Instit. cap. 17. 10. 11.
he can never be so bold as to say, that he sets before us a naked sign:
wherefore according to their judgment if we will allow of any one of their
interpretations, we must find out some other judge, or else affirm; that
Christ has ordained no sufficient judge or rule in his Church to decide
controversies, and to discern the true interpretations of holy Scripture, from
the false. And because our adversaries acknowledge no other judge but the bare
letter, and every man's own fancy; Hence proceed so many sects and dissensions
among them, which were so diverse and implacable even in Luthers days (who
began this Tragedy,) concerning the true sense of Scripture it self, that
the said Luther plainly confessed; that if the world were long to endure
they should be forced to have recourse again to trial of Councels, and that
otherwise they should never agree. Luther contra Zwinglium and Oecolampadium.


Further, seeing that the Scriptures admit senses so diverse, and interpret not
themselves, and the false sense is so dangerous; how can any man be assured by
the bare words, that he has attained to the true sense? For example, Bible,
1592. Hieron. in Catal. verbo Marcus. Eusebius, lib. 2. hist. cap. 14.
our new Sectaries affirm that the word Babylon, in the first Epistle of S.
Peter (although S. Hierome and Eusebius say the contrary) signifies the great
City called Babylon in Caldea or Assyria, not Rome; because otherwise it would
follow, that S. Peter was at Rome: contrariwise they tell us, that in the
Apocal. 17. and 18.
Apocalipse the same word signifies the City of Rome, because there much is
said against Babylon, which they are desirous to apply to the City of Rome. But
how know they by the bare words of Scripture, that this their double
interpretation of the self same word, is true? Add also, that the diverse and
large Commentaries upon the Scriptures, and the great study of al sorts
concerning the exposition of them, are evident arguments, that the bare words
of Scripture may receive diverse and false interpretations: yea every man must
of necessity grant, that some of our learned adversaries themselves expound
them falsely, seeing that their expositions be repugnant and contrary. Of which
I infer, that it is a matter impossible that every man out of the words
themselves only, should gather infallibly the right sense; which if it be true
in the learned, much more true it is in the unlearned.

The common answer of our adversaries to this argument is, See before part. 2.
chap. 5. sect. 1. in the beginning
that one place of Scripture expounds another; and therefore if the words
of any place be of doubtful sense, they bid us confer them with other such
like sentences: but this answer may be easily refelled. For like as the place
in controversy or doubtful, receives diverse interpretations; so do also
those other places with which they would have it conferred: wherefore, by
this conference diverse times we are never the near for attaining to the true
sense; yea not seldom, by such conference the difficulty is increased, as
appears by those places before alleged, Part. 2. chap. 1. sect. 4.
which seem to contrary one another. Hence our new sectaries themselves being
divided into diverse sects, and having conferred a long time such places
together as are controuersed among them, cannot as yet agree about the true
sense of the said places, but remain still at mortal jarres. And all this which
I have here said may be confirmed by the authority of Field, Field book 3
chap. 42.
who affirms the ground of their faith to be the written word of God,
interpreted according to the rule of faith, the practice of the Saints from the
beginning, the conference of places and al light of direction, that either the
knowledge of tongues or any parts of good learning may yield: Thus Field. In an
other place he prescribes seven rules, Book 4. chap. 19.
which he thinks we are to follow in the interpretation of Scripture, that
we may attain to the certainty of the true sense of it, of which diverse are
extrinsecal, and concern not the letter it self of Scripture. Lastly, against
the sufficiency of conference of places alone, he adds these words. Ibidem.
We confess that neither conference of places, nor consideration of the
antecedentia and consequentia; nor looking into the originals are of any force,
unless we find the things which we conceive to be understood and meant in
the places interpreted, to be consonant to the rule of faith: but of Fields
rules for the expounding of Scripture more hereafter. Harmony of Confess. sect.
10. page 33. Confess. Wittenb. art. 32.
The Lutherans of Wittenberge (as I have before noted) acknowledge in the
Church a rule of faith, according to which she is bound (as they say) to
interpret the obscure places of Scripture; by which their assertion they
acknowledge also for the exposition of Scripture, an other necessary guide
besides the letter. Let us therefore conclude, that the true sense of the
Scripture is not sufficiently gathered out of the bare words; and
consequently, let us not admit the bare words to be a sufficient ground of
Christian religion. And hence I gather, that our adversaries have no certainty
of faith and religion; which is apparent, because they make the naked letter of
holy Scripture the only ground of their belief, the true sense of which unto
them is always very uncertain: for either the assurance which every one of
them has proceeds from his own reading and judgment, or from the credit of
some other Minister or Ministers, who interpret the Scriptures in that sense
which he embraces; both which means be most uncertain. For they depend
upon the judgment of private men, who have no assurance from the holy Ghost
of not erring; wherefore they are subject to error; and consequently, none of
them have any further assurance of the truth of their religion, then humane
judgment.

Unto the reasons already brought for the proof of the title of this Chapter,
I add these that follow, partly gathered out of that which has been
already said in this Treatise: first, that the rule of Christian faith ought to
be general and sufficient for all sorts of people, which cannot appertain to
the bare letter of holy Scripture, because diverse persons cannot read; and
consequently, to know the contents of the Bible, they must use the help of
some of the learned, and upon their report (which may be false and erroneous)
build their belief. It is also manifest, that Christians had some other rule
of faith, before the Scriptures of the new Testament were written. Finally I
have already proved, that together with the letter we ought to receive that
sense and interpretation, which has by tradition and succession descended
from the Apostles: And thus much concerning this matter.

Chapter 6. The new Sectaries Bibles contain not the true word of God.
SECTION THE FIRST. In which this is first proved concerning al their Bibles in
general.
IN the Chapter next before, I have demonstrated the bare letter of holy
Scripture on which our adversaries build, not to be a sufficient ground of
Christian faith and religion: in this present Chapter to make their weak
foundation the more manifest, I intend to prove; that although we should yield
the bare letter to be sufficient, yet that in very truth their Bibles contain
not truly the said bare letter. And first, I prove this concerning al their new
translated Bibles in general, and that by their own confession; Lauatherus in
histor. Sacrament. fo. 32
for Luther and the Lutherans condemn the translation of Zwinglius and the
Zwinglians, Zwing. tom. 2. in respons. ad Luther. li. de Sacrament.
and of al others besides those which are proper to their own sect: Zwinglius
and the Zwinglians pronounce the same censure against the translation of Luther
and the Lutherans. And in like sort proceed Beza in annot. noui test. passim.
Castalio in defens. suae translat.
Beza and Castalio against one another, and al other sectaries; for every
particular sect has his particular Bible, which it embraces rejecting al
others: wherefore, if we may believe al these Professors of the new
religion, they have not among them one true translation of the Bible. Moreover,
there is but one truth, and one true word of God, penned by the instinct of the
holy Ghost, who teaches not contrary doctrine. But our adversaries translated
Bibles be diverse and different one from another, and insinuate contrary
doctrine (wherefore every Bible is not admitted by every sectary, but that only
which favors his own sect, as I have even now declared:) It is therefore
impossible that they should al contain the true word of God, and be penned by
the instinct of the holy Ghost. And being so that the translator of the one,
was even as much subject to error as the translator of the other, and had no
surer ground for his translation, with like probability and reason they may be
al rejected; because they have al received the same censure from the Church.
Whitak. controu. 1. quest. 2. cap. 7. arg. 3. and cap. 9. arg. 4. See also his
reprehension of the Rhemes Testament, pa. 15.
Finally, Whitaker seems to acknowledge the Scriptures only in those tongues,
in which they were first spoken by God, or penned by the holy Ghost, to be
the true word of God; wherefore he seems to exclude from this truth, all the
translations of Scripture in the world.

SECTION THE SECOND. That Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, and Beza, in particular
have corruptly translated the Scriptures.
BUT let us descend to the particular Bibles of some principal sects, and for
the better declaration of this matter, note some corruptions of the principal
sectaries, and speak a word or two of the corruptions of those translations of
the word of God, which be most approved and received in their congregations:
And let us not now stand upon the truth of the Latin vulgar edition, but prove
that they forsake and falsify the true sense of the very Hebrewe and Greek
text, which they profess to translate. So shall I not only prove, that the
unlearned professors of the new religion, build their faith upon a false
ground (to wit, the word of men or the word of God corrupted:) but also,
make that more manifest which I principally intend to prove, I mean that the
learned sort have erred in their translations, and that the ground of their
faith also is not the word of God.

S. Augustine long since observed in Heretics, August. tom. 6. contra
Faustum, lib. 32, cap. 29.
that they make not their faith subject to the Scriptures, but the Scriptures
(as a man may say) subject to their faith: giving us thereby to understand,
that al Heretics either out of some one place of Scripture falsely understood;
or out of their own perverse and licentious humor; or out of the weakness
of their natural reason, not able to comprehend the high mysteries of our
faith; or finally, out of some other false and erroneous ground, frame to
themselves one or more false opinions, and afterward by corrupting the text or
wresting the sense, make the Scripture seem to confirm the same. And like as
this has been found true in all Heretics, who in former ages have oppugned
the Church: so most true it is in the Professors of the new religion of our
days, as every man skilful in the tongues may easily perceive, in their
translated Bibles and other of their works.

If I should run over al their corruptions and falsifications, I should
scarce ever make an end, they are so many and diverse. See Staphilus in Apolog
part. 2. Emser. in praefat Annot. in nouum Testam. Lutheri. Lindanus in
Dubitantio, page 84. 85. etc. Erasmus in Epist. ad fratres inferioris Germaniae.
Some note a thousand four hundred in the new Testament only, translated by
Luther, Calvin: and Bezaes corruptions are to be seen in diverse worthy
Authors; wherefore, I will only gather five or six notable falsifications out
of the translations of these principal Sectaries, and afterward discourse
more at large of our English Bibles.

To begin therefore with the first Captain Luther; before his Apostasy from
the Catholic Church, he read with us and al antiquity according to the Greek
text: 1. Cor. 9. verse. 5. after this sort: Have not we power to lead about a
woman a sister as also the rest of the Apostles? But having changed his
profession, and contrary to his vow coupled himself to Catharine Bore (whom
he termed his wife) he changed also his translation of this sentence, and
read: Have not we power to lead about a sister, a wife as the rest of the
Apostles? S. Paul to give us to vndertstand that faith does justify us, as the
foundation and root of our justification, or else comprehending under the word
faith, also the works of faith, uses these words: We account a man to be
justified by faith. Romans 3, 28.
Moreover, to exclude from our justification the works done before our
conversion or faith, he adds; without the works of the law. But how does
Luther translate this place of Scripture? Luther to. 2. edit. Wittenberg. anno.
1551. fo. 405.
We account (says he) a man to be justified by faith only, without the works
of the law: this is his translation.

And what a manifest corruption is this? where does he find in the Greek text
or any other approved edition, the word only? verily, it is added by
himself, and not to be found in the text. But perhaps although S. Paul has it
not expressly in this place cited, yet it is necessarily understood. I reply and
demand how Luther knew this? I add further, that although it were so, yet
he has no authority to add to the word of God: neither is it likely that if
the said word had been necessary, the holy Ghost guiding the Apostles pen,
would have omitted it. And that Luther gives not the true sense of the
sentence of the Apostle, I prove out of these words following of S. Augustine:
August. de gratia et lib. ^rbitrio ca. 7.
Men (says he) not understanding that which the Apostle says (we account a
man to be justified by faith without the works of the law) did think him to
have affirmed, that faith would suffice a man, though he lived il, and had no
good works; which God forbid, the vessel of election should think, who in a
certain place after that he had said: Galat. 5, 6.
In Christ Jesus neither circumcision or prepuce avails any whit, he straight
added; but faith which works by love: this is the opinion of S. Augustine.
Hence the same Apostle in other places, Galat. 6, 15.
has these and such like sentences: In Christ Jesus neither circumcision
avails ought, nor prepuce, but a new creature. Again: Circumcision is
nothing, 1. Cor. 7, 19.
and prepuce is nothing but the observation of the commandments of God. In
which he gives us to understand, that in the place corrupted by Luther, under
the name of faith he comprehends the whole reformation of our souls, and our
new creation in good works; which may further be proved, because taking
faith precisely as it is a virtue distinct from hope and charity, 1. Cor. 13.
v. 2. and 13.
he tells us; that Although a man has a^ faith so that he should remove
mountains, and has not charity, he is nothing: And concludes, that charity
is a greater virtue then either faith or hope; with whom accords S. James,
who directly contradicts Luther and avouches, James 2, 24.
that by works a man is justified and not by faith only.

Perhaps some Lutheran in the defense of Luther vvil say, that this corruption
was not willful. But I reply, that the contrary is manifest: for Luther by
letter being kindly admonished by his friend, that this by some was
reprehended as a fault, answered his said friend very sharply, calling the
reprehender Ass and Papist, and gave this reason in his own defense: Luther
to. 5. Germ. f. 141. epist adf amicum.
Doctor Martin Luther will have it so. And like as in this text he added to
serve his purpose, so in another he omitted. For whereas the Apostle S. Peter
writes, 2. Peter. 1. verse 10. Wherefore brethren labor the more, that by
good works you make sure your vocation and election, he left out the words,
by good works.

These and other such like corruptions of Scripture, which are to be found in
the Bible and other works of Luther, gave Zwinglius vvriting against him,
just occasion to condemn him of this fault. Thou do (says he) corrupt and
adulterate the word of God, Zui^g. in resp. ad Luth. l. de sacram. to. 2. fol.
412. 413.
imitating surely in this the disciples of Marcion and Arius. Again, See how
thy case stands Luther, that in the eyes of al men thou art seen a manifest
and common corrupter and peruerter of the holy Scripture, which thing thou
can never deny before any creature. How much are we ashamed of thee, who
hitherto have esteemed thee beyond al measure, and now try thee to be such a
false fellow? Bucer tells us, Bucer Dial. co^t, Mela^ch.
that in translating the Scriptures his errors are manifest, and not few. But
is not Zwinglius himself (although he so confidentlie reprehend Luther) to be
found guilty of the same crime? Certainly to establish his doctrine against
the Real presence, he corrupted those words of our Savior; This is my body,
by translating them thus: Mat. 26, 26. Conr. Schluss in Theolog. Caluinist. l.
2. cap. 6. fol. 43. 44. l. 2. art. 1. Luther. tom. 7. in defens. verborum
coenae.
This signifies my body. Of this Conradus a Lutheran is a sufficient
witness, who affirms, that he saw those words so translated in a
Zwinglian Bible at Mundera, in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred
and threescore: and therefore he pronounces this sentence against him, that he
was stricken with the spirit of giddiness, and blindness, as al Heretics are,
daring to corrupt the Testament of our Lord. Hence Luther also to requite
Zwinglius, called him and al his followers corrupters of the word of God.
Calvin to prove his blaspheamous Doctrine that Christ despaired, and suffered
on the Cross the very torments of the damned in hell, whereas the Apostle
says, Hebr. 5. verse. 7. that Christ was heard for his reverence, Calvin in
Catechis. and lib. 2. Instit. cap. 16.. 11. 12.
makes him say that Christ was heard from his own fear: which translation
is not only new, (for Calvin, as Beza confesses in his Annotations upon this
place, was the first Author of it;) but also contrary to the true
signification of the Greek word, as Beza likewise grants, and it is
apparently to be seen, Act. 8. verse. 2. where the adjectiue of the same
Greek word is used to signify devout men, Calvin lib. 4. Instit. ca. 14.. 23.
1. Cor. 10. v. 3
such as religiously reverenced God. In like sort, the same Calvin to prove no
difference between the Sacraments of the old and new law, affirms; that
the Apostle teaches that our Fathers of the old law did eat the same
spiritual meat which we eat: whereas the said Apostle says only, that the
Jews among themselves did eat the same meat.

Beza annot. in Math. 3. v. 2. Marc. 1. v. 4. Luc. 3, 8 Beza annot. in Romans 5.
Beza of set purpose (as he himself confesses) in his translation auoideth
the word penance, and this sentence, do penance. Wherefore Act. 26. verse. 20.
whereas the Greek says doing works worthy of penance, he reads: doing the
fruits meet for them that amend their lives. Also he grants, that he added
to the text of Scripture and altered the same, to overthrow (as he terms
it) the execrable error of inherent justice. Further, those words ( Act. 2.
verse. 27.) thou will not leave my soul in hell: He wittingly and willingly
according to his own confession, Beza annot. in Act. 2. ver. 27. and 24. and
in 1. Petr. 1. verse. 19.
to improve Limbus Patrum, Purgatory, and Christ's descent into hell (which he
terms foul errors) translated in his edition of the new Testament of the
year 1556. thus: thou shall not leave my carcas in the grave. And this not
only against al Greek copies in the world, but also against the proper
signification of the Hebrewe words in the 15. Psalm ver. 10. whence this
sentence is taken. For the Hebrewe word which Beza translateth carcas
signifies only a soul, and the other which he translateth grave, usually
signifies hell. Hence in his latter edition he corrected somewhat the former,
and read, thou shall not leave my soul in the grave: but of this his
corruption more hereafter. Finally, because these words of our Lord spoken of
the Chalice and recorded by S. Luke (which is shed for you) as they are in
the Greek text, Beza in Luc, 22. verse. 20.
contain a manifest proof of the real presence: for (as he says) according
to their plain construction, and that in all his ancient books, they
appertain of necessity not to the blood, but to the cup of the Chalice; this
Geneuian Doctor altered the text, and made an other sense of the said words in
this translation. And why so? but because they cannot (as he affirms) be
understood of the cup, and that according to his belief. Our English
Sectaries cannot deny this fault in Beza: for they in some places dare not be
so bold as to follow him, but think it best to forsake and reject him. For
example, James 2. verse. 22. whereas Beza reads, Bible printed anno, 1592.
1595.
Faith was a helper of his works; they read with the Greek, Faith wrought
with his deeds. Again, whereas Beza reads 1. Cor. 12. verse. 30. in his new
Testament of the year 1556. Behold moreover also I show you a way most
diligently, and in the editions of the year, 1562. And besides I show you a
way to excellency, Bible, 1595. verse. 31.
against the dignity of charity above faith. Our English sectaries according
to the Greek read: And yet show I unto you a more excellent way. Yea,
although in the new Testament printed in the year, 1580. they undertake and
profess to follow him, yet in some places they reject him; as for example,
Act. 1. verse. 14. Beza reads, Bible, 1595. Bible, 1600. they put the word
wives in the marge^t Carolus Molinaeus in tra^slat. Test. noui. part. 11. fol.
110. Idem part. 26 30. 40. 64. 65. 66. 67. 74. 99. Humfred. de ratione
interpret and i. lib. 1. page 62. 63. 189.
Al these were perseuering with one mind in prayer with their wives; to the
end to prove that the Apostles were married: they read according to the Greek,
with the women.

But I need not labor to prove Calvin and Beza guilty of this crime, seeing
that one of their own brethren confesses, that Calvin made the text of holy
Scripture leap up and down at his pleasure, that he offered violence to the
same, and added of his own to the very sacred letter it self, to the end he
might draw it to his purpose. He cries likewise out against Beza, and tells
us; that he actually alters the text, that he actually changes the text,
retained by all Doctors: and the like censure is pronounced against his
translation by Selneccerus, by the University of Zena, by Castalio, and diverse
other Protestants. But the last of these named although a Sacramentary, and a
man much commended by Doctor Humfrey, Gesnerus in Bibliotheca.
and Gesnerus, is more vehement then the rest. For having noted certain errors
committed by Beza in his translation, only of the first ten Chapters of S.
Mathewes Gospel, thus he concludes: Casta. in def. pa. 182. 183.
I trust I have showed sufficiently by these ten Chapters of S. Mathewe ( in
which notwithstanding I have omitted very many things, which justly I might
have reprehended) what a long register of his errors I could gather out of his
whole work. For this is true, that oftentimes he erreth not only in words
(which is not so dangerous, and might be tolerated;) but also in things, and
the same most weighty: and often times be enforces by wresting, not the
sentences only, but also the words of the holy writers to serve his error. So
John the 1. verse. 12. he corrupts a most notable place and of greatest moment
touching free will, etc. Thus Castalio. Before this he affirms, that to note
al Bezaes errors in translating the new Testament, Ibid. pa. 170.
would require a volume over great. Contrariwise, Beza to requite Castalio,
condemns his translation of holy Scripture (which is very highly praised by
D. Humfrey and Gesnerus, even now alleged) not only as false, Beza in
Testament. anno 1556. in Praefat. and in Marc. cap. 3. 1. Cor. 1. Math. 4. Luc.
1. Act. 8. and 10.
corrupt, and perverse, but also as pestilent, sacrilegious, Ethnical, and
Turkish: he avouches it to be such a translation, as contains the very
seed, and lays open the high way to manifest Apostasy from Christ. The like
censure he pronounces against the new Testament set forth by Oecolampadius
(as is supposed) and the other Divines of Basil; for he avouches it to be in
many places Beza in respons. ad defens. and respo^s. Castalionis.
wicked, and altogether disagreeing from the mind of the holy Ghost: But of
these foreign sectaries enough.

SECTION THE THIRD. Our English Sectaries also, have falsely and corruptly
translated the Scriptures.
BUT do our English sectaries, although they follow not (as I have showed)
some corruptions of Beza; yet commit no wilful errors and falsify nothing
themselves? Truly they are far from this sincerity. Carlisle in his book that
Christ went not down into hell, printed anno 1582. fol. 116. 144 etc.
Carlisle an English Sectarie having discovered many faults in the English
Bible, of them infers; that our English Protestants in many places detort
the Scriptures from the right sense, and show themselves to love darkness,
more then light, and falsehood, more then truth: he says, they have corrupted
and depraved the sense, obscured the truth, deceived the ignorant, supplanted
the simple, etc. M. Broughton, one of the greatest Linguists of our English
precisians, wrote not many years since an Epistle to the Honorable Lords of
the Council (which is yet extant) desiring them to procure speedily a new
translation of the Scripture, because (said he) that which is now in use in
England is full of errors. The same request was made of late by Doctor Reynolds
in the conference held at Hampton Court between the Protestants and the
Puritans; yea, Barlow in his relation of co^fere^ce held at Hampton Court, page
45. 46. Lindanus in Dubitantio. Fox, pa. 981.
the King himself (as it is recorded by M. Barlowe) avouched that he could
never yet see a Bible well translated in English, but the worst of al he
affirmed to be that of Geneua: wherefore, by his Majesty's order another
translation (as is said) is now in hand. And this may very well be believed:
For Bishop Tonstal as it is recorded by Lindanus, noted no less then two
thousand corruptions in Tindals translation only of the new Testament, which
assertion of his may be confirmed by the authority of a statute, made by the
first head of our English Church, King Henry the eight. For notwithstanding
that Fox terms Tindal not only the true servant, and martyr of God, but the
Apostle also of England in our later age, Idem, pa. 732
and painteth the said King with the Gospel in his lap, and his sword in his
right hand, lifted up for defense of the same: yet certain it is, that King
Henry in the 34. or 35. year of his reign, not long before his death,
together with the whole Court of Parliament, An. 34. and 35 Henri. 8. c. 1.
by statute condemned the translation of Tindal, as a crafty, false, and an
untrue translation; and also commanded it to be utterly abolished, and
extinguished; and forbadde it to be kept or used within any of his Dominions:
These things are to be seen in the statute it self yet extant. Finally, that
the English Bible it self set forth under King Henry the eight was corrupt, it
is confessed by D. Humfrey. And no doubt, Humfred. de ratione interpret. lib.
3. page 523.
but although many of the said corruptions be amended in the latter editions,
yet the multitude of them through the whole Bible, is al most infinite. For
besides those which are reprehended by M. Broughton and D. Reynolds, which (as
I suppose) were none wilfully committed in prejudice of our religion, and in
defense of their own against us (because they being of our preciser sort of
enemies, would not as I imagine acknowledge any such errors): M. Gregory
Martin a learned man of our side, has also made a whole book concerning such
corruptions as have been made in their English Bibles, of set purpose to draw
the text from the true sense, to impugn us and favor their new opinions.

I cannot stand to repeat them al, wherefore referring my reader to the said
book of M. Gregory Martin, entitled a discovery of the false translations,
etc. I vvil only note a few; yet in such order, that every man may see that
this has been done of malice, concerning every article between us in
controversy. Neither do I speak of their forsaking and corrupting of the
true sense of the Latin vulgar edition, but of the Hebrewe and Greek text it
self, which they profess to follow.

But before I come to this matter, I must forewarne my reader that although our
English sectaries have set forth diverse Bibles in their vulgar tongue; yet I
intend especially to speak of three of the principal: of which the first was
authorized by Cranmer called Archbishop of Canterbury, and read during al King
Edwards reign in their Churches, and (as it seems by the new printing of it
in the year 1562.) during a great part also of the reign of Queen Elizabeth;
The second was printed in the year 1577. and again as I think, in the year
1595. and is authorized likewise to be read in their Churches at this present.
The third is that which was lately printed in the year 1600. which as I
imagine is the self same with that which was printed not long before in the
year 1589. and 1592. let us now come to see a few of their corruptions.

SECTION THE FOVRTH. Containing false translations against the authority of the
Church, Traditions, honor of Images, Purgatory, and the honor of Saints.
FIRST, to improve the supreme authority of the Church, they banished the word
Church clean out of their Bible printed in the year 1562. and in place of it
used the word congregation; but in the later editions, since that they began
to have a certain form of a Church, this fault is amended.

Secondly, to make weak the authority of Traditions, wheresoever in the
Scripture speech is of evil Traditions, they translate the Greek word truly,
Traditions; but when mention is of Apostolic Traditions, they cannot endure
this word, but force the same Greek word to signify ordinances,
instructions, preachings, or institutions: yea they translate Tradition in il
part where it is not found in the Greek. For example, the Apostle says:
Colos. 2. verse. 20. according to the Greek. Why do you yet decree? They
translate: Why are you yet led with traditions? and in an other edition.
Bible, 1600. 1595.
Why are you yet burdened with traditions?

Thirdly, against the honor of Images, they translate the Greek word which
signifies Idolatry and an Idolater, worshipping of images, and a worshipper
of Images: 2. Cor. 6, 16. Coloss. 3. v. 5. and Ephesians. 5, 5. Bible, 1577. 1.
Cor. 10. Bible, 1562.
thus they make the Apostle say; How agrees the Temple of God with Images,
covetousness is worshipping of Images, be not worshippers of Images, etc. I
add also, that sometimes when neither the word Idol nor Image is to be found
in the text, they thrust it in by force, as Romans 11. verse. 4. in steed of
Baal, they translate Baals Image: also 2. Paral. 36. ver. 8. they add these
words (carved Images which were laid to their charge) to the text. But al
these faults are amended in the later editions, Bible, 1595. Genesis 1. v. 27.
Exodus 25.3. Reg. 6. etc.
and not without cause; for if every Image be an Idol, and every Idol an
Image, we may say that God created man according to his Idol; we may call such
Images as were used in the old law, Idols; and finally term the Image or
Picture of a man the Idol of a man, which kind of speech is not tolerable.

Fourthly, against Purgatory, Limbus Patrum, and the descent of Christ into
hell, they make the Hebrewe and Greek words which signify hell, signify
grave: as for example, with Beza they read Act. 2. verse. 27. Thou shall not
leave my soul in the grave; Psalm. 15. v. 10 Bible, 1600. Bible, 1595. 1600.
See Parkes in his Apology, concerning Christ's desce^t into hell, and in his
ans. to Lim bomast. printed, an. 1607 According to their account. Psalm. 86.49.
and 89
this likewise is corrected in the Bible of the year 1595. Also Genesis 37. v.
35. they make the Patriarch Jacob say; I will go down into the grave to my
Son mourning: whereas in like sort the Hebrewe and Greek word signifies
hell; and it is manifest that he could not think it possible that he should go
down into the grave to his Son, because he thought him devoured of vvilde
beasts, not buried. The same corruption is sound in diverse other places, as
Psalm. 86. v. 13. where they read. Bible, 1579. 1600. corrected in the Bible
of the year, 1595.
Thou have delivered my soul from the lowest grave. Psalm. 48. verse. 15. where
they read, thou shall deliver my soul from the power of the grave. Osee 13.
verse. 14. where they read, O grave I will be thy destruction, and in sundry
other places: this notwithstanding in See other such corruptions as these are,
recited and sharply reprehended by Carlisle a man of the English Church, in his
book that Christ went not down into hell, fol. 144.
other places, as Proverb. 15. ver. 24. etc. where speech is of the hell of the
damned, they translate the same word, hell.

Fifthly, to bereave the Saints of their honor, which from mortal men is due
unto them, they falsely translate the 17. verse of the 138. Psalm. For whereas
we read, Thy friends, O God, are become exceeding honorable; their
Princedome is exceedingly strengthened: They turn it thus, Bible 1595. Psalm.
138.
How dear therefore are thy Councels unto me O God; O how great is the sum
of them. But the Hebrewe makes for our translation, as every man that
understands that tongue may see, especially by the last words, which word
for word are thus to be translated: How are the heads or Princedomes of them
strengthened. Again, Hebr. 11. verse. 21. according to the Greek we read, by
faith Jacob dying blessed every one of the Sons of Joseph, and adored the
top of his rod: Bible 1600. some thing better in the Bible 1595. Luke 1. v.
28. Bible 1600. 1595.
They translate the last words thus, and leaning on the end of his staff
worshipped God: In which translation they add two words to the text (leaning
and God) and turn the sense vpsi-downe. I add also their translation of those
words, Hail full of grace; for which they read: Hail thou that art freely
beloved; and Hail thou that art in high favor.

SECTION THE FIFTH. Of their corruptions against inherent Justice, Justification
by good works, Merit of good works, and keeping the Commandments, and in
defense of their special Faith, vain Security, etc. and against Freewil, and
Merits.
TO prove their imputative justice, against inherent justice, first whereas
the Apostle says, Romans 5. verse. 18. Therefore as the offense of one, unto al
men to condemnation, so also by the justice of one unto al men to justification
of life: Bible 1595. worse in the Bible 1600.
they read thus; Likewise then as by the sin of one, sin came on al men to
condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, good came upon al men to
the righteousness of life. In which their translation, they add four
words to the text of the Apostle, to make him seem to say, that al men be
truly sinners; and none truly just, but so reputed. Ephesians. 1. verse. 6. for
gratified, they read; Bible 1600.
made accepted. Luke 1. verse. 28. for full of grace, they translate, freely
beloved and in high favor. Dan. 6. verse. 22. whereas Daniel according to the
Chaldee, Greek, and Latin said; Justice was found in me: they make him say,
Bible 1600. 1595.
my justice (or vnguiltinesse according to an other translation) was found out
before him: The like corruption may be seen, 2. Cor. 5. verse. 21.

To prove that good works done in state of grace, concur not to our
justification, and that we reap no grace by observing of the Commandments:
whereas the Scripture to signify the Commandments of God, uses in diverse
places the word justifications, and justices; because the keeping of the
Commandments is justification, and justice, and the Greek word is always
correspondent to the same: they nevertheless in all such places, suppress the
very name of justification, and use the words ordinances or statutes, Bible
1595. 1600.
as may be seen in the Psalm. 118. in diverse verses: Luke 1. verse. 6. Romans 2.
verse. 26. etc. To this end also they avoid in their translations the word
just: and call a just man a righteous man. Math. 1. v. 19. Bible 1577. 1595.
corrected in the text of the Bible 1600.
Luke 1. verse. 6. except the word just be joined with faith, for then, they
translate the same word, just: as Romans 1. verse. 17.

For proof of their special faith, vain security, and only faith they wrest
first the words of S. Paul, Hebr. 10. verse. 22. for whereas he says: Let us
approach with a true heart in fullness of faith: they make him say; Let us draw
near with a true heart in assurance of faith. Romans Bible 1595. 1600.
8. ver. 38. the same Apostle says according to the Greek. I am probably
persuaded: They in their Bible of the year 1595. read; I am sure, but this is
corrected in the Bible of they year 1600. Further, in diverse places of the
Gospel where our Savior said. Thy faith has healed thee, or made thee whole
(to wit of thy corporal infirmity) they translate; Thy faith has saved thee;
as Mark 10. verse. 52. Bible 1595.
Luke 18. v. 42. etc. The like corruptions unto these may be seen, Sapient. 3.
verse. 14. Eccles. 5. verse. 5. Ephesians. 3. verse. 12.

To impugn freewil, whereas Christ speaking of continency or chastity, says;
Math. 19. verse. 11. Not al take this word: Bible 1595. 1600.
they translate, Al men cannot receive this saying. God said unto Cain, Genesis 4.
verse. 7. that he should receive according as he did well or evil, because sin
was subject unto him, and he had the rule and dominion thereof: They make him
say thus. 1600.
If thou do well shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin
lies at the door and also unto thee his desire shall be subject, and thou shall
rule over him. In which translation they put the relative in the masculine
gender, reading (his and him) as though these last words were referred to
Abel: whereas they should be referred to sin, and most absurdly and contrary
to S. Augustine lib. 15. de ciuitate. cap. 7. wherefore in the Bible 1595.
they translate it otherwise. The Apostle says, Romans 5. verse. Bible 1600.
amended in the Bible 1595.
6. Christ when we were yet weak died for us: They read, when we were of no
strength: again, whereas the same Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. verse. 10. uses these
words: I have labored more abundantly then al they: yet not I but the grace
of God with me, that is to say, which labors with me: Bible 1595.
they turn the last part of this sentence thus; Yet not I but the grace of God
which is with me. Finally, S. John in his first Epistle cap. 3. verse. 3.
tells us, that the Commandments are not heavy: they say, Bible 1595.
not grievous, but falsely; because through patience they may not be grievous,
although heavy and impossible.

Against merits or meritorious works and their reward, they also corrupt
diverse places: as Romans 8. verse. 18. where the Apostle affirms, that the
passions of this time are not condign, equal, correspondant, or comparable to
the glory to come, Bible 1595.
as Beza himself translateth: they make him affirm, that they are not worthy.
The same Apostle says, Hebr. 10. verse. 29. How much more does he deserve
worse punishment, etc. Bible 1562. corrected in the Bible 1595. 1600.
They leave out the word deserve, and read, how much sorer shall he be
punished. Sometimes they vvil have for their advantage the self same Greek
word signify worthy, as Math. 3. verse. 11. cap. 8. verse. 8. etc. other times
Bible 1600. See Beza in his new Testament of the year 1556. Annot. in Math. 3.
meet, as Colos. 1. verse. 12. 1. Cor. 15. verse. 9. moreover in the Psalm.
118. verse. 112. King David says. I have inclined my heart to keep thy
justifications always for reward. They forsaking the seauenty Interpreters in
Greek, and S. Hierome, and all the Latin Fathers, contrarying also their Bible
1600. Psalm. 19. Bible 1595. Psalm. 119.
own translation of the 18. Psalm. verse. 11. or 12. translate that verse thus.
I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes always even to the end: The like
corruptions may be seen. 2. Cor. 4. verse. 17. Wisdom. 3. verse. 5.

SECTION THE SIXTH. Of their false translations against the Real presence,
Priesthood, election of Bishops, single life of Priests, Penance, and
satisfaction for Sin; the Sacrament of Matrimony, and some other points.
BUT have they nothing to pervert or corrupt, in defense of their Sacramentary
Heresy against the Real presence? They have verily: S. Mathewe tells us
according to the Greek text, Math. 26, 26
that our Savior instituting the blessed Sacrament took bread, and blessed
and brake it, etc. and taking the Chalice gave thanks, etc. They use not the
word (blessed) but in place of it read in the first place also (gave
thanks,) to derogate from the virtue of our Saviors benediction. But if every
blessing were a thanksgiving we might read, Genes. 1. and 9. that God gave
thanks to Adam, Eve, Bible 1595.
and Noe, and his children; for there it is said that he blessed them. What
sense also should we make of those words of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 10. verse. 16.
The Chalice of benediction which we do bless? Again, Act. 3. verse. 21. we
read according to the Greek, whom heaven truly must receive until the
restitution of al things: They translate; whom heaven must contain until the
times that al things be restored; Bible 1600. Whitaker ad rat. Campian. page
43. fasly englished by Stock, pa. 63. corrected in the Bible 1595.
and Beza, and Whitaker worse, who must be contained in heaven. By which
translation they intend to prove, that Christ is always in heaven, and never
forsakes the right hand of his Father; of which they infer, that he is not
really in the Eucharist: but although we grant the first, yet we deny the
sequel; because Christ can be in more places then one at once. Further, 1. Cor.
9. verse. 13. and cap. 10. verse. 13. contrary to the Greek, in place of Altar,
they use the word Temple. Bible 1562. Bible 1562. 1577.
Contrariwise, to derogate from the dignity of Altars, Dan. 14. verse. 13.18.
and 21. they call the Idol Bell his table, the Altar of Bell: but now al Altars
in their Churches be down, these faults be some thing or altogether Bible
1595. 1600.
amended. Finally, Proverb. 9. verse. 2. and 5. against the mingling of Wine and
Water in the Chalice, they translate, Bible 1595. 1600.
powered out, and some times drawn in steed of mingled.

For the overthrow of Priesthood, and to prove that there be no Priests of
the new Testament: when mention is of the Priests of the Jews, or Gentiles,
See Acts. 14. v. 23. Act. 16. and 20. Tit. 1. 1. Timot. 4. James 5. 1. Peter 5.
(especially when they are blamed) they use the word Preiest; but when speech
is of the Priests of the Church of Christ throught the whole Bible, they use
not the word Priest, but in place of it read Elder. They say that the Greek
word Presbiter signifies an Elder and not a Priest. I answer, that although
this word if we run to the first signification of it, signifies an Elder,
(wherefore the Latin Interpreter of our vulgar edition translateth it sometimes
Seniour or Ancient) yet by Ecclesiastical use, See the first Cou^c. of Nice
Bilson in his treatise of the perpetual government of Christ's Church, cap. 11.
page 181.
and Apostolic authority, as appears in all the ancient Fathers works, ever
since the beginning of Christ's Church it has been appropriated to signify a
Priest: no less then Episcopus to signify a Bishop, and Diaconus a Deacon.
And hence almost in all languages the word which signifies a Priest, is derived
from the Greek word Presbiter. Neither did the first founders of the Church
without cause, appropriate this word to signify men of this function: for it
was done to distinguish the Priests of the new law, from those of the old,
which long after the Ascension of Christ kept their offices; and perhaps also
to make a difference between them, and the Priests of the Gentiles, with
whom the world was replenished.

But concerning this matter I cannot but note the folly and ouer-sight of our
adversaries, who term their Elders, Ministers, and their Deacons, Deacons;
whereas the Greek word Deacon signifies properly a Minister, wherefore a
Minister, and a Deacon, in very truth are al one: and they according to their
proceedings should have termed their Ministers, not Ministers but Elders, and
their Deacons, Ministers.

Besides this sometimes they translate, and read Minister, whereas according to
the Greek they should read Priests: as Ecclesiast. 7. Bibl. 1595.
verse. 29. whereas they should read Priests, they read, Honor his Ministers,
contrary to themselves in the 31. verse following.

Bibl. 1562.
To the same end they call S. Peter and S. John, laymen, whereas the Scripture
calls them only unlearned or vnlitterated, Act. 4. verse. 13. but this is
amended in the edition of the year 1595. and 1600. For their Puritan election
of Ministers, whereas Act. 1. verse. 26. Bibl. 1600. and in some bibles before
amended in the bible 1595. Bible 1595. Bibl. 1592. Amended i^ the text of the
bible 1595.
we read according to the Greek, that S. Mathias was numbered with the eleauen
Apostles: they translate, that he was By common consent counted with the
eleauen Apostles; the like corruption is Act. 14. verse. 23.

Moreover, against the grace which is given by the sacrament of order, 1.
Timoth. 4. verse. 14. and 2. Tim. 1. verse. 6. In steed of grace, they read gift.
To prove that Priests may lawfully marry, whereas the Apostle says, 1. Corinthians. 9. verse. 5. That he might have led about a woman a sister: they read a
wife, being a sister. And this notwithstanding, 1. Corinthians. 7. verse. 1. where
the Apostle uses the self same Greek word, they read not: It is good for a
man not to touch a wife: but, it is good for a man not to touch a woman, See
Beza annot. in Mat. 5. verse. 28. Bible 1595. 1600. Philip. 4. v. 3. Bible 1577.
1600. 1595.
because otherwise it would make against their doctrine of marriage. To this
purpose also they make S. Paul say as to his wife: I beseech thee also
faithful good fellow: whereas his words signify a sincere companion, and so
Calvin and Beza translate them.

Further, to the same end is that their translation of the 4. verse of the 13.
chapter to the Hebrews, Wedlock is honorable among al men; or as they have
in another edition something amended the matter: Marriage is honorable in all.
For in the first translation they added two words to the sentence, is, and
men; and in the last the the word, is; and so they turn clean the sense of
the Apostle, which rather is, Let marriage be honorable in all; to wit, in
those that are married. So they themselves translate the next verse; Bible 1600.
Let your conversation etc. the like corruption may be seen, Mat. 16. v. 11.

The Priests lips (says Malachias the Prophet) shall keep knowledge etc. they
read, should keep knowledge. S. Paul affirms, Malach. 2. v. 7. Bibl. 1592
corrected in the bibl. of the year 1595. Bibl. 1595. and 1600. Bibl. 1600.
Bibl. 1595.
that he released the penance of the incestuous Corinthian in the person of
Christ; that is, as the Vicar of Christ: They translate, In the sight of
Christ, and put in the margent this exposition, That is truly and from mine
heart even as in the presence of Christ. Contrary to the Greek, and also to
the Apostle himself, who (1. Corint. 5. verse. 4.) excommunicated the said
person as he says, In the name and with the virtue or power (as they
translate) of our Lord Jesus Christ. See also Mich. 5. verse. 3.

Because their liberty cannot endure any paineful satisfaction for sin, for;
Do penance, and fruits worthy of penance: They translate; Mat. 3, 2.8. Luke 3.
v. 8. Act. 17, 30. Apoc. 2, 21. and 22. cap. 16, 9. and 11
Repent, and fruits worthy of amendment of life and repentance. They say that
the Greek word signifies as they translate: But the circumstance of the
text, and all the Greek and Latin Fathers tell us the contrary. Neither can they
in some places translate the Greek word otherwise then we do, as Math. 11.
verse. 21. Luk 10. verse. 13. 2. Corint. 7. verse. 9. where it must needs signify
sorrowful, paineful, and satisfactorie repentance. I grant that the Greek word
being spoken of God and the damned, must be otherwise translated; but this is
little to the purpose: for neither in such places can it be translated as our
adversaries translate it in the places alleged; for God and the damned amend
not their lives. Dan. 10. verse. 12. for, Afflict thy self, contrary to the
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, they read, Bible 1600.
Humble thy self. Bible 1595.
Esdras 9. verse. 5. for, affliction: they read, heaviness. Dan. 4. in like
sort contrary to all the said texts in steed of redeem thy sins with alms:
Bible 1595. 1600. Iam. 5. v. 14.
they read; Break off thy sins with righteousness. See another corruption,
Tit. 3. verse. 8. against confession, whereas S. James says: Is a man sick
among you, let him bring in the Priests of the Church etc. and after, verse. 16.
Confess therefore your sins one to another: Bible 1595.
they translate thus: Is any diseased among you? let him call for the Elders of
the Church etc. and verse. 16. knowledge your faults one to another.

And although they seem to esteem so highly of marriage, yet they commonly
deny it to be a sacrament, wherefore, whereas the Apostle speaking of matrimony
says; Ephesians. 5, 32. Bible 1595.
This is a great sacrament, or mystery: they translate, This is a great secret.

In defense of the Princes supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, in king Henry
the eight, and king Edward the sixth his days, they read 1. Bible 1539. 1562.
Peter 2. verse. 13. Submit your selves to al manner of ordinance of men;
whether tt be to the King as the chief head, etc. whereas the Apostle says:
Be subject therefore to every humane creature for God, whether it be to the
king as excelling, Bible 1595. 1600.
etc. But now the last corruption contained in these words, as the chief
head, is corrected, the first remains still.

Hebr. 5. v. 7. Bible 1595. 1600.
Another corruption is in their translation of these words of the Apostle; He
was heard for his reverence, which with Calvin they turn thus: He was heard
in that which he feared.

Finally, to prove that a man may absolutely find out the true sense of
Scripture, by conferring only one place with another; Act. 9. Bible 1577. 1595.
v. 22. they read, Saul confounded the Jews, proving by conferring one
Scripture with another that this is very Christ: whereas the Greek words only
tell us, that he affirmed that this is Christ. But this is amended in the later
Bibles.

Unto al these corruptions I add, that our English Sectaries in their
translations add words to the text of Scripture, which they print not seldom
in a smaller letter, then that which contains the text it self. And who can
say that the said text with such additions is the true word of God? seeing that
such additions are made by man, without any warrant from God himself.

SECTION THE SEVENTH. That the Professors of the new religion in corrupting
the Scriptures, follow the steps of the ancient Heretics, and what follows
of this discourse.
I HAVE now discovered diverse corrupt and false translations of our English
Bibles, yet not al, but certain of the principal. I have been the longer,
because the Sectaries of our days (as I have before showed) make the holy
Scripture the only Canon and rule of their faith: and these Bibles (as every
man knows) are accounted the only ground of our English adversaries new
belief and religion; for unto them as to a touchstone they always appeal:
wherefore their Bibles especially were to be impugned.

They boast truly very much of the word of God, but as we see they have not
the word of God among them, but are corrupters and falsifiers of the same; and
in stead of it possess a devise of their own heads. In this also as in
other things, they follow well the steps of al Heretics their forefathers,
who to color their horrible blasphemies and detestable heresies, have always
used the like deceits. Hence Tertullian fourteen hundred years since, used
this discourse of the Heretics of his days. Tertul. lib. de praescript. ca.
18. see him also, cap. 15. and 38.
Encountering with such by Scriptures avails nothing, but to ouerturne a man's
stomach or his brain. This heresy receaueth not certain Scriptures: and if
it do receive some, yet by adding and taking away, it peruerteth the same to
serve her purpose; and if it receive any, it does not receive them wholly: and
if it does exhibit them after a sort wholly, nevertheless by diuising diverse
expositions it turns them clean an other way. Origin in c. 2 ad Roman. Cypr.
de unit. Eccl. Nu^b. 7. Ambros. lib. 2. de Spiritu sancto, ca. 11.
Hence also Origin who flourished soon after, called Heretics, thieves, and
adulterers of the Scriptures: S. Cyprian terms them corrupters of the
Gospel, false interpreters. artificers, and craft-masters in corrupting the
truth. S. Ambrose notes, that the Macedonians to overthrow the divinity of
the holy Ghost, blotted out of the Gospel those words: Ioh. 4. v. 24. Tertul.
contra Marcionem, lib. 1. in princip. and lib. de prescript.
God is a spirit. Marcion an ancient Heretic, is reprehended for the same
fault by Tertullian, a and is called Mus Ponticus the mouse of Pontus, because
with his corruptions to serve his own turn, he did as it were gnawe certain
places of Scripture. The Arians against the eternal generation of Christ,
whereas the Scripture says: The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his
ways; Hierom. in c. 26. Isaiae.
read as S. Hierome records: The Lord created me. The like corruptions
August. lib. 5. cont. Iulianum, cap. 2.
S. Augustine notes of the Pelagians, and more such complaints may be seen in
Epist. 89. and lib. de peccatorum meritis, cap. 11.
Origenes epist. ad Alexandrinos; Eusebius in Apologia sub nomine Pamphili;
Ruffinus epist. ad Macarium; Euagrius lib. 3. cap. 31. Cassiodorus de diuinis
lect. cap. 8. Finally, Sutcl. in his answ. to Kellisons Survey chapter 4. page 32.
Sutcliffe tells us, that Heretics to defend their perverse and erroneous
doctrine, are wont to detruncate, and by false expositions, to pervert holy
Scriptures. And no marvel that Heretics have always run this course, for
how can falsehood being of no force or strength, be defended and maintained but
by cunning devises, deceits, and lies? truth being of it self invincible
needs no such deceitful help. This moved S. Paul of himself and other
preachers of truth, to use these words: 2. Cor. 2, 17.
We are not as very many adultering the word of God, but of sincerity: and as
of God, before God we speak. And again: We renounce the secret things of
dishonesty, not walking in craftiness not adultering the word of God: contrary
to this are all the proceedings of the patrons of falsehood.

But let us now gather two brief conclusions out of the long discourse of this
Chapter: Of which the first shall be, that the controversy between us and our
adversaries is not touching the authority of the Scriptures themselves, but
touching the translation and interpretation of the same. This is manifest,
because we do not reject the places of Scripture by them corrupted and
falsified, as they are in the Hebrewe, Greek, or vulgar Latin: but we argue
their translation and interpretation of the said places of corruption and
falsehood; and consequently, censure it to be the word of man, not the word of
God.

Secondly I infer, that our adversaries translated Bibles contain not the
true word of God: and consequently, that although we should grant unto them,
that the bare letter of Scripture is a sufficient ground of Christian faith and
religion; yet that they building upon their said Bibles, have not this ground
or foundation.

Chapter 7. That they build not upon the letter of holy Scripture, contained
(as they say) in their own Bibles.
SECTION THE FIRST. In which this is proved; first, because the propositions
(which they term of their faith) are not in express terms contained in the
Scripture.
LET us go on a little further and prove, that although we should also yield
to our adversaries, that the letter of holy Scripture is a sufficient ground of
Christian religion, and that their Bibles truly contain the said letter (both
which propositions I have already proved to be most false:) yet, that they
build not upon that letter which is contained in their own Bibles.

And first let us declare, that the propositions and articles of their belief
in which they dissent from us, are not in express terms contained in their
said letter; yea, that their said letter makes more for our doctrine, then for
theirs: and out of this gather, that they build upon their own private
deductions out of the letter, not upon the letter it self which makes more
for us then for them.

Where find they then in their word of God (as they term it) this
proposition, which is (as they say) the very ground of their religion, to
wit; a man is justified by faith only, except it be in Luthers Bible who
cogged into the text the word (only) as I have showed before? We find this in
their common books: Romans 8. v. 24. Iam. 2. v. 24. Bible 1592.
We are saved by hope; and that of works or deeds a man is justified; and not
of faith only. Where is it found, that the faith which works our
justification is that by which a man without al doubt, believes him self
through the passion of Christ to be just, and in state of salvation? we find
in diverse places (as I have proved above) that the faith which works this
effect, is that by which we believe the articles of our Creed, and the
mysteries of Christian religion. Where read they, that their faith ought to
make them secure of their salvation? we read in their own books, Phil. 3.
v. 12. Bible 1595.
that we ought to work out our salvation with fear and trembling: 1. Cor. 10,
12.
and that he that thinks himself to stand, must take heed least he fall.
Where does the Scripture tell us, that the Commandments of God are impossible?
Our Savior tells us, Math. 11, 30. 1. Ioh. 5. v. 3.
that his yoke is easy and his burden light; and S. John, that his
commandments are not grievous (they should say not heavy.) Where is it
affirmed in their word of God, that the Eucharist is only a figure of the body
of Christ? Math. 26. v. 26.28. etc.
we find, that it is his body and blood. Where are we taught that we receive
the body and blood of Christ only spiritually? Christ has taught us, that his
flesh is meat indeed, John 6. v. 55. John 20. v. 23
and his blood is drink indeed. Where find they that Priests cannot forgive
sins? we find, that whose sins soever they remit, they are remitted unto
them. Where read they, that good works done in the state of grace are not
meritorious? we read, Math. 16, 27 Math. 25, 34
that Christ on the latter day shall reward every man according to his works,
and that then he will bestow upon the elect the Kingdom of heaven, for feeding
the hungry, giving drink to the thirsty, and doing other works of mercy.
Where is it affirmed, that infants borne of Christian parents may be saved
without Baptism? we can show that Christ himself has pronounced this
sentence: John 3. ver. 5.
except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. How can they prove that the usual form of Baptism is not
necessary, Luther in Sinops. col. act. 7 De captiuit Babylon, c. de bapt.
Zwing. l. de vera and falsa relig. ca. de bapt. Bre^t. in catechis. c. de bapt.
as Luther, Zwinglius, and Brentius imagine? Our Savior as we are taught by
S. Mathewe, commanded his Apostles to Mat. 28, 19
baptize al nations; In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. Where is it said that Marriage is better then Virginity? we read,
that 1. Cor. 7, 38
he that gives his daughter in marriage does well, but he that gives her not
in marriage does better. Where are they taught that we ought not to vvorshippe
Saints and Angels, nor to pray unto them? The Scripture tells us, that Iosuae
5, 14.
Iosue, and Apocal. 19, 10. c. 22, v. 8.
S. John Evangelist adored Angels: Yea, the last of these two did this honor
to an Angel, although forbidden before to do it by an Angel, which is a
manifest proof that such reverence was due unto the Angel, although he refused
it from S. John, whom he thought equal to himself. It is also recorded in
the Scripture, that the Genesis 48, 16.
Patriarch Jacob prayed unto an Angel. Where are we forbidden to have Images
in our Churches or to do them any reverence? We find that two Images of
Cherubins; Exo. 25, 18. etc. c. 37, v. 7.
by Gods Commandment were placed near the arc in the chiefest place of the
tabernacle. That Solomon in like sort placed two Cherubins in the most sacred
part of the temple; 3. or 1. of Kings, cap. 6, 23. Ib. v. 29. Act. 5. v. 13.
and that he made pictures of Cherubins (so they read in the Bible of the
year 1595.) in the wales of the house (or temple) round about; and that the
shadow of S. Peter (which was after a sort his picture) cured the sick. We
also find that the Jews Psalm. 98. or 99. v. 5 psalm. 131. or 132, 7
adored the foote-stoole of God, that is to say; the arc of the old Testament:
and that Moises by the Exodus 3, 5.
commandment of God, and Iosue of an Iosuae 5, 15.
Angel, put off their shoes because the ground on which they stood through the
presence of God and an Angel, was holy; and consequently they did reverence to
the said ground. Where is honor denied to Saints relics? It it affirmed in
holy writ, 4. or 2. Reg. cap. 13. v. 21. Math. 9, 20. Act. 19. v. 12
that a dead man was raised to life by touching the dead bones of Elizeus the
Prophet, that a woman was cured of an issue of blood by touching the hemme of
of our Saviors garment; and that napkins and hand-kerchefs (or Bible 1595
partlets as they translate) which had touched S. Paul's body, wrought
miracles. Finally, where are they taught that temporal Princes laws bind no
man's conscience, Luther in 1. Pet. c. 2. Calvin l. 1. Instit c. 19.. 16. li. 4.
c. 10.. 15.
as it is auerred by Luther and Calvin? We learn of S. Paul that Romans 13, 5.
Bible 1595.
we ought to be subject unto such Magistrates; not only for fear of
punishment, but also because of conscience.

I could add the like discourse concerning other matters in controversy
between us, and the new Sectaries; but I should be over tedious: and besides
I doubt not, but that which has been already said in this Section, is fully
sufficient to persuade every indifferent man that the articles which our
adversaries term of their belief, are not in express terms to be found in
the whole Bible; yea, that the text of their own Bibles makes more for us
then it does for them. Out of which I may well infer, that they build not upon
the letter contained in their own books, but upon their own collections,
which every private man makes according to his own fancy.

SECTION THE SECOND. The same argument is confirmed by the testimony of some
Protestants, concerning the true sense of some words of Scripture, alleged
for our Catholic doctrine touching justification in the Section before.
NOTVVITHSTANDING the words af Scripture cited for us Catholics are most
plain, yet it may be some follower of the new religion will imagine, that we
wrest them to a sense improper, and in the primative ages of the Church unheard
off; contrariwise, that those of his belief deliver the true, literal and
ancient exposition of the same. Now therefore to make the force of the reason
brought more strong, I add; that I could easily prove even by the testimonies
of our adversaries themselves, that the letter of holy Scripture in these
controversies mentioned and others, according to the proper sense thereof, and
the tradition and practice of al former Christians, is on our side, not on
theirs. But if I should here declare this to be true in every particular point,
I should be over long: wherefore I vvil exemplify only in one or two of the
principal, by which my reader may easily perceive, what may be done concerning
the rest.

Luther to. 5. in cap. 5. ad Galat. f. 382.
And first, what article of religion by these Sectaries is esteemed above that
of justification by only faith? Luther himself writes thus: Whosoever ever
falls from the article of justification (by faith only) becomes ignorant
of God and is an Idolater; and therefore, it is al one whether he return to
the law (of the Jews) or worshipping of Idols. Al is one, whether he be a
Monk, a Turk, a Jew, or an Anabaptist. For this article being once taken
away, there remains nothing but mere error, hipochrisie, impiety, idolatry;
although in show there appear excellent truth, Calvin in Epist. ad Sadoletum,
p. 176.
worship of God, holiness, etc. thus Luther. Calvin also tells us, that the
knowledge of justification by faith being taken away, both the glory of Christ
was extinguished, and religion abolished, and the Church destroyed, and the
hope of salvation altogether overthrown. Our countriman M. Perkins in like
sort affirms, Per. in his reformed Catholic touching justification of a
sinner, page 65. 66,
that we by our doctrine touching justification, do ra^^e the very foundation;
and that the disagreement between us and the Protestants concerning this
matter (if there were no more points of difference) alone, were sufficient to
keep us from uniting our religions: this is his opinion. Wherefore, this being
an article of Christian belief in these men's conceits so principal, let us
behold whether the letter of holy Scripture according to the judgment of
Protestants, do not plainly deliver our doctrine concerning it, and impugn
theirs.

The chiefest place which I have alleged in the section next before touching
this matter, is that sentence of S. James the Apostle: Of works or deeds a
man is justified, and not of faith only. Iam. 2. v. 24. Bible, 1592.
And how do all the Lutheranes, yea, some Sacramentaries understand these
words? Truly they openly and boldly confess, that they war against
justification by only faith, and approve justification by works; and they
assign this as one reason, why this epistle is to be rejected out of the
Canon. Luther the captain of them al writing upon the 22. chapter of Genesis
has these words: See him also praefat. in nouum Testam. edit. 1. Genensis and
in captiuitat. Babilo. ca. de Extrema Vnct. and in 1. Pet. c. 1. fol 439. 440.
edit. Wittenb.
Abraham was just by faith before he is known such an one by God: therefore
James does naughtily conclude, that now at the length he is justified, after
this obedience: for by works as by fruits faith and justice is known. But it
follows not, vt Iacobus delirat, as James dotingly affirms, therefore the
fruits do iustifiy: thus there. And in another place, Luth. in colloquijs
conuiualibus latin. to. 2. de libris noui Testam. Part. 2 chap. 6. sect. 2.
Many (says he) have taken great pains in the epistle of James, to make it
accord with Paul, as Philppe endeavors in his Apology; but not with good
success, for they are contrary; faith does justify, faith does not justify.
Lo, Luther expressly tells us, that S. James avouches faith not to justify.
But whereas he makes this Apostle contrary to S. Paul, he does wrong them
both. For neither does the one say, that faith does not justify, nor the
other, that faith alone does justify as he supposes: But out of their
discourses it may be gathered, that both faith and works concur to
justification, which is our Catholic doctrine. Of the place of S. Paul unto
which Luther alludeth, I have said something before: and therefore no more of
it at this present shall be necessary. The opinion of Pomeran. in c. 8. ad Roman.
Pomerane a Lutheran of great estimation, is conformable to that of Luther, for
thus he pronounces his censure: Faith was reputed to Abraham for justice: By
this place thou may note the error of the epistle of James, wherein thou
see a wicked argument. Besides that he concludes ridiculously, he cites
Scripture against Scripture, which thing the holy Ghost cannot abide:
wherefore, that epistle may not be numbered among other books which set forth
the justice of only faith: thus Pomerane. I will not stand to free S. James from
his wicked accusations, which is very well performed by diverse Catholic
authors. Hill in his defense of the article, Christ descended into hell, fol. 23.
Centur. 1. lib. 2. c. 4. col. 54. Centur. 2. ca. 4. col. 71.
But unto this Lutheran I will join the Magdeburgians his brethren (whose
vvritings an English Protestant judges to be worthy of eternal memory) who
say, that the epistle of S. James much swarueth from the analogy of the
Apostolical doctrine, whereas it ascribes justification not only to faith, but
to works; and calls the law, a law of liberty. Again, Against Paul
against al Scriptures, the epistle of James attributes justice to works, and
peruerteth as it were of set purpose, that which Paul disputes, Romans 4. out of
Genesis 15. Abraham was justified by only faith without works, and affirms
that Abraham obtained justice by works: hitherto are their words. With these
consents Vitus Theodorus an other of that company, and a preacher of
Norinberge; who yields this reason wherefore he excluded this epistle from
the Canon of holy Scripture. The epistle of James and the Apocalipse of John
(says he) we have of set purpose left out, because the epistle of James is not
only in certain places reproueable, where he overmuch aduanceth works
against faith, but also his doctrine throughout is patched together of diverse
pieces, whereof no one agrees with an other: this is the general opinion of the
Lutherans. Among the Sacramentaries, Wolfangus Musculus in locis com: cap de
iustificat. number 5. p. 271
Wolfangus Musculus a Zwinglian having reprehended S. James for alleging the
example of Abraham (as he says) nothing to the purpose, and for not
distinguishing (if we believe this doctor) the true and properly Christian
faith, from that which is common to Jews and Christians, Turks and Devils: He
adds, that the said James sets down his sentence much different from the
Apostolical doctrine, whereby concluding he says; you see that a man is
justified by works and not by faith only etc. I shall recite his words more at
large in the next chapter. And what greater proof then the assertion of so
many of his learned Masters, can a reasonable man of the new religion require?
Behold both learned Lutherans with their first beginner Luther, and a principal
Sacramentarie confess, that we follow the true and litteral sense of S. James
words. It may be replied first, that these Sectaries reject this epistle out of
the Canon of holy Scripture. I confess it is so, but this notwithstanding the
Church of England with Calvin and the Caluinists and most of the Zwinglians,
admit it as Canonical; and therefore according to the doctrine of the followers
of the new religion, we may very well frame this argument: The Epistle of S.
James is Canonical Scripture; but the Epistle of S. James approves
justification by good works, and says it is not wrought by faith only;
therefore the Canonical Scripture approves justification by good works, and
says it is not wrought by faith only. The first proposition is affirmed true
as is before said, by the Church of England, by Calvin and al his Caluinists and
by most of the Zwinglians; the second by all the Lutherans: of which the
conclusion necessarily follows, and consequently our doctrine touching
justification, according to the testimony of our adversaries, is built upon the
letter of holy Scripture. Which prerogative if it be truly yielded unto us, it
must needs be denied unto them; for the Scriptures teach not contraries, and
it is in no place opposite to it self.

Secondly, it may be replied and said, that the Lutherans do not well
understand and apprehend S. James his meaning. This is likewise easily
refelled; for what reason has any indifferent man, to prefer the
Sacramentaries judgment, before that of the Lutherans. Do not these
understand the Scriptures as well as they? what privilege or vvarrant of not
erring have the Sacramentaries above the Lutherans? In learning without al
doubt, and other gifts necessary for attaining the true sense of Scripture,
these were not inferior to them; yea, Luther as I have related in my Preface,
is extraordinarily commended even by those Sacramentaries, who otherwise
expound S. James then he does. Their enmity and hatred against us were
likewise equal, wherefore it is not like, if with any probable gloss they
could have drawn this Apostles sentences to an other meaning, that they would
have bereaved themselves of such a monument of antiquity, and have confessed it
to make against themselves: such a monument, I say, which their brethren
affirm to be Canonical Scripture, and they themselves cannot deny to have
been highly esteemed by all their Christian predecessors; nay by most, and
those of greatest learning and authority, to have been placed in the sacred
Canon of divine books. Finally, Field book 1. chap. 18. page 35. 36.
Field seems to confess, that S. Paul sometimes by works of the law,
understands works of the law of Moses: for he tells us, that this
Apostle pronounces that the Galathians were bewitched; Galat. 3. and 5.
and that, if they still persisted to join circumcision and the works of the
law with Christ, they were fallen from grace, etc. Now if this be so, it may
also be, that in the place, which the Lutherans think opposite to that of S:
James, by works of the law he understands works of the law of Moses:
which if it be admitted as true, the sentences of these blessed Apostles may
easily be reconciled; although S. Paul's words admit also other very good
expositions, Chap. 6. Sect. 2. Field book 3 c. 22. p. 118.
as I have before declared. The same Field in like manner affirms, that when
we are justified God requires of us a new obedience, judges us according to
it, and crowns us for it; and that in this sort it is, that he will judge us
in the last day according to our works. By which his assertion he plainly
grants, that for good works men shall be crowned in heaven, and consequently
that good works done after justification, are meritorious of eternal glory in
the next world: and why not then also of the increase of grace in this life,
which is all that by us is avouched? Ibid. chap. 44 page 179.
Lastly he says, that justification implies in it self Faith, Hope, and
Love; which proposition I see not how he can verify, if according to the
Scriptures faith only does justify. And thus much out of our adversaries
touching the proof of justification by works, and not by faith only, out of
the word of God.

Neither have these Protestants only thus understood the holy Scriptures, but
also as I have affirmed in the beginning of this Section, the ancient Fathers.
And this I vvil also prove, by the like testimonies and confession of our
adversaries. The Magdeburgians or Century writers are much commended by all
sorts of followers of the new religion, for their diligence used and pains
taken, both in perusing and censuring al Councels and old Authors, and also in
penning of their Ecclesiastical history, especially of the primative Church:
Let these men therefore declare and tell us, what the ancient Fathers believed
and taught touching justification. Verily, they so great and so principal
antiquaries, being themselves of a contrary belief affirm that the said
Fathers have erred in this article by ascribing justification to good works,
and denying it to only faith. For of the second age after Christ thus they
write: The doctrine of justification was delivered more negligently and
obscurely, Centur. 2. ca. 4. col. 60. 61.
by the Doctors of this age. Again; This article the highest and chiefest of
al, by little and by little through the craft of the Devil, began to be
obscured. Further, It appears (say they) out of the writings of Clemens
Alexandrinus, that in his age the doctrine concerning the end of good works,
began to be obscured. Finally, The times ensuing declare sufficiently, that
the doctrine of faith justifying without works, began forthwith to be more
and more varied and obscured. Centur. 3. ca. 4. col. 53. 79. 80. 81.
In their history of the third age they tell us, that this article was almost
altogether obscured, and that the Doctors of that time declined more from the
true doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, then of the age before. Hence among
others that erred in this point, they name S. Clement, Tertullian, Origin, Ibi.
and Ce^tur. 4. c. 4. p. 292. Centur. 5. c. 4 page 504. and cap. 10. Cent. 6.
cap. 4 page 274.
S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Cyril,
Theophilus, Lactantius, Eusebius, Chromatius, Ephrem, S. Gregory Nyssene, S.
Gregory Nazianzene, S. Hilary, S. Leo, Saluianus, Isichius, Prosper, Maximus,
and Paulinus. Nay in their Century of the fourth age, having proved at large
that neither Lactantius, Chromatius, Ephrem, Theophilus, S. Hierome, S. Gregory
Nyssene, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S. Hilary, nor S. Ambrose ever acknowledged
their manner of justification by faith only; they add these words: Now let
the Godly reader imagine with himself, Centur. 4. c. 4. page 292.
how far this age touching this article went a stray from the doctrine of
the Apostles. In their history of the fifth age they have the like discourses:
but among others of Prosper a famous Father of that time, thus they write:
Prosper retained not a few freckles (so they term such opinions in the
Fathers as the said Fathers hold with us, Cent. 5. c. 10. page 1363.
and they think erroneous) of his age; such an one is that faith only does not
justify: Hitherto the Magdeburgians. The same is confessed by their M. Luther:
Luth. in colloquijs conuiualibus, cap. de Patribus Ecclesiae.
For having pronounced his censure against diverse of the Fathers in particular,
of them in general he says; See ye what darkness there is in the Fathers
writings concerning faith. For when that article of the justification of man is
covered with darkness, it can by no means be that greater errors be avoided:
Thus Luther. And because he and his brethren confirm their doctrine of sole
faith by certain sentences, especially taken out of S. Paul's Epistles to the
Romans and the Galatians, which they wrest to an other sense, then ever was
yielded by the ancient Fathers, hence he also makes this complaint. Those
Fathers truly taught very well, Ibid.
but they could bring forth nothing singular, when they wrote not of
controversies and in confutation of others: neither are there any works extant
of theirs upon the Epistle either to the Romans or to the Galatians, in which
any thing pure and sincere may be found: Hitherto are Luthers words. But of S.
Hierome in particular, because he contrarieth his exposition of the said
Epistles, Luth. tom. 5. in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 3. fol. 348. and tom. 2. de
seruo arbitrio, fo. 473. and in epist. ad Brentiu^, quae praefixa est Bre^tij
com. in Oscam See him likewise in ca. 5. ad Galat. fol. 383.
he avouches; that he was deceived by Origin, and that he understood nothing
at al in S. Paul, but depraved the justice of only faith; and that this one
error of his was so great, that it alone was sufficient to destroy the Gospel,
by which if it had not been (says Luther) through the singular grace of God,
Hierome had merited rather hell then heaven: The like he has in other places.
And seeing that I am entered so far into this matter, I beseech my reader not
to condemn me of being tedious and over long, if I declare unto him out of the
same Luther by all probable conjectures, the fountain and offspring of this
Solifidian doctrine. For what other thing was this, but the impurity of
Luthers conscience, and the abomination of his sinful soul? This relation he
makes of himself and his own proceedings. Lut. in praefat. tom. 1.
But howsoever (says he) I lived as a Monk irreprehensible, who felt my self
to be a sinner of a most unquiet conscience before God, neither could I have
confidence that he was appeased with my satisfaction, did not love, yea I hated
God just and punishing sinners; and inwardly in my heart if not with a
blaspheamous, truly with a very great murmuring or grudging, I repined and was
displeased with God, saying: As though it were not sufficient that miserable
and wreatched sinners, and eternally lost by original sin, are by the law of
the ten Commandments oppressed with all kind of calamity, except God did by
the Gospel add grief to grief, and threaten also by the Gospel his justice
and anger upon us; I was therefore mad and did rage through an angry and
troubled conscience. And not long after declaring how he freed himself from
this miserable estate, he adds: Wherefore, by how much the more I hated
before these words (the justice of God) with so much the greater love I
extolled that sweet word unto me (concerning justification by only faith:) so
this place of Paul was truly unto me Porta Paradisi, a gate to Paradise.
Afterward I read S. Augustine in his book de Spiritu and Litera, where
beyond my expectation I found, that he also does so interpret the justice of
God, to be that with which he clotheth us, when he does justify us. And
although this was spoken imperfectly, and he does not explicate al things
clearly concerning imputation, yet it pleased me that he taught the justice of
God to be that, by which we are justified: Hitherto are Luthers words. By
which it evidently appears, that sweet liberty and freedom from al band of
law, and fear of sin, together with the horror of his guilty conscience
burdened with enormious crimes, were the chiefest reasons which moved this
first beginner of the new religion, to invent and embrace the doctrine of
faith only justifying; by which it is defended that through the apprehension of
Christ's justice by faith, without any more a do man is freed from the
imputation of al sin, made just by the imputation of Christ's justice, and
secured of his eternal salvation, be his sins never so great and heinous: But
of this no more.

Of the same opinion concerning the error of the ancient Fathers, or rather
their true belief condemning the Protestant false faith, is Philippe
Melancthon: for he affirms, Melancthon in c. 3. 1. Cor.
that presently in the beginning of the Church, ancient writers obscured the
doctrine touching the justice of faith. And although Calvin above al other
Fathers Calvin Instit. book 3. cap. 11.. 15.
esteemed of S. Augustine, yet he avouches, that Ibid. chap. 15.. 2.
the very sentence of Augustine, or at the least his manner of speaking, is not
altogether to be received: and grants moreover, that the old writers of the
Church have commonly used the word merit. Beza his scholar accuses Origin in
this point Beza in Act cap. 10. v. 46.
of horrible blaspheamy. D. Humfrey says, H^fred. Iesuitismi part. 2. page 530.
It may not be denied but that Ireneus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and others called
Apostolical (in respect of the time in which they lived) have in their writings
the opinions of free will, and merit of works. The like have Whitgift in his
defense, p. 472. and 473.
Whitgift, Adam. Scultet. in Medulla Theolog. p. 48. 122. 151.
Adamus Scultetus and others. Nay Field, although he also term S. Augustine
the Field book 3. chap. 42. page 170.
greatest of all the Fathers, and worthiest Divine the Church of God ever had
since the Apostles times; yet he tells us, that Ibid. chap. 15. page 93.
his manner of delivering this article of justification, is not full, perfect,
and exact, as they are forced to require in these times, against the errors of
the Romanists: For that when he speaks of grace, he seems for the most part
to understand nothing else thereby, but that sanctification, whereby the holy
spirit of God changes us to become new creatures; seldom mentioning the
imputation of the righteousness of Christ: hitherto Field: And thus we see,
that the letter of holy Scripture, not only according to the plain and open
confession of our adversaries, but also according to the tradition and belief
of the ancient Fathers (our said adversaries likewise being witnesses) does
teach, not with them, that faith only does justify us by the imputation of
Christ's justice, but with us, that works also concur to our justification. I
could join unto this another argument, sufficient in any wise man's judgment
to condemn these Sectaries doctrine of falsehood, and consequently, to prove
it not to be build upon the letter of holy Scripture, (to wit) the dissension
which is among them in explicating this article; but breuity causes me to
omit it. Only I wish my reader to peruse that which Field of the Church book
3. chap. 44. page 177.
Field has in his third book of the Church concerning this matter, and to
confer it with the doctrine of Luther, Calvin in his Institutions.
Calvin, Perkins in his reformed Catholic page 48. 315.
Perkins, Willet in his Synops. controuers. 19. part. 2. page 827. part. 4.
page 877. 885. 887.
Willet and others. For there he shall find, that the said Field makes that
act of faith which obtains and works our justification, an act by way of
petition humbly entreating for acceptance and favor, not an act in the nature
of comfortable assurance, consisting in a full and assured persuasion, that
through Christ's merits we are the children of God; as is taught by the rest.

SECTION THE THIRD. The like discourse is made concerning a place of Scripture
alleged for the real presence.
AN other principal article controuersed between us and our adversaries, is
that, touching the real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist.
For the affirmative part which we Catholics defend, especially against the
Sacramentaries, I have alleged in the first Section of this Chapter among
other, those words of our Lord; This is my body: I will therefore proceed and
discourse of this sentence, as I have already done of that of S. James,
touching justification by works.

Melancthon for his learning and piety is much commended, both by See Bulle^ger
in Firmame^to firmo, cap. 4. fol. 27. colloquium Altemberg. an. 1568 fol. 203.
Lutherans and Sacramentaries. Luther himself, judged his book of common
places, Luth. tom. 2. de seruo arbitrio, fol. 424. in colloq. co^uiualibus, ca.
de Patribus Eccles.
worthy to be placed in the Ecclesiastical canon of holy Scripture; and Luther
in praefat. to. 1.
affirmed that God raised him that he might have a companion in his labors,
combats, and dangers in the propagation of the sincere doctrine of the Gospel.
Calvin termed him Calvin admonit. 3. ad Westphalu^, and admonit. vlt. fol. 23.
the great ornament of the German Churches, and with great vehemency affirmed,
that Philip Melancthon in the controversy touching the supper, could be no
more plucked or divided from him then from his own proper bowels. Peter Martyr
calls him Martyr in dialogo de corpore Christi in loco, fol. 107. contra
Gardinerum de Eucharistia, page 768.
a man incomparable, and most instructed in all kind of virtue and learning; he
makes him equal in learning and piety with S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Leo
and the ancient Fathers. Beza finally says he was instaurator, Beza in
Iconib. and in Creophag. pa. 80.
the repairer again of Euangelical doctrine: he terms him likewise the
singular ornament of our age, and together with Lauather. in histor.
Sacrament. fol. 47.
Lauatherus likeneth him to the Phoenix. What then vvriteth this great scholar
of so rare virtue touching this matter? thus he discourses: There is no care
that has more troubled my mind, then this of the Eucharist; and not only my
self have weighed what might be said on either side, but I have also sought
out the judgment of the old writers touching the same. Melancth. li. 3. ep.
Zwinglij and Oecolampadij, fol. 132.
And when I have laid al together, I find no good reason that may satisfy a
conscience departing from the propriety of Christ's words; this is my body.
You gather many absurdities (he debateth the matter with Oecolampadius a
Sacramentary) which follow this opinion, but absurdities will not trouble him
who remembers, that we must judge of divine matters according to Gods word,
not according to Geomatry. And soon after; I find no reason, Ibid. fol. 140.
how I may depart from this opinion touching the real presence. Well it may be
an other opinion more agreeable to man's reason, may please an idle mind,
especially if the said opinion be furnished and commended with arguments well
handled: but what shall be come of us in tentation, when our conscience shall be
called to an account, what cause we had to dissent from the received opinion in
the Church? Then these words (this is my body) will be thunderbolts: hitherto
Melancthon. Luther as all the world knows, out of the same words gathered
and defended the real presence; in so much as he condemned the Sacramentaries
as Heretics for auouching the contrary: but let us rehearse some of his
words. Luther to. 7. in defens verborum coenae, fol. 388. Ibid. fol. 390.
Whereas Gods power (says he) surpasses al cogitation, and works that which
is to our reason incomprehensible, and which only faith believes; and the same
God said; This is my body which shall be delivered for you, how can I persuade
my conscience, that God has neither means nor ability to do as his words
sound? Again, These good Sacramentaries by their loathing and abhorring such
things, make way to the denial of Christ, and God himself, and of al articles
of our faith. And truly for a great part, they have already begun to believe
nothing: for they bring themselves within the compass of reason, which is the
right way to damnation. And themselves know, that these Ethnical cauils,
either are nothing worth against this article, or if they conclude any thing
against this, they do the like against al: for the word of God is foolishnes
to man's reason, 1: Cor. 1. And they would never have uttered this, had they had
any regard of the Scripture, and were not their hearts full of infidelity, so as
their mouth speaks out of the abundance of their heart. Fol. 391.
Finally he concludes thus; If these be the grounds and reasons which should
certify us of the truth, and prove our faith and confirm our conscience, (he
means such grounds and reasons as are brought from natural discourse and
Philosophy) then truly we are in evil case. If a man had delivered me such
books without title or name (as are written by the Sacramentaries,) and I
knew not otherwise such learned and excellent men to have been the Authors
of them, I should surely have thought that some jesting Comediant or Turkish
vagabond, had made them in despite and derision of Christians. Verily I see not
how they can be excused with any probable pretense, as many other Heretics
have had: for it appears, that they play with Gods word of wilfulness and
malice. And I think it cannot be, that such cold toys and bablings should
indeed move a Turk or Jew, much less a Christian, etc. Centur. 4. in
praefat.
This and much more has Luther: The Magdeburgians likewise tell us, that some
(and they mean the Sacramentaries) flatly by Philosophical reasons, make void
and frustrate the Testament of our Lord, so as they take away the body and
blood of Christ touching his presence and communication, which (presence and
communication) is according to the most clear, most evident, most true, and
most puissant words of Christ; and they deceive men with marvelous
equivocation of speech: hitherto the Centurie writers. Of the same opinion
touching the ground of the Sacramentary doctrine, is Westphalus; for the
Sacramentaries against the real presence urge this argument: Westphalus in
Apolog. co^tra Calvin. c. 19. page 194. anno 1558.
The body of man is circumscribed in a place, therefore at one time it cannot
be but in in one place, therefore not in all places where the supper is
ministered, unto which Westphalus replieth thus: Is not (says he) this
Geometrical argument featched from Euclides demonstrations, the pillar and
vpholder of al these Sacrame^taries? Does not this uphold the building of their
sillogismes, which corrupt very many places of Scripture? Most truly is
verified of the Sacramentaries that memorable saying; Take from Heretics that
wherein they agree with Philosophers, and they cannot stand. Take from the
Sacramentaries that which they draw from Philosophy, and how small a quantity
will remain of the great volumes of all the Sacramentaries? How long will it be
before the doctrine of Berengarius fall to the ground? Well and truly wrote
Tertullian, that Philosophers are the Patriarchs of Heretics; for Philosophy
brought forth al Heresies, and she begat the error of Zwinglius: Thus much out
of the Lutherans in defense of the real presence against the Sacramentaries;
and their works generally are full of such discourses. Hence it appears,
that according to their judgment the belief of the real presence is built
upon holy Scripture, and the denial of it upon Geometrical and Philosophical
reasons.

But find we no proofs for our Catholic exposition of the before said words
in the Sacramentaries themselves? Truly first Calvin avouches, that unless a
man will call God a deceiuer, Calvin. Institut. book 4. cha. 17.. 10.
he can never be so bold as to say, that he sets before us an empty sign:
and this he is forced to affirm through the evidence of the words of
Scripture. Secondly, it is the opinion of diverse learned men of this sect, yea
of some esteemed by them Martirs, that our doctrine touching this point may be
held without any peril of damnation, or separation from the one true spiritual
body of Christ his holy Church. Of which opinion among others was William
Tindal, whom Whetenhal honors with this title; Whete^hal in his discourse
of the abuses, etc. page 134.
William Tindal that blessed martyr of God, the first man that ever brought the
Gospel of Christ into English print; and therefore (says this Puritan) he may
worthily be called our English Evangelist: yea, our book of martirs Fox p.
883. edit. 1.
calls him the true Apostle of our latter days, and that much more justly
then Popish Augustine the first Archbishop of Canterbury, is so termed by
diverse: Thus Whetenhal. This Tindal I say, as also Frith, Barnes, and Cranmer
(of whom the said Whetenhal Whetenhal ibid. p. 157.
in an other place) as is related by Fox in Tind.
Fox himself, held it Frith, Barnes, and Cranmer, especially page 500. edit.
anno 1563.
a thing indifferent to believe or not believe the real presence. Of the same
opinion is Couel in his def. of Hooker, art. 11.
M. Couel, a man of good account among the English Protestants. Dove persuasion
p. 11.
Dove also vvriteth, that in fundamental points of doctrine, the greatest
Papists in the world agree with them: And seeing that we agree not with them in
this, it is manifest that in his judgment this is no fundamental point. It may
likewise be well gathered out of Fields assertions See Field book 3. chap. 3.
and 4.
in his third book of the Church, that his sentence is conformable. But what
need I rehearse particular authors? For this must of necessity be See the
Apology of the Church of England par. 3. page 100. Sutcliffe in his answer to
the Ward-word, page 21. Fulke upon the Rhemes Testam. Ephesians. 4. verse. 4. etc.
granted by all the Sacramentaries, who make one Church of themselves and the
Lutherans: And of this the reason is apparent, because although the Lutherans
differ from us in the manner, yet with us they confess Christ to be really
and corporally present in the Eucharist. Unto which if we add, that our
doctrine touching the manner it self how this is done, in the Sacramentaries
judgment is more tolerable then Luthers, it vvil follow that there can be no
reason assigned, why we should receive a harder censure for our belief then
they for theirs. And does not Calvin himself auerre this to be so? It must
needs be granted: For certain it is, that almost all the Lutherans to defend
this real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, affirm his humane nature to be
really present wheresoever is his Deity, Calvin Institut. book 4. chap. 17. 30

See also the preface to the harmony of confessions.


which Calvin calls the monstrous being of Christ every where; and says, the
Papists doctrine is more tolerable or at the least more shamefaste then this.
Nay, all the whole company of Sacramentaries in foreign Countries, are more
vehement in oppugning this, then ours: Wherefore, if the Lutherans according to
the doctrine of the Sacramentaries this notwithstanding, are neither excluded
from heaven nor the Church, a man may likewise believe as we do and be barred
from neither; and consequently it cannot be said, that our faith is opposite to
the word of God. I may urge this a little further; for seeing that the
Sacramentaries belief is so hardly censured both by us and the Lutherans, and
the Lutheran opinion both by us and the Sacramentaries; seeing moreover, ours by
the Lutherans is esteemed better then that of the Sacramentaries (as all the
world knows, and it appears true by this that the Lutherans condemn it,
not as heretical; yea Luth. de captiuit. Babylon. Ite^ sermon. de Eucharist. and
sermon. de venerabili Sacrame^to, etc. tom. 7. Germ. fol. 20. and in Visitat.
Saxonica.
Luther allows of it as tolerable,) and by the Sacramentaries preferred
before that of the Lutherans, a man according to the rules of wisdom, is
rather to think ours comformable to truth and the written word of God, then
that either of the Lutherans, or Sacramentaries.

But it may be urged against us, that diverse See Whitakers reprehension against
Martin, p. 11.
learned Sacramentaries censure our doctrine to be of things incredible and
impossible. I answer; although some of this sect be so blaspheamous against
the omnipotent power of God, as so to affirm it; yet others protest, that they
never doubted of Gods power herein, that he is able to effect it, but they say
he never did it; as may be seen in Jewel in his reply against Harding, art.
10.. 9.
M. Jewel and others: Wherefore, according to these men our faith is of things
by us in this life incomprehensible, and above the ordinary course of reason,
not of things impossible. Neither is this peculiar and proper only to this
mystery, but also common to other articles of our faith; as to our belief
touching the most blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, the resurrection
of our bodies, etc. Nay, if Calvin and some of his disciples say true, this is
verified even in their doctrine concerning the Eucharist. For Calvin himself
discourses thus: Although it seem incredible, Calvin Institut. book 4. cha.
17. 10.
that in so great distance of places the flesh of Christ reaches to us, that
it may be meat to us (for they hold the body and blood of our Lord to be
always as far from us as is the highest heaven:) yet let us remember, how
much the secret power of the Spirit surmounteth above al our senses, and how
foolish a thing it is, to go about to measure his unmeasurableness by our
measure. That therefore which our mind comprehends not, let our faith conceive
etc. Again; Ibid.. 24.
The doctrine it self which I have declared does clearly enough show, that I
do not measure this mystery by the proportion of man's reason, nor do make it
subject to the laws of nature. He adds, that he is more then senseless,
that perceaueth not many miracles to be contained in this mystery as he
delivers it, and that nothing is more beside nature or more incredible.
Finally, Ibid.. 32.
now if any man (says he) ask me of the manner (how Christ is joined to us
in the supper) I will not be ashamed to confess, that it is a higher secret
then that it can either be comprehended with my wit, or uttered with my words:
and to speak it more plainly, I rather feel it then I can understand it.
Therefore I do herein without controversy embrace the truth of God in which I
may safely rest: Hitherto are Caluins words. The like has the French
Confession, French confession art. 36. in Harmony of confess. sect. 14. page
426.
in which his disciples affirm, that this mystery of our union with Christ (in
the supper) is so high a thing, that it surmounteth al our senses, yea and the
whole order of nature; that it being divine and heavenly, cannot be perceived
nor apprehended, but by faith. Now if these things be so, who can make any
great difference between Caluins doctrine and ours in this, that his is of
things credible and possible, ours of things incredible and impossible? Are
not both according to his sayings, of things incomprehensible? Verily,
whosoever considers well his words, and observes his rules, vvil not be
very much moved with any of the Sacramentaries arguments, conuincing (as they
imagine) the real presence by us taught to be impossible. Thus then we see,
that by the confession of our adversaries, the words of our Lord, This is my
body, according to their literal and plain sense, are an evident proof of the
real presence; against which their sense, no humane or Philosophical reasons
(as they likewise avouch) are to be admitted.

Let us now see how our said adversaries relate, al our Predecessors
especially the Christians of the first ages after Christ, to have expounded the
said words. And in this point I need not be long or spend much labor,
because the Lutherans have not been altogether negligent, in gathering such
testimonies of antiquity against their enemies the Sacramentaries, as make for
the real presence and overthrow the Sacramentary doctrine. This appears in
diverse of their Se the Magdeburgians in their ce^turies and others.
books published to the view of the whole world; in which they declare even
to the eye, that all the ancient Fathers held and taught the true, real, and
corporal presence of Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist. Nay, some of
them grant certain of the Fathers to have believed transubstantiation, so the
Century writers affirm Centur. 5. c. 4. col. 517.
that S. Chrysostom seems to confirm it, and that Centur. 4. c. 4. col.
294. see also ca. 6. col. 480.
S. Athanasius, S. Ambrose, and S. Gregory make for it. Luther himself tells
us, that Luth. tom. 7. in defens. verborum coenae, fol. 391.
this is worthy of admiration, that none of the Fathers (of whom there is an
infinite number) did ever speak of the Sacrament so as do the Sacramentaries,
but clean contrary. And what say the Sacramentaries? Martyr in defens. ad
object. Gardener. part. 4. p. 724. See also his epist. annexed to his common
places, page 106. to. Beza and p. 98 to Calvin.
Peter Martyr plainly refuses to subscribe to S. Cyrils doctrine touching
this matter. Beza auerreth, that Beza epist. Theolog. 8. page 73. 74.
most of the most ancient Fathers thought it meet, to hide or keep secret
the holy mysteries of the Christians (he means the celebration of the
Eucharist) no otherwise then the mysteries of Ceres; in so much as they
admitted not the Catechumenes, that is: such as believed yet were not
baptized, to behold them. And why so, if Christ be not really and corporally
present in the Eucharist? Field also confesses, that Field book 3. chap. 34.
page 149.
in the primative Church the manner of many was to receive the Sacrament, and
not to be partakers of it presently, but to carry it home with them, and to
receive it privately when they were disposed; as Tertullian (says he) and
others do report. He adds; The manner was to send it by the Deacons to them,
that by sickness or other necessary impediment were forced to be absent, and
to strangers. Yea for this purpose, they did in such places where they
communicated not every day, reserve some part of the sanctified elements, to be
sent to the sick and such as were in danger of death. Page 150.
He denies, that Calvin does not any where say, that the elements consecrated
and reserved for a time, in reference to an ensuing receiving of them, are not
the body of Christ. This he plainly admits; as also that the Christians of
the primative Church, thought the sanctified elements to be Christ's body, as
long as they might serve for the comfortable instruction of the faithful
pertaking in them. Finally he tells us, Book 4. cha. 31. page 266.
that bread being appointed to be the matter of the Sacrament of the body of
Christ, and water of Baptism, the Christians in ancient time held that bread,
which had been offered and presented at the Lords table (out of which, says
he, a part was consecrated for the use of the Sacrament) more holy then other
bread: Hitherto Field. Al which his assertions, may well be urged in proof of
the real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament. But whereas he
seeks to draw Calvin to his opinion, he labors in vain; Calvin Institut.
book 4. chapter 17.. 39.
for Calvin expressly condemns this reservation as unprofitable: and although
he confess, that they that so do have the example of the old Church; yet he
affirms, that in so great a matter, and in which we err not without great
danger, nothing is safer then to follow the truth it self, which he imagines
to be opposite to this observation. It is also evident, that with Bucer,
Melancthon, and almost al other sectaries, See him ibid. page 37.
he holds the Eucharist to be no permanent thing, but to be the Sacrament
then only when it is received.

More I could say of the ancient doctrine and practice of the Church,
confirming our exposition of the aforesaid words of holy Scripture, but here
occurreth a certain opinion of some which I think not amiss to confute; and
my confutation of the same will be something long: wherefore, I vvil break off
my former discourse, and forthwith enter upon it.

Some Sacramentarie followers of the new religion imagine and think, that
Calvin and his disciples deny not the real presence of Christ's body and blood
in the sacrament, and therefore they approach unto the Caluinian communion with
great reverence, deeming themselves truly and reallie to receive in it, the
said body and blood of our Lord: whereupon they infer, that their belief
touching this point, is as conformable to the letter of holy Scripture, as
ours. But alas simple souls, they are much deceived; as even Calvin himself
and their learned masters confess. For although these Doctors in some places
of their works, seem to acknowledge some such matter; yet in others they
flatly deny it, and in plain terms declare their meaning in those other
places first mentioned, to be otherwise them their words do sound. I grant
their magnificent terms may easily seduce a silly soul, and I my self know
some good creatures deceived; but whoseuer does read their masters books, may
easily discover their falsehood: let us first behold how they plainly seem
to avouch the real presence. Calvin Institut. book 4. chapter 17.. 10.
Calvin writes thus: Our souls are so fed with the flesh and blood of Christ,
as bread and wine do maintain and sustain the bodily life. And do not bread
and wine maintain and sustain the bodily life by true and real eating them?
But he goes on: For otherwise the proportional relation of the sign should
not agree, unless our souls did find their food in Christ, which cannot be
done, unless Christ do truly grow into one with us, and refresh us with the
eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood. And soon after; Unless a man
will call God a deceiuer, he can never be so bold as to say, that he sets
before us an empty sign.. 11.
Again; I say that in the mystery of the supper, by the signs of bread and
wine, Christ is truly delivered to us, yea and his body and blood, in which he
has fulfilled al obedience for purchasing of righteousness unto us.. 32.
Moreover, Christ pronounces that his flesh is the meat of my soul, and his
blood the drink; with such food I offer my soul to him to be fed. In his
holy supper he commands me, under the signs of bread and wine to take,
eat, and drink his body and blood, I nothing doubt but he does truly deliver
them, Calvin in 1. Cor. 11. v. 24. See him also de coena Domini.
and I do truly receive them. Finally, I conclude and grant (says he) that
the body of Christ is given us in the supper really, (as they commonly speak)
that is to say truly, to the end it may be wholesome food for our souls. I
speak after the common fashion, but I mean, that our souls are fed with the
substance of Christ's body, to the intent we may be made one with him: these
and other such like sentences every foot occur in Calvin. Calvin lib. de
coena Domini edit. an. 1540. Gallice. and an. 1545. Latin. See him also in his
Institutions chap. 14. and chap. 17.. 5.6.
Hence he also by name reprehendeth the doctrine of Zwinglius touching this
sacrament, who affirmed Zwinglius tom. 2. epist. ad quandam Germaniae
ciuitatem, fol. 296.
the supper to be nothing else, but a solemn sign or token of charity and
friendship, a sign of spiritual things; but it self in no wise spiritual,
neither working any spiritual thing in us. He likewise avouches (as I have
before noted) that the truth of this mystery seems incredible, that it is
wrote by the secret power of the spirit, that it is incomprehensible, by our
mind and above nature, that many miracles are contained in it, etc. which his
assertions seem to argue some great matter. Lastly he tells us, that Calvin
Instit. book 4. c. 40.
not unworthily they are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, who come to
this sacrament unworthily, which they do with ungodliness full of sacrilege so
foully defile. Therefore (says he) by this unworthy eating they take to
themselves damnation. The book of common prayer in the communion in the
exhortations.
The like has the English book of common prayer (yea much more) as every man
may see, and others are of the same judgment. And who can deny, but this is a
manifest token that they acknowledge the real presence? For what indignity can
be offered to Christ, or damnation taken, by eating a piece of bakers bread
only in rememberance of Christ's passion? The French Sacramentaries in their
confession follow Calvin, for there we read among other things, Confess.
Gallica, art. 37. Se it in Harmony of Confess. sect. 14. page 426.
that the body and blood of Jesus Christ, are no less truly the meat and
drink of the soul (in the supper) then bread and wine are the meat of the
body, that this mystery is above nature, etc.

And these their assertions in very deed have caused some Co^fess. Eccl. in
ditione Comitum Mansfeldiae, etc. anno 1559. fol. 21.
Lutherans, to make a difference between the old Sacramentaries, that is (as
they term them) the Carolostadians, the Zwinglians, and the Anabaptists, who
(say they) always taught the Sacrament of the Altar to be nothing else, but an
external sign without the body and blood of Christ, and that it served only
for a token to distinguish Christians from Pagans, and the new commonly called
Caluinists.

Now if unto these discourses of Calvin and his followers, we join that
proposition by them so often repeated, and with such vehemence defended; that
Christ's humane nature is only in heaven, Calvin in 1. Cor. cap. 11. verse. 24.
Item in his Instit. chap. 17.. 24. etc.
and always as far distant from the Eucharist as the highest heaven and
earth are a sunder; What a Paradoxe or rather a contradiction in external show
of words, shall we here find? I need not recite their sentences, because they
are found almost in every place, where any one of them treats of this
matter, and no Caluinist will deny this to be a part of his belief. But do
these things accord together? How does Christ truly grow unto us, and
refresh us with the eating of his body and drinking of his blood, his said body
and blood being in a place so far distant from us? how is he truly delivered
unto us, yea and his body and blood in the supper, seeing that he does approach
no nearer unto us then the highest heaven is unto earth? how does he truly
deliver, and we truly receive under the signs of bread and wine his body and
blood? and how is his body really and truly given us? how are our souls
finally fed with the substance of Christ's body, if his said body be only in
the heavens, and our souls no nearer unto him then is the earth? Are not these
things according to the proper signification of the words opposite and
contrary? Verily if corporal sustainance came no nearer to the bodies of these
sectaries, then the body and blood of Christ does (according to their own
doctrine) to their souls, they would soon perish with hunger.

But is not Calvin, although he make a show never so glorious in words, of
the true and real presence of Christ in the Eucharist; yet inwardly in very
deed a Zwinglian and Carolostadian in belief? It cannot be gainesaid. And to
declare this, first thus he writes: I plainly confess, Calvin Institut.
book 4. chap. 17.. 32
that I refuse that mixture of the flesh of Christ with our soul, or the
pouring out of it (or the transposing of it from one place to an other) such as
they teach, because it suffices us, that Christ does out of the substance of
his flesh breath life into our souls; yea does power into us his own life,
although the very flesh of Christ does not enter into us. And in an other place
even now alleged he adds, Calvin in 1. Cor. cap. 11. verse. 24.
that it is al one to say that our souls are fed with the substance of
Christ's body, to the intent we may be made one with him; and to auerre, that a
certain quickening virtue is powered on us out of the flesh of Christ by the
holy Ghost, although the flesh be far distant from us. Thus Calvin begins
more plainly to open his mind, but by adding an other falsehood: for what
Philosopher or Divine ever affirmed the body and substance to be one, with a
virtue proceeding from the same, as he here avouches? He goes on and says,
that we receive him though so far distant from us as heaven is, for that he
causes from heaven to descend on us presently and truly the virtue of his
flesh. Lo, Christian reader, now thou receiuest no longer truly and really
the body and blood of Christ, but the virtue of his flesh. And let us hear him
declare this by an example or similitude. In an other place he discourses
after this manner; Calvin Institut. book 4. cha. 17.. 12.
For if we behold the sun shining forth with his heames upon the earth, after
a certain manner to cast forth his substance unto it, to engender, nourish,
and quicken the fruits thereof: why should the extending beams of the spirit
of Christ; be inferior to convey the communion of his flesh and blood unto us?
Thus he: Out of ^^ch his words if his similitude hold, it is evident, that
Christin^^e Eucharist does no otherwise communicate unto us his body and blood,
then the sun shining does communicate his substance to the earth. Wherefore,
like as no m^n can say that the sun does truly and really communicate his
substance to the earth (for this is most false, and therefore Calvin says it
is done after a certain manner:) so Christ does not truly and really
communicate himself unto us according to this Doctors opinion, as before he
avouched, but after a certain manner. And how is this? He had declared before
where he uses these words: We confess there is no other eating but of
faith, Ibid.. 5.
as there can no other be imagined. The flesh of Christ is eaten by believing,
because by faith he is made ours. And this is that which our English
Protestants have decreed in their articles of religion; Articles of religion
agreed upon in the co^uocation of 1562. art. 28.
in which they define, that the body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in
the supper only, after an heavenly and spiritual manner; and the mean (say
they) whereby the body of Christ is eaten in the supper, is faith. Hence the
same Calvin and his Beza in Math. ca. 26. verse. 26. Calvin Instit. book 4.
chap. 17.. 31.
disciples affirm, that the right way to find Christ and receive him in the
supper, is that our minds stay not on earth, but mount aloft into the
celestial glory where Christ dwells, there to embrace him: and so they vvil
have us to enjoy his presence as well as if he descended unto us. The like has
Andrewe Willet an English Caluinist writer; who tells us, Willet in his
Synopsis controuers. 13. part. 1. quest. 1.. That Christ. p. 516. Calvin
Instit. book 4. chap. 14.. 14.
that Christ is verily exhibited unto us in the Sacrament, that the substance
of Christ's flesh is exhibited unto us, etc. Not that Christ descends from
heaven to us, but we ascend (says he) by faith in spirit to him. And seeing
that this feeding upon Christ by faith, may be performed at other times as well
as when their supper is received, hence they further avouch, that Christ
himself as well at other times as then, may be received; but principally they
say, we receive him by reading the word of God or hearing it preached. He is
deceived (says Calvin) that thinks there is any more given to him by the
Sacraments, then that which being offered by the word of God, he receives by
faith. Ibid.. 17. and in Joan. 6. verse. 54.
Again, Let this remain certain, that there is no other office of the
Sacraments then of the word of God, which is to offer and set forth Christ unto
us, and in him the treasures of heavenly grace. Moreover, expounding those
words of Christ. Idem in 1. Cor. 11. v. 24.
Do this in remembrance of me, thus he argues; Therefore the supper is a
token or memorial appointed to help our infirmity: for if otherwise we were
mindful of Christ's death, this help were superfluous. And this is common to
the Sacraments, for they are helps of our infirmity: Thus Calvin. Beza in
epist Theolog. 65. page 285.
And this was decreed in a Synod held by the Caluinists at Rochel; in which
we find, that albeit the supper be particularly appointed for our mystical and
spiritual communication of Christ, yet that Christ is received as fully with all
his gifts also, in a simple or only word or sermon. But this is most earnestly
defended by Peter Martyr likewise a Caluinist, who among other his discourses
has these sentences: We attribute no more to the words of God, then to the
Sacraments: nor no more to these then to them. Martyr in de fens. Euchar. cont.
Gardin. part. 2. regula 5. page 618.
I add withal, that touching the delivery and obtaining of Christ's body and
blood, if ye respect the thing and substance it self, we have it no more by
Sacraments then by words. Ibid part. 3. page 651. see also before, p. 644. 547.
The body of Christ is received as well in hearing faithfully the word of God,
as it is in the Sacraments. Ibid. p. 683
I deny not but this is our doctrine, that the body of Christ is received no
less in words, then in the Sacraments or Symbols. For this receiving is
wrought by faith, and to faith we are stirred up by words as well as by the
Sacraments. Only an empty sign, etc. possible.
And I fear not to affirm, that we come to the receiving of Christ's body
much more by words then by Sacraments. For Sacraments have al their force from
the words: Hitherto Martyr. Calvin Instit. book 4. c. 14.. 20. 23. Calvin
Beza and Martyr in 1. Cor. 10. v. 1.2
Hence they make no difference in honor, grace, virtue, and efficacy between
the Sacraments of the old law and those of the new. Calvin Instit book 4. c.
14. 23. Beza in actis colloq Monpelg. p. 77. Sadeel in tract. dema^ducut.
Sacram. p. 191.
Nay they add, that the Fathers of the old were as much pertakers of the body
and blood of Christ, as Christians are in the new. And to prove this Calvin
Institut. book 4. c. 14.. 23.
Calvin corrupts S. Paul's words, 1. Cor. 10. verse. 3. by affirming the
Apostle to say, that the Fathers of the old law did eat the same spiritual
meat which we eat; whereas the Apostle makes no comparison between
Christians and Jews, but only tells us, that the Jews among themselves both
good and badde, just and unjust, did eat the same spiritual meat.

Neither ought it seem strange to any one of our English nation, that this
doctrine is taught by the Caluinists: for we want not some even in our
Protestants Church of England, that seek to uphold it. And among other. Willet
in his Synopsis controuers. 11. p. 463. see also Jewel in his reply against
Harding, art. 5. page 323.
Andrew Willet before cited, in express words avouches and concludes, that
look how the word of God works being preached, so do the Sacraments. Their
doctrine therefore is, that Christ may as truly and really be received by
hearing of a sermon, as he is in their supper. And of all this I may first
infer, that if they say true we may as truly and really receive Christ in
our chambers reading the Scriptures, and by feeding on him by faith, or by
eating a piece of bakers bread and drinking a cup of wine, or by taking any
other such corporal food in remembrance that he died for us on the Cross; as
we can do in their Churches by taking the like bread and wine of the
Minister. I further infer that the opinion of Carolostadius, Zwinglius, and
Calvin in very deed, equally exclude Christ from being really present in the
Eucharist: and therefore the bread and wine which they receive according to
al their judgments, is nothing better then a piece of bakers bread, or a
bottle of wine bought in a tavern. The reason is evident, because Christ
himself according to his humane nature, is as far distant from the bread and
wine as heaven is from earth: and although Calvin acknoweledg a certain union
between us and Christ by faith, yet this is a thing altogether extrinsecal to
the bread and wine, for this faith is in the soul not in the bread and wine:
neither does it unite the body and blood of Christ to the bread and wine, but
(as they say) to the soul. And this union in like sort is not real but
imaginary; for the body and blood of Christ are as far distant from our faith
(which is an inward act of our soul, and produces of it self no outward
effect;) as they are from the bread and wine. And this is true, even according
to the doctrine of Calvin and his disciples, whatsoever they seem in words
to say to the contrary. But to make the proof of it more strong, let us
confirm it by the testimony of Beza, Beza Epist. Theolog. 1. page 7.
Caluins scholar; and of some Lutherans. Bezaes words are these: I say they
are very impudent slaunderers, that imagine that there was ever any contrariety
between those most excellent men, Zwinglius, OEcolampadius, and Calvin, in
their doctrine concerning the Sacrament: Thus Beza; Among the Lutherans,
Westphalus a principal Doctor of their company vvriteth thus: Calvin uses such
art in handling this matter, Westphal. in Apologia de coena contra Calvin. p.
71.
he leaves his reader so doubtful and uncertain, what to judge of him: he
shadoweth his speech with such colors, that sometimes he yields a confession
of faith like to our (Lutheran) Churches: he seems to reject the doctrine of
Zwinglius, and to believe, that the very body and blood of Christ is truly
present, and given in the supper with the bread and wine. But having conferred
many of Caluins sentences together, thus he resolves: By view of these places,
every man may see, Ibid. p. 76. 71
that Calvin sticks in the same mire, in which Zwinglius and other
Sacramentaries have wallowed, and that he is stirred up with their spirit, and
that under this crafty juggling, he sings the old song of Zwinglius and
OEcolampadius, and jumbleth in his figures and significations, taking away the
true presence of Christ's body and blood: Hitherto are the words of
Westphalus.

But wherefore did Calvin in this matter use such crafty dealing and juggling?
Luther 4. fol. ante.
Verily the said Westphalus affirms it was to deceive his readers, and to
abuse them more pernitiously. For seeing that the words of Scripture are so
evident for the real presence of Christ's body and blood in this Sacrament;
seeing also that al our forefathers and predecessors have esteemed it so highly,
have spoken so honorable of it, and have expounded the Scriptures according to
their plain meaning, if Calvin had in flat terms and words so much debased
it, as to make it no better then a piece of bakers bread, and a cup of wine,
he had made forthwith his doctrine odious to al indifferent Christians. And of
this he saw an experience in Zwinglius before him, against whose profane
doctrine both the Catholics and Lutherans with one voice exclaimed. He
thought it therefore convenient in external show to condemn Zwinglius, and to
cover his vvoluish heart and opinion, with the words and fleeces of the
sheep of Christ's fold; but in condemning Zwinglius he condemns himself,
and his own disciples as is sufficiently proved. The same proceedings of the
Caluinists are also noted by Luke Osiander an other Lutheran Protestant and
superintendent, who for the aforesaid proceedings of the Caluinists likeneth
them to the Camoeleon; Lucas Osiander in Euchirid. cont. Caluinianos c. 1. In
principio Plinius lib. 28. cap. 8.
and he avouches, that like as this creature as Pliny writes, has of his
own nature no certain color, but seems now of one color, now of an
other, according to the variety of the place and colors near unto him: So the
Caluinists play. For where (says he) they are to deal with the more simple
sort, which they hope may be drawn to their opinion, there they take upon them
the color and confession of the orthodoxe or right believers, and say with
them: The body and blood of our Lord to be so present in the supper, that they
cannot be more present, etc. And for these and other such like speeches he
alleges Beza in the conference of Monpelgar, page 21. He adds; But when
they speak among those of their own sect, they condemn and blaspheame the
true and real presence of the body of Christ, and pronounce a far different
sentence. Hence also Grawerus an other Lutheran, very learned and living in
these our days, Grawer. Absurda, Absu^dorum, etc. cap. 3.. 4.
avouches; that the Caluinists in words protest, that both by heart and voice
they confess before God and al his Angels and Men, that the body and blood of
Christ not only are present in the supper, but also that they are eaten and
drunken: Notwithstanding in the mean time (says he) it is most certain, that
in very deed they deny the true and real presence of the body of Christ in
the supper. And this he proves at large by invincible arguments, and among
other things he very well declares,. 34.
that faith cannot make things absent present, as the Caluinists say it does
in the Sacrament.

Now to conclude this discourse, no man I think vveighing well these matters,
will deem Calvin and his disciples to accknowledge any true and corporal
presence of Christ in the Eucharist, their words and proceedings are so plain
for the contrary. And truly, what need we almost any other proof of this
matter, then the testimony of Beza rehearsed? who calls them impudent
slaunderers, who imagine there was any contrariety between Zwinglius,
OEcolampadius, and Calvin in their doctrine concerning the Sacrament. For seeing
that Zwinglius excluded Christ altogether from the Sacrament, and made it a
naked sign as Calvin confesses; if Beza say truly, who can doubt but Calvin
himself does the same? Of which I infer, first that Calvin and his
followers call God a deceiuer. For thus I argue: Unless a man will call God a
deceiuer, he can never be so bold as to say that he setteh before us an empty
or naked sign in the supper (so says Calvin before cited:) but Calvin and his
followers are so bold as to say, that God sets before us an empty or naked
sign in the supper, as is proved by their own words, by the testimony of
Beza, and the censure of some learned Lutheran Protestants; therefore Calvin
and his followers call God a deceiuer. Secondly I infer, that the Caluinian
Sacrament or supper, is no better then a piece of bakers bread and cup of
ordinary wine; this is demonstrated and it is apparent, because Christ (as they
say) is no otherwise present but by the apprehension of faith, and faith has
no effect at al in the bread and wine, it being an inward act of the
understanding: whererfore the bread and wine remain as they were before. And
this Luther long since concluded against Zwinglius, from whom Calvin as Beza
confesses does not dissent: for he complains that the Devil (by Zwinglius
and his adherents) labors to suppe up the egg and leave us the shel, Luther
ser. de Eucharist. fol. 335.
that is (as he expounds himself) to take from the bread and wine, the body
and blood of Christ, so that nothing remain but plain bakers bread. Thirdly
it is evident, that the words of Scripture are plain for Christ's real and
corporal presence in the Sacrament; for this is one principal reason, why
Calvin and his Caluinists some times would seem to affirm it. And seeing that
the Sacramentary doctrine denies this true and real presence, it is manifest
finally, that the said doctrine is not built upon the word of God, but that
this prerogative is due to our faith which holds the affirmative part.

Thus I have exemplified and showed in two principal controversies, by the
testimonies of our adversaries, that the words of holy Scripture are on our
side, not with our adversaries: Of which my prudent reader may gather, what I
could do concerning other matters for breuities sake omitted. And by these
means it is apparently declared, that the propositions which the new
Sectaries term of their faith, are not contained in the holy Scripture. Let
us now prove the title of this Chapter by an other reason.

SECTION THE FOVRTH. The followers of the new religion in diverse matters
observe not the letter of their own Bibles.
MY drift and intent in this Chapter is to show, that our adversaries build
not their belief upon the letter of holy Scripture, contained (as they say) in
their own Bibles. This I have already proved by one argument, unto which I
adjoine another even of as great force, to wit: that in diverse points they
observe not the letter of holy Scripture contained in their own Bibles. I vvil
exemplify in some matters in particular.

And first, if the letter of holy Scripture be so strictly to be observed, and
al other grounds to be neglected, as they imagine; how dare they eat blood
and strangled meats? Is not this expressly forbidden in the Acts of the
Apostles by the whole Council of Jerusalem, Act. 15. v. 29.
in which were present S. Peter, and S. James Apostles, with diverse others?
Where, and when, and by whom was this law repealed? verily there is no
mention of any such repeal in the word of God, nor in any Ecclesiastical
writer: wherefore Luther himself absolutely confesses, Luther lib. de
Concilijs and in Act. 15. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. v. 25 Math. 19, 17
that either the Apostles them selves erred in this Council, or else that we al
sin in transgressing this law. Moreover, did not God in the old law bind
al men to observe the ten Commandments? and did not Christ in the new law
bid us, if we will enter into life observe the same? How presume they then to
break the third commandment, both in not keeping holy the day prescribed in
holy Scripture, which without al doubt is the Saturday; and also in dressing on
that day (which they keep) meat, and making of fire? They cannot deny
themselves in these matters to be faulty, for they have no warrant in the word
of God, in place of the Saturday to observe the Sunday. Only in one place of
the Apocalipse mention is of the Dominical or our Lords day, Apoc. 1. v. 10
but it is only there said, that S. John on that day had a vision; which makes
little for them. And therefore Field confesses, Book 4. cap. 20.. that the
Apostles: Exodus 20, 9. Exodus 35, 3. Number. 15, 32. Exodus 12. Leuit. 23. v. 5 Number.
9. v. 11 Deu. 16, 5. etc Luther lib. de Concilijs. Baleus l. 3. c. 25. Centur.
1. de scriptor. Brita^. in Colman. and Wilfrido. Powellus in thesibus de
Adiaphoris. cap. 3. Math. 26, 17 Mar. 14, 12. Luc. 22. v. 7.
there is no precept found for this in the Scripture, and says the observation
of it is an Apostolic tradition. There is likewise a most express
commandment in the Scripture, that no manner of work be done on the Sabbath,
not so much as fire kindled: wherefore by the commandment of God a man was
stoned to death for only gathering sticks on that day.

Further, wherefore keep they not Easter Day on the fourtenth day of the Moon
of March, as is prescribed in the old law, and Christ himself observed? what
warrant have they in the word of God otherwise to do? Verily in this also even
according to the censure of Luther, they stray from the holy Scripture; of
whose opinion (if I be not deceived) is likewise our countriman John Bale.
Powel seems to make it a thing indifferent. Wherefore also do some of them
bind their followers to have one only wife at once? Had not the Patriarchs and
others of the old law, diverse wives at the same time? And where find they in
the Scripture this liberty abridged among Christians? Yea some of our English
Sectaries seem to confess, that in the primative Church it self some
Christians had at once diverse wives: for in the Bible of the year 1589. 1592.
and 1600. upon those words of the Apostle: 1. Tim. 3, 2. Tit. 1. verse. 6.
Bernard. Ochinus, lib. 2. Dialogo. 21. page 200.
It behooves a Bishop to be irreprehensible, the husband of one wife, etc.
they make this note: for in those countries at that time some men had more then
one, which was a sign of incontinency; thus there we read. Wherefore they
seem to grant, that S. Paul only commanded Bishops to have one only wife at
once, not other Christians; Yea this is expressly auerred by
Bernardinus-Ochinus, who writes thus: Paul forbids Bishops and Deacons to
have many wives, to others he vertually grants it. But in very truth the
Apostle there orders, that none be admitted to be Bishops, that be Bigami,
that is to say; that have been married to two wives, although to the one after
the other: and the aforesaid gloss is made by these men to help their Bishops
and Ministers, among whom some have had two or three, or more, one after
another, contrary to this sentence of the Apostle. And I must needs conclude,
that either they abridge Christian liberty (as they term it) in not suffering
al except Bishops, to have diverse wives at the same time; or otherwise that
they transgress the word of God, in admitting men twice married into their
Clergy; or which is worse, in suffering their Ministers and Bishops to marry
as often as they please. Luther in explicat. Genes. edit. an. 1525 in c. 16.
Iene^s. and in propositionibus de Bigamia Episcop. edit. an. 1528. propos. 62.
65. 66.
And of the first opinion seems Luther: for he absolutely grants Poligamy
(that is to say, the having of more vviues then one at once) to be neither
commanded, nor forbidden in the Church of God, but to be a thing indifferent:
Musculus in epist. Pauli ad Philip. Colos. etc. in 1. Tim. 3. p. 396
Musculus also thinks it was tolerated in the Church in the Apostles days;
and consequently in his judgment, no Christians except Bishops are to be
restrained from it.

I add likewise, that they commonly translate those words of God; Exodus 2. v.
4 Deuter. 5. Bible 1595.
Non facies tibi sculptile, thou shall make thee no graven Image: and with
Zwinglius tom. 2. in actis disput. Tigur. fol. 632.
Zwinglius affirm them to contain an everlasting precept, and to bind as
far forth as those words; Thou shall not kill. Wherefore then allow they of
the pictures of men and other worldly creatures? Is there any difference
between such pictures and the Images of Christ and his Saints, which they
vvil needs have here forbidden as graven Images? Certainly there is no reason
wherefore those should be allowed, and these forbidden: and therefore they have
no reason to exclaim against the pictures of Christ and his Saints, except
they will with the Turks generally disalowe of al pictures. Luther tom. 4. in
Michae. cap. 1. fol. 69. Act. 19. etc.
Yea Luther himself thought it meet that Images should be placed in Churches;
and judged it a very barbarous and ignorant part, to tolerate the pictures of
men and beasts, and to cast out of Churches the Images of our Savior and his
beloved Saints.

I demand also of them, wherefore they use not in all places to give the holy
Ghost after baptism by imposition of hands? they cannot deny but this was
practiced continually by the Apostles: for what almost is more often recorded
in the acts of the Apostles. Wherefore in like manner use they not to wash one
another feet? John 13.
Have we not for this an express example and commandment of our Savior?
wherefore finally anoint they not their sick with oil? Is not this directly
commanded by S. James? Iam. 5. v* 14.
verily the text according to their own translation is evident.

In these and diverse other points they follow not their own text of holy
Scriptures, but rejecting both it and al other grounds, do that which
pleases best their own fancies: and this neglect of the word of God among
them is so apparent, that they are after a sort enforced to confess it
themselves. Martyr in 1. Cor. 15. v. 5. see also Field of the Church book 4.
c. 20. That the Apostles.
Among the rest Peter Martyr avouches, that the Canons of the Apostles
concerning the election of Ministers prescribed by S. Paul, 1. Tim. 3. are not
always to be observed, with whom accords Beza in praefat. noui test. dicati
Principi Condensi.
Beza who tells us, that al rites whatsoever used by the Apostolic Church,
either as profitable or as necessary for that time, are not at al times to be
received. Yea Calvin in c. 5. verse. 14. Bre^tius in Apolog. co^fess. Wittenb.
cap. de Baptis.
Calvin and Brentius go further and affirm, that Christians are not bound to
follow the example of Christ or the Apostles, or to obey their doctrine,
except it can be proved out of Scripture, that they did and commanded with an
intention to be followed and obeyed: this is their doctrine. And who are to be
judges, what Canons, rites, examples, and doctrine, are to be admitted and
bind man to the observation of them, but every private man's judgment and
fancy? Besides this, they observe diverse rites not prescribed in the Scripture
if we follow the bare letter. For where find they that there be two
Sacraments? Surely neither Baptism, nor the Eucharist in the word of God are
called Sacraments: Only Matrimony which commonly they esteem not to be of such
dignity, is honored by S. Paul with this title. Moreover, Ephesians. 5, 32.
where are the form, and ceremonies which they observe in public Baptism,
Communion, Marriage, and common Prayer, ordained and set down in the
Scripture? What vvarrant have they in the word of God for baptizing of
Infants, before they actually believe? did not our Savior say: He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved? Mar. 16, 16.
and how do infants according to their doctrine (for they usually deny al
habitual faith) believe? verily that which is affirmed by Luther lib. cont.
Cochlaeum. Lutherani in Sinod. Wittenb. anno 1536.
Luther and some Lutherans (to wit, that infants newly borne vvhiles they are
baptized have the use of reason, actually hear, and believe the word of God,
etc.) seems altogether incredible. But Luther ser. contra Anabaptistas.
Luther elsewhere plainly confesses, that the Baptism of infants cannot be
proved by Scripture; yet says he, Luther epist. ad duos Parochos.
it is to be admitted, because it is an Apostolical tradition. The like
questions I could demand concerning the Creed of the Apostles, and diverse
other observations: wherefore I conclude, that they both neglect the
observation of diverse things prescribed in the holy Scripture; and also
observe sundry rites and ceremonies for which in them they find no vvarrant;
and consequently, that the ground of their faith and religion is not the word
of God, contained (as they say) in their own Bibles. Of which I finally
infer, that they build not at al upon the letter of the holy Scripture; for
certain it is that their own translated Bibles favor more their doctrine,
then either the Hebrewe or Greek text, as every man may gather of that which
has been said in the Chapter next before: wherefore, seeing that their faith
and religion is not al approved in their said Bibles, every man may well censure
it not to be approved at al by the word of God. And this may be confirmed,
because they neither build upon the Hebrewe, Greek, or Latin text, but in some
places reject them al as I have partly above declared, and vvil declare also in
the next Chapter.

Chapter 8. In receiving, translating, and expounding the holy Scriptures they
only build upon their own fancies and judgment, and that they have no other
ground.
SECTION THE FIRST. In which this is proved by their doctrine and dissension
concerning the books of Canonical Scripture, and their altering of the text of
the same.
HAVING already proved, that our adversaries build not upon the bare letter of
holy Scripture, which they seem to make the only ground, and rule of their
faith and religion; it remains that I now declare and make manifest, what
is the ground and rule which in all such matters they follow. And this in the
title of this Chapter, I have affirmed to be their own fancy and imagination,
by which they either by private and erroneous deductions out of the letter of
holy Scripture, or by falsely understanding of the same, frame to themselves a
particular and false rule of belief; or else first frame to themselves out of
their carnal, faithless, and feeble understanding, such a rule; and
afterward by rejection, false translation, corruption, or erroneous
exposition, ply and wrest the word of God to their said rule. For the proof
of this I could use diverse arguments, notwithstanding these few following for
breuities sake shall suffice.

But before I bring forth any one reason, I must here divide all the Professors
of the new religion into three sorts or companies: for some of them read and
understand the Scriptures in those tongues, in which they were first penned by
the instinct of the holy Ghost; others there be that read and understand them
only translated into other tongues; and others that cannot read at al. The
first for distinctions sake I will here call the learned, the second the
unlearned, and the third the ignorant sectaries. In the four first Sections I
will principally discourse of the learned. And first I demand of them how they
prove the Bible to be Canonical Scripture? verily this as I have showed before,
cannot be proved by Canonical Scripture, neither have they for it as I have
there also declared, any other infallible proof: wherefore I may truly
avouch, that every one of them receives and rejects Scripture according as
he is led by his own fancy. But to make this more evident, let us behold their
dissension concerning the Canonical books; and consider, that such as some of
them receive into the Canon others reject, and contrariwise, such as some
reject others receive.

Luther tells us plainly, that he does not believe al things were so done as
is related in the book of Luther in sermonib. co^uiualibus titul. de
Patriarchis and Prophetis, and titul. de libris veteris and nouitestam.
Job; and further disgraceth the said book, by affirming it to be only an
argument of a fable or tale, whereby to set forth an example of patience. He
affirms that the book of Luth. in co^uiual. ser. tit. de libris noui and
veter. test. Rabenstocke, l. 2. colloquior. Latin. Luther cap. de veter. test.
Ecclesiastes has never a perfect sentence, that the author of it had neither
boots nor spurs, but rid upon a long stick, or in begging shoes as he did
when he was a Friar. He vvil have Luth. in exordio suarum Annotat. in Cantica.
Cantica Canticorum, (which some Bible 1595
English Sectaries term, the Ballet of Ballets of Solomon) to be nothing
else, but a familiar speech or communication between Solomon and the common
wealth of the Jews. Castalio in tra^slat. Latin suorum Bibliorum. see Beza
praefat. in Iosuae.
Castalio goes further, and judges it to be a communication between Solomon
and a certain friend or mistress, he had called Sulamitha. The Epistle to the
Luther in 1. edit. noui test. Germ. praefat in epistol. ad Hebr. and in
posterior edit eiusdem.
Hebrews (if we believe Luther) was written by none of the Apostles, and
contains things contrary to the Apostolic doctrine: The like is affirmed by
the Centur. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Century writers. The same Luther calls the Epistle of S. James, truly a
Luth. in praefat. in nouum test. Germ. edit. 1. and in Ienens. edit. noui test.
praefat in Jacob.
strawen Epistle in comparison of those of S. Peter, and S. Paul; says that it
is In captiuit. Babylon. cap. de extrema unction.
probably auerred to be none of his, nor worthy of an Apostolic spirit; Ad
cap. 22. Genes. in colloquijs co^uiual. lat. tom. 2. de lib. noui test.
reprehendeth the doctrine of it as false and contrary to that of Genesis and
of S. Paul the Apostle; says the author does delirare, that is dote, etc. It
is likewise judged not Canonical by Muscul. in locis comunibus c. de Iustific.
Brent. in Apol. Illiric. praef. in Jacob.
Musculus, Brentius, Illiricus, Kemnitius, and others. The second epistle of S.
Peter (says Luth. in suis Germ. Biblijs Brentius in Apolog. ca. de Scripturis.
Luther) is none of his, but is of some uncertain author, who was desirous to
give credit to his work by the glory of an other man's name: Brentius plainly
rejects it as Apocryphal. The like is said by these and others of the Epistle
of Luther praef. in epist. Jacob and lib. cont. Amb. Catharinum Magdeburg.
Cent. 1. lib. 2. ca. 4. Brent. in Apolog.
S. Jude. Finally, Luther censureth the Luther praefat. in Apocal. prioris
edit. and lib. de abroganda missa priuata. Brent. in Apol.
Apocalipse of S. John to be neither Apostolic nor Prophetical, but I think
it is (says he) like the fourth of Esdras (a book rejected by us al) neither
can I any ways find that it was made by the holy Ghost. Let every man think
of it as he please, my spirit cannot accommodate it self to it. And this cause
is sufficient to me not greatly to esteem it, that in it Christ is neither
taught nor known: Thus Luther. Brentius having recited it among other books
by him censured Apocryphal, concludes; that some of the books rejected are
called dreams, others fables. And this is the judgment of these Protestants,
concerning these books.

Notwithstanding, our See the Bible of the year 1595. authorized to be read in
Churches. Articles of the year, 1562. 1604. Articul. 6. Calvin in his
Institut. and in argum. epist. Iacobi.
Church of England with Calvin and diverse other of their brethren, receive al
these books as Canonical. And seeing that both these opinions cannot have an
infallible ground, and one according to their own proceedings, has no greater
reason for it self then the other, I infer; that they both have no other
rule whereby to receive and reject books of Scripture, but their own
judgment and fancy, from which principally this difference among them arises.
It may be said that some Sacramentaries, and among the rest Whitaker in his
answer to Campians 1. reason.
Whitaker and Rogers page 30. upon the Articles of faith of the year 1562.
1604.
Rogers deny Luther and the Lutherans, to reject the books mentioned. I
confess it, but in very truth whosoever reads the authors and places
alleged, will find that I do them no wrong. And this he may partly gather out
of Rogers himself, who although he Page 30.
affirm al reformed Churches to be of the same judgment with the Church of
England, concerning the Canonical books: Yet in the next leaf Page 32.
alleges two principal Lutherans, Wigandus and Heshusius, and accuses them
both of error; the one for refusing the first and second epistles of S. John's,
with the epistle of S. Jude; the other for rejecting the book of S. John's
Revelation or the Apocalipse. I add also, that Whitaker de sacris Script.
controuers. 1. quaest. 1. c. 6.
Whitakers himself discoursing of this matter in an other place, having set
down their doctrine concerning the authority of all the books of the new
testament, adds these words: If Luther or some that have followed Luther,
have taught or written otherwise, let them answer for themselves; this is
nothing to us, who in this matter neither follow Luther nor defend him, but
are led by a better reason: Thus Whitakers. But Calvin directly tells us,
Calvin in argumento epistol. Iacobi.
that in his time there were some that judged the epistle of S. James not
Canonical. Oecolampadius testifies the same touching the Apocalipse, and
affirms himself to Oecolampadius lib. 2. ad cap. 12. Danielis.
wonder that some with rash judgment rejected S. John in this book as a
dreamer, a mad, or braine-sicke man, and a writer improfitable to the Church.
That Luther in particular with a hard censure bereaved this book of al
authority, it is recorded by Bullinger. in Apocalip. cap. 1. ser. 1.
Bullinger: Yea Field book 4. chap. 24.. wherefore.
Field condemning the inconsiderate rashness of such, as in our time make
question of any of the books of the new testament, etc. names Luther in the
margent.

It may perhaps be said by some man, that all the Sacramentaries accord together
concerning the books of Canonical Scripture, and therefore that they have some
certain and divine rule, whereby to discern such books from others. But this
is easily refelled because there is no such consent or agreement among them.
For does not Wolfangus Musculus a Zwinglian of great fame with Luther and the
Lutherans, reject the epistle of James out of the Canon? Verily either this
must be granted, or else it must be confessed that he affirms one Scripture
to contradict an other, and false doctrine to be contained in the divine
books. These are his words: They object unto us the place of James; Wolfangus
Musculus in locis communibus cap. de Iustificat. number. 5. page 271.
but he whatsoever he was, though he speak otherwise then S. Paul, yet may he
not prejudice the truth. And after the disagreement between these two Apostles
(according to his imagination) showed at large, he thus breaks forth into
open reproach of S. James: Wherefore he (James) alleges the example of Abraham
nothing to the purpose, where he says; will thou know O vain man, that faith
without works is dead? Abraham our father was he not justified by works when
he offered his son Isaac? He confounds the word faith. How much better had
it been for him, diligently and plainly to have distinguished the true and
properly Christian faith which the Apostle ever preached, from that which is
common to Jews and Christians, Turks and Devils; then to confound them both,
and set down his sentence so different from the Apostolical doctrine, whereby
as concluding he says: You see that a man is justified by works, and not by
faith alone; whereas the Apostle out of the same place disputes thus, etc. And
having made S. Paul to speak as he thinks best, afterward he infers.
Thus says the Apostle of whose doctrine we doubt not: Compare me now with
this argument of the Apostle, the conclusion of this James: A man therefore is
justified by works and not by faith only, and see how much it differs;
whereas he should more rightly have concluded thus, etc. This and other more
such stuff has this Sacramentary Doctor against S. James and his Epistle, in
which he dissenteth from most of his own company. Does not also Beza reject,
or at the least doubt of the truth of the whole history of the adoulterous
woman, recorded by S. John in the eight Chapter of his Gospel, which
notwithstanding other Sacramentaries admit as Canonical Scripture? This cannot
be denied, and I have before related his words. Part. 2. chapter 1. sect. 4. Bible
1592. etc.
Does not our English Church Mathewe 6. receive as Canonical Scripture those
words: For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, which they add at
the end of our Lords prayer? and yet of them Bullinger a Zwinglian writes
thus. There is no reason why Laurentius Valla should take the matter so hotely,
as though a great part of the Lords prayer were cut away. Rather their
rashness was to be reproved, who durst presume to piece on their own to the
Lords prayer: Thus Bullinger. Nay further, some times the same Sacramentary
receives words into the Canon, which before he had rejected. For example,
Beza in one edition of his new Testament in the end of the eight chapter of S.
John's Gospel, puts in these words: See the new Testaments translated by
Beza of the years 1556. and 1565. And his Testament translated into English by
L. T. printed anno 1580.
Jesus passing through the midst of them, etc. which in another edition with
great vehemence he rejects: wherefore although Beza in his edition of the
year 1556. leave the said words out, yet in Bezaes englished Testament of
the year 1580. they are admitted. And these things in like sort manifestly
convince, that the Sacramentaries in admitting and rejecting books of
Scripture, are led by their own judgment and fancy, not by any divine or
infallible rule.

Moreover, diverse parcels of holy Scripture (as I have declared above) have bin
in times past of doubtful authority; of which most of our adversaries have
received some into the Canon, and rejected others. For example, our English
Protestants have received the Epistle to the Hebrews and the Apocalipse, and
rejected the books of the Machabees, of Judith, Tobias, etc. because the
authority of these in the primative Church was called in question. But what
reason have they for this fact? have they had any divine testimony or
revelation commanding them to admit the first? Surely none, seeing that they
contemn the authority of the Church. And wherefore received they not the last,
as well as the first? They vvil say perhaps, that the first were admitted by
diverse even in the primative Church, and doubted off only by some. I reply,
that Brentius having named and numbered al of both sorts of them in general,
writes thus: Brentius in Apolog. confess. Wittenb.
There are some of the ancient Fathers who receive these Apocriphal books
into the number of Canonical Scriptures: and in like sort some Councels command
them to be acknowledge as Canonical. I am non ignorant what was done, but I
demand whether it were rightly and Canonically done? Thus Brentius who
rejects them al alike. And that which he says may be proved true by the
testimony of the third Council of Carthage and S. Augustine, as Field
confesses; Council. Cartag. 3. ca. 47. Augustine. de doctrina Christiana, lib.
2. cap. 8.

Field book 4. chap. 23.. hence.


and of diverse others who received the books of Tobias, Judith, and the
Machabees: wherefore it seems, that not only in the judgment of Brentius,
but also in very deed the doubt of al was almost alike. It is evident
therefore in my judgment, that the reason why they rejected and reject those
of the old Testament is, because in some points they contrary their new
doctrine, which they made and make a rule whereby to discern which books are
Canonical. Hence they received those which they could make in outward show
seem to favor their opinion, and rejected others: and this is the cause why
Luther rejects more books then the later Sectaries. For he being the first
that began to preach this new Gospel, could not presently forge and invent
new glosses and interpretations, upon all the books of Scripture that opposed
themselves against the same: wherefore he rejected sundry such books, which
afterward his followers having invented such glosses and interpretations,
received. This also moved the same Luther to affirm those to be the best
Evangelists, Luther tom. 5. praefat. in epist. Petri. fol. 439. Centuriat. 2.
ca. 4. p. 260.
who most especially and most earnestly teach, that only faith without works
does justify and save us: of which he infers, that S. Paul's epistles may
more properly be called the Gospel, then either the Gospel of S. Mathewe, S.
Mark, or S. Luke. His disciples the Centuriatores likewise yield this reason,
wherefore the epistle of S. James is to be rejected; that in the second
chapter he affirms that Abraham was not justified by faith only, Zwinglius
in explanat. art 57. tom. 2. fol. 100.
but by works. Zwinglius also affirms, that although the second book of the
Machabees were in the Canon, yet that the author of it makes himself
suspected by this, that writing an history he does set down a point of
doctrine concerning prayer for the dead. By which it is manifest, that they
measure Canonical Scripture by their faith, not their faith by Canonical
Scripture.

But to reject those books of Scripture which made against them, was an old
devise among the ancient Heretics, unto whom our adversaries in this also as
in other things, conform themselves. For this fault S. Augustine noted in
Faustus a Maenichee, and reprehendeth it in him after this sort: Whereas thou
say this is Scripture, or this is such an Apostles; August. contra Faustum,
lib. 11. cap. 2. Tertul. lib. de praescript. Epiphan. here is. 30. 42. and 69.
this is not, because this stands form, and the other against me. Thou then
art the rule of faith, whatsoever is against thee is not true: Hitherto S.
Augustine. Tertullian in like manner and S. Epiphanius record, that even in
their days Heretics rejected certain books of Scripture.

Unto this their rejecting and admitting of Scripture according to their own
fancy, I add also that out of their own judgment without any further
vvarrant, they alter or (as they say) correct the text. For example, although
they esteem the Greek text of the new testament above al others, yet Beza in
his translation of the same (as it is noted before) does willingly and
wittingly thrust out of it those words ( Luke 3. verse. 36) who was of Cainan.
Of the same fault I accuse also our English Protestants in their Bible of the
year 1595. And this they do, notwithstanding that al Greek copies both of
the old Testament in the book of Genesis, and of the new; and all the Latin of
the new conspire against them. If they answer that the Hebrewe of the old
accords with them; I reply that all the Scripture was penned by the instinct
of the holy Ghost, and consequently is true: wherefore, if something more be
said in one thing more then is in another, the one is not to be corrected or
altered by the other, for both may be very well consonant unto truth. Moreover,
vvil these men say that the Hebrewe of the old testament is so true and
sincere, that it self needs no correction? what warrant have they more for
the sincerity of this, then for the Greek of the new. If it be so sincere,
and they have any such warrant; wherefore do they also correct and forsake it
in their translations? That they do this, it appears by their translation of
the 17. verse. of the 22. psalm, where they read: Bible 1595.
they pierced my hands and my feet; whereas the Hebrewe text word for word
ought thus to be englished: As a Lion my hands and my feet. And what divine
authority have they for these their actions? certainly none, but they alter
the sacred text of holy scripture according to their own private liking and
fancies.

SECTION THE SECOND. The same is confirmed by their translations, and
expositions, of holy Scripture.
AND like as in admitting, rejecting, and altering, so they proceed in
translating, and expounding the word of God according to their own judgment.
For first it is manifest, See before part. 1. chapter 7. sect. 2. part. 2. cha. 5.
sect. 4.
that diverse sentences of the holy Scripture in the tongues in which they
were first written, (the words being either of sundry significations, or the
sentences hard, obscure, and doubtful) admit diverse translations, yea in all
tongues diverse interpretations as I have proved before. This I say is manifest,
both because no man skilful in the tongues can deny it; and also because our
learned sectaries cannot as yet agree, concerning the translation and
interpretation of those very books which they al receive. Munster in praefat.
tom. 1 Bibliorum.
Nay Munster a learned sectary affirms, that sometimes even among the Hebrews
themselves he finds diverse readinges. For sometimes dissentions (says he)
are found among them, some thinking this to be the true reading some thinking
contrary: Thus he. And in very deed their translations, even through the
variety of the signification of some Hebrew words and their like characters,
are very much different in sundry places. Alias ps. 110.
I vvil exemplify in one: Psalm. 109. verse. 3. the vulgar edition reads thus:
Tecum principium in die virtutis tuae, etc. Some of them translate it out of
the Hebrewe thus; English bible of the year 1592.
Thy people shall come willingly at the time of assembling thine army in holy
beauty: the youth of thy womb shall be as the morning dew. Others after this
sort; Bible 1577. and that commonly read in Churches.
In the day of thy power shall the people offer thee free will offerings, with an
holy worship: the dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning. Others
thus: Marloratus in psalm. 110. Bucer, Musculus, Calvin and Pomerane.
Thy people with voluntary oblations in the day of thy army, in beauty of
sanctity: Of the womb from the morning the dew of thy youth to thee. And how
different are these translations? The first says; youth of thy womb and the
morning dew; the second; dew of thy birth, and womb of the morning, etc. For
the Lauath. in hist. Sacram. fol. 32. Zwinglius to. 2. in respon. ad Luther.
li. de Sacra. Beza in annot. noui testam. passim. Castalio in defen. suae
translationis.
Lutherans with Luther reject the translation and interpretation of Zwinglius
and the Zwinglians. The Zwinglians with Zwinglius admit not that of Luther and
the Lutherans; and the like proceedinges are between Beza and Castalio, and
other professors of this new religion.

This therefore being presupposed, that diverse sentences admit diverse
translations, let the new sectary now tell me, what divine authority he has
moving him rather to follow one sense then another, the words receiving and
sometimes being indifferent to both? Every private man's understanding is
subject to error, and there is but one truth; how then does every one of them
know that truth is on his side? what divine authority does warrant him this?
Surely in following one translation and interpretation, and not admitting
others, he must needs follow his own fancy.

And this is almost in plain terms confessed by Calvin himself concerning
his own expositions: for explicating those words of Christ, Math. 26. verse.
26. This is my body: he affirms, that having by diligent meditation examined
the said sentence, he does embrace that sense which the spirit tells him. And
leaning to this (says he) I despise the wisdom of al men which can be opposed
against me: Thus Calvin. See part. 1. cha. 7. sect. 3. part. 2. chapter 5. sect. 4.
And note well that he prefers his own private spirit (for the holy Ghost
as I have proved, infallibly directs not every private man's judgment) before
the testimony of al other men, and plainly confesses that he builds upon
it, not upon the word of God. This also moved the translatour of the English
Bible printed in the year 1589. 1592. and 1600. to protest in his preface,
that in the translating of it, he has in every point and word according to the
measure of his knowledge, faithfully rendered the text; and in all hard places
most sincerely expounded the same.

But to make this the more evident I add further, that they make the self
same word sometimes to signify one thing, and at other times another thing,
as it best serves their purpose. For example, our English Protestants
whenever the Scripture speaks of evil traditions, as Math. 15. verse. 6. and
in other places, Bible 1595.
translate the Greek word which signifies properly a tradition, truly as
they ought. But when mention is of Apostolic traditions, they make the self
same Greek word signify ordinances, instructions, Bible 1595.
preachings, or institutions, as 2 Thessalonians. verse. 15. etc. And this they do to
bring traditions into contempt. But of such examples see more in the sixth
Chapter before. Besides this, although they undertake to translate the Hebrewe
text of the old testament, and the Greek of the new; yet when the Hebrewe or
Greek makes against them, or not so much for them as the Latin, they forsake
the Hebrewe and Greek, and follow the Latin: I vvil bring an example of both.
Hieremy 7. verse. 18. and chap. 44. ver. 19. the said Prophet inueigheth against
those that offer sacrifice to strange Gods, especially to the Moon. And
whereas according to the Hebrew they should read in the first place, The women
kneade the dowe to make cakes to offer to the heavens or planets: they follow
the Latin and say thus: Bible 1595.
The women kneade the dowe to make cakes for the Queen of heaven. In like sort
they proceed in the second place. And by this means as they imagine, they
make a strong argument against us, who honor our blessed Lady and call her
Queen of heaven, although we offer up no sacrifice unto her or any other
creature. In the new testament whereas the Apostle according to the Greek
text says only: Romans 8. v. 38,
I am probably persuaded that neither death nor life, etc. shall be able to
separate us from the charity of God: they read; I am sure that neither death,
Bible 1595.
etc. And like as after this sort they serve their own turns in their
translations, so do they also in their expositions of diverse words. One
example I have touched above concerning the word Babylon, which in S. Peter's
epistle to hinder the proof of the said Apostles being at Rome, 1. Pet. 5, 13.
Eusebius. lib. 2. histor. c. 14. Hieron. in li. descript. Eccles. verbo. Marcus.
contrary to Eusebius and S. Hierome, they vvil have signify the great City
called Babylon in Assiria, or Caldea: contrariwise, to make against the honor
and dignity of Rome, in the Apocal. 17. verse. 19. Bible 1592.
Apocalipse they affirm the City of Rome by it to be understood.

Let us also consider that it must needs be granted, that some of the learned
sectaries have erred in their translations and interpretations of holy
Scripture; for this is evident, because there is but one true word of God,
which according to truth admits not opposite interpretations. But our
adversaries translations and interpretations be diverse and much different, yea
repugnant one to another: wherefore as I have showed, they reject one another
translation and interpretation, and also allege Scripture for their different
doctrine. They cannot therefore al be consonant to the true word of God; which
if it be confessed, it must needs follow that some of them in these matters
have erred; and if some of them have erred, then some of them (without al
doubt) have not built upon divine authority which cannot be the ground of
error, but upon their own judgment. And seeing that the warrant which they
claim from God, of al of them is the same, and their ground alike; we may well
infer, that none of them build upon any other more sure foundation.

Add unto this, that the self same sectaries oftentimes upon further reading,
study, and knowledge, change their translations and interpretations of holy
Scripture; which is apparent by the diverse editions of the Bibles, and other
their works in which Scripture is alleged and interpreted: and of our English
sectaries it is granted by the translatour of the Bible printed in the year
1585. 1592. and 1600. in the preface of which he confesses, that the former
translations required greatly to be perused, and reformed. I have also showed
in the sixth chapter, that diverse places have been corrected, and that as yet
by the judgment of the best, it is faulty: of this follows not seldom, a
change of belief and a difference from themselves in religion, which in the
next chapter I vvil prove to have fallen out in their first Captains
themselves. And this is an invincible argument (seeing that the Scriptures
remain always the self same) to prove, that they varying build only upon
their own fancies, and are never certain that they have attained to the truth.

But this vvil be most apparent to him, that shall set before his eyes the
manner of proceeding of our said learned sectaries, in their discourses or
disputations with their adversaries. For do they in such conferences admit
the text of holy Scripture, as a supreme judge of al controversies concerning
matters of religion? Surely no: for although they seem to recurre to the holy
Scripture and vehemently plead the word of God, and by the authority thereof
show themselves desirous to have al difficulties decided; yet in very truth it
is not so, as every man may well judge, because the letter of Scripture
oftentimes does not sufficiently interpret it self, and they will admit and
allow of no other translation or interpretation but their own: let us declare
this a little more at large. It is not unknown that the Catholics receive as
Canonical, the Hebrewe and Greek text as well as they; and consequently those
very places, either in Hebrewe, Greek, or both, which they allege to
establish their doctrine opposite to the belief of the Catholic Church. Yea,
the Catholics attribute more authority to the places alleged as they are
penned in the said tongues, and to al books which the new sectaries receive,
then they do; and further receive five whole books at the least, and diverse
other parcels of holy Scripture into the Canon, which they al commonly reject.
Wherefore, the controversy is not concerning the authority of the text, either
in Hebrewe or Greek, whither it be to be believed or no: but vvhither the
Catholics building in this upon the authority of the Church, Traditions,
Councels, and Fathers, have the true translation and exposition of the text; or
the Professors of the new religion, who allege no other testimony for
themselves then their own private spirit and fancy.

To make this more evident by an example, let us suppose that a Catholic and a
new Sectary fall into disputation concerning Christ's descent into hell. The
Catholic usually for proof of the affirmative part, brings forth that
sentence of holy Scripture: Thou will not leave my soul in hell; Act. 2. v.
27. Psalm. 15, 10.
and avouches this to be the true translation of those words, especially in
this sentence in which they can bear no other sense, seeing that the soul of
Christ was not detained in his grave. The Sectary contrariwise affirms the
words cited not to be truly translated, but will have the true translation of
them to be: Bible 1589. 1592. 1600.
Thou will not leave my soul in grave. And how shall this controversy be
decided? The Catholic for his opinion and to prove that Christ truly
descended into hell, alleges all the grounds of Catholic faith above set
down. But what can his adversary bring forth in defense of his doctrine?
Perhaps he will run to conference of other places of Scripture: but what if
those other places admit also diverse translations as well as this, and therefore
he give one sense of the said places, and the Catholic another? To what other
judge will the Sectary appeal? verily to no other but to himself and his own
private judgment. This is the ordinary course of proceeding of our adversaries
with us, and al others that do impugn them. And do they in this case remit
the controversy to holy Scripture? do not the Catholics as well as they, admit
of the text cited both as it is found in the Hebrewe in the 15. psalm; and
also as it is in the Greek in the second Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles?
this cannot be denied. The difference then between us and them, is concerning
the translation of the last word which the Catholic affirms to signify hell,
the Protestant grave. And what moves the Sectary to admit one translation
rather then another? Certainly his own private opinion, which he has framed
to himself contrary to al antiquity, against Christ's descent into hell. August.
epist. 99.
Surely S. Augustine avouches: that No man but an Infidel will deny him to have
been in that place; and with him the rest of the Fathers consent.

SECTION THE THIRD. Concerning the new exposition of those words, This is my
body, in particular.
BUT if it were not for being ouer-long in these discourses, I could
exemplify in particular concerning sundry new expositions of holy Scripture,
invented by our adversaries; and show to every man's eye the inuentors of the
same, who framed them out of their own brains. One example I vvil bring
among the rest, which shall be concerning those words of our Savior: Math. 26,
26
This is my body. For who invented in these our days, the first Sacramentary
exposition of the said words? verily Carolostadius, as all the vvriters of his
days bear witness. And what was he? He was Archdeacon of Wittenberge,
Melanct. Sleidan and others
but as Melancthon himself a Sectary reports, Melanct. in epist. ad
Fredericu^ Myconiu^ praefat. veterum senten. de coena Domini.
a rude sauadge man, without wit, without learning, without common sense; in
whom never appeared any token or sign of the spirit of God. But how expounded
he the said sentence? Certainly not of the Sacrament which Christ delivered to
his Apostles, but of the visible person of Christ sitting at the table as if
Christ had said: Eat and drink, for I am he that must suffer on the Cross
for your redemption; so that he changed the sense of the word This into the
word Here. Let us farther demand, what moved him to invent this heresy and
false interpretation? Melancton above cited reports, that it was only the
hatred which he had conceived against Luther, who rebuked and reproved him
for breaking down of Images in the Churches of the said City, without his
warrant and approbation.

The second principal Sacramentary was Zwinglius, Zwingl. l. de vera and falsa
relig.
who first affirmed the body of Christ to be present in the Eucharist, but
together with bread and wine; and consequently denied only transubstantiation:
afterward he denied the real presence altogether, and turned the word is,
into the words does signify, and made the sense to be; This does signify my
body. The third was Oecola^p. in li. de genuina expos. horum verborum.
Oecolampadius, who altered the sense of the word body, and would have it
signify a figure of the body, and therefore the sense of those words
according to his judgment is; This is a figure of my body. The fourth was
Calvin, Calvin l. 4. Instit. c. 17.. 10. 11. 24. 32. Idem lib. de coena Domini
who although he confess that Christ is really only in heaven, yet he vvil
have us truly to receive him on earth in the Eucharist: wherefore he
reprehendeth both Luther and Zwinglius, and vvil have the sense of the said
words to be; This bread is a figure of my body, but a figure giving my body it
self: so he in effect. How this is brought to pass he confesses himself
ignorant. But what says Luther their first parent to these his children, he
damneth them to the pit of hell, and Luth. these. 24 cont. Louanie^s. Ite^ in
parua co^fes. de coena Domini.
tells us; that they tread under foot and overthrow al. He adds further,
To. 7. in defensor. verb^, coenae, etc. fol. 387.
that the text can admit but one direct and true sense. How then are the said
words to be understood in his judgment? Thus he vvriteth in an epistle to
certain of his followers concerning the interpretation of them. Luther the
Preacher and Evangelist of Wittenberge to the Christians of Strasburge. Luther
to. 7. Wittenberg. fol. 502.
Thus much I neither can or will deny, that if Carolostadius or any other man
five years since could have persuaded me, that in the Sacrament was nothing
else but bread and wine, be truly had bound me unto him, and I would have
accepted that as a very great benefit. For in examining and debating that
matter I took maruailous pains, and strained every vein of my body and soul
to have rid and dispatched my self thereof; because I saw fulwel, that
thereby I might have done notable harm and damage to the Papacy. But I see my
self taken fast, and that there is no ways to escape* For the text of the
Gospel is so clear and forcible, which cannot easily be shaken; much less
overthrown by words and glosses devised by giddy brains: Hitherto Luther,
both declaring the true cause which moved him to set a foot his new Gospel
(to wit) the hatred of the Sea of Rome; and also the force of Scriptures for
the real presence. What then believed he touching this point? First, Luther
lib. de captiuit. Babylon. cap. de Eucharist.
although he affirmed it to be no article of faith, whither bread remained or
no in the Eucharist together with the body of Christ; yet he esteemed the
affirmative part most probable: Ide^ in sermon. de Sacra. coenae Domini. Et in
li. quod verba Christi (HOC EST CORPUS MEVM) firmiter stent. and in confess. de
coena Domini.
yea, not long after most absurdly he taught and defended, the humane nature of
Christ to be in every place together with his divine; And this he did to
prejudice the Roman Church and Catholic religion. For seeing that the words
are so plain that he could not in substance deny the real presence, by these
means malice drove him to contrary our doctrine concerning transubstantiation,
and the manner of the being present of Christ's body in this dreadful Sacrament.

These are the principal expositions of those words, to which I could add
diverse others: for Luther in l. quod verba Christi (HOC EST CORPUS MEVM)
firmiter stent.
Luther has recorded, that in his days there were among the Sacramentaries,
about ten diverse interpretations of them; and in the year 1577. a book was
published, in which two hundred expositions or deprauations of the said
words are numbered and assigned, al invented or revived by the Professors of
this new religion. Now I think, that no man endued with any sense or reason
will be so fond, as to affirm that al these expositions have a certain ground
in the word of God: for certain it is (as we have hard Luther himself
confess) that there is but one true sense of these words; wherefore it must
needs follow that all the rest be false and forged. And seeing that the
inuentor or vpholder of one, has no more reason or divine assurance for his
invention or opinion, then has the inuentor or vpholder of an other; we may
with like probability affirm them al to be humane inventions. And certain it
is, that whosoever imbraceth any one of them, builds only upon the erroneous
and fallible judgment of man: yea I may truly say, that the ground of his
belief is his own fancy, which moves him to censure one opinion as true,
and to condemn all the rest as false. And like as I have discoursed of this one
sentence of our blessed Savior: so could I in like manner discourse of sundry
other places of holy Scripture, but I should be over long.

It may be some for the solutions of al these matters, vvil fly to private
illumination or inspiration of the spirit, and plead that to prove the
certain truth of their interpretations of holy Scriptures: but first such
persons if we believe Field, Field book 4 of the Church chap. 16. See also
Whitaker de Ecclesia co^trouers. 2. q. 4. cap. 3. page 278.
are accursed by the common consent of Protestants, if as the Enthusiasts they
neglect the common rules of direction.

Secondly, I have at large Part. 2. chap. 5. sect. 1.
before proved al such illuminations to be uncertain, and that no private man
is by any such means, ordinarily directed by God into the truth: something
also concerning this point shall be said in the next section.

SECTION THE FOVRTH. That certain rules prescribed by Field for the true
understanding of Scripture, of themselves alone without the censure of the
Church, are insufficient to assure us, that our exposition made, is of divine
truth.
BECAUSE the doctrine of Field is commonly singular, in so much that I think I
may very well in some sort, liken the platform or order, and faith of a Church
set down in his books of this argument, to Sir Thomas Moors Eutopia; for
that there neither is, nor ever vvil be any such Church in the world as he
describes: I am and shall be forced, especially in my treatise of the
definition and notes of the Church, to dispute against him in particular, and
sever him from al his brethren.

Part. 2. chap. 5. sect. 4.
We have heard him before acknowledging the Scriptures to be hard and obscure:
of which it seems to follow, that except he assign us some divine rule,
whereby we may come to an infallible knowledge of the true sense of them, we
can never infallibly assure our selves of their true interpretation. He tells
us therefore first, that men not neglecting that light of direction which the
Church yields, Field book 4 chap. 15.
nor other helps and means, may be assured out of the nature of the things
themselves, the conference of places, the knowledge of tongues, and the suitable
correspondence that one part of divine truth has with another, that they have
found out the true meaning of it; and so be able to convince the adversaries
and gain saiers: Thus Field. But how frivolous this his assertion is, it vvil
appear by the confutation of his rules which he vvil have us observe, and
helps which he says we must trust unto in interpreting the Scriptures. What
rules and helps are then assigned by him let us recite, and for avoiding of
repetition together confute them: Ibid. chap. 19
these are his words. Touching the rules we are to follow, the helps we are
to trust unto, and the things required in the interpretation of Scripture, I
think we may thus resolve. First, there is required an illumination of the
understanding, for the natural man perceives not the things of God, for they
are spiritually discerned; but the spiritual man judges al things, and
himself is judged of none. This is the first help, concerning which I first
demand; how a man shall infallibly know that he has such an illumination, or
that he is a spiritual man? if he answer that it is known by this, that a man
feels himself thus and thus affected: I urge further and ask, by what
divine testimony or firm reason he knows, that a man feeling himself so
affected, has an illumination of the understanding from God, and is a
spiritual man? verily, seeing that Luther and Calvin both boasted of such an
illumination, and yet one of them was deceived: 2. Cor. 11, 14
seeing also that the Devil does often transfigure himself into an Angel of
light, as S. Paul vvarneth us, and as our adversaries vvil grant it happens to
the Anabaptists, and others: seeing moreover, 1. John 4. v. 1. Calvin alleged
in the 8. section of this chapter.
that the Apostle S. John bids us not believe every spirit, but prove the
spirits if they be of God, which Calvin also thinks necessary; he must
allege or know some such testimony or reason, or else he cannot ordinarily
have supernatural knowledge of it: which nevertheless at the least is
necessarily required to this, that the exposition of the place of Scripture
expounded, be an inducement or ground of supernatural faith. And what divine
testimony can he allege? no other I think but Scripture, or divine
inspiration: if Scripture, then another question may be asked, how he knows
himself rightly to understand that place of Scripture? if inspiration, I
demand in like sort, how he knows it to be divine and not diabolical? and so
of both these answers will follow a process without end. Secondly, of this
rule it may be inferred, not only against Field, but al our adversaries that
our faith is not built upon only Scripture, for a man (as Field says) must be
spiritual before he can understand the Scripture: and how spiritual without
faith? and vvhereupon shall this faith be built? upon the Scripture? this cannot
be, because without it he cannot understand the Scripture: and how can he
build his faith upon Scripture before he understands it; of which it
follows (as I have said) that the Scripture is not the first and only rule of
our faith, as they affirm. Neither can it be auerred, that the first faith is
not properly faith; for as they confess it makes a man spiritual, and is the
ground of the understanding the true sense of Scripture, and consequently must
be a true faith, and properly so called.

Secondly Field requires, a mind free from the thought of other things,
depending on God as the fountain of illumination, desi^^^s of the truth, with
resolution to embrace it, though contrary to the conceit of natural men. But
first this also seems to presuppose faith and grace: yea some extraordinary
perfection, more then is ordinarily found in the greater part of Christians.
Secondly, I dislike those his words (desirous of the truth with resolution to
embrace it) if they be understood of matters of faith; for they seem to
pretend a certain kind of doubt and staggering, which must not be allowed in
such points, especially in spiritual men as before.

Thirdly, he thinks the knowledge of the rule of faith formerly set down,
necessary; as also of the practice of the Saints according to the same. Of this
his rule of faith formerly by him set down, book 3. chap. 4. I have said
something before: Part. 2. chap. 4.
As touching this his present doctrine it is certain, that most men will not
allow of his said rule, but either vvil condemn it as insufficient, in not
containing al things necessary: or as ouer-large in containing things
superfluous: wherefore, this his third rule in this part is very uncertain.
But in very deed, that the Scriptures ought to be interpreted according to the
rule of faith, that is: the whole sum of Christian religion preserved as a
Depositum in the Church, Part. 1. chap. 7. sect. 5.
I have proved in the first part of this Treatise. Moreover, as before I argued
against the first rules, so I argue against this; that of it may be inferred,
that our faith is not built upon the holy Scripture, because the rule of faith
must be a rule by which the scriptures are to be expounded: of which it
follows, that it self is not known and believed through the authority of
the scripture. Against the second part of this rule I oppose only, Part. 2.
chap. 4.
that according to his grounds of which I have discoursed before, the practice
of the Saints can very hardly be gathered out of the monuments of antiquity,
especially concerning such matters as Field denies to be of the substance of
our faith: wherefore, this also makes every exposition of scripture obscure,
and of an uncertain truth.

Fourthly, is required (says he) a due consideration, what will follow upon
our interpretation, agreing with, or contrary to the things generally received
and believed among Christians: in which consideration the conference of other
places of Scripture, and the things there delivered is necessary. To this I
say first; that if Luther had well observed this rule, he had never broached
new doctrine in the Church. Secondly, the insufficiency of it is evident, See
before Part. 2. chap. 4.
if Fields doctrine before set down concerning the error of almost al
Christians be true.

Fifthly he requires, the consideration of the circumstances of the places
interpreted, the occasion of the words, the things going before, and
following after.

Sixthly, he also requires the knowledge of al those Histories, arts, and
sciences which may help us. Both these I let pass as necessary, yet not as
sufficient to give us infallible assurance.

Seauenthly, he thinks the knowledge of the original tongues necessary, and
of the phrases and Idiotismes of them. To which I say, that although I think
this a great help, yea absolutely necessary according to the Protestant
doctrine, because they make the scripture the only ground of their faith, and
nevertheless have no divine mean or prudent reason, to assure themselves that
any one has translated them truly; yet it cannot be sufficient: Neither is it
according to our Catholic proceedings so needful: both because we are sure
that we have the text truly translated; and also, because we make not the
scripture the propounder of our belief, but expound it according to the rule
of faith delivered and received. These are M. Fields helps and rules, which he
sets down as a mean where by we may be assured that we have found out the
true meaning of scripture. And although every man may perceive by that which I
have said against some of them in particular, how vveake and doubtful they
are; Yet I vvil add a word or two of them in general. And first I ask M.
Field, how he knows these his helps and rules to be sufficient? can he prove
their sufficiency by any divine testimony or infallible argument? nothing
less, and therefore I imagine that in the beginning he does not so confidently
affirm it, but uses these words: I think we may thus resolve; and yet that
divine proof or at the least some forcible reason is necessary, it can not be
denied, because the true interpretation of Scripture is their principal ground
of faith, and no interpretation in a matter doubtful, can be infallibly known
otherwise then by the aforesaid means? Are also al these his helps and rules
necessary? See Willet in his Synopsis controuers. 1. quaest. 7. See also part.
2. chap. 5. sect. 1. before.
neither this vvil be admitted by his brethren who reject the greater part of
them; and he must needs in a matter of such importance as this is according to
their principles, condemn them of great ignorance and error, if he absolutely
affirm them al necessary.

Secondly, I gather out of these rules, that no man can divinely or infallibly,
assure himself of the truth of any other man's exposition. This is manifest,
because no man can by divine testimony or prudential ground, know that any
other man has sufficiently proceeded according to al these rules: nay, what
ignorant person can so know the sufficiency of any learned man, that he is
sufficiently instructed in the tongues; etc. that he may embrace his opinion as
divine? Finally, no man can after this sort assuredly know, that an other has
an illumination of the understanding; and that his mind is disposed according
to the second rule; which things nevertheless Field vvil have required, for
the attaining of the right understanding of holy Scripture.

Thirdly, that appears to be very false which is auerred by Field, to wit:
that a man following such directions as he prescribes, may not only assure
himself of the truth of holy Scriptures, but also convince the adversaries and
gainesaiers; for no part of this assertion is true. The first is showed false
in my discourse of some particular rules, especially by this; that no man can
assure himself that the has an illumination of the understanding: unto which
I here add, that he cannot likewise assure himself that he has exactly
observed such rules, and that he is every way sufficiently disposed in mind,
and furnished with learning according as they require; neither can he lastly
prove the sufficiency of them, as I have also showed. The second part of his
assertion is much less true: for no man can prove the truth of that to an
other, of which he cannot be assured himself.

Fourthly, I may infer, that no man who observes not these rules has true
faith; and the reason is manifest, because the Scripture thus interpreted (as
Field says) is the ground of their faith; Field book 3 chap. 42.. if this
kind.
wherefore whosoever expounds it otherwise, is not faithful. By which I
exclude from the number of the faithful (according to this rule) not only such
men as are carnal, not spiritual; and such as are not disposed in mind
according to the second rule: but also al persons unlearned, who have not the
knowledge of such histories, arts, and sciences, as may help, nor of the
original tongues, according to the two last rules. Neither can it be said that
such are to learn of others: for as I have proved in my second illation or
collection, no man can infallibly assure himself that another does interpret
truly. And this makes the matter the more doubtful, that commonly what
exposition soever he follow, he has more even of the new religion it self
against him, then with him: yea, he may find the best of them erroneous in
some points, and consequently, has cause to distrust their judgment in others.

Fifthly out of this discourse it is evident, that although we should grant this
to M. Field, that the bare letter of holy Scripture is sufficiently known by
such means, as I have before related out of him and confuted: yet, the true
interpretation being so obscure, and not certainly to be known by these his
rules; it is evident I say, that whosoever grounding upon these only embraces
any interpretation as divine, builds upon his own judgment and fancy, not
upon divine authority. And of this and that which has already been said in
this chapter and before, I finally infer; that the whole faith of the new
sectaries is uncertain, and lastly resolved to their own judgment and fancy.
It is uncertain, because they assign no certain and infallible rule, by
which they can assuredly know the letter or true sense of holy Scripture,
which they make the only ground of their faith: of which (accorning to the
judgment of M. Whitaker in the like case, Whitaker de Eccles. contra Bellar.
co^trouers. 2. quaest. 4. cap. 3. page 278.
as also according to al reason) must needs follow an uncertainty of truth
in their whole belief; that their faith is likewise lastly resolved to their
own judgment and fancy, it is apparent. For although Field tell us, that Field
book 4. chap. 13.
the judgment of God the Father, as supreme; the judgment of the Son, as
the eternal word of God; of the spirit, as the fountain of al illumination,
making them discern what is true, is that in which they finally rest. And that
the judgment or determination of the word of God, is that wherein they rest,
as the rule of their faith; and the light of divine understanding, as that
whereby they judge of al things. And both he and the rest seem to resolve al
to the bare letter of holy Scripture: yet it is evident, that their last
resolution is not the letter, both because al Christians as well as they
commonly receive the letter; and consequently, if the last difficulty were
touching the letter, al would easily be brought to an agreement. And also
because as Field very well notes out of S. Hierome: Cha. 18. ibid. Hieron. in
epist. ad Galat. cap. 1.
The Gospel consists not in the words of Scripture, but in the sense and
meaning; not in the outward rind and skin, but in the inward path and
marrowe; not in the leaves of the words, but in the root and ground of
reason: of which it appears that the last resolution is to the sense. Seeing
therefore, that al our adversaries in translating and expounding the Scripture,
build upon their own judgment; it is evident, that in their own judgment
not in the holy Scripture, they set up their last resolution in matters of
faith. Neither would they obtain any other more sound foundation and stronger
stay, if we should grant that they remit al things finally to the letter of
holy Scripture: for this also they receive and reject according to their own
fancies, as I have proved. And in very truth I cannot sufficiently marvel,
that M. Field or any other man of judgment and learning, does run these
courses; I mean impugn our doctrine concerning these points, as absurd and in
some sort impossible, which in deed is most prudent and divine; and fall into
most gross absurdities and inconveniences themselves. For whereas according
to the first opinion above related, we lastly resolve our faith into divine
revelation, whereunto we are aided and inclined to give assent by the
supernatural light of faith, which with us concurreth to every supernatural
act of belief, unto which we are prepared and disposed by most prudential
motives and arguments of credibility. And whereas in the first act of faith,
we include the belief of a general rule by which we are to be directed, and
which we are bound humbly to follow in all particular points of belief, and
consequently, for the preservation of unity and deciding of controversies,
acknowledge one supreme, divine, and definitive authority on earth: They
impugn our assertions, and obtrude unto us for an only ground of our faith and
a directour of our belief, the holy Scripture; and give us no prudential
rules, which may give a prudent man any assured means, how to know which is
the true letter, or which is the true sense of the same; Yea, assign such
means and rules which are proved insufficient by their own dissension
concerning these very points. And besides this, that which we upon such
prudential motives give to a general authority: Field book 4 cap. 13.
they, rejecting with Field al such general authority, must needs give without
al reason to every particular man; which is the root of al pride, and a
fountain of discord and division, contrary to experience and not warranted by
Scripture; or else grant themselves to have no faith. And this is true, whether
they vvil have themselves secured of the truth of their judgment by particular
and extraordinary inspirations of the spirit, or by the light of divine
understanding, or grace (as Field calls it) ordinarily found in every
spiritual person. See Aberus contra Carolostadian. c. 7.
And in my judgment it is strange how they confess every man although never
so much enlightened, to be subject to error; and yet every one assures
himself, having one no more warrant then an other, that he is in the truth.
Finally, this doctrine of divine inspirations and illuminations, gave occasion
to Frederi. Staphilus l. de co^cordia discipuloru^ Lutheri. Petrus Palladius l.
de haeresibus. Calui^ in Instructorio co^tra Libert. cap. 9. Willet in his
Synops. controuer. 1. q. 1.
Muncerus, and certain Anabaptists his followers, as also to the
Zwenckfeldians, and Libertines of their blaspheamous opinions. For like as our
Protestant adversaries commonly fly to illuminations for the knowledge of the
true text and interpretation of holy Scripture: so these men either because
they found it written that 2. Cor. 3, 6.
the letter does kill, or because they thought the Scriptures not necessary,
seeing that the holy Ghost is able to teach men's hearts without any written
letters, rejected the Scriptures altogether, and pretended only such
illuminations of the spirit. Hence also perhaps proceeded the dreams and
visions of the Enthusiasts a famous sect of Anabaptists: but of this no more.

SECTION THE FIFTH. Concerning their deductions out of holy Scripture: that they
likewise are framed by them according to their own fancies; and of their
accusations of one another touching these matters.
IT is moreover a thing most evident, that in the deductions or collections of
the articles of their faith and religion out of holy Scripture, they are not
only subject to error; but also that they follow their own judgment and
inclinations: And this vvil appear to any man that shall consider the same. One
deduction I vvil here set down, which I my self have heard some of them
make, which was this: I urged them to bring forth some authority out of the
word of God, for their keeping of the Sunday in stead of the Saturday? and
they alleged as a sufficient proof of this matter, those words of S. John in
the Apocalipse: Apocal. 1, 10.
I was in spirit on the Dominical (or as they say) on the Lords day. And what
an insufficient deduction is this, if we set aside the authority and tradition
of the Church, which they despise? How does this follow? S. John was in the
spirit, or had a revelation on the Sunday: therefore al Christians may lawfully
work on the saturday, a day commanded by God himself both in the old and new
testament, Exo. 20. etc. Math. 19, 17
(if we follow the letter) to be kept holy, and observe the Sunday. I could
bring a hundred more such examples, and my reader may gather some out of that
which has been already said, in the first section of the seventh Chapter.

I add also for the proof of this, that their deductions out of the self
same words, be diverse and opposite; for every sect like as it has a
particular and proper form of faith, so has it peculiar and proper deductions
out of the text of holy Scripture. This cannot be denied, because the
collections of the Lutherans, Zwinglians, English Protestants, Caluinists, or
Puritans, Anabaptists, Libertines, differ from one another, as their belief is
different. And to give one instance or two, (but yet to omit the known
different collections which are found among Lutherans and Sacramentaries;) Do
not some Lutherans gather out of Scripture a necessity of good works; See
colloquiu^ Altenberge^se.
others that such works are not necessary? Bishop Barlow of Rochester in his
sermon. Whitgift and others
Do not also some Sacramentaries as our English Protestants, out of scripture
deduce their government of the Church by Bishops; others as the Puritans their
government by Elders? Do not finally Caluins Institut. book 2 chap. 16. ver.
10.11.12. in Math. 26. and 27. Willet in his Synopsis controuers. 20.
Calvin, Willet and others, gather out of scriptures that Christ suffered in
soul the pains of hell, which by others is disalowed? And do not the
followers of one part of these collections, condemn them of the other, either
as Heretics, or as Schismatikes, or as Blaspheamers? These things are most
certain. Of which I infer, that al these sectaries deductions cannot be
found, but some must needs frame them according to their own fancies; And
seeing that we have no infallible reason according to their grounds, to
approve the one of them before another, we may with like reason condemn them
al, as having no other ground (as they are by them maintained) then humane
judgment and understanding.

In defense of the Lutherans of Wittenberge, both concerning the proof of the
letter, and interpretation of holy Scripture, and also touching deductions out
of the same, it may perhaps be said by some man, Harmony of co^fess. sect. 10
pa. 332. 333. Confess. Wittenb. art. 32.
that they hold the Church has authority to bear witness off, and interpret
holy Scripture; as likewise to judge of al doctrines according to that. Try the
spirits whither they be of God, and let the other judge. Yea they add, that
she has received of her husband Christ a certain rule, to wit: the
Prophetical and Apostolical preaching confirmed by miracles from heaven,
according to the which she is bound to interpret those places of the Scripture
which seem to be obscure, and to judge of doctrines. I answer and confess,
that in very deed this is their doctrine, which makes not a little against
the dreams and inspirations of their brethren; but this can make no
infallible ground according to their assertions: for they make both the Church
and tradition subject to error; and consequently if we believe them, no man
can build upon their authority, an act of divine and supernatural faith.

Finally hence it proceeds, that our adversaries themselves accuse and
censure one an other to be corrupters of scripture, falsifiers, and liers. If
we believe Luth. epist. ad Joan. Heruagium typographum Argentinens.
Luther, the Sacramentaries began their opinion of the Sacrament with lies,
and with lies they do defend it; and they broached it abroad by the wicked
fraud of corrupting other men's works. If Calvin, Calvin. admonit. 3. ad
Westphalum. Calvin in defens. de Sacram. p. 1085
the Lutherans are nothing else but forgers and falsifiers: and of Westphalus
in particular he vvriteth thus. Westphalus as though he were I know not what
Comical Jupiter, carrying Minerua in his brain, puts boldly upon al his
fictions the visard of the word of God: if it had not been now an old thing
and commonly known, that the false Prophets did so much the more gloriously
pretend the name of God, by how much the further they were from him, by these
frights and scar-crowes, he would peradventure do something. The word of God
does confidently sound again and again in his mouth, but in word only. And
soon after: This profane man does filthily abuse at his pleasure the sacred
sentences, no otherwise then Magitians do wrest holy words to wicked
incantations: Hitherto Calvin. If Bre^t. in recog. prophet. etc. in fine.
Brentius say true, all the Zwinglians works are full of deprauations or
corruptions, cunning deceits and slanders. If Ca^panus in colloquijs Latinis
Luther. tom. 2. cap. de aduersarijs, fol. 354.
Johannes Campanus, as certain as it is that God is God, so certain it is
that Luther was a devilish liar. If Westphalus in Apologiae contra Calvin page
430. cap. 19. page 194.
Westphalus deserve credit, Caluins works are stuffed with taunts, curses,
and lies: and he (as he says) is able to show certain pages in Caluins
works, of which every one contains above thirty notable lies and taunts. He
adds moreover, that the Sacramentaries corrupt very many places of Scripture.
If Conradus in Theolog. Caluinist. lib. 2. fol. 120. 123. 124. l. 1. fol. 80.
and 132.
Conradus, all the Caluinists are compounded of lies, impiety, and impudency. If
Oecola^pad. in Dialog. co^tra Melancthonem.
Oecolampadius, the Lutherans bring forth only a color or shadow (as
Heretics commonly are accustomed to do) of the word of God, they bring not
the word of God; and yet al (says he) will seem to build upon the word of God.
Of the Zwinglians of Zurick thus writes Sta^carius de Trinitate, lib. 1. d. 5.
Stancarius: These Arians of Zurick maliciously maime and mangle the sentences
of the Fathers, and are worthily to be accused and condemned as falsifiers of
the truth: and for that grievously to be punished, for they sin against that
Commandment of God; thou shall not bear false witness. These men are
altogether Atheists, and allege falsely the Scriptures and the testimonies of
holy Fathers, to cast down the Son of God, yea the most holy Trinity, from
the throne of his Majesty: Hitherto Stancarius. Our Puritans works (according
to the judgment of one of our Survey of the pretended H. discipline cap. 3. p.
56. chap. 5. p. 80. c. 24. p. 307.
Protestants) are full of boldness, sophistications, falsifications, and many
such corruptions. The same man accuses them, that they have perverted the true
meaning of certain places both in the Scriptures and Fathers, to serve their
own turns: And affirms, that the word of God is much troubled with such
kind of choppers and changers of it. Every giddy head (says he) wresteth and
wringeth it to serve his own devise. Further, he professes as in the presence
of God, that of all the places of Scripture which they allege against the
Protestants, Chapter 31. p. 414. See also chap. 35. page 463.
he cannot find any one on which they have not cast such a color, as was
never known in the Church of Christ among all the ancient Godly Fathers, from
the Apostles times til these our troublesome and presumptuous days. Yea he
affirms, that all the catterbrawles, pitiful distractions and confusions
which are among Puritans, proceed of such intolerable presumption, as is
used by perverting and false interpretation of holy Scripture. Listen also,
what we read in an other book of theirs concerning this matter: Co^spiracy
for pretended reformation printed, an. 1592. in the end.
Lastly (says the Author of the history of the Puritan conspiracy) do not
the Puritans make great shows and many pretenses for their unsound and absurd
opinions, that they are taken from the holy and sacred written word of God?
which by these means they make to be of private interpretation, and do not
reduce their senses unto it when they read, but do wickedly captiuate the
Scriptures unto their own senses and meaninges. Hooker has the like
accusation. Hooker in his third book of Ecclesiastical policy,. 5. page 135.
Calvin in like sort noted this fault in the Libertines, for thus he
discourses against them: Calvin in praefat. ad lectores de psychopanychia in
tract. theolog. page 539.
And whereas they are ashamed to be ignorant of any thing, in all things even
as oracles they answer most confidently. Hence are so many schisms, so many
errors, so many slanders of our faith: by which occasion the name and word of
God is blaspheamed among the wicked. At length which is the head of al
mischief, when as they obstinately defend that which they rashly and foolishly
uttered, then they ask council of the oracles of God; out of which they seek
protections and sauegardes for their errors. O good God what do they not
turn vpsidowne! what do not they corrupt, that they may I say not bow it,
but by force crook it to their own sense? Doubtless truly said the Poet:
Fury finds weapons. Is this the way to learn to turn and toss the
Scriptures to serve our own pleasures and sensuality, that they be made
subject to our sense, then which nothing is more foolish? O n^isome plague, and
most certain cockle of the enemy man, by which he indeauoureth to obscure and
cover the true seed! and yet we wonder whence arise so many sects among those,
that first embraced the Gospel and the word again springing up: Thus far
Calvin. And he concludes of them in another place with these words: Falsely
therefore do they abuse this pretense, and seek to persuade the more simple
that they are governed by the prescript or rule of holy Scriptures; when as
these being altogether rejected, they follow the imagination of their own
brain: Hitherto are Caluins words. And these their accusations of one
another convince, not only that in translating and expounding the Scriptures,
they frame al things according to their own fancies and imaginations; from
whence proceeds that their assertion, that the Scriptures are easy, because
among them it is even as easy to expound Scriptures as to imagine: but also,
that they have no other ground vvhereon they build their faith and religion.
And al these reasons proceed principally against the learned sectaries.

SECTION THE SIXTH. The unlearned and ignorant sectaries, in receiving and
expounding the holy Scriptures, likewise build upon their own fancies and
judgments, and have no other ground of their faith and religion.
THAT the unlearned Sectaries be likewise in the the same case, it is far
more easy to prove. For besides that they have no other means to know which
books are to be received as Canonical Scripture, and which are to be rejected,
but the opinion of their learned Masters, who differ among themselves
concerning this matter: of which it follows, that in following of one and
condemning others, they follow their own judgments. Besides this I say it is
evident, that they build not their faith and religion upon the pure word of
God, as it was first penned by the inspiration of the holy Ghost (for they as
I suppose understand not the tongues in which it was so penned) but upon the
word of God translated by their learned Captains.

Now if their translatours have erred or may err in their translations,
where is their faith? Surely that they are al subject to error, it is proved
before? How then can the unlearned know that either through ignorance or
malice they have not erred? what divine authority or revelation have they to
persuade them this, or to propound unto them their translated Bibles as the
true word of God? If the sincerity of the translatour be doubtful, and they
have no such authority or revelation, how can they know certainly and
infallibly by divine vvarrant, that their Bibles contain the pure and sincere
word of God? And if they know not this after this sort, how can they build
upon their Bibles true faith, which is a most certain knowledge through
divine revelation? without al doubt seeing that they admit no other infallible
rule, they must needs confess that they are always uncertain whether their
belief be true or no, for their belief can have no further assurance of
truth, then they have of the truth of the ground thereof; which they affirm
to be the only word of God, contained in their own books. Wherefore, seeing
that the truth of these is uncertain, their faith also must needs be
uncertain. And this argument is sufficient to prove that the unlearned
sectaries have no faith. But I add further, that I have before set down
diverse places of holy Scripture, which we affirm in very deed to be
corrupted by their translations: which our affirmation they may the better
believe, because they may also there see, that diverse places in the first
editions corrupted, are amended in the latter. How then can the unlearned
being ignorant in the tongues, discern by the Scripture only whether we say
true or no? or whether we or the authors of their translations err? Surely,
in judging of this controversy they follow their own fancies, neither have
they any sound reason (much less divine authority) that can move them rather
to condemn our translation, then their own. Hence also I infer, that our
unlearned Sectaries are not yet certain that the English Bibles are the true
word of God. This I prove, because they cannot deny but their said bibles were
once falsely translated: otherwise wherefore have they been in so many places
as I have noted corrected? Does not every correction suppose a fault? But that
they were once false, it is granted in the preface to the Bible of the year
1589. 1592. and 1600. If they were once false, how know they that they are
now true? Had the learned Sectary or Sectaries that last amended the Bible,
any further vvarrant from God that they should not err, then they that erred
before? what vvarrant had they that erred? no other certainly but their own
knowledge. And what had they that last of al corrected it, but the same? and
so the translatour of the aforesaid Bible in the preface to the reader
protests, that according to the measure of his knowledge he has faithfully
rendered the text, and sincerely expounded al hard places; but who knows not,
that al these men's judgments and knowledges be alike subject to error? If
therefore the last translators or correctors had no further warrant (as they
had not) then the former, how can it certainly be known that they have not
also erred? Conference at Hampton Court, etc.
but this likewise is confessed by the Kings Majesty and D. Reinolds, as I
have noted before: wherefore as yet the unlearned English sectaries never had,
nor have at this present a true and certain ground of their faith; and
consequently, they are yet uncertain vvhither their belief be sound or no,
because their Bible on which only they build, contains not the true word of
God. Neither will this be remedied by a new edition of the Bible (which as it is
said is now in hand) because the new Translatours which now endeavor to
correct the old, are also subject to error; and therefore the unlearned
sectaries can never certainly know whither they have erred or no. Of which I
finally infer, that they can never have true faith, which is a most certain
and sure knowledge of things revealed by God.

I vvil add one other argument most evidently conuincing, that none of the
unlearned professors of the new religion, can possibly be certain that their
translated Bibles are the true word of God, which is this. Every man must
needs confess that there is but one true word of God: But our adversaries
Bibles be diverse and differ much one from another (wherefore as I have showed,
every man rejects al other Bibles, but that which is translated and approved
by those of his own sect:) therefore al of them but one must needs be false;
which being presupposed, I demand of any one unlearned sectary what reason he
has to prefer one Bible as true, before all the rest? for example, wherefore
does he reject the Lutheran, or Puritan Bible, and admit that which is
authorized to be read in the Churches of England? He cannot say that it is
because the one agrees with the Hebrewe and Greek, and the other do not;
for this he knows not, because he is ignorant of those languages. Perhaps he
will say that some learned men told him so; But this is no sufficient ground,
both because if he ask a Lutheran, or Caluinist, although even as learned as
the English Protestant, they will tell him the contrary; and also, because the
judgment of a learned man, yea of all the learned sectaries in the world
together, is not sufficient to make any thing so certain, that we may
without al doubt admit it, as a sufficient ground of an article of faith. For
be they never so learned, yet their sentence may be erroneous, they themselves
being subject to error: wherefore the unlearned sectary although he make
himself judge of all the learned, yet he can not possibly most assuredly know,
which of them have erred in translating the Bible. And therefore in accepting
and approving one, and rejecting and condemning the rest, he builds only upon
his own fancy, which moves him to accept and approve one edition of holy
Scripture, before another: either because it favors his own opinions, or
because he has conceived a good opinion of the Translatour, or because the
translation is allowed in the Country where he dwells, or for some other
private respect. Moreover, although we should grant to the unlearned and
ignorant sectaries, that they most assuredly know that their translated Bibles
are the true word of God: yet the interpretations also on which they build,
yield us even as forcible an argument as the former. For seeing that the
Scriptures are hard and admit diverse interpretations (as I have already proved)
yea are so diversely expounded by their learned Captains, that al their
expositions cannot be true, who sees not first, that the unlearned and
ignorant have little reason to accept more of one interpretation, then of an
other. Secondly, that in accepting one and rejecting others, they build not
upon any divine authority, but upon their own judgment; by which they are
moved to think the doctrine received true, either through the authority of him
that teaches it, or some discourse of their own understanding. Lastly it is
also apparent, that in so doing they make themselves judges over their Masters:
for understanding of diverse opinions among them, they choose and embrace one as
true, and condemn al others as false. But if their learned doctors themselves,
in their interpretations build upon their own fancies, much more the
unlearned: wherefore, I need not use any long discourse of this matter. Only I
will add, that it seems likewise necessary, that he that vvil build his faith
upon the holy Scriptures, should find his whole belief in the said
Scriptures, and know perfectly by his own study, what articles of faith by
them are approved; and consequently, that he should read over the whole
Bible, and confer one place with another, least that he be deceived.
Otherwise, if he believe others concerning these points, he seems to build
upon their words, more then upon the word of God; and to fall into that which
by his brethren and him, is commonly reprehended as a fault in us. For they
reprehend the unlearned Catholics that they rely so much upon the authority of
the Church, and read not the Scripture themselves to know what they ought to
believe; whereas, if they do not as I have said, they build themselves upon
the authority of a few Ministers. And these reasons have more force concerning
the ignorant sectaries that cannot read, then the unlearned that can read,
especially this last: for the ignorant sort cannot find their belief by their
own study in the Bible, and therefore must needs rely wholly upon other men's
reports.

But our English unlearned and ignorant Protestants, (yea some of the learned
sort also) recurre to the statutes of the Parliament, and make it as it were
an infallible judge of al matters of religion. Against these I reply, that the
Parliament has no such prerogative, See Bilson in his treatise of the
perpetual government of the church cha. 16. page 371. 388. 389.
seeing it has neither authority from God, after such sort to enter-meddle in
matters of faith (for this belongs to the Bishops and Prelates of the Church)
nor a vvarrant from him of not erring: Yea seeing that it has erred diverse
times, as our Protestants themselves cannot deny, the judgment of it must
needs be very insufficient. That they must needs grant it to have erred, I
prove; because it has now approved some articles of faith, which in former
times it condemned. This is evident, because some of the articles of their
belief now approved, were censured to be heretical by a Parliament held in
the first year of King Richard the second against the Wiccliffians, in the
year of our Lord 1380. Also by another act of Parliament, in the second year
of King Henry the fourth. Further their whole religion was condemned by act
of Parliament in Queen Mary's days; Yea they cannot deny, but some of the
chief articles of their new belief, were adjudged heresies by a Parliament
held in the latter days of King Henry the eight, even when he used the title
of supreme head of the Church of England, by the statute of six articles: upon
which diverse of their brethren were burned, as Fox their martir-maker
records. Wherefore I may well say, that their religion has been condemned
as authentically by act of Parliament, as it has been approved. And what
reason have they to believe more such Parliaments as have made for them, then
those that make against them? Moreover, it is a most absurd thing, to condemn
the ancient Councels of the Church of error; and yet to make the judgment of
an English Parliament consisting principally of temporal men, of an infallible
truth. Field book 4 chap. 7. page 209.
Finally M. Field affirms, that we can never be so well persuaded of any man,
or multitude of men, but that we may justly fear, either they are deceived, or
will deceive: and therefore (says he) if our faith depend upon such grounds,
we cannot firmly and undoubtedly believe. Which his assertion if we apply to
the English Parliament, it must needs be confessed, that according to his
judgment we may justly fear, that either it is deceived, or will deceive; and
that who builds his faith on that, cannot firmly and undoubtedly believe; and
consequently it follows, he has no faith.

SECTION THE SEVENTH. Of the miserable estate of the unlearned and ignorant
Sectaries.
HAVING proved that the unlearned and ignorant Sectaries, build their faith and
religion upon their own fancies; I think it not amiss to gather out of that
which has been already said, how miserable their estate is, and upon what
weak ground they stand, and venture the everlasting estate of their souls.
For the declaration of this let us suppose, that an unlearned sectary being
doubtful of his faith, comes to be resolved to his learned masters; and let
us behold what grounds of faith are delivered unto him, by which he may make
a steadfast and assured resolution; what then is this man perplexed in his
belief, according to our adversaries ordinary manner of proceeding first
wished to do? verily first; according to their advise he must take the Bible
into his hands, and diligently view what faith is there delivered and
prescribed. But what Bible must he take into his hands? no other certainly
if he follow their counsel, but that which is translated and corrupted by
those of their own sect: not the word of God but the word of men, as I have
proved before: and this is the first ground which he receives from them.
Suppose this be done, and that he being doubtful of this article among others,
whither Christ be equal and consubstantial to his Father or no, turn over his
Bible and find those words of Christ; The father is greater then I: John 14,
29.
But yet finding two natures in Christ, the one of God, the other of man; and
not able to judge of which these words were spoken, is not yet satisfied:
what more is to be done? He must confer say they this place of Scripture
with other such like. Suppose then further, that he turns to that sentence
of our Savior; John 10, 30*
I and the father are one, and pondering upon it finds that the Father and
the Son may be one diverse ways; wherefore not understanding of what unity
the said sentence is meant, suppose that he remain yet doubtful and cannot
resolve himself by his Bible: what must he do more? He must then (say the
learned) betake himself to his prayers, and pray unto God that his spirit may
by his divine inspiration, teach him the true sense of the aforesaid places of
scripture, and resolve him of the truth. Well he does so: After his prayers
either he finds his mind inclined to one certain interpretation and
opinion, or no: If not then he is yet doubtful. But if he does find his mind
so inclined, is he consequently sure that he has attained to the truth? How
knows he that this inspiration is from the holy Ghost? what reason, miracle,
revelation, or infallible vvarrant has he to assure himself of this? where
does he find that God has promised, that the holy ghost shall assist and
preserve every private man's understanding from error, that prays for his
assistance? How does he likewise know, that his prayer is good and acceptable
in the sight of God? verily this is most uncertain; and yet otherwise by our
prayers we obtain not our requests, and that the holy Ghost does not usually
inspire every man that so prays for the truth, it is apparent. For suppose
that an English Protestant, and a Geneuian Puritan be at controversy touching
the same sentence; I and the father am one, and after ordinary discourses not
agreeing, they betake themselves both to their prayers, and desire God to
instruct them of the true sense of the said words. Will they after their
prayers forthwith agree and be of one opinion? Certainly this is not their
custom. What then? The English Protestant vvil say, the spirit has taught me,
that the Father and the Son are one in substance: the Puritan contrariwise,
according to the doctrine of his master Calvin in Joan. 10, 30.
Calvin approved by Whitaker in his answer to Campians eight reason page 204.
M. Whitaker, will affirm; that the spirit has taught him that the aforesaid
sentence is to be understood of unity in power and consent, not in substance.
The ancient writers or fathers (says Calvin) abused this place to prove Christ
consubstantial to the Father, for neither does Christ dispute of unity of
substance, but of the consent which he has with the Father: Thus Calvin. Which
sense this Puritan may also confirm as Whitakers does with that sentence of
our Lord, used when he prayed for his Disciples that they might be one. John
17, 21.
That they al may be one (said he) as thou O father art in me, and I in thee?
And be not these inspirations contrary? did the holy Ghost in this case inspire
them both? Truly it is impossible. And thus the Lutherans and Sacramentaries,
the Protestants and Puritans with diverse other sectaries, after many prayers
used on every side, remain yet at mortal jarres concerning diverse matters in
controversy between them. Neither can it be said, that one part without al
doubt is assured of the truth; for one has no more vvarrant for his assurance
then another; and consequently, seeing that they cannot be al assisted with
divine inspiration, we may well affirm; that none of them are certain that
they enjoy this prerogative, yea we may very well deny it unto them al: but
of this matter I have treated above. For mine intent at this present it is
sufficient, that by prayer the unlearned sectary without some special
revelation or vvarrant from God, which none of them receive, cannot assure
himself that his opinion is true. Wherefore let us yet further suppose, that
he remain hitherto doubtful, as upon these grounds he should; Is there now
any other thing to be done for his better resolution? If all this (say his
aduisers) suffice not, he must repair for his better instruction to the
learned, and ask their counsel. If he demand whither the learned may not
err in their counsel, they grant it. If he urge them, to give him a certain
and infallible rule whereby to discern in their doctrine, truth from falsehood;
they tell him, that when the learned speak according to the word of God, they
say true; otherwise, when they swerve and stray from the said word. Sutcliffe
against the wardword encont. 2. page 54.
So our countriman Sutcliffe plainly affirms, that we are to believe every
thing which our Pastors teach us, but as far as they teach the doctrine of
Christ JESUS. Nor are we (says he) absolutely to obey them, but when they
teach according to the law: Wherefore, one of our Arch-puritans, of Calvin
whom the followers of his sect esteem above al others vvriteth thus: We
receive M. Calvin and weigh of him, T. Cartwright in D. Whitgifts defense
tract. 2. cap. 4. page 111.
as of the notablest instrument that the Lord has stirred up for the purging
of his Churches, and restoring of the plain and sincere interpretation of the
Scriptures, which has been since the Apostles time: and yet we do not so
read his works, that we believe anything to be true, because he says it; but
so far as we can esteem that which he says does agree with the Canonical
scriptures: And this is their common doctrine. Behold therefore this poor
perplexed man is sent back again to the Scripture. And is not this a palpable
circle? First, they sent him to his Bible, then to conference with one place of
Scripture with another; thirdly to his prayers, afterward to the learned, and
now to his Bible again to know the true doctrine of the learned from the
false; neither can they assign any other rule whereby this may be known. Of
which follows moreover this absurdity, that they make him judge over the
learned; for he is to accept and refuse their doctrine, according as he judges
it consonant or dissonant from the word of God.

But let us suppose notwithstanding these absurdities and inconveniences, that
the unlearned sectary for his better instruction goes to the learned; and
coming first to an English Protestant, demands of him the true sense of the
said sentence so often alleged: I and the father are one. The Protestant
tells him (according to the assertion of all the ancient fathers, who by this
sentence commonly refuted the Arians) that Christ by these words gives us to
understand, that he as he is God, and his father have the very self same
substance. This not satisfying him, he goes further to a Caluinist, who being
demanded the same question answers, that the true sense of those words is:
That Christ and his father agree together, Calvin in Joan. 10, 30.
and are of one consent. What is this poor man the near for all this? One
tells him one thing, another another thing: and how shall he discern and
judge of the truth? Does not this commonly happen? do not the Professors of
the new religion disagree among themselves, both concerning the translation,
and also the interpretation of the word of God? Does not each one of them
inuit every man to his sect, bear the world in hand that he has the truth,
and condemn al others, oppugning his opinions of error and falsehood? what is
more manifest then this.

What instructions then can this unlearned sectary receive of the learned? Has
he not cause to be more perplexed and doubtful then he was before? what
therefore shall he finally do? Certainly, I cannot see what other grounds he
can receive from those Doctors: wherefore, if he vvil not go to the pillar of
truth the Catholic Church, which is guided by the holy Ghost, and of he^
receive a divine and infallible resolution; without al doubt he must either
remain still doubtful in this principal article of Christian religion, or else
going back to his Bible again, out of his own judgment he must resolve to
follow one of the aforesaid interpretations, and to condemn the other as
contrary to the word of God. And what a slender ground of faith is this? yea,
seeing that he has no divine authority vvhereon he builds, I may boldly say
that he has no faith at al, but only a kind of opinion.

And like as I have exemplified in this particular controversy, so could I do
concerning the real presence, and the true sense of those words; This is my
body, or any other matter or place of Scripture in question between us, as my
reader will easily grant, for there is the like reason of them al: and thus
much concerning the unlearned sectarie that can read.

But what shall we say of him that is altogether ignorant and cannot read? The
learned sectaries cannot send him to their Bible to search out the truth: He
cannot likewise confer one place of scripture with another; his prayers be
of no greater force then his be that can read; wherefore he has no other
mean left, but the advice of the learned and his own judgment: and what will
the advice of the learned help and avail him, if he find among them
possibility of error and dissension? These things he cannot but find, yea,
concerning that very text first alleged: The father is greater then I; they
are at variance; for whereas some restrain it only to the humane nature of
Christ, Calvin says, He doubts not to extend it to the whole complexum,
Calvin epist. 2. ad Polonos seu in admonitione ad Polonos.
or person of God and man. And certain it is, that if this ignorant person
embrace any one opinion as certain, concerning a matter of which he was before
doubtful; that he must either build upon his own judgment, or otherwise he
must take the word of some learned man, that the opinion which he follows
is true, and upon it ground his faith, religion, and salvation. But what
reason has he to accept rather of the word of one minister, then of another?
For example, what reason has he in the exposition of those words: This is my
body, rather to follow the Sacramentaries, then the Lutherans? are they not al
alike subject to errors? he cannot say that the scripture moves him so to do,
because he knows the Scripture only by the report of others. Neither has he
any infallible rule whereby to discern the true sense: wherefore, it is his
own fancy which persuades him to accept of the one exposition, and to reject
the other.

And does not also this sectary although altogether unlearned, take upon him to
judge the learned? Can he possibly believe the Sacramentary, except he judge
his doctrine to be true, and condemn all the learned Lutherans? Can he follow
the Protestants and not condemn the Puritans? etc. verily he cannot. And what
a simple judge is he, being a man ignorant, void of learning, and commonly of
a slender wit and judgment? And like as every unlearned sectary condemns all the rest that dissent from him in opinion; so all the rest condemn him. For if
he follow the Protestants, all the Puritans tell him that he is deceived: if the
Puritans, the Protestants tell him the like tale: If he believe Zwinglius,
Luther condemns him to the pit of hell: if Luther, Zwinglius pronounces the
same judgment against him, etc. And of what opinion soever he be, certain it
is, that more of his own brethren condemn, then approve his belief. He is
therefore in a most miserable and lamentable case, both because he has no
ground of his faith, but the word of a few ministers, and his own weak
judgment: and also, because he is condemned of error, even by those of his
own profession; even as learned and as wise as they whom he follows, and
far exceeding himself in all such qualities.

And this is the ordinary manner of proceeding of the learned sectaries, with
the unlearned and ignorant: these grounds of faith and no others they receive
from them: If any man doubt of the truth of this discourse, let him exactly and
strictly examine either the learned, what grounds of faith they can afforde the
unlearned and ignorant; or these, what grounds they receive; and why they
believe thus and thus touching any article of religion; and their own
confession will teach him, that al which has been said; is true; and that the
last and chiefest cause of this or that belief in the unlearned and ignorant,
is their own judgment, or the opinion of the learned, liking their own fancy.

SECTION THE EIGHT. That the new sectaries allege Scriptures to confirm
their new doctrine, it is no certain argument that they build their faith and
religion upon the said Scriptures.
TO prove that the professors of the new religion ground their faith and
religion upon the holy Scripture, some will say; that they allege sentences of
the said Scripture in great abundance, in confirmation of their doctrine: unto
whom I answer that true it is, that so they do. But I add, that this is no
sufficient argument to prove that which is intended. And first, let every man
deluded by such their proceedings consider, that all the ancient Heretics have
done the like. Did not Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutiches, and other
Arch-heretikes together with their followers, for proof of their heresies
bring forth diverse places of holy Scripture? Of this Vincentius Lirinensis who
flourished almost twelve hundred years since, Vincent. Lirinens. aduers.
prophanas haeresum nouitates, c. 35.
is a sufficient witness; for of the ancient Heretics alleging of the word
of God, he writes thus: Here perhaps some man may demand, whether Heretics
also do use the testimony of holy Scripture? To which I say, that they do,
and that very earnestly; for a man may behold them ranging and coursing in
every part of the Bible, in Moises, in the books of the Kings, in the
Psalms, in the Apostles, in the Gospels, in the Prophets. For whether they be
among their own brethren, or with strangers; whether in private or in public;
whether in talking or in writing; whether in the house a feasting, or abroad
in walking: they almost never allege any thing of their own, which they do
not pretend to shadow with the sacred word of Scripture. Read the pamphlets
of Paul as Sumosatenus, of Priscillian, Eunomius, Iouinian and the rest of such
like pestilent Heretics, and you shall find through al their works an huge
heap of examples, almost no page omitted, which is not colored and painted
with the sayings of the old and new Testament: thus far Vincentius
Lirinensis. Origin. tom. 1 homil. 7. in Ezechielem.
Of this point also Origenes discourses after this sort: When to defend false
opinions we say, it is written in the Prophet, Moises testifies this, the
Apostle speaks it: What other thing do we but taking the bread of truth,
propound or offer it up to the Idols which we have feigned or made to our
selves? Marcion makes an Idol, and offered up to it the bread of Scriptures;
Valentinus, Basilides, and al Heretics have done the like: hitherto Origenes.

The same is affirmed but in fewer words by S. Augustine, who tells us; Aug.
lib. 1. de Trinit. cap. 3. see him also epist. 222.
that Al Heretics endeavor to defend their false and deceitful opinions out
of the same Scriptures. And in another place he recorcordeth; Idem in breuiculo
collat. 3. cap. 8.
that the Donatists alleged many testimonies of holy Scripture. S. Hillary
bids us Hillar. orat. 2. contra Consta^tium.
remember, that there is no Heretic which does not faigne, that the
blaspheamies which he preaches are according to the Scriptures. And long
before al these Tertullian noted, that Tertul. de praescript. cap. 15.
the Heretics even in his days, pretended to bring Scriptures for themselves,
and that with such their impudency forthwith they did shake some.

But of whom learned Heretics after this sort to allege Scripture? Surely of
the Devil himself their grand-master; for did not he likewise tempting Christ,
confirm his wicked temptations with the testimony of holy Scripture? it
cannot be denied. Math. 4. verse. 6. etc.
If thou be the Son of God (said he) cast they self down: and why? he
adds a reason: for it is written, that he has given his Angels charge of
thee: and in their hands shall they hold thee up, lest perhaps thou knock thy
foot against the stone. Lo the Devil has scripture at hand to confirm his
temptations, as well as his scholars to confirm his doctrine their heresies;
and the scholars follow the example of their master. Hence proceed these
words of S. Hierome in his Dialogue against the Luciferians: Let not
Heretics flatter themselves, Hieron. contra Lucifer, in fine.
if they seem in their own conceit, to affirm that which they say out of the
chapters of Scripture: whereas the Devil also spoke some things out of the
Scriptures, and the Scriptures consist not in the reading, but in the
understanding: Hitherto S. Hierome. And certain it is, that any Heretic
whatsoever, if license be given him to translate and expound the Scriptures as
he pleases, may wrest some places to his own foolish fancies; yea this may
be done by any man, although he would set a broach some strange and absurd
doctrine, that was never heard of in the world before.

But let us add to these testimonies of the ancient Fathers the confession of
Calvin, who against the Anabaptists discourses thus: Calvin in tract. Theolog
page 571.
Because silly Christians who have some zeal toward God, can be seduced by
no show or appearance more fair, then when the word of God is pretended and
alleged: The Anabaptists against whom we now write, have it always in their
mouths, and they always solemnly recite it. And soon after having
delivered, that the highest place is to be given to the word of God, and that
they press it against us. He adds this exception, or moderation against the
Anabaptists: But as it is our part to give ear to those things which are
said, until we know of what force or quality euerything is: so it is necessary
that we prudently discern truth and falsehood. And we must juditiously
consider, whether the word of God be truly or falsely alleged unto us: for we
are commanded to try the spirits and to consider whether they are of God; which
how necessary it is, the thing it self teaches us. For the Devil himself
armed himself with the word of God, and girded himself with that sword, to
invade and assault Christ; and we find true by experience, that he does daily
use these guiles or arts by his organs or instruments to deprave the truth, and
so to lead miserable souls to destruction: Hitherto are Caluins words; in
which (as we see) he is forced to plead that against the Anabaptists, which
we even with as good reason and as forcibly do plead against him, and al
other sectaries alleging falsely the Scriptures. Neither do the Anabaptists
only cite the scriptures plentifully; but also the Arians, Trinitarians,
Familists, and other such like whom our adversaries commonly censure to be
Heretics. The like report we have heard him above make of Westphalus a
Lutheran: yea there he tells us, Sect. 5. of this chapter.
that the false prophets in old times, by how much the more further they were
from God, by so much the more gloriously did pretend his holy name.

But did the Devil or any ancient Heretic, or do the new sectaries in these
our days, bring forth scriptures in their true sense and meaning? God forbid:
for the scripture confirms nothing but truth. They falsely therefore wrested
and wrest the scripture to a wrong sense, to the end to make it seem to favor
their blaspheamies, and wicked doctrine. Neither can our adversaries at this
time in excuse of themselves truly say, that the ancient Heretics alleged
Scripture without any color or probability of truth, which as they
themselves think is not their custom: for this is most false, as it vvil
appear to any scholar that shall consider the proofs of holy Scripture,
which ancient Heretics brought for their pestiferous opinions, and confer
them with the testimonies which are ordinarily used by the professors of the
new rellgion.

Let us declare this by one or two examples: the Arians as every one of any
reading knows, made the Son of God inferior to his Father; and what could
be brought more plausible for this in outward show, then that sentence of
Christ: John 14, 29.
The father is greater then I? especially if we admit of that exposition of
Calvin upon those words of Christ; I and the father are one: John 10. v. 3.
who as I have showed before, will have them spoken of unity in consent.

The Nouatians taught, that none falling into mortal sin after baptism,
could be received again to mercy or penance in the Church; and what apparent
testimonies at the first sight out of the word of God, did they also bring to
confirm this falsehood? Does not the Apostle even as plainly, yea more
plainly teach this then he does, that faith only does justify? Hebr. 6. v. 4.
It is impossible (says he) for them that were once illuminated, have tasted
also of the heavenly gift, and were made pertakers of the holy Ghost; have
moreover tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, and
are fallen: to be renewed again to penance, crucifying again to themselves
the Son of God, and making him a mockery. Again; Hebr. 10, 26.
If we sin willingly after knowledge of the truth received, now there is not
left an host for sins: Thus far the Apostle. And what such places have our
new adversaries for their justifying faith? Surely they have no such. But did
these Heretics allege these places in their true sense? nothing so, as S.
Cyril Bishop of Alexandria delivers unto us, discoursing of the aforesaid
words of the Apostle after this sort. Ciril lib. 5. in Joan. cap. 17.
Penance (says he) is not excluded by these words of S. Paul, but the
renewing by the lauer of regeneration. He does not here take away the second or
third remission of sins (for he is not such an enemy to our salvation;) but
the host which is Christ he denies that it is to be offered again upon the
Cross: Hitherto S. Cyril, with whom agree S. Chrysostom, Chrisost. homil. 9.
in cap. 6. ad Hebr. Ambros. de poenitent. lib. 2. cap. 2.
S. Ambrose and the rest of the holy Fathers. And like as these Heretics
falsely interpreted these places of scripture: so do the sectaries of our
days, diverse others.

This our English Protestants with Calvin will easily grant of the Anabaptists,
whom they censure to be Heretics; and yet these sectaries have as evident
places out of the word of God to confirm their own doctrine, as our
Protestants can allege for their particular opinions. For example, the
Anabaptists defend that children ought not to be baptized before they come to
years of discretion, and can actually believe: And what Scriptures do they
bring for proof of this their doctrine? Mark. 16, 16
It is written (say they) He that shall believe and be baptized shall be saved,
but he that shall not believe shall be condemned. Lo (say they) it is necessary
to believe before baptism, and the one is even as necessary as the other to
salvation: and upon this ground principally (although they allege thirty other
places) because infants cannot actually believe, Calvin admo. vlt. ad
Westphalum. page 1116. 1129.
they build their aforesaid doctrine. And they so press the Protestants who
deny habitual faith, with this sentence of Christ; that they forced the
Lutherans to affirm, Luther. lib. cont. Cochlaeu^ Lutherani in Synodo
Wittenberge. anno 1536.
that infants actually believe when they are baptized, which opinion is now
earnestly defended by Lucas Osia^der in Enchirid. co^t. Anabaptist. cap. 2
printed Wittenberge. anno 1607.
Lucas Osiander a Lutheran superintendent. In like sort they affirm al oaths
to be unlawful, and this they gather out of those words of our Savior, Math.
5. verse. 33. Again you have heard that it was said to them of old, thou shall
not commit perjury, but thou shall perform thy oaths to our Lord. But I say
to you not to swear at al, neither by heaven, etc. And soon after. Let your
talk be, yea, yea; no, no; and that which is over and above these is of evil.
These and other such like testimonies are alleged by the Anabaptists, which if
we reject the censure and interpretation of the Church, make even as
apparently for these Heretics, as any other used by the new sectaries for
proof of their new doctrine. Hence Calvin himself vvriting against the
Lutherans tells us, that if it be so, we are bound with this law, that it is
necessary we receive whatsoever the words (of Scripture) sound, there will be
no kind of absurdity, by which profane men may not reprove and defame the
doctrine of the Gospel, that is to say: there will be nothing so absurd, which
profane men to the infamy of the Gospel will not gather out of it. Again; if
the Scripture be so violently pressed as these men will have it, it will be as
full of absurdities as it has verses: Survey of the pretended holy discipline
chap. 31 page 414. 415.
Thus Calvin. In like sort the Author of the Survey of the Puritan discipline,
against the Puritans affirms, that it is not enough for men to allege
Scriptures, except they bring the true meaning of the Scriptures. And all this
discourse conuinceth, that the allegation of Scripture is no certain proof,
that the Scripture is the ground of his belief by whom it is alleged.

But for a farther proof of all this in our new sectaries, let us also
consider, that they do not only bring forth Scriptures against the Catholics,
but also against one another: For although their opinions be never so diverse,
yet they cite places of Scriptures out of the self same books, as well for the
confirmation of their own, as the confutation of their adversaries doctrine.
And further, al are (as they say) contented to have the Scripture decide and
end the controversy. Fox p. 1097. 987. anno 1536. page 1591. col. 2. page
1094. col. 2.
Hence on the self same day three sectaries were burnt in Smithfield, Barret,
Garret, and Hierome, of which the first was a Lutheran, the other two
Zwinglians; and yet they al (as Fox reports) protested at their death, that
they taught nothing but that which was contained in the Scripture. In like sort
the Puritans of this realm of England, now See a christian and modest offer of
a most indifferent conference, tendered by the late silenced and deprived
Ministers to the Archbishops printed anno 1606.
offer to prove al their Puritanical assertions out of the word of God, which
nevertheless our Protestants taught (as they say) by the same word of God,
reject. Of which I infer, that whosoever weighs a little and looks into
the matter, may see first; that they cannot al truly allege Scripture, and
build upon the same, for the Scripture approves not contrary doctrine: and
therefore he may imagine that they may even as well err in bringing forth
Scripture against us, as against their own brethren; and consequently be
persuaded, that their alleging of Scripture is no certain argument of truth.
Secondly he shall likewise find, that in their alleging the word of God, both
against us and those of their own company, they remit not the controversy to
the bare words of Scripture, but unto the words of scripture translated and
expounded by themselves, wherefore they differ in the translation and
interpretation of holy Scripture; for every one of them rejects al other
translations and interpretations but his own, upon which (being his own
fancy) not upon the Scripture he builds his opinion. But wherefore do
Heretics covet so plentifully to allege the word of God? the reason of this
is notably well declared by Vincentius Lirinensis in this his discourse: They
know fulwel (says he) that their stinking and unsavory drugs, be not likely
almost to please any, Vincent. Lirinens. ca. 35.
if simply and nakedly they be set forth: and therefore they do temper them as
it were with the sweet powder of Gods word, that he which quickly would have
contemned man's erroneous invention, dare not so readily reject Gods divine
Scripture; wherein they are like to those which minding to minister bitter
potions to young children, first anoint the brims of the cup with honey, that
thereby unwary youth feeling sweetness, may nothing fear the bitter
confection. This devise also practice they, who upon naughty herbs and
hurtful juices, write the names of good and wholesome medicines; whereby almost
no man reading the good superscription, any thing suspecteth the lurking poison
of the self same thing. Math. 7.
Likewise our Savior cries out to al Christians: take ye heed of false
prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening
wolves. What is meant else by sheep clothing? but the sayings of the
Prophets and Apostles, which they with sheepe-like sincerity did wear, etc.
And soon after: But to the end they may more craftily set upon the sheep of
Christ mistrusting nothing; remaining still cruel beasts, they put of their
woluish weed, and shroud themselves with the words of Scripture, as it were
with certain fleeces; whereby it happens, that when the silly sheep feel
the soft wool, they little fear their sharp teeth: Ambros. in cap. vlt. ad Tit.
hitherto Vincentius Lirinensis. S. Ambrose likewise tells us, that impiety
seeing authority to be esteemed, covers her self with the veil of
Scriptures: that whereas by her self she is not acceptable, by Scriptures
she may seem most commendable: And of this matter I need say no more.

Chapter 9. In which is proved by the new Sectaries forsaking their own
supposed ground and flying to others, also by their dissension and inconstancy,
that they build their faith and religion only upon their own fancies.
SECTION THE FIRST. Concerning their flying to other grounds by themselves
rejected, and their dissension.
I HAVE now sufficiently proved, that our adversaries build not their faith
and religion upon any one of those particular grounds, which are found in the
Church of Christ; yea that in all matters, the rule of their belief is
principally their own judgment and fancy.

For the confirmation of al which my discourse, I purpose in this chapter to
set down three manifest tokens and signs of this their vveake foundation, to
wit: their forsaking of their own ground and flying to others when they
confute their adversaries; their dissension or division; and their inconstancy.
Concerning the first, it is a thing most evident in all their proceedinges, that
although disputing against us they plead and demand only Scriptures, and
commonly reject al authority of the Church, Councels, and Fathers: yea, when
they come to confute other Sectaries like unto themselves, they refuse such
trial by scriptures, and sometimes fly to other such grounds. Thus Calvin
although he refer al matters sometimes to Scripture, affirming that we ought
to hearken to the voice of Christ alone, and that it is meet the mouths of al
men be shut, after that our Lord has once spoken: Calvin lib. 4. instit. cap.
8. 7. 8.
which by his ordinary courses he seems to approve as a sufficient argument,
to show that the words themselves of Scripture as they are expounded by
himself, are without contradiction to be applauded and reverenced; yet at other
times he desires al sorts diligently to ponder and examine whether the word of
God be truly or falsely alleged; and to try the spirits whether they be of God
or no, because the Devil assaulted Christ by Scripture, and his instruments
daily practice the same art to deprave the truth, and seduce silly souls. This
course he takes against the Anabaptists, as I have showed a little before. See
before chap. 8. sect. 5.
Nay discoursing against the Lutherans he uses these words: Now again I
turn my speech to you godly readers, whom I earnestly beseech, that you
suffer not your senses to be astonished with that tinckling, wherein the
Magdeburgians boast. This voice always sounds in their mouths, Calvin
admonit. vltima ad Westphalum, page 1147.
that we must not dispute where Christ the only master and doctor, has
clearly taught what is to be believed; that we must not contend where the same
supreme judge has pronounced a plain sentence: thus Calvin to the Lutherans,
pleading hardly the scriptures against him in proof of the real presence.
After this sort also Beza against the Arians, Trinitarians, Nestorians, and
Eutichians pleaded the authority of general Councels, as I have else where
showed. Part. 1. chap. 9.
Westphalus likewise wrote to Caluini ibid. page 1098.
Calvin, that the consent of many Churches condemning him, should satisfy him.
Finally our English Protestants although they pronounce so hard a censure
against general Councels themselves, and are so earnest for the sufficiency of
only Scripture, as we have seen before; yet against the Puritans plead hardly
the authority of the Church, Councels, and Fathers, as every man may behold in
their works of this argument, Whitgift in his defense. Belson in his treatise
of the perpetual government of the Church.
and such other examples are not wanting.

Touching their dissension and division Tertul lib. de praescript.
Tertullian affirms, that we may lawfuly judge that there is adulteration
both of Scripture and expositions, where there is found diversity of doctrine.
And the reason of this is manifest, because the truth unto which the
Scriptures and their true interpretation is consonant and give testimony, is
one: wherefore they cannot approve diverse and opposite doctrines. Now that
division is found among our adversaries, no man of any sense and reading can
deny. Stanislaus Rescius lib. de Acheismis and Phalerismis haereticorum nostri
te^poris.
Stanislaus Rescius numbreth of them an hundred and seauenty distinct sects, of
which Caspar Vlenbergius li. 22. Causaru^ causae, 9.
Caspar Vlenbergius recites diverse principal: See Hedio a Zwinglian epist. ad
Melancthonem.
others reckon far more. And this every man may the better believe if he
consider, that it is a very hard matter to find any two of the learned sort of
them, of one opinion touching al matters of religion. Hence arises dissension
in their Churches, in which they proceed so far, that they fear not to
censure and condemn one another of heresy. If we believe Luther these. 27.
cont. Louaniens. tom. 7. in defens. verborum coenae, etc.
Luther and the Lutherans; Zwinglius, Calvin, and all the Sacramentaries are
damned Heretics: If we credit Zwinglius tom. 2. in respo^s. ad Luth. l. de
Sacram. fol. 411. 401. Calvin admonit. 3. ad Westphalum.
Zwinglius, Calvin, and other Sacramentaries; Luther and the Lutherans are
guilty of the same crime. And the like dissentions are between the inuentours
and followers of other sects. But of this matter I shall have a more fit
opportunity to discourse in my treatise of the definition and notes of the
Church: wherefore in this place passing over altogether with silence, the
domestical discord which is between our Protestants and Puritans; touching the
Lutherans and Caluinists abroad I vvil recite this only testimony of an
Relation of the state of religion in the West parts of the world,. 45. written
(as said by Sir Edwine Sans) printed in the year 1605.
English Protestant, who having travailed in those parts, of their dissension
writes thus: The Lutheran preachers rage hitherto in their pulpits against the
Caluinists as much as ever, and their Princes and people have them in as great
detestation, not forbearing to profess openly, that they will return to the
Papacy, rather then ever admit that Sacramentary and predestinary pestilence.
For these two points are the ground of the quarrel, and the later more
scandalous at this day, then the former: thus he writing as it is probable, of
things which he saw and heard with his own eyes and ears.

And what is the offspring and fountain of this their division and
dissension, but the want of a certain infallible rule to direct them? for
because they al seem with one consent to accept of the bare words of
Scripture, for the only ground of their faith and religion; and the said
words admit sundry expositions, every man among them (whose wit by any means
can reach to the invention, either of a new translation or interpretation of
the word of God, or of some new opinion, which by wresting and wringing he can
in outward show, confirm by the authority of the same) foundeth a new sect.
Hence are these words of Luther: Luther. epist. ad Antuerp. tom. 2. Germ. ^en.
fol. 101.
There be almost so many sects and religions among us, as there be men. There
is no Ass in this time so sottish and blockish, but will have the dreams of
his own head, and his opinion accepted for the instinct of the holy Ghost, and
himself esteemed as a Prophet. And again in an other place thus he
complains: The peace and concord of the Church being once broken (that is to
say the pillar of truth, and the infallible rule of our faith being once
forsaken) there is no mean or end of dissentions. Luther in ca. 5. ad Galat.
tom. 5. Wittenb. fol. 416
In our time first the Sacramentaries forsook us, afterward the Anabaptists.
Of these neither agree among themselves. So always one sect brings forth
another, and once condemns another: Hitherto Luther the ringleader of all the
dance himself. And thus much of their division and dissension in this place.

I know that some of our adversaries are so bold (I might say so impudent) as
to deny there is any great or material dissension in their Churches. And among
others M. Field writes, Field book 3 chapter 42. p. 170. See also ibid. page 169.

Where he says there is a full consent in their public co^fessions of faith.


that it so fell out by the happy providence of God, when there was a
reformation made (by his brethren) that there was no material or essential
difference among them, but such as upon equal scanning, will be found rather to
consist in the diverse manner of expressing one thing, and to be but verbal upon
the mistaking, through the hasty and inconsiderate humors of some men then any
thing else. He adds further; Yea I dare confidently pronounce, that after due
and full examination of each others meaning, there shall be no difference found
touching the matter of the Sacrament, the vbiquitary presence, or the like;
between the Churches reformed by Luthers ministry in Germany, and other
places, and those whom some men's malice called Sacramentaries: that none of
the differences between Melancthon and Illiricus, (except about certain
ceremonies) were real: that Osiander held no private opinion of justification,
howsoever his strange manner of speaking, gave occasion to many so to think
and conceive. And this shall be justified against the proudest Papist of them
al: Thus Field. But how untrue this his assertion is, all the world knows;
and it might be easily here demonstrated, did not the matter belong properly to
an other place. I have partly also showed the falsehood of it already:
Nevertheless, to add a word or two against this doctor in particular; how
does this agree with the beginning of the Epistle Dedicatory of his book? See
his words cited at large in the preface of this treatise. See also in his third
book, chapter 13. page 86.
Does he not there complain of unhappy divisions in the Christian world, and
of infinite distractions of men's minds, not knowing in so great variety of
opinions what to think or to whom to join themselves? every faction (says
he) boasting of the pure and sincere profession of heavenly truth, challenging
to it self alone the name of the Church, and fastening upon all that dissent or
are otherwise minded, the hateful note of schism and heresy? There he
affirms, that the controversies of religion in our time are grown in number
so many, and in nature so intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer
strength of understanding to examine them. And therefore he concludes, that
nothing remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such
consequence, but diligently to search out the Church, that so they may embrace
her communion, follow her directions, and rest in her judgment: Thus he
discourses in his Epistle dedicatory. And how can these things be made
consonant and agreeable to his other words, even now alleged? Truly I think
an indifferent reader vvil hardly excuse him from contradiction. Besides this
he tells us, there is no difference touching the Sacrament, the vbiquitarie
presence and the like, between the Lutherans and the Sacramentaries: Calvin
Instit. book 4. chap. 17. 16. etc.
but Calvin avouches, that by the vbiquitarie presence, Marcion an ancient
Heretic is raised up out of hell. The Caluinists also in the Preface to the
Harmony of confessions (although a book published to show a consent among the
followers of the new religion) exclaim in like manner against it: and a
thousand other books written on both sides, convince him of falsehood. Field
says, none of the differences between Melancthon and Illiricus, except about
certain ceremonies, were real: but whosoever reads the acts of Synod held
by Lutherans at Altenburge, and the public vvritings of the Flaccians (so
called of Flaccus Illiricus) against the Synergists and Adiaphorists, two other
sects of Lutherans, and of these against them; shall find dissentions touching
greater matters. Field avouches, that Osiander held no private opinion of
justification: but Calvin in his Institutions, Calvin Instit. book 3. chap.
11.. 5. etc. Heshusius l. cont. Osiand. Schlusselbur. in Catalogo haereticorum
lib. 6.
spendes almost one whole Chapter in the confutation of Osianders opinion
concerning this article, which at his very entrance to this point, he calls
be wotes not what monster of essential righteousness. Heshusius a Lutheran in
like sort condemns his brother Osianders doctrine touching this. And Conradus
Schlusselburge an other of that sect, places him and his followers in the
Catalogue of Heretics. Such are Fields rare and singular proceedinges, in
which he fears not to affirm things most apparently false, and confessed
untrue by all his brethren. And truly a man of small learning reading his books
of the church, may first find that he has a good opinion of himself, of his
own wit and learning; then, that having learned a few school distinctions,
by them he thinks he can make whatsoever of any thing, and so reconcile
opinions and assertions be they never so contrary. By which his dealings a man
may well gather that it is no hard matter for Heretics after such sort, to
draw and wrest the sacred text of holy Scripture to their own fancies. And
thus much of the new Sectaries division and dissension for this present.

SECTION THE SECOND. Concerning the inconstancy of the Professors of the new
religion.
OVT of the same root or weak foundation of our adversaries faith, springs
inconstancy: for they do not only dissent from one another, but also at sundry
times from themselves. Let us declare the truth of this especially in the
principal sectaries, and begin with Martin Luther the first unhappy father of
them al.

Luther therefore began to preach new and strange doctrine, See Sleidan,
Surius, Lauatherus, and others.
in the year of our Lord 1517. and went on forward adding, altering, chopping,
and changing for diverse years together, in such sort that no man could know
any certainty of his belief. That I wrong him not in this accusation, his
own works will testify to any indifferent reader: for he fell by little and
little into his sundry heresies, not into al at once. It is manifest in his
books yet extant, that after his Apostasy from us, he granted Luther de 1.
praecept. in purgat. quoru^da^ articul. tom. 6 Germ. f. 21. de praeparat. ad
mortem.
invocation to Saints; Idem in declar. quorundam articul.
allowed of Miracles done at Saints relikes; In defension. co^t. Eckium.
affirmed the Commandments to be possible, yea easy through the grace of God;
Thesi. 10. Wittenb. an. 1517. and in epist. ad Joan. Mogu^tinum.
taught that no man was certain of his own salvation; Ep. ad Leonem 10. in
co^memora. reru^ quae Augustae an. 1518. actae su^t in resolut. al^aru^ propos.
an. 1518. in res^lut. de Indulgen. conclus 69.
acknowledged the Popes supreamacy; In explicat. orat. Domini.
granted Freewil; Lib. de potest. Papae.
confessed seven Sacraments; and in particular In visita^. Saxonica contra
articul. Louaniens. cap. 35. sermon. de Poenit. to. 7. Germ. fol. 3.
approved Penance to be a Sacrament, and taught In concione de poen^t.
concione. de confess. praepar. ad mortem co^cio. de praeparat. Sacra. tom. 7.
Germ. fol. 11.
Confession to be necessary; he Sermo. de Eucharist. and sermon. de venerabili
Sacramento and fraternitat. tom. 7. Germ. fol. 20.
allowed of Transubstantiation; De 3. praecept. sermon. de Indulgent. in resolut.
de Indulg. conclus. 26.
commended the Mass; In disput. Lipsica cap. de purgat. in resolut. de Indulg.
concl^s. 16. aduersus Bullam, tom. 7. fol. 132.
granted Purgatory; and Concione de Indulg. disput. Lipsica cap. de purgat.
liked of Prayer for the dead: wherefore Vrbanus Regius his disciple tells
us, Regius 1. part. eperum informata caute loquea^^, fol. 86.
that The man of God Martin Luther his master ever to be reverenced, thought it
nothing against Christian piety, if of free devotion we pray once or twice for
our dead. This I say was sometimes Luthers doctrine even after his fall from
us. Al which he at other times contraried as I could easily show, if it were
not both for ouer-charging my margents with allegations of his works, and
also because I think that our adversaries vvil easily grant, that he denied
before his death these our Popish propositions, as they term them.

One example only of his inconstancy I vvil bring at large, to give the more
credit to the rest, which shall be touching his contradictory opinion of freewil;
for against freewil thus he writes: Luther in assert. articul. 36.
Freewil is a forged or feigned thing in things, and a title without a
substance; because it is in no man's power to think any good or evil, but al
things fall out of absolute necessity. And soon after: There is no doubt but
this word freewil, came from the Devil, and that he was master of it. Again.
The leuity and foolishness of the Pope and his followers, is to be borne
withal in other articles of the Pope-dome, of Councels, of indulgences, and
other unnecessary trifles: but in this article of the bondage (servitude or
slavery) of the will, which is the best of al others, it is a thing to be
lamented and be wailed with tears, that the miserable men are so mad: thus
much Luther against free will.

But listen how he recanteth this doctrine in a book which afterward he
published: thus he discourses. Luther in visitat. Saxoni.
Many speak indiscretly of free will, wherefore we have adjoined this brief
information. Man being compelled by law and penalties, has of his own proper
strength free will to do or not to do external works; wherefore he may
attain to secular or civil honesty, and do good works of his own proper
strength, given and obtained from God to do these things. For Paul calls
that justice, justice of the flesh: that is to say, which the flesh or man has
of his own proper strength. So therefore a man works of his own strength
some justice. Verily he has choice and liberty both to fly evil, and to do
good. Again: The will of man is in such sort a free power, that it may do the
justice of the flesh or civil justice, where it is compelled by law and force:
as not to steal, not to kill, not to commit adultery, etc. Hitherto Luther
expressly contradicting his former doctrine. The reason as I imagine of this
contradiction was, that he saw his Saxonian disciples by his former opinion
grown to al looseness of life, and abomination of vice: Erasmus in epist. ad
fratres inferioris Germaniae.
wherefore he was forced (as Erasmus records) to send visitours to reduce
them from Paganism, into which they were falling headlong; unto whom for the
better effecting of the matter, he gave among other instructions, a recantation
of his absolute denial of freewil. Unto this I could add his inconstancy
touching the real presence: for besides that, he sometimes allowed of
Transubstantiation, and at other times denying it affirmed Christ to be really
present, together with bread and wine; he also at the length affirmed the
humane nature of Christ to be present in every place, together with his
Godhead: but of Luther enough. This only I will add, that this inconstancy of
Luther was even when he lived, noted and reprehended by Zwinglius, who then
told the whole world: Zwingl. tom. 2. respons. ad confess. Lutheri fol. 454
458. 460. 514.

Zwingl. ibid. in praef f. 417 se also f. 449 in respo^s. ibid


that Luther not seldom was found contrary to himself within the space of
four or five lines: and that pronouncing now this, now that of the same
thing, he was never constant to himself; but thought that such leuity and
inconstancy might be used in the word of God, as shameless jesters commonly
use, playing at dice. Again, Luther (says he) does not only bring his former
doctrine in suspicion: but also gives the Papists a most fit occasion to
condemn him, by sending in this present controversy his reader only to those
books, which he wrote within four or five years before. For who having heard
or read these things will not say? that if so be that we expect other five
years, without al doubt they being past, he will call into doubt those books
which he wrote in these last five years: Thus far Zwinglius of Luthers
inconstancy. Erasmus also, Whitaker in his answer to Campians reason, 8. p. 208.
a man denied by Whitakers, to be a writer of our side, and by the martir-maker
Fox canonized for a Saint of the new religion, of Luther and his disciples
writes after this sort: Erasmus lib 3. de libero arbitrio.
What should I recount here the dissension that is among these Gospellers?
their bloody hatred? their bitter contentions? nay their singular inconstancy?
Luther himself having changed his opinion so often; and yet new paradoxes
springing up from him daily: Hitherto Erasmus. Finally Field, although he extol
Luther for a worthy divine, as ever the world had any in those times wherein he
lived, Field book 3 c. 24. p. 170.
or in many ages before; yet confesses, that by degrees he saw and discried
those Popish errors (I use his words) which at first he discerned not. But to
excuse the matter he first avouches, that in sundry points of greatest moment,
as of the power of nature, of free will, grace, justification, the difference of
the law and the Gospel, faith, and works, Christian liberty, and the like, he
was ever constant. Which assertion of his how false it is, that which I have
before said touching free will does demonstrate. An other of his excuses is,
that it is not so strange a thing as his adversaries would make it seem to be,
that herein Luther proceeded by degrees, and in his later writings disliked
that which in his former he did approve. And his reason is, because S.
Augustine wrote a whole book of retractations. S. Ambrose complained that he
was forced to teach before he had learned, and so to deliver many things that
should need a second reuiewe. And S. Thomas of Aquine in his sum corrected
and altered many things which he had written before. Against this I first
reply, that it excuses not Luthers building of his new belief upon his own
judgment: nay it proves manifestly, that he came not to it by the infallible
direction of any external guide, but by the discourse and search of his own
wit; and moreover, Calvin Instit. book 4. chapter 3. The Apology of the church of
England part. 4. p. 123 124. etc.
that he was not extraordinarily by internal inspirations instructed and sent
by the spirit of God, as diverse of these men seem plainly to affirm, (for
the works of God are perfect, and they whom he immediately sends and
directs in faith, err not in any point of that argument) but that his
inconstant reason, was the principal ground on which he built his said faith
and religion. Secondly I add, that the examples brought by Field in excuse of
Luther, make nothing for his purpose. For what if S. Augustine vvriting, when
he was yet a nouice in Christian religion, and not fully instructed, erred in
some points; which errors having received better instructions he reclaimed?
What if the like happened to S. Ambrose, being miraculously chosen to be a
Bishop and a teacher, before he was a Christian? What if S. Augustine before
some articles of Christian religion were so thoroughly discussed and defined in
the Church, as afterward upon the rising of new heresies, spoke not so aptly
and properly as was needful in succeeding times, and therefore retracted what
he had uttered? What if he and S. Thomas of Aquin in diverse matters disputable
and not determined by the Church, altered and corrected their former opinions?
So has Cardinal Baronius now done, who has run over the first ten tomes of
his Ecclesiastical history, and made as it were a book of retractations,
recalling such things as he judged amiss. What I say if also these things be
so, as without doubt they were no otherwise, shall it therefore be lawful for
Luther or any other person to leap up and down, hither and thither, and to
chop and change his faith according as his fancy leads him, in any articles
of Christian religion? verily I think, to no man of judgment such a fault
vvil seem excusable. But was Zwinglius, who as we have seen so peremptorily
reprehendeth Luther for his inconstancy, him self free from this crime? Truly
he was not: and because breuity suffers me not to run through his works,
and to show the change and alteration of his opinion concerning al particular
points, in which he showed himself inconstant, I will only convince him of
inconstancy touching one or two, and that by his own confession. It cannot be
denied, but before his fall from us he held the Catholic doctrine concerning
the baptism of infants, otherwise, without al doubt his nouelty would have
been noted and censured. His first alteration therefore concerning this
matter, was from us to Anabaptisme; his second from Anabaptisme in some sort to
our belief again. That he was once an Anabaptist thus he confesses.
Wherefore, I my self also confess frankely (says he) that a few years
since, I being deceived with this error, thought it better to defer the
baptism of young children, until they come to perfest age: thus Zwinglius.
That he partly recanted afterward this heresy, he declares in the same
place: I say partly, because he always denied the necessity of baptism to
salvation. That he was likewise inconstant in his belief of the Eucharist,
these his own words testify: Zwingl. tom. 2. comme^t. de vera and salsa
religione, cap de Eucharist. fol. 202.
We have written two years since of the Eucharist, where we have written many
things rather according to the time, then the truth of the matter. And soon
after: If (reader) thou find certain things here otherwise then in the
former books, do not thou wonder we would not give food out of season, nor
set pearls before swine. Finally, We retract therefore (says he) and revoke
those things which we have said there, in such sort that those which we set
forth in the two and fortith year of our age, counterpoise those which we set
forth in the fortith; when as we said we served more the time then the truth of
the matter, that we might by that means the more edify: thus Zwinglius of
himself. Who then can deny but he also was inconstant, and at the least in
outward show altered his belief? yea, does he not confess to excuse his
inconstancy, that sometimes contrary to his own conscience and opinion? he
oppugned the truth and seduced men with falsehood: truly this his own words
testify and it cannot be denied. But what doctrine does he here recant?
certainly Luthers not ours. For he first fell from us to Lutheranisme, and
defended Luthers opinion concerning the real presence, but within few years
profiting to the worse, he became a Sacramentary, and affirmed the Eucharist to
be a bare figure only of the body and blood of Christ. Unto these three I may
very well join John Calvin, as every man will grant that shall view the first
edition of his Institutions, set forth at Strasburge, where he professed
himself first a Lutheran; and confer it with the last editions of the same,
and with other of his works.

The disciples and followers of these four principal Captains, most
constantly followed the inconstancy of their masters. And first it is a strange
matter and almost incredible, how wonderful inconstant the Lutheran professors
of the confession of Ausburge, have always showed themselves in their
proceedinges. For the declaration of which I must give my reader to understand,
that this confession above al others penned in those days by our adversaries,
was both permitted by the imperial laws of Germany, in such sort as the
professors thereof were freed from al punishment by the laws due unto
Heretics, and also by diverse esteemed as a fifth Gospel. Hence it proceeded,
that al sectaries of what new sect soever, professed themselves followers of
this confession. And because the words themselves could not sound well on every
side, they added also their Commentaries upon the same; and like as the
sentences of holy Scripture, so of this every man endeavored to draw to his
diverse fancies. Unto this mischief an other soon after was adjoined, to wit:
the change and alteration of the Confession it self. For Melancthon the first
penner of it, falling by little and little from Lutheranisme to Zwinglianisme,
framed a new Confession according to his new faith, and published it under the
name of the Confession of Ausburge: Neither was this practiced only by
Melancthon, but also (as it seems) by others. Hence farther among sundry
other contentions among the professors of this new faith, there arose no small
controversy even among the Lutherans themselves, who were the true followers
of the Confession of Ausburge. And whosoever is desirous to see a part of this
conflict, let him read a book entitled Colloquium Altenbergense, in which
the acts and opinions of certain Lutheran Divines, which met in the said
town for the decision of this matter and others, are set down. And among
other things in it he shall find, not only their dissension concerning the
true copy or authentical edition of this Confession: but also understand, that
some of these divines accused their fellow Lutherans of Wittenberge, that they
were miserably turned round like a wheel, in their faith; that they were as
it were violently carried with contrary winds; and that they varied without
end and measure the Confessions of their faith. This perhaps caused George that
most noble Duke of Saxony, being demanded touching the new sectaries faith
what it was, to make answer; that he knew very well what they believed
this year, but that it was impossible to know what they would believe the
next. This also moved the Lutheran Historiographers, Centur. 9. in praefat.
to term all the followers of the Confession of Ausburge, Ecebolios; and to
liken them to the fish Polipus or Pourcountrel, which changes often his
color; and to the old Pagan God Vertumnus, who could turn himself into al
shapes. They affirm finally, that they now approve the true doctrine, and
presently after condemn the same; now calling that heresy, which before they
preached as an unconquered truth: Thus far the Centuriators. They might
likewise have added, that they embraced sometimes that doctrine as true and
euangelical, which before they censured to be heretical. For an example of
this their manner of proceeding we have from Dresda in Misina, where in a
Synod held anno 1571. certain Lutherans condemned the opinion of Brentius and
Illiricus their fellows, In lib. concordiae.
concerning the person of Christ; which opinion nevertheless after some few
years, to wit: Anno 1580. they publicly embraced as true. And these contrary
opinions were published in the self fame City, by the authority of the self
same Prince, within so short a time. The Zwinglians have showed themselves even
as inconstant, as appears by this, that the inhabitants of the County
Palatine turned from Catholic religion to Zwinglianisme; from Zwinglianisme to
Lutheranisme; and from Lutheranisme in a short time again to Zwinglianisme.
Simlerus in vita Bullingeri fol. 15.
Add also, that the Earl of Wittenberge in the year 1535. with his whole
Country embraced Zwinglianisme: but he being dead the religion was soon
changed again, as Simlerus a Zwinglian reports. Other Cities likewise of
high Germany as long as Bucer a Zwinglian lived, Fol. 15.
followed his doctrine: but soon after his death (as the same Author
testifies) they condemned the Zwinglians, as the most wicked men living.

I cannot but say a word or two of Melancthon in particular, both because
sometimes he was a man of great estimation among the professors of the new
religion, and also because his inconstancy was most notorious. He is called by
Beza Beza in Iconibus.
the setter up of Euangelical doctrine, and the singular ornament of our age;
by Lauather. in histor. Sacram. fol. 47.
Lauatherus, and Martyr co^tra Gardener. par. 4. p. 468
Peter Martyr, a man incomparable, and thoroughly instructed with all kind of
virtue and learning; by certain other Ministers, Minist. Pinzoniensis apud
Stancarum. M. 8.
the Doctor of Doctors, and the Divine of Divines; who being one (say they) is
better then a hundred Augustines: Thus these sectaries commend him. But how
inconstant a man he was in his belief, all the world knows; and every man may
easily perceive, by the conferring of the diverse editions of his See Colloq.
Alte^b. f. 520. 503. 463. 425. 424.
Apology and book of common places together: wherefore for this vice he is
reprehended by diverse of his own company. Yea concerning his Apology this is
plainly confessed by Melancthon himself, who in his second epistle to Luther
vvriteth thus: In the Apology we daily alter many things; For they are ever
now and then to be changed, and to be accommodated or conformed to occasions:
Thus he. The like discourse I could make of the inconstancy of Peter Martyr,
who is accused of this fault by Bullinger in firmame^to firmo, c. 4. f. 127.
Bullinger: but I should be ouer-long.

Our English sectaries at home have not been free from the same crime: for
how often did they change during the reign of King Edward the sixth? The first
statute made in a Parliament held in the first year of his reign, seems
principally to condemn the Sacramentaries, who deny the real presence;
wherefore Lutheranisme then seemed to prevail: Communion also under one kind
in time of necessity is in it approved. By another law inacted in the second
year of the said King, Zwinglianisme was set up, An. 2. Edwardi vi. cap. 1.
and a book of common prayer allowed and established as the said act
pretends, not only according to the most sincere and pure Christian religion
taught by the Scriptures: but also according to the vsages of the primative
Church. Which book notwithstanding has been thrice reuiewed and altered, and
still according to the self fame word of God: once in the same King Edwards
days, secondly by the direction of Queen Elizabeth, and lastly by his Majesty
that now reigns. See the book of common prayer turned into latin by Thomas
Vautrollerus, printed at London an. 1574. cu^ priuilegio Regiae Majestatis,
touching private baptism administered in houses by lay-me^ or women: as also
some others printed in English before the last corrected by his Majesty who now
reigns and confer them with the said last corrected.
And yet it is much disliked by the Puritans, and censured to be contrary to
the said word. And like as their book of common prayer has been altered: so
also have their opinions concerning some points of religion, as I could easily
show if time suffered me. If any man be desirous to behold the like proceeding
among our Puritans, let him read the Survey of their religion. If I should
descend to the inconstancy of particular men of our English nation I should
never make an end: yet one example I will not omit, which is as follows.
During the reign of Queen Mary a Catholic Prince, diverse sectaries from
hence fled to Geneua, and there in the year 1558. printed sundry books, in
which by diverse testimonies of holy Scripture they endeavored ^o prove, the
government of women even in temporal matters to be monstrous, unnatural,
against the law of God and man; and therefore not to be suffered. But the next
year following Queen Elizabeth coming to the crown, the same men found it
agreeable to al Scripture and al laws, that a woman might have supreme
authority in things also spiritual, and be supreme head of the Church.

And do al our adversaries acknowledge this their leuity as a fault? verily
no: Yea Calvin approves it, and indeauoureth to defend it from al suspicion of
a vice. Thus he discourses: Calvin de scandalis page 135.
Many complain that they are scandalized, that they saw not al things
together in the same moment; that so hard a work was not thoroughly and
perfectly polished the first day: How importune and out of season these
delicacies are, who sees not? for they do as if a man should accuse us, that
at the first breaking of the day we see not as yet the Sun shining at noone
day. And soon after: There is nothing more common then these complaints;
wherefore was not that which we ought to follow presently exactly prescribed
unto us? wherefore did this lie hidden more then other things? will there be at
the length any end, if it shall be permitted ever now and then to go further?
Certainly they that speak after this sort, either envy the profit of the
servants of God, or are sorry that the Kingdom of Christ is promoted to the
better: Hitherto are Caluins words. Concerning the same matter in another
place he has this censure: Calvin admonit. 3. ad Westphalum.
A law over hard (says he) is prescribed to learned men, if after a proof of
their wit and learning published, it may not be lawful to them to profit any
thing during their life: Thus Calvin. In which his discourses, he does not only
confess himself, and his brethren to have been inconstant: but also seeks
a defense of this inconstancy. But how absurdly he reasons every man of
sense may easily perceive; for our Christian faith and religion depend not (as
he seems here to imagine) upon the wit and learning of any man: neither is it
lawful for any man be he never so wise or learned, to call any one article by
any means into doubt; for all the articles of our faith are revealed by God,
who is truth it self. But Calvin here plainly grants, that he and his
fellows build their belief upon their own fancies and judgments, not upon
any certain and infallible ground: and consequently, that they vary and alter
the same according to their progress in learning, and other motives of their
understanding, like as Philosophers do their opinions concerning matters of
philosophy; indifferent, and doubtful. And this is the principal ground of our
adversaries inconstancy: Some other causes there may be assigned why they are
inconstant, to wit; that some of them make their temporal Princes their
absolute guides, and immediate heads in Ecclesiastical matters: wherefore, as
often as upon any consideration of policy or any other respect, the Prince
changes his mind; so often also is religion altered. But whether this
alteration in any man proceeds from the authority of the Prince, or the
judgment of the learned, or any other such cause; certain it is, that it
argues and proves no certain foundation of faith, to be in him that so
changes. And besides this, he does also approve this or that belief or
religion, because for some one or other respect it pleases his own fancy. And
like as these sectaries, so were all the ancient Heretics inconstant,
especially the Arians; Socrates lib. 2. hist. ca. 32.
who as Socrates reports altered their Creed or form of belief no less
then ten times. Hence it proceeds that none of these new sectaries can
ever be certain, that they have attained to the truth, and of this their
inconstancy is a most manifest argument. For I think that every one of them,
that have changed his belief, vvil easily grant that once he lived in error.
And it must be confessed, that every one altering, condemns his former faith;
which if it be so, how can such men certainly know that they are not in
error still? what warrant have they after their change, more then they had
before? But besides this reason, every one of them has other motives to make
him uncertain of the truth of his own religion, to wit: that the most learned
of his company, Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, and the rest, have erred; and
consequently, that he also may err: that as wise and as learned men as he is
himself, censure his belief to be false and erroneous, etc. He that is
unlearned may also consider, that if he build upon the judgment of the
learned, he cannot possibly assure himself that they do not err: yea, seeing
that every one of them affirms his doctrine to be true, and yet they disagree
in faith, he may well assure himself that some of them do err; for contraries
cannot both be true.

And how can he certainly judge who follows the truth, and who is guilty of
error? I add likewise that he must needs confess, that both Luther,
Zwinglius, and all the principal sectaries have erred in some one point or
other, (for I think that there is almost no man that follows either of them
in all things:) how then can any man be assured, that they have not likewise
erred in other articles, in which he follows them? Surely a possibility of
error in one point, argues a possibility of error in all other of that kind.
But these matters have been touched before.

Chapter 10. Containing the Conclusion of this Treatise.
LET us now draw forth of the long discourse of this treatise, some brief
conclusions; and so make an end. First therefore out of that which has been
here said I gather, that the Catholics build their faith and religion upon
far more sound and firm grounds then the professors of the new doctrine.
This is manifest, because there is not so much as one ground among al those,
which I have set down in the first part of this treatise, on which the
Catholics build, which does not far excel any ground whatsoever of the new
sectaries: yea, I dare yet go a little farther and affirm, that although I
should set aside the authority of the Church (of which as I have above
declared, al our particular grounds receive their strength and force) and
consider our grounds only as they are in themselves, without any other
authority annexed; and also grant unto our adversaries that they build upon
the bare letter of holy Scripture: yet I say I dare affirm, that we build upon
the holy Scripture far more soundly and more firmly, then they. Consider a
little, that the Catholics receive the bare letter of holy scripture in the
tongues in which these sacred books were first penned, as well as the
sectaries: let us therefore suppose, that in this they are equal. But what a
great difference shall we find, between the proofs of the truth of their
translation and interpretation, and the proof of ours?

Hieron. in praefat. in Euang. ad Damasum, Item in Catalago.
The Catholics have the old Testament translated by S. Hierome: their
translation of the new Testament although it was used in the Latin Church
before S. Hieromes days, yet it was by him corrected and amended. And what
was S. Hierome? He was first a marvelous holy man of life, as al antiquity
gives testimony; he flourished in the Church above eleauen hundred years
since, and therefore he lived near unto the Apostles days, that is, within
the first five hundred years after Christ: wherefore, the said Apostles
doctrine being then something fresh in memory, he could with greater ease
attain to the true sense and meaning of holy Scripture, then any interpreter
of our age. In his days there was no question or doubt moved in the church,
concerning the especial points now in controversy between us and the new
sectaries; I mean touching the real presence, justification and such like
points: wherefore he was a man indifferent, not partial of either side, but he
followed that sense which was then commonly approved by the consent of the
whole Church. Of his great learning thus vvriteth S. Augustine in his first
book against Julian the Pelagian: Aug. lib. 1. contra Iulianum cap. 7.
Neither do thou think that S. Hierome because he was only a Priest, is to be
despised; who being skilful in the Latin, Greek, and moreover in the Hebrewe
tongue, passing from the west Church to the East, lived in the holy places (in
Iewrie) and in study of holy Scripture until he was a very old man. This man
read al or almost al, that before him had written of Ecclesiastical doctrine in
both parts of the world: This is the testimony of S. Augustine. The like he
has in an Idem li. 18. de ciuit. c. 43.
other place of his works, and See also Cassianus l. 7. de verbi Incarn. cont.
Nestor. Prosp. de ingrat. Cassiodor. diuinar. Lect. ca. 21. and others.
other approved authors give him as great a commendation. Add unto this, that
for the better understanding of the Hebrewe text; he Hieron. epist. 4. et 125
took instructions concerning that tongue of the most learned of the Jews.
Hence Illiricus a learned Lutheran, having found fault with the Church of the
four first ages after Christ for ignorance in the Hebrewe tongue, of S.
Hierome vvriteth as follows: Only my countrieman Hierome was marvelous
cunning in the tongues, he endeavored to illustrate the Scriptures, both by
his translations and commentaries. But he indeed being ignorant of man's
sickness, and Christ the physician, and wanting the key which opens the
Scripture, that is, the difference between the law and the Gospel; being also
destitute of Christ who opens the door, did little good: hitherto are his
words. Of which it is manifest, Illiricus in Claui part 1. proefat.
that according to this Protestants judgment no skill in the tongues was
wanting to this holy doctor. And although I confess, that the knowledge of
the rule of faith believed in the Church, and the assistance of Christ and the
holy Ghost are necessary to this, that a man truly translate or interpret
Scripture; yet I also first affirm, that any man of sense will rather yield
these prerogatives to S. Hierome a man so holy and ancient, then to any new
sectary whatsoever. Secondly, I cannot see how according to the Protestant
grounds, these conditions or qualities can be prerequired in a translator or
interpreter of such divine books: for if the Scripture be the foundation and
only rule of faith, as they teach; and out of it only true belief is to be
learned; how is it possible but a man first beginning to translate, read, or
interpret Scripture, shall want true belief? How can Scripture be the only
ground of our faith, and yet true faith be prerequired to the true translation
and interpretation of Scripture? Besides this, out of the words of Illiricus
alleged it may well be gathered, that no skill and knowledge of tongues
suffices to make a man a sufficient translatour or expounder of Scripture,
except vvithal his faith be sound, and he directed by Christ, who opens the
door. Of which it vvil follow, seeing that no man (as they say) before he
reads and understands Scripture can infallibly know, that he himself or
any other is endued with such faith, or has such assistance that no man can
infallibly know his own, or an other man's translation to be true and sincere.
Verily, if the translators faith must be judged by the conformity which it has
to holy Scripture (as it is by them affirmed) the Scripture must first be
known before this conformity can be discerned, and how can this be done by
the unlearned sectary, seeing that he cannot otherwise know the Scripture, but
by some translator or interpreter? Of which may be inferred, that the unlearned
sectaries can never assure themselves that any translation is true: but of
these matters before.

For the authority also of our translation in general, it makes, that it has
been read and allowed of in the Church above eleauen hundred years, and
approved by thousands of Saints, and learned men, and by them accepted as the
true word of God. The translation of the old testament in particular if we
believe S. Augustine, Aug. l. 18. de ciuitat. c. 43.
was acknowledged as true by the very Jews themselves then living, who
favored no more us, then the Protestants. That of the new as the same holy
Father writes, was also in those days approved by all Christians. Idem epist.
10 ad Hieron.
For it likewise we have the testimony of Beza himself, who among our
adversaries is accounted a great linguist, who in commendation of the old
translator writes thus: The old interpreter seems to have interpreted (or
translated) the holy books. Beza in c. 1. Luc. verse. 1. Ibide^ in praefat.
nou. test. anno 1556. Idem ibid.
with marvelous sincerity and religion. Again, The vulgar edition I embrace
for the most part, and prefer it before al other whatsoever. By it in diverse
places he corrects the Greek text as may be seen, Luc. 20. verse. 28. Luc.
7. verse. 31. etc. He also blames Erasmus for reprehending of it as dissenting
from the Greek, saying; that he does it unjustly: I will recite his words
which are as follows; How unjustly and without cause does Erasmus blame the
old interpreter; as dissenting from the Greek? He dissented I grant from those
Greek copies which Erasmus had gotten, but we have found out in one place,
that the same interpretation which he blames, is grounded upon the authority
of other Greek copies, and those most ancient. Yea in some number of places,
we have observed; that the reading of the Latin text of the old interpreter,
though it agree not some times with our Greek copies, yet it is much more
convenient, for that it seems, he followed some truer and better copy: Thus
Beza. Unto whom I join Molinaeus an other sectary, as some think to him not
inferior, Molinaeus in Luc. 17.
who in like sort prefers this edition before those of Erasmus, Bucer,
Bullinger, Brentius, Pagnines, that of Zuricke; yea also before John Caluins,
and al others. He affirms, Ibidem.
that Erasmus in a certain place did well to follow the old edition, and says
it had been better for Beza to have done so too. He avouches further, that
Beza did not well in changing the old translation. Idem in Joan. 3. v. 19. and
43 see also in Joan. 7. ver. 35.
He adds also, Ide^ part. 30
that he can very hardly depart from the vulgar and accustomed reading, which
also I am wont (says he) very earnestly to defend. Castalio in like sort, a
man much commended by Humfredus de rat. Interp. lib. 1. pa. 62. 63. 189.
D. Humfrey, and Gesnerus in Bibliotheca.
Gesnerus, blames Beza for finding fault with the old interpreter, Castalio in
defens. p. 179 174. 181. 183. 188. 198. 202. 204. 213.
auerring that he does it unjustly, and that the said old interpreter had
translated it better before. Yea Humfred. de rat. interpret. lib. 1. page 74.
D. Humfrey himself yields the old translator this praise: The old
interpreter seems sufficiently bent to follow the propriety of words, and
he does in deed over carefully, which notwithstanding I suppose him to have
done, not of ignorance but of religion. And in truth that this is no fault I
gather out of his own doctrine; for he Ibid. p. 179.
tells us, that in profane writers a man may range abroad more freely, and
depart from the words: but in Canonical scripture (says he) no such license
is tolerable, for man may not alter the tongue of God. And thus much for the
vulgar Latin edition of the new Testament out of our adversaries.

Further, for the truth of our expositions of the holy Scripture, we have the
continual tradition of the Church, and the testimony and suffrage of all the
holy Fathers, and of thousands of Saints and learned men, who ever expounded it
as we do, and out of it gathered the self same doctrine and belief. For unto
them we are al contented to remit the trial of the truth of our cause: and of
the ho^y Church and them, we profess our selves to learn the true sense of
the word of God. And thus much the Catholics can allege for the authority of
their translation and interpretation of holy Scripture, although they set aside
the authority of the Church. Now what can our adversaries say for themselves?
what sound testimony or proof can they bring for the truth of their
translations and expositions? Surely, every sect at the lest has a distinct
bible, wherefore for the proof of these things, they can only allege the
testimony of their sect-master, or translator of their Bible, and his followers.

And what a goodly matter is this? do not far more of the new sectaries
themselves, condemn and reject every one of their Bibles and their particular
expositions, then there do approve them? Certainly every Bible is condemned by
diverse, but approved only by the followers of one sect, and so in like sort are
diverse particular interpretations. Unto which I add, that the diversity of
their Bibles, makes the truth of them al suspected: for seeing that we have no
greater reason to allow of one, then of an other; and al but one without al
doubt are false, as they themselves must needs confess, because there is but
one true word of God: we may with like reason reject them al. Moreover, is any
one of their sect-masters or learned translators or expositors, to be compared
with S. Hierome? Is the opinion of a few sectaries touching the translation
and interpretation of holy Scriptures, to be preferred before the testimony of
all the Saints and learned men, that flourished in the Church in S. Hieromes
days, and ever since? yea I may demand, whether their opinion be to be
preferred before the testimony of al good Christians, that have lived ever
since the beginning of Christianity? For S. Hierome followed the steps of his
predecessors, and consented with the universal Church of his age, and the
Church ever since has approved his labors. Stancarus de Trinit. and Mediat.
M. 4.
Surely, Stancarus himself a Protestant avouches, that Peter Lombard (called
the master of sentences) is more to be esteemed, then one hundred Luthers, two
hundred Melancthons, three hundred Bullingers, four hundred Peter Martirs, and
five hundred Caluins. He adds, that if al these sectaries named were beaten
or pounded together in a mortar, there could not be strained or pressed out of
them one ounce of true divinity, especially out of their doctrine concerning
the blessed Trinity, the Incarnation, the Mediator, and the Sacraments; which
nevertheless be the principal mysteries of Christian religion Wherefore he
concludes, that Peter Lombardes doctrine is truly golden, theirs dirty and
filthy: Thus discourses Stancarus one of their own company. Yet who knows
not, that Peter Lombard by the Catholics is accounted but among the middle
sort of divines? and who is so bold as to compare him to S. Hierome, especially
in translating and expounding the Scriptures? But the more to weaken the credit
of their translated Bibles, which they boast to be drawn and featched from
the very fountains themselves, to wit: from the Hebrewe and Greek text, in
which tongues the scriptures were first penned, let us here add; not only that
they are not sincerely featched from thence, as has been sufficiently proved
before, even by the testimonies of Protestants themselves: but also that the
said fountains and that likewise according to the judgment of Protestants,
are not now pure and sincere, but in some places have been corrupted. I have
in like sort proved before this last point, as far forth as it concerns the
Greek text of the new testament. And although something has been said of the
Hebrew text of the old: yet in this place I will relate for further proof of
the same, certain sentences of Castalio, Conradus Pellicanus, and D. Humfrey,
in which this is plainly avouched. For the first of these writing in defense
of himself, against one that maintained the sincerity and purity of the Hebrewe
text, has these words: Castalio in defens. suae translat. page 227.
This good fellow seems to be of that opinion (as in manner all the Jews
are, and some Christians drawing near to Iudaisme or Iudaizing in this
respect) that he thinks no error ever to have crept into the Hebrew Bibles,
that God would never suffer that any word should be corrupted in those sacred
books: as though the books of the old testament were more holy then those of
the new, in the which new, so many diverse readings are found in so many
places; or as though it were credible, that God had more regard of one or other
little word or syllable, then he had of whole books, whereof he has suffered
many, I say not to be depraved, but to be utterly lost: Thus Castalio. And in
his discourse following he calls this high opinion of the Hebrewe text a
Jewish superstition: Conrad. Pellic. tom. 4. in Psalm. 85. v. 9. alias 8.
Conradus Pellicanus expounding these words of the 84. Psalm verse. 9. Qui
conuertuntur ad cor: (which in one of our English Bibles are thus translated;
Bibl. 1592. Bible read in Churches.
That they turn not again to folly, and an other; That they turn not
again,) writes after this sort. The old interpreter seems to have read one
way, whereas the Jews now read another; which I say, because I would not
have men think, this to have proceeded from the ignorance or slothfulness of
the old interpreter. Rather, we have cause to find fault for want of diligence
in the Antiquaries, and faith in the Jews, who both before Christ's coming and
since, seem to have been less careful of the Psalms, then of their
Talmudical songs: Hitherto are his words. Humfred. lib. 1. de rat. interpret.
pa. 178. Idem ibid. lib. 2. page 219.
In like sort D. Humfrey tells us, that the reader may easily find out and
judge, how many places the Jewish superstition has corrupted. And again, I
like not (says he) that men should to much follow the Rabbis as many do:
for those places which promise and declare Christ the true Messiah, are most
filthily corrupted by them: Such is the judgment of these sectaries. Perhaps
some man vvil deem these to be men of no account among Protestants, but it is
not so. D. Humfrey is well known, Humfre. ibid. lib. 1. page 62. 63. 189.
and he matcheth Castalio with the best, and affirms the Bible by him
translated, to be most paineful, most diligent, most thoroughly conferred,
examined, sifted, and polished. Gesnerus also a sectary of no small fame, gives
him this commendation: Castalio has translated the Bible so diligently,
Gesnerus in Bibliotheca.
and with so singular fidelity, according to the Hebrewe and Greek, that he
seems far to have surpassed al translations of al men, whatsoever have
hitherto been set forth. Finally, Conradus Pellicanus was Professor of the
Hebrewe tongue in Zuricke. And out of this whole discourse it is evident, that
although we should suppose the authority of the Church not to be infallible,
and that both we and our adversaries, build only upon the bare letter of holy
Scripture; yet, that the said letter is a far more sound and firm ground as
it is translated and expounded by us, then it is as it is translated and
expounded by our adversaries. For although we both challenge to our selves the
holy Scriptures, yet our translation and interpretation is of greater authority
then theirs. We also for the proof of the sense by us received, offer to be
tried by the censure of al our ancestors, from whom together with the
letter, we have received also that sense which we embrace: Contrariwise, they
both in their translation and exposition, build only upon their own
judgment, and have no further proof or authority. And this I say is true,
although we should make the Church subject to error, and grant the bare letter
of Scripture to be the ground of our adversaries belief. But as I have proved,
the authority of the Church is infallible and divine, and besides this, the
new sectaries build not upon the letter of holy Scripture. Secondly I infer
of that which has been said, that our adversaries according to their
doctrine, have no infallible mean whereby to know what articles of faith have
been revealed by God to his Church, and consequently, that they want a
condition necessary to true faith. And this is manifest both because they make
the Church (which God as I have showed, has ordained to be the ordinary mean
for us to come to the knowledge of such things) subject to error: and also
because the bare letter of Scripture which they ordinarily pretend in this
case, is insufficient; neither do they build upon it as I have proved. Thirdly
I conclude, that absolutely all the professors of the new Gospel, ground their
faith and religion upon the judgment and fancy of man, not upon any divine
authority. Hence they measure the omnipotent power of God by their own weak
understanding, and in those mysteries which being above the reach of reason
cannot be by it comprehended, they cry out with the Jews; how can this be?
John 6. v. 52. Ciril. lib. 4. in Joan. cap. 13.
which word (how) says S. Ciril Bishop of Alexandria is a Jewish word, and
worthy of al punishment. This also was in some sort confessed by king Henry
the eight, the first head of our English Church: For being desirous after his
denial of the Popes supreamacy, to make some innovation of religion within his
dominions, he published (as Hal, Hollinshed, and Stowe report) certain
articles, unto which he gave this title; In the year of our Lord 1536. of King
Henry 28. Stow p. 965. edit. an. 1600
Articles devised by the Kings highness: Insinuating thereby, that both the
said articles, and al other dissonant from the doctrine of the Church, were and
are devises of men. This moved a certain Courtier in those days, discoursing
with a Lutheran Lady that found great fault both with this title, and the
articles to answer her; that he had rather follow the devises of a King then
of a knave (meaning Luther,) if needs new devises in religion were to be
admitted: but this illation or conclusion is sufficiently proved before.

And this vveake foundation of our adversaries, was also noted by the ancient
Fathers in the ancient Heretics. Irinaeus lib. 3 cap. 2.
S. Irenaeus records: that every one of the Heretics of his age and before,
auerred his own fiction which he had devised, to be wisdom; and that every
one of them boasted, that undoubtedly and sincerely he knew the hidden
mystery. Tertullian affirms that Tertull. de praescript. ca. 37. see also
cap. 6.
Heretics arise of diversity of doctrine, which every man either inuenteth or
receives at his pleasure. Aug. tom. 6. cont. Faustum l. 32. cap. 29.
Al Heretics (says S. Augustine) that receive the Scriptures as authentical,
seem to themselves to follow the said Scriptures: whereas they rather follow
their own errors, and are Heretics for this; not for that they contemn them,
but because they do not understand them: Hitherto S. Augustine. He affirms
likewise as I have noted before, Tom. 7. de nuptijs and co^cupiscentijs lib. 2.
cap. 31.
that Heretics make not their faith subject to the Scriptures, but the
Scriptures subject to their faith; and that it is the custom of Heretics to
wrest the Scriptures to what sense they please: the like sentence has Hieron.
ad Paulam epist 2. sieve in prologo Biblioru^.
S. Hierome.

Hence like as the Apostle terms covetousness Idolatry, and consequently a
covetous man an Idolater, so the Sea Tertull. de praescr. ca. 40. S. Cipria^ de
vnitat. Eccles. Number. 12 S. Hieron. in Osee 11. Amos 8. and Abacuc 2. August. in
psalm. 8 v. 10. l. 18. de ciuitat. c. 51. l. de vtilitat. jejunij, etc.
ancient Fathers term heresy Idolatry, and an Heretic an Idolater; for
like as the covetous man his worldly wealth, so the Heretic makes his own
fancies as it were his God.

Last of al I conclude, that the professors of the new religion are Heretics,
and have no faith: They are Heretics, because they obstinately defend doctrine
condemned by the Church of Christ as heretical; which doctrine they build
principally upon their own fancies: For according to their own private
judgementes they choose their belief, of which choice as we are taught by
Tertul. lib. de praescript. cap. 6.
Tertullian and Hieron. in epist. ad Galat. and habetur 24. q. 3. cap. haeresis.
S. Hierome, such Sectaries are called Heretics, that is to say, choosers.
Tertul. de praescrip. c. 6. see also c. 37.
Heresy (says Tertullian) is so called from the Greek word, signifies an
election or choice, which a man uses either in inuenting or receiving it. With
him accords S. Hierome, whose words be these: Hier. in ep. ad Galatas.
Heresy is a Greek word, and is derived from election or choice, because
every man chooses that doctrine which he thinks best. And hence it is that
the faith of Christians (he means of Catholics) can never truly be called an
heresy, for this depends not of the fancy of any man, nor was invented by
man's wit, but was manifested unto men by the inspiration and revelation of God:
thus far S. Hierome. They have likewise no faith, both because they want a
condition necessarily requisite to this virtue; and also because faith as I
have proved, ought to be built upon divine authority, and therefore cannot be
grounded upon any man's opinion and judgment in the world, except it be
warranted from error by God himself; which warrant is wanting to all the
professors of the new religion as I have declared: wherefore, the fallible
and erroneous fancy of men is their only ground. Of which I infer, according
to my discourse in the beginning of this Part. 1 chapter 4. page 27.
treatise, that they have in like sort no religion, because the root and
foundation of Christian relgion is faith, Hebr. 11, 6.
without which (as the Apostle says) it is impossible to please God.

Hence the ancient Fathers denied Heretics to be Christians. If they be
Heretics (says Tertullian) they cannot be Christians. Tertu. de praescript.
c. 37. Augustine. in Enchirid. ad Laurentium, cap. 5.
His reason is, because in following their own election and not receiving
their doctrine of Christ, they admit the name of Heretics. The name of Christ
only (says S. Augustine) is found among Heretics, who will have themselves
called Christians: but Christ in very deed is not among them. S. Ciprian
teaches us the self same lesson, and affirms that Cipr. epist. 52. ad
Antonianum.
whosoever and whatsoever he be that is not in the Church, he is no Christian.
The very self same sentence is also pronounced by Aug. sermon. 81. de tempore
cap. 12.
S. Augustine in one of his sermons, and other fathers have the like. Finally
Beza de haereticis a civilly magistratu puniendis, p. 184. 185. see him also
page 106. 236.
Beza himself censureth such as break due order, and do not subject
themselves to the word of God, but according to the property of Heretics
endeavor to subject the word of God to themselves, to be Idolators; and in this
worse then Infidels, that they shadow their lies with a color of piety and
truth: thus much Beza. And thus I think the argument of this treatise
thoroughly proved: wherefore it remains only that I exhort every man that has
care of his soul and salvation, and dreadeth the anger of God, and everlasting
damnation; if he be a member of the Church of Christ, and a child of his
Spouse, there firmly to remain; if he be not, with all speed to incorporate
himself to this sacred body, and to fly the fancies of his own judgment,
and the erroneous conceits of mortal men. Math. 7, 24.
So shall he like unto a wise man, build his house upon a rock, which no
storms of winds, rain, or floods can overthrow: not as a foolish man upon
the sand of man's imagination, and consequently have it subject to alteration.
This Church is a firm and immovable rock, the sure pillar and firmament of
truth, on which we may securely build our salvation, and the whole edifice of
our faith. She is an invincible Castle and fortress against falsehood, a
learned Mistress and guide in all matters doubtful, and a most certain security
in all points appertaining to faith and religion. She is finally the ship and
skilful pilot, which throughout all the storms and tempests of Schisms and
Heresies, vvil guide us without error to the port of everlasting salvation,
and make us fit stones to be placed everlastingly in the triumphant Church of
God in heaven.

FINIS:
AN APPENDIX TO THIS TREATISE, CONTAINING A BRIEF CONFVTATION OF A BOOK,
PVBLISHED IN THE YEAR M.D.C.VI. BY WILLIAM CRASHAW, bearing this title Romish
forgeries and falfifications, etc.
IF al were true which is objected by new sectaries, against the one true
Spouse of Christ, the Catholic Church, al men endued with reason might
(according to reason) prudently marvel, that any man of common sense does
follow her doctrine, or embrace her communion. Luther exclaimeth against her
children, that they make the Virgin Mary a Luther ad Euangeliu^ d^ festo
Annunciationis.
Goddess, giving her omnipotency both in heaven and earth. Calvin Calvin book
3. Instit. c. 20. 22. l. de necessit. reformand. Eccles.
that they give the worship of God unto Saints, and honor them and their
relikes in place of Christ. Luther again, Luth. ad c. 50. Genes. in colloq.
Germ. c. de Christo.
that they deny justification and salvation through Christ's passion and
merits. Calvin, Calvin book 3. Instit. cap. 20.. 21.
that in their Litanies, Hymns, and Proses there is no mention of Christ: yea,
that for the most part, Christ being passed over, God is prayed to by the names
of Saints. Luther moreover, Luther ad l. Ducis Georgij scripsit an. 1533. and
l. de abrogat. Missae priuatae.
that they hold a man may keep the Commandments without the grace of God.
Calvin, that they Calvin book 1. Instit. chapter 11.. 9. and 10.
give Idolatrous worship unto Images. Luther also, that Luther l. de Ecclesia.
the Pope buried the Scripture in dirt and dust: Calvin, Calvin book 4.
Instit. chapter 9.. 24. in antid. Council. Triden. sess. 7. Canon 1^.
that they make the oracles of God subject unto men; and that they esteem more
in baptism of chrisme, salt, and such other things, then of the washing with
water. Luther finally, Luther lib. de Concilijs.
that they give to Councels authority to make new articles of faith and change
the old; Calvin, that they give the Pope authority to institute new Sacraments,
and that the Popes hold there is no God, Calvin and alij passim in 2. Thessal.
2, 4. Calvin Instit. book 4. chap. 7.. 27.
that al things written and taught of Christ are lies and deceits, that the
doctrine concerning the future life, and the last resurrection are mere
fables. These and diverse other such monstrous untruths, are forged by our
adversaries against us; and this course they are constrained to take, that they
may have something to impugn. For if they should plainly and sincerely
deliver what we hold, the force and brightness of truth it self would easily
at her only sight, weaken, yea overthrow al their impugnations. And like as
the first beginners of the new religion ran these unconscionable (I may say
shameful) courses; so their successors always have continued in the same: and
even those of our days, obstinately refusing to accept of any reasonable
answer, or to understand the truth, insist in the steps of their predecessors.
For whereas if they were but indifferent they might well perceive, that we
whom neither fear of death, nor infamy and disgrace, nor loss of liberty,
living, and worldly goods, can move to do one act contrary to our religion,
will not for all the world deny any one article of our faith: Yet
notwithstanding, although we deny their false slanders never so much; yet
they vvil needs have us to hold them as they say, whether we vvil or no.
Diverse impute unto us daily strange paradoxes in matters of faith: But among
others one William Crashaw, Anno 1606. In the Epistle Dedicatory.
has not long since published a book, accusing us of an horrible matter of
fact, to wit: of the crime of corruption and forgery in the highest degree; so
are his words. His said book bears this title: Romish forgeries and
falsifications, together with Catholic restitutions. By reading of the
contents of it, he that is not learned and acquainted with their dealings, may
easily be drawn and persuaded, not only to condemn us as notable corrupters
and forgers; but further to imagine, that we in former ages have corrupted all the Fathers works; and consequently infer, that their testimonies can yield
us no firm ground vvhereon to build our faith, Crash. in his preface to the
reader.. see what. see also will these men.
contrary to that which has been said in this Treatise. Nay Crashaw himself
does not only affirm, that they have cause to suspect that we have so dealt
with the Fathers, because we have not spared (as he says) some as ancient as
some fathers: but also auerreth, that it will be proved to the worlds view, that
we. But when.
have (de facto) corrupted almost al antiquity, in so much that no man can tell
what ground to stand upon, either for Councels, Fathers, decrees or men's
writings. And he adds, To end this point.
that he does not doubt but ere long God will raise up some instruments of his
glory, who shall fully discover to the world this treachery of the Romish
Church, by making it as apparent they have corrupted the Fathers, as I hope
(says he) to do in this, and the books ensuing that they have corrupted al
such late writers, as they imagined any way to make against them: Thus Crashaw.
For the resolution of which his false imputation, as also for clearing of our
present practice, which may seem to some to tend toward the overthrow of the
authority of antiquity; I think it not amiss to spend some few lines in
proving these three points. First, that our practice in correcting of books
reprehended by Crashaw, is prudent and laudable. Secondly, that our adversaries
(if we offend in this) are much more to be condemned for the like proceedings
in the same kind. Lastly, that the Fathers works are sincere and free from
al corruption. To declare the first, I must first give my reader to understand,
that the Church of Christ now has and ever has had, authority to censure and
condemn al such books as are published, and contain things any ways
opposite to the truth of her faith and religion.

This first appears, because she is supreme judge on earth of al
controversies arising touching faith and religion, and has jurisdiction over
every Christian; from which it proceeds that she condemns heresies and
Heretics: wherefore it cannot be denied, but she has also authority to
condemn the works of any Heretic, or other person whatsoever containing
heresies or errors opposite to her faith. For much more it is to condemn an
Heretic, or an heresy, then to condemn an heretical or erroneous book.

Secondly, authority to do this was needful, for the preservation of one true
faith and religion in the Church: for what is more dangerous to infect true
Christian hearts, then bad books? especially if they be not known and censured
to be such, but read by all sorts indifferently; as Catholic and Orthodoxal.
Verily, if conference and conversation with Heretics be so straightly Romans
16, 17. 2. Tim. 3. v. 5. Titus 3. v. 10 2. John v. 10. I^^n. l. 3. c. 3. Cipr.
l. 1. ep. 3 Athanas. in vita Antonij.
forbidden us, both by the Scriptures and Fathers, as we find; much more are
their books to be avoided, which diverse times contain poison colored with
eloquence, which may always be had at hand, and are easily dispersed ever in
such places unto which Heretics cannot have access.

Hence the very Heathens themselves, led by reason and the law of nature only,
Plato lib. 7. de legibus. Valor. Maxi. lib. 1. cap. 1. Cicero l. 1. de nature.
Deoru^. Lact. l. de ira Dei cap. 9. Sueton. in August. cap. 31. Dio Cas. l. 54
Titus Liuius lib. 39.
condemned books hurtful and prejudicial to the religion by them received, as
I could prove out of Plato, Valerius Maximus, Cicero, Lactantius, Suetonius,
Diocassius, Titus Liuius, and others.

Fourthly, the Church has in all ages practiced such authority, as is evident
by Ecclesiastical records: I will name only a few examples, because I will not
be over long.

S. Clement tells us, that the Clemens lib. 1. Constit. Apostol. cap. 7.
Apostles themselves forbad the faithful to read the books of the Gentiles.
About the year 250. Dionisius Alexandrinus (as Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 7. hist.
cap. 6.
records) was reprehended by other faithful people, for reading the books
of Heretics.

Ciril. epist. Sinod. 1.
In the year 432. the Fathers assembled in the general Council of Ephesus
requested of Theodosius then Emperor, that he would take order that the
books of Nestorius wheresoever they were found, should be burnt; and
according to their request the said Emperor by his imperial constitution L.
vlt. de haeret. Cod. Theodos. Laberatus in Breuiar. c. 10
willed, that al such books should be dilligently sought for, and publicly
committed to the fire.

Anast. epist. ad Joan. Hierosolim.
S. Anastasius the Pope at Rome, and S. Epiphanius in a Sinod held at Ciprus,
with diverse others about the year 402. Socrat. li. 6. cap. 9. see S. Hiero^.
ep. 26.
condemned the book of Origines called Periarchon, which Ruffinus to the great
hurt of the Church had published before in the city of Rome, and Didimus in
the East. S. Leo the great burnt great store of the Manichees books in Rome,
as Prosper in Chronic. 443
Prosper writes in the year 443. The fourth Council of Carthage permits
only Bishops to read heretical books in time of necessity.

Gelasius the Pope in a Council of seauenty Bishops held at Rome, in the year
494. Distinct. 15. Can. Sancta Romana.
sentenced diverse books and made a certain index of them, as is to be seen in
the decree yet extant.

The fifth general Council about the year 553. condemned certain things
written by Theodoretus against S. Ciril, and the epistle of Iba. And al those
books except those of Nestorius, were thus Socrates lib. 1. cap. 6.
censured long after the death of the authors.

See L. Damnato Council. Chalced. act. 3. L. Quicunque Cod. de haereticis.
The like examples I could bring of the proceedinges of Constantine the great
against the books of Arius, L. vlt. tit. 16. lib. 9. and leg. 24. tit. 4. l.
16 Cod. Theod. Socrat. lib. 2. histor. tripartitae. Liberat. in Breuiario cap.
10.
who prohibited them under pain of death; of Valentinian and Martian Christian
Emperors against those of Eutiches and Apollinaris; of Honorius and Theodosius
against books of art Magic. Yea Arcadius, Honorius and Justinian by their
laws decreed, that al heretical books should be burnt publicly. And this
practice perhaps of burning such books began in the Apostles times, when (as
S. Luke vvriteth in the acts of the Apostles) Act. 19, 19.
Many of them that followed curious things, brought together their books, and
burnt them before al.

Now, seeing the Church has authority to condemn or burn heretical books,
or others that contain false doctrine opposite to the rule of faith; no man of
any judgment will deny, but she has also authority to correct them, if by
that means she can make them profitable for her use, and beneficial to her
children: For much less it is to correct, then to condemn and burn; and much
better it is in such cases to correct, then clean to abolish. Hence are these
words of S. Hierome speaking of the works of Origin: Hieron. epist. 76. ide^
epist. 64. and Apolog. 1. aduersus Ruffin.
Neither are his evil opinions to be received for his doctrine, neither are his
Commentaries if he wrote any upon the holy Scripture, altogether to be rejected
for the wickedness of his opinions: thus S. Hierome, who upon this ground
newly translated and amended the book of Origin before mentioned. In like
sort, the collations of Cassian were long after his death corrected by diverse,
as we gather out of Cassiodorus and Ado. And although this authority of the
Church be such, Cassiod. Institut. divine. lect. cap. 29. Ado in Chronic. an.
425. in fine.
that with discretion and to edification she may execute it against any
whatsoever; yet much more reason and right she has, to execute it upon the
works of her children who are her subjects, and submit themselves and their
works wholly to her censure. Some man perhaps will say, that every Catholic
does not so submit himself and his works: but it is certain that whosoever
does not so, either expressly or vertually, is no Catholic; because he
prefers his own judgment before the censure of the whole Church. And
whosoever does this, although through ignorance he err as every man may, he is
no Heretic according to that of S. Augustine; I may err, I cannot be an
Heretic, seeing that the one is proper to a man, the other to a perverse and
obstinate will. And out of this discourse I conclude, that if our Church be
Catholic as it is, we are not to be blamed for our proceedinges in forbidding
and correcting such books as oppose themselves any ways against our
religion, or may seduce the hearts of their simple readers, or any ways seem
to taste of an heretical kind of speech or phrase, although the authors
themselves diverse times intended no hurt. And this must much more be granted
unto us in modern authors, and such as have written in this last age: both
because they submitted themselves commonly in express terms to the censure
of the Church, and also because by the late orders of the church, nothing must
be published in print except it be first viewed, and allowed by men thereunto
authorized: wherefore, whatsoever comes now forth seems to be approved by
the Church, and consequently a man may well infer, that it contains no
notorious error or heresy. Whereof I infer, that the Church in case that any
such errors escape, must be very diligent and vigilant in mending of them,
lest that in stead of wholesome doctrine, some ignorantly perhaps and that
through her default drink poison.

But yet to descend a little lower, what books may we correct according to our
rules, and of what antiquity? none certainly of any Catholics, but such as
lived since the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen, which was the
second year before Luther began to fall from us, besides a few other
expressly named in our Index of forbidden books. And of such named authors
more ancient then Luther how many have we de facto corrected? Verily I do not
think that Crashaw can bring forth so much as one. True it is that he uses
these words: In the Epistle dedicatory fol. 2.
We produce the authors that lived and wrote long before Luther, but we find
them so rased and altered, as some that spoke for us, are now silent; yea some
that made for us, are now against us: Thus he. But how he will prove it, I do
not know: He names soon after Viues, Erasmus, Cardinal Cajetane, Ferus,
Stella, Espencaeus, Oleaster, and Faber; but al these either lived in Luthers
days or since. And for my part I have perused a little his book, and I cannot
find any one author named that lived not either in Luthers days or after, In
his testimonies of John Ferus, D. 3.
only Bertramus and Rampegolus excepted, who (for ought I know) are not yet
corrected. He makes much ado about Ferus, but what was he, and when lived he?
He was a Catholic Friar in profession, although diverse of his sentences seem
to taste of Lutheranisme. He flourished as Crashaw in his testimonies of John
Ferus, D. 3.
Crashaw confesses in the year 1530. that is thirteen years after Luthers
first breach from us, which was in the year 1517. Yea in the next leaf he
confesses him to have been alive in the year 1552. more then thirty years
after Luthers said beginning. But perhaps some man vvil say that he published
the books which we have corrected before Luthers fall. Neither is this true:
for the most ancient copy that he can name of those books he speaks of, was
printed in the year 1555. almost 40. years after that Luther first impugned
us, Prolegomena. F. 2.
as appears by his own grant. And hence a man may both gather; how well he
proves his aforesaid assertion, affirming that they produce the authors that
lived and wrote long before Luther, but find them razed, etc. and also
perceive, how true that his accusation is; They have corrupted al authors of
this last two hundred years: Prologo. E. 3.
for (as I have said) I think that he can hardly name one author that we
have corrected of any age before Luthers. I can as yet find but one named
throughout his book, which was of the age immediately before Luthers
departure from us, (and whether he be corrected or no I know not) nevertheless
this is one of the two hundred years. Of much less truth is that following in
which he says, we have razed the records of higher antiquity reaching up to
some that lived 500. and 800. years ago. Ibidem.
For all this is spoken (if it have any color of truth, for any thing I can
find in his book or other where) of one Bertramus whom he auerreth that we
have altered; Ibid.. C. 2.
but it is more then ever I saw or heard. And yet not contented with this he
goes a great deal further, and avouches that our Index expurgatorius has so
used almost al books in the world. I might here use one of his ordinary
exclamations, and begin as I find the first words of that page. Oh
intolerable injury! For first we have an express inhibition that no man touch
the text of the ancient Fathers, De correctione librorum,. 3. and 4.
nor of any Catholics that vvrote before the year 1515. not specified and
censured in the Index of forbidden books: then, we meddle not with any books
of Archeretikes. or with such as treat professedly of heresy, and so we
exclude from our correction all the works of Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, and a
thousand other books of this age. And out of this that in like sort appears
false, which he says of corrupting al such late vvriters as we imagine any
way to make against us: so that we only have corrected or intend to correct
some few, of which most have written since this new Gospel began to be
preached, others very few in number lived in deed before the year 1515. but
are named in our Index, and besides these no other can be touched. Neither are
al these corrected for heresy, as will appear to the reader by such rules as
are to be observed in the correction, of which more hereafter, but they are
partly set down by Crashaw toward the end of his Prolegomena. I cannot
finally but note, Prolegom. E. 3. Gesnerus in Bibliotheca.
that he calls Ferus an old and famous writer, who according to his own
confession was living within these threescore years: nay I think it may be
proved out of Gesnerus that he died not forty years since, but to save this he
adds in the margent, that he means old in comparison of the Jesuits, who
now (says he) carry al before them; for he was in the ear, when they were in
the blade. This is his marginal note, by which he saves but il the truth of
the text, let his meaning be as it will; for the religion of the Jesuits
began about the year 1521. And was confirmed by Paulus 3. Pope about the
year 1540. long before Ferus died by his own confession. And this it seems
he well knew; for it may plainly be gathered out of his preface, that the
Jesuits were before the end of the Council of Trent, which nevertheless was
in the year 1563.

But to clear us further from al blame touching this point, I must also add
this in our defense; that this our manner of proceeding is neither to the end
to bereave our adversaries of any proof, which our adversaries may bring out
of antiquity, or any modern author for the truth of their religion, nor to
strengthen our cause. For although I should yield, that all the authors whom
Crashaw names were Protestants (which yet he confesses to be false, for he
grants they were al Catholics,) what should I in effect help their cause,
or weaken ours? suppose some named that lived before Luther held some opinions,
with Wickliffe, Hierome of Prage, and John Husse; what is this to us? Do we
build our faith upon the particular opinions of some few private men, or do
we prove the truth of our doctrine by their testimonies? Moreover, suppose
some followed those men in some one or two opinions, were they presently in all
other points Protestants? or does it prove the Protestant religion true?
Treatise of the definition and notes of the Church.
Nothing less: for as I vvil show hereafter, neither Wickliffe, nor Hierome
of Prage, nor John Husse were Protestants, much less any that were in open
profession Catholics. But in very deed, the Church does not only in modern
authors correct propositions that are in plain terms heretical, but also
(as appears by our rules related by Crashaw) such as be erroneous, taste of
heresy, are offensive to godly ears, or temerarious; yea such as are vvanton,
or dishonest, superstitious, tending to the infamy of any, etc. as I will
declare anon.

Besides this, if our intention were to make the authors seem altogether ours,
and to take them as it were from the Sectaries whose doctrine they seem to
approve; what reason have we to publish in print to the whole world, what we
will have corrected in their works? Is not this a plain confession, that we
dislike their manner of speech, or their doctrine? Wherefore, in this we rather
help our adversaries cause, if the authority of the said authors be of any
moment, then weaken it. And in very truth, if we did it to any such end as
they intend, it were no wisdom to make our doings known to the world, but
much more policy we should show, if we did it in private and never made any
open mention of it but rather did deny it. Why then do we correct such
books? in very truth as is apparent, for no other causes then I have partly
rehearsed before, to wit: principally that one faith and religion may be
preserved among al sorts, and that no man embrace any doctrine as approved or
tolerated in the Church, which is not so approved and tolerated; then also to
avoid al superstition, witchcraft, corruption of manners, and other such vices
as will appear by the rules, of which hereafter.

But they say that we take upon us to correct Bertramus, an author who lived
in the Church 700. years since, and Rampegolus who flourished in the year
1418. I answer that we neither do this to bereave our adversaries of any
testimony; for as concerning Bertramus, we commonly grant that book which
goes under his name, to make for their doctrine against the real presence,
although some Protestants seem to deny it: nay further, See the Century
writers, Centur. 9. c. 4 col. 212.
many of the best learned men of our side, acknowledge also in their public
vvritings the book to be his ( Pantaleon in Chronographia, p. 65
although Pantaleon a Sacramentary number it not among his works) and this is
sufficient for our adversaries, although the book be never so much altered:
wherefore, for this cause only that some good things are contained in it
together with the poison, lest that men suck the one with the other, we think
it good to remove away that which is naught, and leave them the good.
Rampegolus is nothing like so ancient, and besides it is confessed by
Possiuinus that his book being written in a time not oppugned by such heresies
as since are risen, Possiuin. to. 1. apparat. q. sacr. page 114. 115.
contains some errors: wherefore neither do we endeavor to conceal,
that in some points he seems to favor our adversaries. He adds, that this
author has put into his work certain absurd things, or rather fables out
of the master of the Ecclesiastical history, that he has many things
otherwise then they are in the Bible, that the Scripture is not cited so
sincerely, yea that sometimes it is alleged falsely, that he has some things
Apocryphal out of the 3. book of Esdras, and out of the epistle of Ciril of
Jerusalem to S. Augustine, concerning the death of S. Hierome. Besides this,
he accuses him of false allegations of Doctors, of Solecismes, Barbarismes,
and obscure phrases. And seeing that it is a book which young preachers would
much use if it were not forbidden, and that as it is like without choice of the
good from the badde, for want of learning, I hope no man will blame us if we
amend that which is amiss. And thus much of the first point. Now to come to
the second point, I must needs return M. Crashawes argument upon himself
thus: They who raze the records and falsify the monuments of men's writings,
altering the books of learned men after they are dead, adding, and taking out
at their pleasures, and namely taking out such words, sentences, and whole
discourses as make against them, and adding the contrary even whatsoever they
can imagine to make for them, incur no less crime then corruption and
forgery in the highest degree. This is gathered out of Crashaw in the second
page of his epistle Dedicatory: But the followers of the new religion, who are
called Protestants, Puritans, etc. have done so; therefore they have incurred
the crime of corruption or forgery in the highest degree. M. Crashaw must
pardon me if I proceed not in form of law by accusation, declaration, and
proof as he does, because I have never yet bin preacher at the Temples. The
proof of my minor proposition if I should run through authors which they
have corrupted, citing the words and sentences left out or added, would rise
to a great volume: wherefore briefly, only I accuse them of corrupting after
this sort, the history of Sigonius de regno Italiae; of Osorius de rebus gestis
Emanuelis Regis; and of Castineda who supplied that which wanted for some
years after Osorius ended, of the lives of the Emperors and diverse others. And
for the proof of this, to the unlearned English sectaries I accuse our English
Protestants, for corrupting S. Augustines meditations, his prayers, and Manuel;
The Meditations of Granada printed in the year 1602. The conversion of a
sinner, the imitation of Christ, the Christian directory, etc.

It may be said, that in the beginning of the books this correction or
alteration is confessed. I reply, that so likewise in our Indices expurgatorij,
and also commonly in the beginning of such books as we correct, we
acknowledge the correction: but do they this in all their works? surely no.
And for example I name the meditations of Granada, in which there is no mention
of any alteration; for they are plainly set forth in his name, as though they
were truly and sincerely his, whereas the translator or rather the falsifier
or corrupter has left out whole discourses, yea I may almost say whole
meditations, and added what pleases himself to make him speak like a
Protestant. Neither do they deal only so with us, but also with their own
brethren, and that sometimes in principal matters. For example, the Lutheran
Protestants in their conference or synod held at Altenburge, accuse one
another for corrupting and falsifying the Confession of Ausburge, which is the
very ground next unto the holy Scripture of their faith and religion.
Colloquium Altenberg. fol. 402.
The former copies or examplars (say they) have not the true and sincere
confession of Ausburge. For there is another substituted or put in the place of
it, which was neither exhibited at Ausburge, or ever approved by the states of
the Confession of Ausburge: Thus they. And upon the corruption of this
Confession, and of an other book called Corpus doctrinae, containing this, and
other treatesies, arose great discord and dissension among them, which is not
yet ended: for no man almost can tell which be the true books. But what
dissension was there among them in the same conference touching Luthers works
corrupted? verily the zealous Lutherans complain after this sort: See 2.
respo^s. ad Hipothes. fol. 284. 290 353. 355. 441. 442. 443. 526.
The Divines of the Prince Elector (who were also Lutherans) do most filthily
and beyond al measure deprave Luthers writings, so as since Luthers death there
have not been more foul corrupters of Luthers books: Thus they; and this
fault each side does most often object to the other in most spiteful terms.
Ibid. Saxon. in respons. discessu. fol. 539. 540.
Last of al a promise is made, that the Duke of Saxony vvil cause Luthers
works to be printed without corruption. And thus much of the Lutherans, whom
M. Crashaw (I hope) with the Apology of the Church of England will acknowledge
to be his brethren. Now let us behold the dealing of the Sacramentaries, who
are more properly of his faith and religion. And first let us look toward
Geneua a City most famous for upholding this sect: What then shall we there
find for our purpose? Verily Westphalus a Lutheran accuses the Caluinists
even of this very place, that they have corrupted Luthers works; for thus he
complains. I marvel much that Calvin keeping such ado about this one word,
could not see the most filthy mutations and corruptions, of the divine
commentary of Doctor Luther upon the Epistle to the Galatians, and translated
into French and printed at Geneua. In one place some words are taken away, in
an other many more: somewhere whole Paragraphs are lopt off: in the exposition
of the sixth Chapter, two pages and a half are left out, etc. at other times
they have put in words such as pleased them. And that this was done at Geneua
without Caluins knowledge it is not very likely: Thus Westphalus. But let us
hear an other man of more credit among English Protestants make the like
complaint, that by the testimony of two witnesses they may be proved
falsifiers: M. Morton a famous Protestant writer of this realm now living,
set forth in London in the year 1605. the first part of his work called by
him a Catholic Apology. But what did they of Geneua? They printed again the
said book in their City, putting the name of London to it, as though it had
been there printed, and disliking a certain answer by him made in defense of
Beza, they put that out, and without any more ado in place of it added an
other of their own. This I prove out of M. Mortons own words, who in
certain animaduersions upon this first part, printed at the end of the second
part published at London in the same year, speaking of the same matter
complains thus. C. 21. in calumnia 5. Noua impressio Londini dicta, ver'e
Geneuae facta, totum responsum meum pro Beza penitus expunxit, and responsum
suum assuit (prob hominum fidem) doleo equidem tantam cum scriptis meis
injuriam factam esse, tum etiam proelo Geneuensi tantam corruptelae labem
contractam. A new impression said to be at London, truly made at Geneua, put
out altogether my whole answer for Beza, and patched in their own (O the
faith or falsehood of men) verity I am sorry both that such an injury is
offered to my works, and also that the print of Geneua is stained with such a
blot of corruption or deprauing: Thus Morton. What will M. Crashaw say to this?
who are now more to be blamed in this kind, we who correct books by public
authority received from a general council, and that publicly making our action
known to the whole world in print: or these his brethren who secretly and as
it were in corners, get other men's works, corrupt them, and then set them
forth to the view of the world as though nothing had been altered. And this
is no old matter, but a thing done within these two or three years. I come
now nearer home. Anno 1606.
This last year was published a book in our language with this title: A
Manuel or brief volume of controversies of religion, between the Protestants
and the Papists, written in Latin by Lucas Osiander, and now Englished with
some additions and corrections. But how does the translator mangle and tear
the poor book? Verily, whereas the author of it being a Lutheran, and a
mortal enemy of the Sacramentaries (for he has published the like book
against them) speaks as a Lutheran, he makes him speak like unto a good
Sacramentary. Hence whereas he has these words in Latin; Chapt. 15.
Alius enim modus a Paulo nobis monstratur, nimirum communicationis. For an
other manner (of Christ's being in the Eucharist) is showed us by Paul, to wit,
by communication. He means that Christ is there really and substantially
together with bread. The English man translateth thus: Chapt. 15. page 265.
For it was in the Sacrament by sacramental relation and union, and received of
the believers spiritually by faith. Again, whereas the Latin is thus: Ergo
vere est corpus Christi cum pane visibili; Therefore there is truly in the
supper the body of Christ with visible bread: In English he says thus; Ibid.
pa. 266.
There is Christ's body, but not after a natural manner of being by
transubstantiation, but after a spiritual by faith, and sacramental union.
Finally, Osiander in Latin uses these words; Nos quidem ipsum Christum, qui
est in Eucharistia, spiritualiter adorandum non negamus. Ipsam vere
Eucharistiam adorandam minime concedimus. We truly deny not but Christ
himself, who is in the Eucharist, is spiritually to be adored. But we grant
not that the Eucharist it self is to be adored. The English translator turns
it thus; We say the Eucharist is to be reverenced as an holy mystery, but not
to be adored or worshipped. And diverse other such corrections or rather
corruptions occur every foot in his English book.

Diverse other such like examples there are, which convince the Sacramentaries
to be guilty of this crime, which for br^uities sake I omit. Only I add, that
this is no new vice in them, but an old and inueterated evil. For if we
believe Luther, such were their proceedings even at their first arising: his
words of them are these. Their opinion of the sacrament they began with lies:
Luther in epist ad Ioanne^ Heruagrum Typographu^ Argentinum.
and with lies they do defend the same: and they broach it abroad by the
wicked favor of corrupting other men's books: hitherto Luther.

But perhaps my reader may here desire to see some president of some Protestant
book, corrupted by some English sectaries, and that confessed by a Protstant:
behold I have such a president or two at hand. The author of the Survey of the
pretended holy discipline (a man of good credit among Protestants) having
alleged Trauerse his Latin book Dc discipline. Suruay of the pretended holy
discipline printed anno 1593. chapter 19. pa. 224. 225.
Ecclesiast. fol. 119. brings forth this reason, why he alleged not the
English, translated by some English sectary. But you must remember (says he)
that I do refer you to this latin book: and not to the English translation
of it. Why? some may say is it not faithfully translated? Shall we think that
such zealous men as had to deal herein, would serve us as the Jesuits do? It
is we know a practice with that false hipocritical brood (or rather he should
have said a false slander imposed upon them) to leave out and thrust in what
they list into the writings of the ancient Fathers that thereby in time,
nothing might appear, which should any way make against them. But we will never
suspect nor believe, that any man who fears God; and least of all that any of
that sort, which are so earnest against al abuses and corruptions, shall play
such a prancke. Surely we do well to judge the best: and I my self was of your
opinian, but now I am clean altered. How were some of Vrsinus works used at
Cambridge? and it is true that some other books have been handled vary
strangely else where. But concerning the present point, this the truth. The
translator of Trauerses book, has quite omitted the words which I have
alleged; and all the rest which tends to that purpose, even seauenteene lines
together. So as if you see but the English book, you shall not find so much as
one step whereby you might suspect, that ever M. Trauerse had carried so hard
a hand over the pretend^d widows. If the translatour had received any
commission from the author, to have dealt in that sort with his book: yet it
should have been signified either in some preface, or in some note, or by some
means or other: but to leave luch a matter out, and to give no general warning
of it, I tell you plainly it was great dishonesty and lewdnes: hitherto are the
Protestant authors words in the aforesaid Survey. But to come yet a little
nearer to M. Crashaw, what will he say if I find him guilty, of corruption and
forgery in this very book, in which he reprehendeth us? This indeed were
something to the purpose, but as a discreet man would think hardly to be
proved true in him, that so sharply in this very treatise argues and blames
others for this crime; well I will do my endeavor. And this argument I bring
against him: he that takes upon him to cite the sayings of others, patcheth in
and leaves out words of their said sentences to serve his own turn, is a
corrupter, and a forger of other men's sayings; but M. Crashaw does this in his
book made of Romish forgeries and falsifications: therefore he is a corrupter
and a forger of other men's sayings. The Major and first proposition cannot be
denied by M. Crashaw: For if he incur the crimes of corruption and forgery
(as he says) in the highest degree, that deals so with other men's books,
how shall we excuse him from them that deals so with other men's sayings or
sentences? Let us therefore see, whether we can prove the Minor or second
proposition? the truth of which I declare after this sort. Prologomena T. 3.
Thus you, etc
M. Crashaw in his epistle or preface to his beloved countrymen the seduced
Papists of England, contending to prove that the Index of forbidden books, and
the Indices expurgatorij are the Popes work, writes thus: For your better
satisfaction I will set you down briefly the rules to this purpose agreed upon
in that Council, and confirmed afterward by diverse Popes: Haereticorum libri
vt Lutheri, Zwinglij, Caluini, and his similium, cuiuscunque nominis, tituli,
aut argumenti existant, omnino prohibentur. The books of Heretics, as Luther,
Zwinglius, Calvin, and others like to these, under what name, title, or
argument soever they be extant are altogether prohibited: thus Crashaw. And in
the margent he has these words: Regula secunda in concilio Tridentino and
Indice Roma. Clementis octaui. The 2. rule in the Council of Trent, and the
Roman index of Clement the eight. But in these words he has corrupted the rule
of the Council of Trent, and of the Roman index of Clement the eight, and no
such rule is to be found, as he here sets down: therefore he is a forger
and corrupter. I will recite the whole rule as I find it in all those books, to
the end that my reader may see I do him no wrong. The books of Heretics, as
well of those who found and raised heresies after the aforesaid year 1515. as
of those who are or have been heads or captains of Heretics, such as Luther,
Zwinglius, Calvin, Balthazar, Pacimontanus, Swenckfeldius, and like unto these
are, of what title name or argument soever they be, are altogether forbidden.
The books of other Heretics also which treat ex professo of religion (that
is whose principal argument is of religion) are altogether forbidden. But such
as treat not of religion, examined by the commandment of Bishops, and
Inquisitours, by Catholic divines, and approved, are permitted: hitherto are
the words of the rule. Out of which it is manifest, that M. Crashaw by placing
the word (Heretics) in the place of the word Archeretikes, has falsified the
said rule, and turned it to a clean contrary sense. For whereas the rule
says, that certain books of some Heretics are permitted, he makes it say
the books of Heretics under what name, title, or argument whatsoever, are
prohibited. And this (as it may seem) he does to persuade his reader that we
are so strict in this matter, that we suffer not any books whatsoever written
by Heretics be they never so profitable, to be read; which is false: this is
one corruption so palpable that it cannot be denied. I vvil not urge that in
the third rule he names Iunius his translation of the old testament, and
Bezaes of the new; whereas these authors or their translations are not so
much as named in the rule, as it is found in our books. And for breuities sake
I come to his rehearsal of our instructions, for the purging and correction of
books. Before he sets down such things as are to be amended, translating
that which is said in our books before such instructions as are given, he
says: And such things as do require correction or purgation are these: And
then he begins to rehearse what our Index wills to be corrected, but so
falsely as he may be very well ashamed of his dealing, For whereas the
instruction commands, that al things that taste of superstion, witchcraft,
or divination be rejected; likewise that al be blotted out that make man's
free will subject to destiny, false or deceitful signs, or Ethnicke fortune:
and that such things as savor of Paganism be abolished; that jests, or merry
conceits and quips tossed to the hurt or prejudice of the fame and credit of
others, be abandoned; that things wanton and dishonest which may corrupt good
manners, be removed; finally, that unseemly and dishonest pictures be defaced:
he leaves out all this, and that without al doubt to make his reader believe,
that we correct books for no other matters, but to make them agree with us
in religion. And to this end, it may be imagined, that before he left out the
seventh and ninth rule wholly, which are against wanton books, books of
Chiromancy, Nicromancy, etc. And what false and unconscionable dealing is
this? Verily this were a foul fault in any man, but in M. Crashaw, who takes
upon him unjustly to censure others for the like proceedinges: This is
intolerable, and no man can do less according to his own grounds, then
condemn him of corruption and forgery in the highest degree. Relation of the
state of religion used in the Western parts.. 36. printed anno 1605. written as
is said by Sir Edwine Sans.
Verily a certain Protestant trauailer reports, that we have our several
offices for purging the world from the infection of all the wicked and corrupt
books and passages, which are either against honesty or good manners: who
indeed (says he) blot out much impiousnesse and filth, and therein deserve to
be commended and imitated. And thus I think I have sufficiently proved, that
our adversaries are rather to be pronounced guilty of such crimes as Crashaw
imposes upon us concerning corruption of books, then we. Touching our
prohibition of certain books I add only, that in like manner as we forbid
their books, and suffer them not to be read of al sorts: so they forbid ours,
as their statutes testify; and for this also are more to be blamed then we;
that our books forbidden by them, maintain and defend an old religion, taught
and left us by our forefathers; theirs forbidden by us, a new devised in this
last age by Luther, Carolostadius, Zwinglius, Calvin, and such companions.

I will dispatch the last point in few words; wherefore to prove that the
Fathers are not by us corrupted, I bring these three brief reasons. First,
this our practice of making such Indices expurgatorij has been but very late,
as Crashaw himself confesses in those his words: Long was the mother Church
of Rome in breeding her Indices expurgatorios; at last she brought them out,
Crashaw in the begi^ning of his preface to the reader.
or rather some politic Jesuits conceived them, the Fathers of Trent bare
them, and the Pope brought them out: thus Crashaw. Out of which it is manifest,
that we used no such Indices before the Council of Trent. And hence proceeds
an other reason, to wit: that there was never any general rule or order set
down by the Church, for correcting any one Fathers works: this is manifest,
because had the Church taken order for any such matters, there can be no doubt
made, but such sentences also as favor Millinarisme, Arianisme, Donatisme,
Nestorianisme, and other such like heresies, which in those days opposed
themselves against the Church, had been put out, rather then such as our
adversaries pretend made for them; seeing that we can find no records that any
of their sort opposed themselves in those times against us. Further, the art of
printing books was unknown at the least to our part of the world, before
the year of our Lord 1440. as al histories of that age testify: wherefore,
the works of the Fathers before those days were written by diverse persons,
and in diverse places, by diverse men that knew not what one another did, which
copies are yet extant. Of which I infer, that except some general rule for all
had been prescribed, it had been impossible that they should have al
conspired to have corrupted the Fathers, by adding or detracting the self same
words; and yet nevertheless we see, that all the written copies of the Fathers
works agree and contain the same sentences: much less could we have
corrupted the Fathers works, if those of our side were only a faction and
diverse in faith agreeing with our adversaries who always opposed themselves
against us, or at the least secretly retained their belief as Field affirms;
Field book 3 of the Church chap. 6. 7. 8.
for then it is like that some of them preserved the Fathers works from
corruption. Finally this opens the way to the Zwenckfeldians and Libertines,
who reject al Scriptures; for of the corruption of the Fathers a man may well
infer the corruption also of them: neither can these by better reason be
freed from such an imputation then those. But here some man vvil occur and
say, Perkins in Problem. praepar. ad demonst. in Ciprian. pa. 14.
that it is a matter manifest, that we have corrupted S. Ciprians book of the
unity of the Church, to establish the Popes supreamacy: and for the proof of
this he vvil allege that, which M. Thomas James has written in his Catalog.
Ox onio. Cantabrig. lib. 2. page 176.
Catalogue of the Manu-script books of the universities of Oxford. and
Cambridge, to wit: that there are four Manu-script copies of S. Ciprians
works in the Libraries of these universities, in which certain sentences are
not found, especially such as make for the Popes supreamacy, which are to be
seen in all printed copies of this book. Of which he infers, that it is
like that we have corrupted the said book, and that according to our
corruption it is corruptly printed. I answer briefly, first, that although we
should grant this to be true which James says, that such Manuscript copies
are found, (which nevertheless I will not believe, except I see or hear it
better proved) yet of this it cannot be inferred that the works of S. Ciprian
are corruptly printed; first because more credit is to be given to all the
Manu-script copies throughout the world, which without doubt be some hundreds,
then to these four. And that al others agree with the printed book it seems
evident by diverse reasons, but principally, because no man ever before noted
any such diversity: yet it is probable that the Protestants themselves (who as
James does grant have printed his works) would have noted it, if there had
been any such matter found in the manu-script copies of the country where his
book was published by them. Nay farther, Centuriator. 3. cap. 4. colum. 84.
Cipria^. epist. 40. 70. 55. 69. 71. 73. see him also in exhortat. ad Martirium
cap. 11.
the Century writers who are esteemed very diligent searchers of antiquity,
tax S. Ciprian for his doctrine touching the Popes supreamacy. Secondly, the
doctrine of S. Ciprian taught in this book, agrees exceeding well with that
which is found throughout al his epistles, in which we find the same
sentences almost in the very same words, which James denies to be in his
manuscript copies of the book of the unity of the church, as that there is one
God, one Church, and one Chair founded upon Peter; that the Church was built
upon S. Peter; that our Lord chose him the first or chiefest; that he
instituted the origin of unity from him, etc. Peradventure some man will say
these epistles are also corrupted: but first, I think they are not found
otherwise in the Manuscript copies mentioned by Master James, then they are in
the printed books: For were they, it is like he would not have passed it
with silence as he does. Secondly, neither Perkins, nor any other affirms
these epistles to be corrupted. Thirdly, one of these Epistles in which it is
said, that our Lord did choose S. Peter the first or chiefest, and that upon
him he built his Church, is cited by S. Augustine, August. to. 7. de bapt.
cont. Donat. cap. 1. Cipr. ep. 72. ad Quintum.
who also alleges those very words as S. Ciprians, which are in the
printed copies, to wit: Nam nec Petrus, quem primum Dominus elegit and super
quem edificauit Ecclesiam suam, etc. For neither S. Peter, whom our Lord chose
the first or chiefest, and upon whom he built his Church, etc. And moreover
after S. Ciprians words he adds himself. Behold where Ciprian rehearses
(which also we have learned in holy Scriptures) that the Apostle Peter in whom
the Primacy of the Apostles through so excellent grace is higher then others,
etc. Thus S. Augustine: of which it is most evident, that this Epistle among all the rest is not corrupted, and yet here is almost said as much in substance of
this matter, as is in his book de vnitate Ecclesiae. Finally, the words
which James vvil have excluded from S. Ciprians book de vnitate Ecclesiae are
so agreeable to this holy Fathers style and phrase, and so fitting his
discourse, that no man can almost suspect them to be added. But it may be
demanded how it falls out, that they are wanting in the Manu-script copies
mentioned by M. James? In very truth if there be such ancient copies, and
there be nothing razed out of them, I cannot but think that they were written
out before the art of printing was invented, by some Wicliffian Heretic; or if
they came out of some foreign country, by some Schismatike or other, that held
with some German Emperor against the Pope. That the Wicliffians were very
potent and prevailed much in our Country, we may gather out of that which is
said by Stowe in his Chronicle, and in the years 1414. and 1377. And
Walsingham vvriteth, Walsingham anno vlt. Edward. 3.
that the University of Oxford in particular was cold in resisting him.

Walsingham in vita Richardi 2. anno 1378.
Nay their coldness was such that Gregory XI. Pope in the year 1378. vvrote
his Breue to it, and reprehended them of the said University for their
coldness and slacknesse.

AN INDEX OR TABLE OF ALL THE CHAPTERS AND SECTIONS OF THIS TREATISE.
The first part of the grounds of the old religion.
CHAPTER 1. Of the first ground of Catholic religion, to wit: that there is a
God, and that God by his providence governs al things. page 1. Section 1.
That there is a God. page 2. Sect. 2. Almighty God has care of worldly
affairs, and rules al things by his divine providence. page 10.
Chap. 2. Of the second ground of our religion, to wit: that the soul of man
is immortal, and that it shall either be rewarded everlastingly in heaven, or
punished everlastingly in hell. page 12. Chap. 3. Of a third principal ground of
our faith, to wit: that Christian religion only is the true worship of God.
page 16. Chap. 4. That among Christians, they only that profess and embrace
the Catholic faith and religion, are in state of salvation, and do truly
worship God. page 24. Chap. 5. Sect. 1. Of the definition and conditions of
true faith. p. 28. Sect. 2. That faith is a most firm assent of the
understanding. page 29. Sect. 3. Faith is of things incomprehensible by
natural reason, and consequently obscure. page 30. Sect. 4. By true Christian
faith we believe such mysteries, as God has revealed to his Church. page 32.
Sect. 5. That true faith is built upon divine authority. page 34. Sect. 6.
Besides the revelation of God, some infallible propounder of the articles of
our faith is necessary: and that they are propounded unto us by the Catholic
Church. page 36.
Chap. 6. Sect. 1. Of the supreme and infallible authority of the Catholic
Church. page 38. Sect. 2. The whole sum of Christian doctrine (by word of
mouth, not by writing) was committed by Christ to his Apostles. page 39. Sect.
3. The Church cannot stray from the rule of faith received, nor err in matter
of faith or general precepts of manners, which is proved first, because the
holy Ghost directs her in all truth. page 42. Sect. 4. The same is proved by
other arguments. page 44. Sect. 5. That the testimonies of holy Scripture, and
other proofs brought for the infallible and divine authority of the Church,
cannot be applied to the Church, considered as it comprehends al faithful
Christians, that are and have been since Christ's ascension, or since the
Apostles days: but unto the present Church of al ages. page 52. Sect. 6. That
the same testimonies and proofs, convince an infallible judgment of the
Church concerning every article of faith, not only concerning certain of the
principal. page 56. Sect. 7. That to salvation it is necessary to believe the
whole Catholic faith, and every article thereof. page 58.
Chap. 7. Of the holy Scripture, which is the first particular ground of faith
in the Catholic Church. page 61. Sect. 1. How the Scripture is known to be
Canonical. page 61. Sect. 2. Concerning the sense or exposition of holy
Scriptures; and first that the Scriptures are hard, and receive diverse
interpretations. p. 67. Sect. 3. The Scriptures may be falsely understood: and
that every private man may err in the understanding of them. page 69. Sect. 4.
That the letter of holy Scripture falsely interpreted, is not the word of God.
page 72. Sect. 5. The true sense of the holy Scripture, is to be learned of the
Catholic Church, who is the true judge thereof. page 75. Sect. 6. An objection
against the premises is answered, and the question concerning the last
resolution of our faith is discussed. page 78.
Chap. 8. Concerning the second particular ground of Catholic religion, to
wit, Apostolic Traditions. page 86. Sect. 1. Of Apostolic Tradition in
general. page 86. Sect. 2. Of unwritten Traditions in particular. page 91.
Chap. 9. Of general Councels, which make the third particular ground of
Catholic religion. page 97. Chap. 10. Of the decrees of the supreme visible
Pastor of the Church, which make a fourth particular ground of our faith, and
of other grounds hence proceeding. page 108. Sect. 1. Containing a brief
explication or rehearsal of the Catholic doctrine, concerning the Popes
supreamacy. page 108. Sect. 2. The aforesaid doctrine is proved. page 113.
Sect. 3. That the decrees of the Bishop of Rome, when he teaches the Church as
supreme Pastor, are of divine and infallible authority; and of some other
grounds of faith, flowing out of these. page 127. Sect. 4. The opinion of some
sectaries that the Pope is Antechist, is briefly confuted: and two objections
against the premises are answered. p. 133.
Chap. 11. Of the consent of the ancient Fathers, and the general doctrine of
the Catholic Church in all ages. page 140. Chap. 12. Containing the conclusion
of the first part. page 144.
THE SECOND PART. In which is proved that the new sectaries build their faith
upon no divine authority, but that the ground of al their belief and religion
is their own judgment, and consequently that they have neither true faith nor
religion.
CHAPTER 1. That by their doctrine they deny or at the least weaken, the three
principal and general grounds of Christian religion, set down in the three
first chapters of the first part. page 1. Section 1. The number of Atheists
among them is great, and of the causes by them given of this impiety. page 1.
Sect. 2. Of our adversaries doctrine concerning the immortality of the soul,
heaven and hell. page 8. Sect. 3. Of our adversaries impious assertions
concerning Christ, and Christian religion. page 12. Sect. 4. That in like sort
they weaken the principal proofs of the said three grounds. page 19.
Chap. 2. The new Sectaries debase the true Christian faith, and in place of
it, extol a presumptuous faith by themselves invented. page 26. Chap. 3. That
our adversaries deny the infallible authority of the Church and affirm it to
have erred and perished. page 30. Chap. 4. They reject al particular grounds
of faith above assigned, and proved to be found in the Church of Christ,
besides the holy Scriptures. page 32. Chap. 5. They build not upon the holy
Scripture, and first, that the bare letter of holy Scripture only, is not a
sufficient ground of Christian faith and religion. page 47. Sect. 1. In which
this is proved, because by Scripture the Scripture it self cannot be proved
Canonical. It is also argued, that according to the sectaries grounds there is
no Canonical Scripture, and some principal reasons (especially inspiration of
the spirit) which they allege for the proof of such Scripture, are refelled.
page 47. Sect. 2. In which the same argument is prosecuted, and two things
principally are proved. First, that the new Testament receives small authority
(if we believe our adversaries) by this that it was written by the Apostles and
Disciples, because they accuse them of error. Secondly, because they confess
the text of Scripture to be corrupted. p. 67. Sect. 3. The same is proved,
because every Christian is bound to admit and believe certain propositions,
neither expressly contained, nor (according to some men's judgments) so
evidently gathered out of the holy Scripture. page 75. Sect. 4. The
insufficiency of the bare letter of holy Scripture is proved by other
arguments, especially by this; that the true interpretation cannot be
infallibly gathered out of the letter. page 78.
Chap. 6. The new Sectaries Bibles contain not the true word of God. page 83.
Sect. 1. In which this is first proved concerning al their Bibles in general.
page 83. Sect. 2. That Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, and Beza, in particular have
corruptly translated the Scriptures. page 84. Sect. 3. Our English sectaries
also, have falsely and corruptly translated the Scriptures. page 90. Sect. 4.
Containing false translations against the authority of the Church, Traditions,
honor of Images, Purgatory, and the honor of Saints. page 92. Sect. 5. Of
their corruptions against inherent Justice, Justification by good works, Merit
of good works, and keeping the Commandments, and in defense of their special
^aith, vain Security, etc. and against Freewil, and Merits. page 94. Sect. 6.
Of their false translations against the Real presence, Priesthood, election of
Bishops, single life of Priests, Penance, and satisfaction for Sin; the
Sacrament of Matrimony, and some other points. p. 96. Sect. 7. That the
Professors of the new religion in corrupting the Scriptures, follow the steps
of the ancient Heretics, and what follows of this discourse. page 101.
Chap. 7. That they build not upon the letter of holy Scripture, contained (as
they say) in their own Bibles. page 103. Sect. 1. In which this is proved;
first, because the propositions (which they term of their faith) are not in
express terms contained in the Scripture. page 103. Sect. 2. The same
argument is confirmed by the testimony of some Protestants, concerning the
true sense of some words of Scripture, alleged for our Catholic doctrine
touching justification in the Section before. page 106. Sect. 3. The like
discourse is made concerning a place of Scripture alleged for the real
presence. page 114. Sect. 4. The followers of the new religion in diverse
matters observe not the letter of their own Bibles. page 130.
Chap. 8. In receiving, translating, and expounding the holy Scriptures they
only build upon their own fancies and judgment, and that they have no other
ground. page 134. Sect. 1. In which this is proved by their doctrine and
dissension concerning the books of Canonical Scripture, and their altering of
the text of the same. page 134. Sect. 2. The same is confirmed by their
translations, and expositions, of holy Scripture. page 141. Sect. 3. Concerning
the new exposition of those words, This is my body, in particular. page 146.
Sect. 4. That certain rules prescribed by Field for the true understanding of
Scripture, of themselves alone without the censure of the Church, are
insufficient to assure us, that our exposition made, is of divine truth. page
149. Sect. 5. Concerning their deductions out of holy Scripture: that they
likewise are framed by them according to their own fancies; and of their
accusations of one another touching these matters. page 157. Sect. 6. The
unlearned and ignorant sectaries, in receiving and expounding the holy
Scriptures, likewise build upon their own fancies and judgments, and have no
other ground of their faith and religion. p. 161. Sect. 7. Of the miserable
estate of the unlearned and ignorant Sectaries. page 166. Sect. 8. That the
new sectaries allege Scriptures to confirm their new doctrine, it is no
certain argument that they build their faith and religion upon the said
Scriptures. page 172.
Chap. 9. In which is proved by the new Sectaries forsaking their own
supposed ground and flying to others, also by their dissension and inconstancy,
that they build their faith and religion only upon their own fancies. page
178. Sect. 1. Concerning their flying to other grounds by themselves rejected,
and their dissension. page 178. Sect. 2. Concerning the inconstancy of the
Professors of the new religion. page 183.
Chap. 10. Containing the Conclusion of this Treatise. page 194.
LAVS DEO.
Errors escaped in the printing.
In the Preface, Page 1. in the title line 6. for three, read two. Ibid. line
10. Lastly, blot it out and that which follows in the title. page 4. line 30.
notable, read not able. page 18. lin. 13. in the margent add Calvin Institut.
book 2. chap. 16. page 2^. line 15. Nevertheless, the Protestants themselves
do, read Nevertheless, do the Protestants themselves.

Part. 1. page 19. line 18. which was foretold, read which also was
foretold. page 22. lin. 1. was, read were. Ibid. in the margent Constantius,
read Constantinus. page 26. marg Augustinus de vnitat. eccles. c. 19. read c.
16. page 27. lin. 14 courseis, read course is. Ibid. lin. 30. and, read an.
page 36. lin. 19. undoubted ground to this that, read undoubted ground that.
Ibid lin. 21. belief) by the habit, read belief to this that by the habit.
page 38. lin. 31. we must, read we most. page 45. marg. Aug. in ps. 126. add
127. tract. 9. in Ioh. and 120. page 57. lin. 26. Beza add in the marg. Beza
lib. de Haeret. a civilly Magistrate. puniend. page 87. and 97. page 64. marg.
Dardaram, read Dardanum. Ibid. Sess. read Sect. page 70. lin. 29. he, read
the. page 74. lin. 1. add in the marg. 2. Corinthians. 3. verse. 6. page 78. page
79. lin. 25. marg. add Psalm. 9. page 81. lin. 29. any, read an. page 90. lin.
1. unto those whom, read those unto whom. ibid. lin. 18. accuses, read
accurseth. page 93. lin. 7. Diosinius, read Dionisius. page 95. marg. much
confession, read much contention. page 107. lin. 4. was, read were. page 110.
lin. 31. a third difference is, read a third difference between Christ and
his Vicegerent is. pa. 112. lin. 6. servant, read servants. page 116. marg.
Ioh. 1. read Ioh. 10. page 117. lin. 6. marg. 1704. read 1074. page 118. lin.
27. 28. whatsoever, read soever. page 130. marg. 1660. read 1606. page 144.
lin. 6. immediately, read mediately.

Part. 2. page 3. lin. 19. no faithes, read more faithes. page 5. lin. 5. many
for want: add in the margent Powel in thesibus de Adiaphor. page 11. lin. 20.
by him, read by Brentius. ibid lin. 14. add in the marg. Field book 3. chap.
42. page 170. page 13. marg. indicij, read judicij. page 14. lin. 14.
Platonist, read Platonists. p. 17. lin. 5. add in the marg. Calvin in Joan.
10. page 29. lin. 37. article, read articles. page 34. lin. 31. 32.
difference, read indifferency. page: 40. lin. 10. Synod, read Synodes. page
45. lin. 14. the Church, read their Church. page 49. lin. 34. rejected, read
received. page 58 lin. 14. denies, read deemeth. page 59. lin. 2. if then,
read yet then. page 64 lin. 6. Apostle, read Apostles. page 66. lin. 11. to
show, read show. page 76. lin. 9. and the Father, etc. blot out that
sentence. page 80. lin. 21. and the Caluinists a fourth, read and the
Caluinists as they say a fourth. page 85 lin. 26. Luther, Calvin, and Beza,
read Luther, Caluins, and Bezaes. page 89. lin. 29. Zena, read Iena. page 99.
lin. 4. good fellow, read yoke fellow. page 112. lin. 18. did not, read I did
not. page 113. lin. 26. not full, read not so full. page 114. lin. 2. build,
read built. page 120. lin. 36. does not any where, read does any where. page
141. lin. 9 in one book more then, read in one more then. page 142. lin. 20.
For the Lutherans, read Hence the Lutherans. page 159. lin. 25. Stancarius,
read Stancarus. page 162 lin. 15. translations, read translators. page 176.
lin. 3. add in marg. Calvin admonit. vlt. ad Westphal. page 1116. 1129. page
179. lin. 7. yea, read yet. page 181. lin. 21. And thus much, etc. blot out
that sentence. page 187. lin. 15. also read al. page 188. lin. 15. opinion?
he, read opinion he.

In the Appendix. page 208. line 1. ever, read even. ibid. lin. 8. Fourthly,
read Thirdly. page 212. lin. 23. our adversaries may bring, read they may
bring. page 217. lin. 24. vero, read vere. page 218. lin. 4. favor, read
fraud. This Paragraphe should have been placed after that following out of
the Suruay. page 219. lin. 35. Heretics, read Archeretikes. page 222. lin.
15. who opposed, read opposed. page 224. lin. 12. and in the year read in
the year.


