S. Edward King.
portrait

S. Hugh.
portrait

S. Martin.
portrait

S. Otho.
portrait

S. Stephen King.
portrait

S. Bernard Abb.
portrait

S. Fulgentius. B.
portrait

S. Malachy Bish.
portrait

S. Anselm Bish.
portrait

S. Benet Abbot.
portrait

S. Antony Abbot.
portrait

S. Tho. of Aquin.
portrait

S. Ant. of Padua
portrait

B. Andrew Bish.
portrait

S. Pachomius.
portrait

S. Theodosius.
portrait

B. Justinian. B.
portrait

FVGA SAECVLI.

OR THE HOLY HATRED OF THE WORLD.

Containing the Lives of 17. Holy Confessors of Christ, Selected out of sundry
Authors.

Written in Italian by the R. Fa. Iohn-Peter Maffaeus of the Society of JESUS.

And translated into English By H. H.

Printed at Paris. M. D C. XXXII.

Mart. B(...).



TO THE NOBLE AND MOST WORTHY KNIGHT SIR B. B.
SIR.
THE Emperor TIBERIUS was of opinion, by vvearing a Laurell-vvreath on his
Brovv, no disastrous Lightning could touch his Person. And I, as secure and
confident, under the covert of your Noble Patronage, fear no malignant blast
of Obloquie, or breath of those, that shall seek to soil the Mirror of my
sincere Intention, in my loving Service to my Country. Which made me thus
presume, to erect your Name, as a Laurellbranch; that every one beholding it,
who knovves your excellent Dotes, and Faculties in this kind, may make more
favorable reflections on the Work.

I forbear to allege many Motives, (as the manner is) which I had for this
dedication: It is enough, that your UUorth and Merit claymes it as due: This
the Tuscan Genius secondes; Maffaeus himself requests; my Obligations urge;
and Necessity importunes. Your free and Generous assent only remains. To
obtain which, I appeal to your Noble Disposition, and Goodness, apt to
communicate it self.

And therefore to go about to extort this Favor, were injurious to your
Bounty, which flovves like a Torrent; and ouerflovving al obstacles that might
deter me, makes the passage clear. So that I, vievving the BROOK, like
NARCISSUS (though I savv nothing before, but my Unvvorthynesse) behold my
self, as you have enabled, and encouraged me, resolute to publish these my
small Labors.

Vouchsafe then (SIR) to shrovvd them under the Laurel of your Protection:
Whereby you shall patronize Holy, and Glorious CONFESSOVRS, and oblige Me
further, to be

Your most devoted to command. H. H.

THE AUTHOR TO THE PIOUS READER.
IN things which at first sight are wont to be considered in any Work
whatsoever, it seems the Intention of the Author, and Trace, or Method are
the principal. Whence I, to give a breife account of either, say first;

My End in this work to have been, to make a choice of Lives, not led so much
in Solitude, as in Community; and of Examples also, not so miraculous, or
stupendous, as virtuous, and (with divine Grace) not uneasy to be imitated.

Next, in the manner of proceeding I have taken license to cut of al
superfluityes, to reduce scattered Narrations to the order of Times, or Kinds;
and finally to modify those passages, which transferring the thoughts to
things dishonest or hurtful (as somtymes it happens) the chaster Ears, or
more delicate Consciences, in some manner, come to be offended: But yet is all
endeavored in such sort, as the substance and truth of the Historyes remain
(what possible) entire, sincere, and uncorrupted.

Such in sum, my design in this present vvriting has been: Which if, in
so great an infinity of Books, it prove not to be superfluous or unprofitable;
the whole Glory thereof shall be ovving to our Lord: And when the Effect
likewise, shall not answer the Desire, at least the Good Will, I trust,
shall be had in reguard.

THE TRANSLATOVR TO THE ENGLISH READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
Behold I put Maffaeus into your Hands, no less Serious, then Delightful,
Pious then Elegant, Simple then Admirable; whose Pleasure yet takes not away
the Gravity, whose Quaintness the Piety, nor Industry the Simplicity; as being
Grave without Severity, Fluent without Superfluity, Terse without Affectation,
and full of the Ornament he shuns.

And I present him to YOU, thus clad, and reuested in our English VVee^es, that
he might now walk as familiar amongst US, as in his native Vulgar he has
done: As properly Ours, as Theirs from whence he came. Since, besides that
Examples and Lives of SAINTS are universal, and common to the whole Church,
some of these are found to be of our Nation.

Wherein I suppose, that such as are acquainted with the Genius of his neater
style, will rather challenge me for attempting it at all; then wonder I should
fall so short, if they but consider how hard it is, to frame a perfect Copy, of
so rare and genuine a Prototype.

Yet take it, Gentle Reader, as it is, from him, who holds it a less ill the
while to blush thereat, then the glory of such SAINTS should be unknown amongst
US.

THE PREFACE TO THE ENSVING TREATISE Of the Holy Hatred of the World.
MAN is a Sphere, his Soul the Intelligence;
Grace is the Sun that sends his light from hence:
Virtues the Stars, that glistring deck this frame
And with their rays give luster to the same;
Whose Lights still fixed, which like the immortal sourse
Maintain a constant gyre, a settled course.
The Worlds Contempt, Canopus like, does keep
The highest point, most severed from the deep
And earthly Center: It Is the Star that brought
The Eastern Sages to the Light they sought;
Which through the Heavens as it his course did run,
Aurora-like forshewd the following Sun.
It Is that, which did the Isaacian squadrons guard,
And to the promised Land their way prepared;
And while we floate upon these dangerous waves,
The Cynosura that us wandering saues.
Within the Land, which that mysterious flood
Fattens with his black slime, and fruitful mud,
The Crocodile (Niles Pirate) ever strives
Of their delicious combs to spoil the hiues:
This to effect, he takes a thousand guiles,
And summons all his slights, and all his wiles.
But use is made of that Antipathie
That is between the Saffron-floure, and he;
Which planted round does give assured redress,
And counter-mands his lust, and greediness.
This Crocodile, is man's inueterate Foe,
The Apostate Prince of darkness, that does go
Ever about to spoil the increase of Grace,
And in our souls Gods Image to deface.
Sensual Delights, Pleasures, Desires to be
Great in the World, the Philters are that he
Does use in this design. The Worlds Disdain
The Moly is, that saues our souls from baine;
The Saffron-floure, that drives his force away,
And guards us safe, that else might be his pray.
For if the Eye, clear and unblemished,
Void of all prejudice, accustomed
In their own colors objects to descry,
To know Appearance from pure Verity,
Would take a right survey of what is below,
The Sphere and Center of true Bliss to know;
And not (as those Astronomers, who take
Great heights by Instruments unequal) make
Unpardonable errors: So the Sense
Fore-taken, blinding the Intelligence
(Void of proportion) should presume to reign
A Handmaid over the Mistress; or to gain
So great pre-eminence, as Judge to be
Of perfect Bliss, or true Felicity:
Then as in Landskipp's, where we think appear
Disioyned far parts that indeed are near,
Little things great: Or as that hellish art
By altering the Medium, does impart
Chimera's to the Senses, and does make
Th'astonisht Powers for Truth Impostures take:
We should discern the glossed Alchimy
Of our allurements, and the vanity
Of worldly pleasures; and vndoubting know
Our joys are dreams, how ever fair in show.
We are but In-mates here, and entertained
As if no Denizens, or rather chayn'd
In golden fetters; When first Life began,
A darkesome prison closed up wretched man:
Whence if we rightly come, we fall upon
An ominous precipitation.
So witty's ruin, so importunate
Upon mankind; so seems angry Fate
To envy us the least conceit of joy,
As all things do conspire to our annoy.
The Elements, that so much disagree,
Band against us, their common Enemy:
Yea, that which, void of substance, Essence takes
From that first motion which all motions makes,
Time, measure of our joys, is tedious grown,
And not by pleasures, but afflictions known;
Whom Tyrant-like we would deceive, and bend
(Only to shun, what least we wish) to end:
Yet, as if Sorrows we might not enjoy,
Or as the Fates did envy our annoy,
So as they would not grant us Time for woe,
Our Time's contracted, as Times larger grow;
And their increase does hasten to their waine,
Hopeless to bring them to their spring again.
For in the worlds first infancy, when man
Aequall wellnigh unto the Spheres, began
His being, then was absolute, and he
Enfranchized to Immortality:
But forfaiting this state, though Death could claim
And challenge part in him; yet the strong fraime,
And firm connection of his parts, did cause
A lasting union, and a during pause.
The Immortal Stars, and Man then seemd to strive,
Ioint-tennants to the world, who should survive.
Now Time, has Time abridg'd, our Life's a breath
Which scarcely drawn, is stopped straight by death.
The world's in a Consumption, not as then
We seem mankind, nor the same sons of men;
And seized as with an Hecticke, seems to dance
His sickly motions, led with discordance.
Behold how those, which as they move, do give
By sympathy, to move, to breath, to live:
The golden Spheres are in their motions changed,
And from their former courses seem estranged.
The lively Spring, the Summer we behold
Like those weak children, who are borne of old
And sap-lesse Parents, quite degenerate,
Void of their ancient strength, their vigorous state.
In vain we seek the stations of the Sun,
And falsely think the wandering Planets run
Their wonted courses: Southward still they fly
And leave our Clime stained with Impiety.
So when our Proto-martyrs Holy gore,
Guiltless it self, made guilty Verlam's shore,
The silver Thames recalled his ancient flood,
And left the soil distained with sacred blood.
Distracted Nature, seems to have lost
Coherence, with a thousand Monsters crossed,
A thousand Prodigies; Proportion's gone,
Strength is decayed, lost is Connection.
Sometimes strange Stars affright the amazed sky,
The air often thunders, it not knowing why.
More strange Conjunctions do the Heavens infest,
And bloody Comets raise a worser crest.
Winter yields Flowers, the lusty Ram that bore,
Through the salt-waues, young Phryxus to the shore
The barren Earth often cease to supply,
And leaves to yield his wonted fragrancie.
Summer is bare: The Dog whom heat did vex,
With moisture oftener does the world perplexe.
The furious Winds are fiercer grown; and more,
The thundering billows rend the conquered shore:
As when our I Will, from Belgia's fore-land rent,
Did yield her self to that proud Element.
So when the Chariot of the golden Sun
By the first cradle of the world did run;
In wandering from its path, did often stray,
And ignorant did leave th'vntracked way:
Or with its proper weight deprest, did take
A doubtful course, and different times did make
Confusedly the same; when Heat did cloy
The Thracian shafts, and Cold the Dog annoy.
Strange signs are these, yet more then these, does rage
Fear in our Hearts that nothing can assuage;
Mis-giuing minds foretell our ills, and show
Th'vnsure condition of the world below,
Whose Love is sourse of all these fears. Then kill
And sacrifice the Cause of all this ill;
This offering shall thee expiate, and give
By death deserved, deserved power to live.
O would our Souls upon themselves reflect,
And search from whence Content they might expect;
Which mindful of their birth, do scorn to fly
At other mark then fair Eternity!
Then should we see, how like the Towering Fire
They would to Heaven their home, their Sphere, aspire
Which only is their Center. Here below
Hope sails with Fear, and Joys with Sorrows flow;
No true content is had. A tottring sand
That fleeting yields, and leaves not where to stand
Is our short life. Our pleasures, like the gold
The Alchymist produces, to behold
Beauteous enough, but by the powerful flame
Straight turned to smoke, or matter whence it came.
Our Joys are died with Oaker, every shower
Defaceth their false Luster. Honors, Power,
Are only vapors, which the growing day
Or hoater Sun dissolues, and drives away.
Beauty's imperfect, like that plenteous fry
Half flesh, half mud, that on Niles bancks does lie.
Riches a crazed Ship, unsure defense
In need to those that there put confidence.
Our Knowledge skillful Ignorance; and Art
The plague Prometheus did to man impart
By his stolen fire, that makes ou^ souls to fry
With feauers of fond Curiosity.
All under Heaven is vain: Wealth, Dignity,
Knowledge, and Beauty, Principality,
Are distant from the Sphere where Joy does move;
Rest d wells below them, Happiness above.
Then give a little time, and see how here
These Heroes scorning what the world holds dear,
Did make a way to Immortality,
And by Contempt attained Felicity.
Here shall you see no sumptuous Houses fraught
With Banquets, or with Viands dearly bought;
No costly Beds shining with Tyrian dye,
No Jewel faing'd for glistering brauerye,
No rooms replete with Musickes charming sound,
No Followers with eyes fixed on the ground:
But Woods and naked Rocks, and thereupon
Horror expressed. Here base Refection;
Small time to sleep allotted; Bodies clad
In basest raiment; Men in penance glad,
Delighted in their pains, whom Life did tire,
Whose Hope was Heaven, and Death their chief Desire.
But yet no cruel Furies do perplexe
Their quiet rest; no pining Cares do vex
Or trouble their Content; nor Envy clad
In fair appearance, ever made them sad.
True Rest, great Joys in their small Cells reside,
And perfect smiles from spotless hearts do glide;
Whose souls remembering whence they came, contain
Themselves and Heaven, and strive it to regayne.
Then loose thy self with these, with these to win
That Heritage, which thou have lost by Sin.
THE TABLE OF THE LIVES.
S. Malachy, Bishop of Conner then in Ireland. page 1. S. Antony Abbot, and
Ermite in Egypt. page 64. S. Pachomius Abbot in Thebais of Egypt. page 121.
S. Martin Bishop of Towers in France. page 155. S. Fulgentius Bishop of Ru^pa
in Afric. page 193. S. Theodosius Abbot of Magariassa in Cappadocia. page
217. S. Benet Abbot, and Father of all Monks in the West. page 235. S. Stephen
the first King of Hungary. page 259. S. Edward Confessor, King of England.
page 287. S. Anselme Bishop of Canterbury. page 308. S. Otho Bishop of Bamberge
in Germany. page 169. S. Bernard Abbot of Clareuall in France. page 187. S.
Hugh Bishop of Lincoln. page 155. S. Antony of Padua. page 282. S. Thomas of
Aquine, the Angelical Doctor. page 316. B. Andrew Bishop of Fesula in Italy.
page 344. B. Laurence Justinian first Patriarch of Venice. page 361.
S. MALACHY.
THE ARGUMENT.
BOrne in the Land, surrounded with the main
Of the Vergiuian deep, S. MALACHY
Appears, and shows unpolished shells contain
Pearls often fraught with richest bravery.
We honor by our deeds, not Countries gain,
And do our selves infect, vnstaynd thereby,
And learn to note, how ere we rise or fall,
We, and our Soiles are not reciprocal.
See how in tender years the world he leaves,
And from his childhood bears the appointed cross:
Try'de with affliction, nothing Grace bereaues,
No pains are hard, no worldly damage loss;
No false allurements move, no fraud deceyues
Him of his hopes, no Vanity does toss
His constant soul, nor from his Haven drive;
Where we, if like, shall like to him arrive.
THE LIFE OF S. MALACHY BISHOP OF IRELAND,
Written by S. Bernard.
Of his Birth, Minority, and the first Flower of his Youth. Chap. I.
SAINT MALACHY, borne in Hybernia, or as we call it, Ireland, in the City of
Ardmach, was there through the particular favor of the Divine Clemency, bred
and brought up in such sort, as from the Native Barbarism of the place, he
drew no more then Fishes do from the brackish Seas. Whence it comes to be a
thing most delightful, that so uncivil and rude a Nation, should seem to
yield us a person of so gentle behavior, and celestial manners. He who
deriues the honey from Stones, and fetches oil from the hardest Rocks, has
moreover wrought this (...). True it is, the Parents of S. Malachy were both of
noble Blood, and of high Degree; and the Mother no less generous of Mind then
Lineage, was very solicitous to show to the Child, as yet tender, the true way
of Salvation, making a great deal more reckoning thereof, then of the swelling
Literature o^ the world, and yet wanted not the Child a good towardnes for
either of both professions. In school he learned the Gra^mer, at home the
fear of God; and continually through his profit, did satisfy both Mother and
Master. Which thing should not seem to others to be any whit untrue; he
having through especial favor from heaven, the lot to have so good a Soul,
which made him as well docible, as strangely amiable and gracious.

From Mothers breast, instead of milk, he sucked the waters of wisdom, and
day by day, became more wise. More wise, shall we say, or more Holy? If I say,
both the one and other, I should not much repent me, because I should have said
but truth. For manners he was grave, a child indeed years, but void of
childish sportfullnes: and howbeit, held in veneration and admiration of all,
yet became he not thereby, as generally others do haughty or insolent, but
rather quiet and submisse with all meckenes. He was not impatient of
government; not stubborn to discipline; not dull for studies; and finally not
delighted with games, the proper and general affect of that age: so as in
learning, which was competent for him, he out-stript all his equals of the
same age* but in Goodness of life and purchase of virtues, he excelled as many,
as taught him; and that not only through the industry of his Mother, but even
also by the Unction of the spirit; wherewith being interiourly solicited and
pushed on, he was never backward in divine Exercises; as to retire himself in
solitude; to meditate the holy law of Christ; to make o^en prayer; to be
temperate in dyer; to vanquish sleep. And whereas from public frequenting of
Churches he was partly hindered through school, and partly kept back through a
certain respectfull modesty; yet forbear he not the less, to lift up his Mind
to the supernall Father, and to adore him even likewise with exterior
gestures, wheresoever in secret he could find occasion there unto: being at
such times very cautious and circumspect to eschew vain glory, the most
certain poison of virtues.

There lies not far off from Ardmach, a village whither his Master went
often to walk, without other company, the this beloved Disciple. Now therefore
on a time, while they were walking both together, Malachy observing the Master
in a deep study with himself, making a step (as he related afterward) remained
somewhat behind, and on the suddayne lifting up his innocent hands from the how
of his (...) ever bent* (...) forth enflamed Iaculatoryes to the Stars; and
for not to be discovered, very ^lyly would he be putting himself again
somewhat handsomely on the way: and with so pious a theft, would the blessed
youth from time to time be deceiving his Guide. It boots not here to relate
all the acts, which made his greener years very illustrious and admirable. My
pen makes ^hast to much greater things. And yet nevertheless will I not
seem to let pass this one thing by the way, which in that te^dernes of his,
gave matter, not only of a good, but of a sovereign hope.

Being now arrived at last somewhat toward the end of the first arts, and
thirsting after the grauer Sciences, being moved through the fame of a learned
Doctor, he went his ways with great diligence; though somewhat far off, to
be acquainted with him. But finding him at his entering into the house very
busy, scoring of the wall very impertinently with an awle, being disgusted with
such a leuity, and immediately pulling back his foot from thence, he had no
list to re^te him any more; so much (howbeit never so greedy of Learning he
were) he preferred honesty before knowledge. In this sort then, he passed over
his childish years, and yet in Youth retained he still, as it were, the same
tenor of candor and purity; sau^ only that together with years, did Wisdom
and grace, both with God and men alike increase in him: with this besides, that
continually there began more high and sage reflections, and discourses to
awake in his breast. For that the prudent youth beholding on the one side the
malignity of the world, and on the other the quality of the Spirit which swayed
within his mind; came more the^ once to speak within himself in this sort.

My spirit is no whit secular; for what has it to do therewith, since there is
no more resemblance between them, then between night and day? Mine seems, to
proceed from God, nor am I ignorant of the gifts, which he has vouchsafed me.
From him, do I acknowledge the stole of innocence I enjoy, with the flower of
continency in me preserved hitherto. From him, that glory of mine so much
securer, as it is more secret, consisting wholly in the testimony of the proper
conscience. None of all which possessions can abide without much danger under
the Prince of this naughty world. Besides, I go carrying so great a treasure in
an earthen vessel, and there is good reason to fear, least it come to take a
knock, and be broken, and the Oil of gladness within be unhappily spilt. And
how is it possible not to take a knock among so many stones, and amidst so many
rocks of this way, and life so full of turnings, windings, and rubs? And shall
I seem in a moment to be loosing of all these blessings of holy sweetenes,
wherewith the Eternal Goodness from the beginning has prevented me? Rather I
resolve to secure the same in the hand of him, who has given it me, and my
self likewise therewith; since also I am his, I will temporally loose my life
for not to loose it eternally. And where may the same with my being, and all
what I am, be in more safety, then in the right hand of the giver? For who is
more wary then he in keeping? who more potent in deffending, and more faithful
in restoring? He will keep it safely; he will restore it in his time. I shall
not loose a jot of whatsoever I shall seem to distribute in works of piety.
Perhaps moreover, I may look for a good return. This magnificent Bancher, is
wont to redouble with usury, the things which he has given of courtesy. Such
were the thoughts of S. Malachy, and he really went about to execute the same,
as knowing most clearly, that good wills without good effects ^re of little, or
no profit.

How S. Malachy submits himself to the discipline of Imarius, and (...) first.
made Deacon, and then Priest. Chap. 2.
THERE was a holy man in Ardmach, Imarius by name, of a very austere life, and
a most implacable chastiser of his proper flesh; he dwelt reclused in a Cell,
near the great Church, in performing there very hard penance with continual
prayer. To this man went S. Malachy to be instructed, and guided in a
spiritual life, by him, though living, yet voluntarily condemned to the grave.
And though from a Child (as we said) he had God himself for Master in the art
of loving God, yet now more ancient, as a rude disciple, would he needs submit
himself to the rule of a man. Here now let those note well this point, who
undertake to teach the same which they have not learned, and go gathering and
multiplying Scholars without ever having been at school; blind guiders of the
blind. And if S. Malachyes example suffice them not, yet let them mark what
the Apostle S. Paul practiced. For had not he, trow you received the Gospel
from Christ himself? And yet thought he it not amiss to communicate the same
with men, least his way and labors might prove otherwise in vain. Where S.
Paul holds not himself secure* do I hold me less. And let him who understands
it otherwise, beware his security prove not presumption.

But return we now to the fact of S. Malachy, whose fame being incontinently
spread, all were astonished at such a nouelty; but yet all not discoursed alike
thereof. Many through humane affect* were bitterly sorry, that ^o delicate^ a
youth, and or so good disposition should so of his own choice be obliged to so
great sharpnes and austerity. Others attributing the fame to ficklenes and
youthful he^ disdaynefully blamed him, for putting himself vpo^an enterprise,
so far beyond his forces. But they wrongfully laid the blame upon him, while
he could not be culpable of temerity, who so adhered to the counsel of the
Prophet, saying: It is good for him, the shall carry the yoke, from his youth.
But such an act in S. Malachy seemed so strait a way, as had not been seen to
be trod by others steps; nor until that time, had any Student of the same
Academy ever entered in. So as he was faygne to be exercised a good while
without a fellow of anyranke, sitting in silence and submission, all the while
at the feet of Imarius, and refining his understanding and will with entire
Obedience, with perpetnall mortification, and with all those industries and
arts, which easily conduct a soul, that is both fervent and meek, to the top
of Evangelical perfection. It was not long nevertheless, that others being
enflamed through his example, began to give themselves to the self same
Discipline they seemed to abhor so much the other day: In so much as where he
was solitary at first, and the only son of his Father, very soon he came to
be the eldest of many Brothers; but as he was more ancient in Conversation, so
was he more sublime in Conte^plation. Whence he seemed to the Archbishop
Celsus, as likewise to Imarius, who by this time knew him well, to be worthy of
Sacred Deaconship, and so they ordained him.

From that time this new Leuit, seemed to buckle himself publicly to all the
works of piety, but especially to those which are ordinarily held in most
contempt with others. And with particular diligence would he attend to the
Funerals and Exequies of the Poor decea^ed, whiles this Office to him seemed
to be of no less humility, then humanity. And therein our Toby had the
temptation of a wicked woman, or rather of the ancient Serpent, by her means,
because a Sister of his* esteeming it a dishonor to her, that he should employ
himself in such affairs. What do thou (would she say) thou fool as thou
art? Let the dead go, and bury their dead. And with such sayings* would she
never c^se to molest him* every day. But the foolish woman had her answer
given her, very apt thereunto; O wretch, you seem to know well* the Syllables
of the sacred Sentence, but not awhit the sense thereof. And so in this sort
would he be cheerfully pursuing that Exercise, so grateful to the eyes of the
Divine Goodness. And for his perseverance therein, his* Superiors holding him
moreover to be worthy, of Priesthood, without delay promoted him there to,
notwithstanding all the resistance which he could make. S. Malachy* was found
at that time, to be 25* years of age. In which two Ordinations, if the Decree
of the Ca^ns were not strictly observed, which prescribes the 25. to the one.
and the 30. year to the other, it may well be imputed, both to the zeal of
the Ordaynant, and merits of the Ordained. True it is, that as such
anticipation of time in so eminent a subject, is no way reprehensible; so for
my part I would not seem to counsel the same to any other quality of
persons. But yet the same was not though to the judicious Archbishop, who made
him moreover his* Vicat in the preaching of the divine Word, and in the
Careohisme of that rude and savage people. Nor was S. Malachy (...) of his
^auayle, but rather with fervor, accepted the same, as not willing (...)
cover* the talents* he had, but to negotiate with them, according to the will
of the Highest.

Thelabours and travels of S. Malachy in his functions, and how he goes to
Ma^i Bi^op of Lesmo^ Chap. 3.
BEhold how S. Malachy anon, with his mystical tools, p^ts himself* to del^
up stumps to break up lands* to tread out path^aies, to louell banks, and with
a Giants heart to be a^ha^d, now here now there. He seemed to be a flame amidst
the Forests, and a hook among naughty plants. In lie^ of barbarous, customs,
he inserts Ecclesiastical rites. All rank superstitious (which were not few)
all diabolical charms, and finally whatsoever heretofore he judged to (...)
disordinate, indecent* or out of square, endured not long in his fight, but as
fruit with the hayle, or as dust with winds. So before the face of this holy
Reformer, abuses and vices were quite defeated or dispersed. But as on every*
side he endeavored to set down Laws and Rules full of justice and honesty,
yet labored he still with particular care to incroduce the Apostolical
Constitutions, the approved Counsels, and above all the Traditions and
Obseruances of the holy Roman Church. And hence it grew, that whereas at first,
no^ so much as in the principal Cittyes of Ireland, were Divine Offices
celebrated with solemn harmony; now, not only in Cittyes, but in Towns and
Villages also, were sung the Masses, and Canonical hours, no less then in
the rest of Christianity. Whereto it helped not a little, that S. Malachy from a
youth had attended to his part in Music. But that which more imports, he
renewed the use of the Sacraments, and in particular of Confession,
Confirmation, and of Matrimony, things that either out of malice, or ignorance,
had been heretofore as it were, wholly forgotten, and dismissed.

Amidst these labors and travails, and many others, which for breuity sake
are letpasse; we may believe for certain, this Servant of Christ, had received
great gusts and consolations from heaven: and yet nevertheless, being as he
was of a most delicate Conscience, and thinking very lowly of himself, and for
that to him it seemed he had neither practice nor Learning sufficient for so
high employments; those same delights came to be much watered, with a
continual sear which he had, least through his imprudence any opinions or
customs might be introduced in some points discordant to the Custom of
Catholic Institutes. So as, to get out of these anxietyes, for his better
instruction, he was resolved, with the approbation of the Prelates, to
transfer himself for a time to Malcus Bishop of Lesmor, being a famous City
of Momonia, in the Southern part of Ireland. Which Malcus, being now
surcharged with years, as well for profoundnes of wisdom, as for singular
sanctity of life, and likewise for the gift of Miracles which he had; was held
in those Regions, as an Oracle of Truth, and a common refuge of the afficted.
S. Malachy being courteously received by this good oldman, while he carefully
ministers to him, and likewise with diligence goes on observing the things
appertayning to divine Service, and to the cure of Souls, through an unlooked
for accident, was a noble field laid open to him to exercise Charity.

How Cormacus King of Momonia repayres to Malcus; and being put out of his
Kingdom, is by friendly saccours restored again. Chap. 4.
IRELAND in those times (as it likewise ought to be at this present) was
divided into certain little kingdoms, and by consequence subject to wars,
seditions, and tumults. Now there being a great discord risen between Cormacus
King of Momonia, and a wicked brother of his; the King being vanquished in
battle, and thurst out of his seat, made his recourse in person to the
Bishop Malcus, to be succored by him; not for recovering his scepter, but
rather to save his soul, as being timourous of him, who takes away the spirit
of Princes, and as very much alienated from sheding of Christian blood for
temporal interests. At the news of such a Ghest, did Malcus make preparation
to receive him with due honor: but he would not consent thereto, affirming his
intention was to live with him in a private and quiet manner; and laying aside
all memory of royal pompes, to betake himself to the discipline, and fare of
the other Canonists. Malcus, at such a resolution by how much more astonished,
accepting the offer of a contrite heart, assigned to the King a little house to
lodge in, S. Malachy for his Master, with bread and water for his sustenance.
Nor did the Prince himself desire hence forth any cheer or delicates;
remaining in a place of all other sweetenes most satisfied with the
incorruptible gusts and celestial via^ds ministered him by S. Malachy. Through
which, notwithstanding remaining more mollifyed, he rightly bewailed his
sins, and extinguished the incentiues of the flesh, with baths of the coldest
water, with David, crying to our Lord: Behold my ^asenes and my misery, and
pardon me all my offenses. Nor were the Sovereign Judges ears found deaf to
such a prayer; but rather heard he the supplication made, not only in the sense
he uttered it, wholly spiritual and internal; but even like wise (conformable
to his infinite Goodness) in the material and extrin^ecall. And as he reserues
not all sentences to the Tribunal there, he was pleased to succor likewise in
this life, the depressed innocence of Cormacus, by exciting the spirit of a
certain King near unto Momonia into so great an indignation for the injustice
offered, as that coming in post to the Cell of the poor Penitent, he labored
to encourage him to a generous return, in setting the goodness of the cause
before him, the perfidiousnes of the Rebels, the favorable right hand of the
Highest; and this, for the more efficacy with fervent exhortations, mingled
with large promises. With engines thus addressed, he sought to stir up and
provoke that afflicted Prince, but perceiving the objects of Soueraignity, and
motives of self-love, were not of force enough to prevail with him, he turned
himself with dexterity, to those of Christian piety, and the public weals
most lively representing to him the miserable oppression of his subjects the
insolences and iniuryes of the intruding Tyrant, and the obligation which a
lawful and natural Lord has to deliver, to his power, his vassals from so
great afflictions and miseryes. In which point the friendly King dilated
himself with greater vehemence then before, as hoping sure with such a battery
at last to make the mind of Cormacus to render up its hold.

But finding him to be firm notwithstanding all this, in his determination,
and more fixed then ever; at last, as to a sacred Anchor, he made his repair to
Malcus the Bishop, and to S. Malachy: who both being voluntarily inclined
thereto, as to be the greater glory of God, without much difficulty was he won
to their opinion. In such sort as Cormacus enforced through the authority and
command of both the one and other, did finally accept the humanity and
promptnes of his Neighbor, and with his aid, and much more through his
presence Who can do all, the impious and wicked Intruder was put to flight, and
he not without the infinite joy of the people, was installed again into his
Royal throne; and from that time ever after did he love and respect S.
Malachy. Who after he had for some time, not without notable emprouement,
enjoyed the familiarity and discourses of Malcus, being by Letters and Messages
recalled by Celsus, and Imarius. (who could no longer endure his absence) he
accordingly made his return back into his Country.

How S. Malachy had a vision, and delivers his sisters soul from Purgatory:
with the noble resolution of his Uncle, in surrending up an Abbay to S.
Malachy. Chap. 5.
IN the mean time his Sister was departed this life, of whom we made some
mention above. Concerning her, it behooues us not to pass over in silence a
Vision, which the Man of God had. Because that although while she lived in
flesh, he abhorred her behavior, in such sort, as that after some years, he
made a vow not to see her any more: yet now she being quit of body, he himself
remained discharged of the vow: and began to reuisit her in spirit, whom he
had no will to see ever any more alive. For so much as on a night, it seemed to
him in sleep, that he was advertised by a Man in have, that his Sister
attended without, in the Church yard in a brown habit, without having tasted
any thing for these thirty days together. At which voice, now S. Malachy being
a waked, he presently understood, what manner of famine tormented her: and
exactly casting up the time, he found it had been just thirty days, since he
had said Mass for her. And in regard the Servant of Christ loved the soul, as
much as he hated the imperfections of his Sister, without delay he returned to
his suffrages so intermitted. Nor was it long ere the dead Woman appeared to
him, upon the three shall of the Church (but yet bard from entering in) and
apprelled in black. But her Brother perseuering still in assisting her without
ever omitting any morning, wherein some Sacrifice was not offered up for her,
he espied her very soon in a grayish gown, within the Church indeed, but not
admitted as yet to the Altar. In sum, he ceased not to celebrate for such
intention, until finally she appeared to him, not only within the Church, but
even likewise near to the Altar in a white garment, amidst a most happy
troop of blessed Spirits, who in like manner having now finished the purgative
pains, were noted with the same candor. Whence clearly appears, how great
is the value and force of the Sacr^d Mass, to the cancelling of sins, to
vanquish the adverse powers, and to lead into Heaven, the Creatures taken out
of the earth, and mire, or rather from the mouth of Hell it self. S. Malachy
took exceeding contentment at so certain a Delivery of his Sister, and felt
no less joy in himself for the pious and magnanimous resolution of an Uncle
of his. The which, to the end it may the better be vnderstoood, and po^dered,
this it was.

We must understand, that in a place of those parts, called Benchor, was
anciently founded a Monastery, by a certain holy Abbot, called Congellus, with
so prosperous increase, as well of means, as of subjects, as that from thence,
as from a fruitful Metropolis were sent, as it were, infinite Colonies into
diverse regions. And it is a constant rumor, that one child only of that
Blessed Congregation, called Siluanus, had planted alone in diverse countries,
full a hundred Conuents. From thence came also S. Columbanus into France, and
after into Italy, and among other Monasteryes erected that of Laxonium, so
numerous, and frequent, as that the Quires succeeding by turns, there was no
intermission had from divine Offices, perpetually night, or day. But that of
Benchor, as the origin and fou^tayne of all, retained the chief dignity,
until such time, as through the fury of the outrageous Free-booters, it was
wholly destroyed, yet withal enriched with a great number of venerable
Reliques^ since, besides so many other bodies of Religious Men, who there
reposed in peace, there were by the same Free-booters, in one day only,
marryred and slain nine hundred. With so cruel a destruction, that most noble
Seminary though quite extinct, yet the inhabitants notwithstanding, ceased not
successively, to create by a certain form, a Secular Abbot, who without any
thought of Religion, attended only to the gathering up of rents, and converting
them sacrilegiously to his proper uses.

In this time now, S. Malachy had an Uncle (of whom we spoke before) who had
this rich Abbay in his hands: who either pricked with a Synderisis, or sting of
conscience, or moved with the Examples and Exhortations of his wise Nephew,
determined while he had space for wholesome penance, not only to quit his hands
of such administration, but to renounce the world outright, and to apply that
huge benefice, together with his person to divine worship, and to the
institutes of S. Malachy; who notwithstanding he were under the direction of
Imarius had now begun to have many imitatours and followers. The man of God
being glad of such a Vocation, did voluntarily accept of the care of his Uncle,
and the plot, for some restoration of the building. But as one tenacious of
the poverty of Christ, would by no means admit of the possessions, suffering
the people to depute another to such affairs. The which afterward (as we
shall see in its place) repayed the beneficence of the divine man, with
abominable ingratitude. The renuntiation being made in this sort, and the
possession taken of the holy place, S. Malachy by commission of Imarius went
thither with ten brothers, and some Carpenters, and immediately put himself to
work. Nor was it long, ere that, in approbation as it were of the enterprise,
there happened upon the fact, a notable wonder.

S. Malachy works a miracle, and is made Rectour of the foresaid Abbay: with
one, or two miracles besides. Chap. 6.
ON a day S. Malachy, for the encouragement of others, was laboring with his
proper hands, and with great diligence hewing of certain timber. Now while he
stood with the axe suspended in the air, as ready to give the stroke; behold
one of the workmen, improuidently putting himself between the arm of S.
Malachy, and the axe, received the whole blow upon the very ridge of the back,
which should have fallen plumpe upon the designed ^biect, when presently, being
deprived of his senses, he fell down ^r dead. At the sight whereof every one
came running in with pit^full cries. The wound was searched, and the shirt was
found to (...) slit from the collar to the reins, but the flesh wholly entire,
and ^ot hurt, except, that only the upper skin was only touched so lightly,
as the mark thereof could hardly be discerned; so as the labourer arose
suddaynely very joyful and lusty, with so much the more gladness of the
standers by, as more probably it hence was co^^uded, that their trauayles and
pains, as we said, were grateful and acceptable to the Divine Goodness.
Whereupon with fresh vigor they set themselves to work again. So as in few
days was the Pratory finished with polished timber, and firm couplings, a
work ^or those swaynes and people, very gracious. And this was the beginning
of the miracles of S. Malachy; and from that time began they to attend afresh
to divine Offices with like piety, though not with equal number of persons.

There S. Malachy himself was Rectour a good while, through commaundent of
Imarius. Who as he was of degree above others, so likewise in his deportments
was he a living Rule, and bright glass, and as a book laid open to those
Clerks, for as much as in all his proceedings, there were true precepts of
Religious conversation to be read. And he not only, in common observance,
seemed to go always before that little flock, in sanctity and justice in the
sight of God; but would moreover be doing particular pennances, and other acts
of Perfection, which no man was able to equal. Which things the common
Adversary, not being able to brook, put into the heart of a familiar friend
there about, lying sick, (whose name was Malcus) that S. Malachy coming in to
him, as he was wont to visit him, he should suddaynely with a knife give him
his death. The good Father, being aware thereof, (the sick man not being able to
keep it in silence) betaking himself to the arms of prayer did
notwithstanding freely present himself before him, and with the Sign of the
Cross, on a sudden banished the malady from his body, and the diabolical
thought from his mind. This man was the natural brother of Christianus, ^bbot
of Mellifont. He was converted to our Lord upon so great a benefit, and with
the habit took upon him new behavior: and at this day do both live a great
deal more united in spirit then blood.

In the self same place he restored to health, a certain Clearke, named
Michael, afflicted with a most grievous dissentery, and despaired of
Phisitia^s, with the only sending him from his table a little of his portion.
This Michael fell afterward into another dangerous malady, and the servant of
Christ cured him anon, not only in his limbs, but in his mind also; and he in
like manner for fear of worse did enter into Religion, and is now (as I
understand) abiding in Scotland, Superior of the Monastery, which S. Malachy
founded lately in those parts.

S. Malachy is made Bishop of Conerthen. His labors there, and the fruit which
he wrought in that Diocese. Chap. 7.
BY such actions as these, the same and family of this great Abbot increased
every day; so as the Church of Conerthen, not far from Benchor, having been
now a long time vacant, those to whom belonged the Election of the Bishop,
resolved upon the person of S. Malachy; nor did any thing hinder the
expedition, but the resista^ce only of the Elect himself. Although afterward,
at last, he was commanded by Celsus and Imarius his lawful Superiors, to
yield and affoard his Consent, being as then of the age of about some 30.
years. When after the solemn Consecration, being led into the City, he
suddaynly applied himself to exercise of his pastoral Office, with such
ardour of spirit, as was requisite for so important a cure.

But scarce had he begun the government, when he saw himself doubtless to be
there not destined for the rule of men, but, setting Baptism aside, very
properly of beasts. In no place had he ever yet noted a people of so ill a
breeding; of so detestable superstitions of so stiff a heart to Faith-wards; so
incapable to law; so untoward to good institutes; nor finally of so soul and
dishonest conversation. They were Christians by name, in life Pagans. There was
no use of Tithes, or tendering the first fruits, nor of Confession, or
demanding penances; nor likewise who to demand them of, so rare were Priests
in those parts; and those that were to be had, so negligent and careless, as in
Churches was no preaching, or divine Office sung. In this Forest now of
sauadge beasts, what course should this Champion of Christ take? Of force must
he either shamfully retire himself, or else combat with danger. But he as a
good Souldyer and good Pastor withal, determined to stand fast, and not to
budge a foot, as ready to give up his life, for his flock, when need should
^uire the same.

And howbeit, it might well be fayd, they were not sheep, but so many wolves;
yet stood the courageous Keeper amidst the (...), seeking by all ways and
remedies, from wolves to render the^ (...) Sheep. So as he ceased not
fervently to admonish al in public and with tears to reprehend every one in
private; here to use Word^, there to deal with tharpenes. And such like
means would (...) continually be using, to draw them out of the snares of the
devil, where with they were so fast entangled. And if these his pious
endeauours failed, he would seem to recurre to Prayer; and accompany his
Devotions with profou^d humility of heart, and propitiatory afflictions of body.
How many nights passed he over without ^epe, and in making supplication for
them? How often in person, went he in the City up and down a seeking of the
fugitives, and constrayning them with sweet violence to appear in the Church?
Nor was the faithful Steward of Christ less anxious for the souls, which
were scattered through the Country, hastening now here, now there, with that
holy troop of Conuictours, never from his side. He went, and dealt among those
spightfull and thankelesse people, whole measures of corn, which some reaped
in such abundance, that atlast they became fit to be laid up in Gods barn.
And let no man think, he used to ride in any of these iourneys: for lo, he
wal^d continually a foot; she wing himself even in this point, to be (...)
Apostolical Person. Nor is there a tongue able to express, what this Father,
tender of such cruel and wicked Children, has suffered in so frequent
Pilgrimages, and Episcopal visits. The tribulations, affronts, and iniuryes,
which he sustained cannot fully be related. How often through their faults, was
he like to perish for huger, and thirst? How often afflicted with cold, and
nakedness? and with a thousand other incommodityes? And yet still, with the
Enemies of peace was he pacificall, and still importuned them in season and ^ut
of season, to amend their wicked lives. For cu^es, he afforded blessings: being
strooke^, he would ward himself with the buckler of Patience: being scorned
and made a laughing stock, he prayed more instantly to God for them: and
perseuering after this manner so long in knocking at the gate of the Divine
Mercy, at last, it was (...) open to him, and through the power of the
Omnipotent, the stones were mollifyed, barbarism mitigated, and crabbed minds
began to mellow, and by little and little to acquaynt themselves with things
appertayning to their salvation, and to admit of discipline and precepts. And
in sum, through divine Grace, they were snatched out, as it were, from the
claws of the ravenous and greedy deuourer, in whose hands they had always
been; out of whose diabolical custody being set free, they made so notable a
change, as at this day to those people, these words suite well, which God
seemed to utter by Esaias the Prophet: The people which heretofore were none of
mine, are now become my people.

The City of Conerthen is destroyed, and S. Malachy with his, repayret^
Cormacus. The Church of Ardmach fell into Seculars. With the Resolution of
Celsus thereupon. Chap. 8.
AFTER a certain number of years now passed over, for better purging of
sins, succeeded an incursion upon them, by the barbarous Inhabitants of the
North, when a great part of the City of Conerthen was destroyed: in so much as
S. Malachy, with his Religious, who were about an hundred and twenty, was
constrained to go his ways out of that City. But yet his departure from
thence, proved not altogether unprofitable, because that repairing himself
into the kingdom of Momonia (whereof we have spoken before) he erected there
a goodly Monastery, at the cost of Cormacus, being very mindful of the good
Offices, and Charity affoarded him, in time of his banishment. So as besides
his coming in person to meet and receive him, and his conuersing with him
afterward, and with the rest of his Company, with much familiarity and love,
he concurred moreover, as we said, very royally to the Fabric. Whereby in
short time it was fully accomplished, and wonderfully increased in annual
rents, and moueables; and that which is yet more to be esteemed, in subjects.
Who, to the end, they might walk with the better will, by the strait and
difficult way, the Blessed Man ceased not, being a Bishop, and a Master as he
was, as if but then he had newly become a Nouice, to be the first in observing
the Traditions and Rules.

He served in his turn, now in the Kitchen, now in the Refectory. In the
Antiphons, Lessons, Ceremonies, or labors of the Quire, he would have no
manner of privilege at all, performing always his part, as one of the least.
Here likewise he showed himself to be so ardent a lover of voluntary Poverty,
as in courting and ^uing the same, among all the Riuals there was none could
seem (...) come any whit near him. And howbeit for the maintenance of (...)
place, he judged it fit to admit of re^ts in common; he was yet notwithstanding
very vigilant, least the public, through human fra^y, might degenerate into
private. Amidst such cares as these, whi^st in holy peace he aduaunceth by all
means, the profit of his, and ^e glory of God, for his greater probation,
there came an assault ^on him, no less slyly, then unlooked for. Which truly
the better (...) understand, it shall be needful for us to fetch the narration
a pretty ^ay off.

The Church of Ardmach, as it is the Mother of the other Churches (...)
Ireland, so is it more illustrious and far more reverenced, then (...).
Besides that, here was the residence of S. Patrick, and the sa^ed bones here
left of that first Apostle, and first Father of all those Nations. Whose fame
and esteem with great reason, is here so famous, ^at even his Successors, be
what they will, do come to be feared ^d obeyed, not only of the inferior, and
the rest of the Clergy, but ^en likewise of any Baron, Lord, or Peer of the
Island. But as all ^e affairs of mortal me^, seem ever to incline to the
worse, there ^d entered in now a good while since, a very execrable abuse; to
retain (forsooth) the Pastoral Chair in a certain family: In so much as
from one Usurper passing to another, it had there so endu^d now for fifteen
continual generations, and under a Diabolical title of imaginary
Prescription, they were so rooted in the wicked possession, as that when there
were found to be no Clerks in the family, they would be substituting the
married: and of the ^me condition, before Celsus, there had been to the number
of ^ght, men though learned for the most, yet as I said, without sacred Orders.
And hence came the dissolution of the whole Christianity with the spiritual
ruin and temporal likewise of all Ireland, in creating and changing here and
there Bishops, at every ca^riccio of the wicked Metropolitan: yea a thing which
was never ^eard of, in making in one Bishopric only, for every people, as
(...) were, an infamous Bishop, with a hellish multiplication of most unworthy
administratours.

Now then to take away so pernicious a scandal, it pleased the Divine Majesty,
the Miter should lastly light on the head of Celsus; Who though of the same
stock, yet notwithstanding he being pricked with the fear of God, as soon as
through a mortal infirmity he perceived the end of his days to approach, he
determined to put in execution the design, which he had a pretty while before;
that is, to cut off indeed, that infenall line of inheritance, by freely
yielding up the Archbish opricke into the hands of S. Malachy, whose reputation
and credit he knew well to be very sufficient in this case, to purchase to
himself the favor of the City, and to oppose himself as a firm wall to the
ambition and greedines of Tyrants.

To which effect, as it were by way of Testament, he declared his mind to be,
that the Sea being vacant, by all means the holy Bishop Malachy should be
placed therein, since there was not to be found a person, more deserving it
then he. To which purpose he most earnestly desired that the Primacy might be
(after his decease) transferred upon him. For the better manifestation of his
arden^ desire, he not only declared this intent viua voce, to the standers by,
but even likewise did intimate and recommend the same by letters and precepts,
on the behalf of S. Patricke to such as were absent, and especially to
personages of quality; and very particulerly to both the Kings of the upper and
lower Momoni^. These through divine inspiration were the thoughts of Celsus:
and they had a glad success, though not so easy, nor yet so speedy as he would
have wished.

S. Malachy is elected Bishop. Mauritius holds stillpossession, whilst S.
Malachy refusing the charge, is enforced by Malcus, and the Popes Leg^ to
accept it. Chap. 9.
THE occasion of the delay, was, for that Celsus departing this life, and the
Electours being come to the Diet, the greater and better number of suffrages,
without controversy elected S. Malachy: and the rest of the voices were for a
certain Cosen of Celsus, called Mauritius. This man through his presence and
power ouer-swaying quite all justice and reason, was temerariously planted in
the Archiepiscopall Throne, to the infinite grief of all good men, and
especially of Malcus the Bishop (even now so extolled by us) and of the Bishop
Gilbert, Legate of the Apostolic Sea, for all the Kingdoms of Ireland. These
two great Prelates, with many others of each quality, made great instance, and
offered whatsoever they were worth ^o S. Malachy, not to refuse to enter into
Ardmach, and to take upon him the spiritual government thereof, according
(...) the determination of Celsus. But the humble servant of Christ* ^o
esteemed every climing to be his own precipice; stood very ^e in refusing the
interprize, while he thought he had a good pre^t for the same, through the
peril of seditions and tumults, that ^ght happen to arise thereupon. With such
delays were now (...) years already passed, when the two zealous Bishops
above ^ntioned, being not longer able to endure the adultery of the ^me Church
of Ireland, and the dishonor of Christ, assembling ^ew the Clergy and Princes,
and with common consent made their ^ourse to S. Malachy, as pressed to constrayne
him with main force, ^case he should seem to perseue^ in the negative.

But the Friend of quietness still showed himself to be more ^ckward,
alleging the difficulties of the business* the multitude, (...) power, the
covetousness of the Adversaries; that he had not ^rage in ough to stand in
contention with the meanest fellow* ^d much less with so many, and such as
those, and for the space of (...). years so rooted in the Sanctuary, whence
how should he (...) be able to (...) them ou^, they being especially his
Ancestors (...) possession? Nor was it worth the while, tha^ for his occasion
^ould follow man slaughters, and the earth by dyed with human ^oud. And he
finally objected the conjunction he had already made with another lawful
Spouse, from whom he saw no reason how ^e could disunite himself. With such
like words and defenses, the dexterous Soldier went skir^ishing in the
continual velitati^ns and assaults of them that loved him so much. But his
Friends not with standing all this, now afresh pressed him hard, and much more
those that were of greater authority, to accept of the Archiepiscopall
government. Which he again denying, they threatened him with open
Excommunication; for now they would not admit of any excuse. Whereupon he made
them this final Reply: You draw me violently to my ^uyne (said the holy Man)
and I will follow, whilst it seems to me, I shall he^rby gain the glorious
Crown of Martyrdom. But if no persuasions will content you, let us make a
bargayne first, ere I enter into the field? That if it shall please God
(according to your desire) to put some order in affairs, and to take out of
impious hands the dominion vsurpatiously possessed, there may be some other
sufficient Rectour immediately substituted into the dignity, that you now go
about to put upon me: and that I be licenced to return again to my present
Spouse, and to my most beloved Poverty.

This was the last and most resolute answer of S. Malachy, Whereby very
clearly may be seen a great purity conjoined with an equal Fortitude; since
on the one side without simulation he fled honor; and for justice sake on the
other, he feared not death.

In sum, by no means for prayers or threats, would he seem to yield his
assent thereto, until such time as promise and firm word was given him, upon
the conditions propounded. As Soon as he was in security thereof, he finally
accommodated himself to assume the charge; and so much the rather, as besides
the unanimous, and perseuering instances of such like personages, it seemed to
him he had yet some other manifest signs of the divine will: whereof one is
worthy of ponderation, and very considerable. There appeared to him (even about
the sickness of Celsus, while he was then a far off, and knew nothing thereof)
a woman of a tall stature, and of a grave aspect, who being demanded by him,
who she was, made him answer, she was the Wife of Celsus, and without more
ado, putting the staff of government into his hand, she suddaynely vanished.
And within a few days after, while Celsus now drew near to his death, he
really sent him indeed in sign of Succession, a rod even just of the figure of
the same Fantastique one. The memory whereof, and the correspondency of the
times, was a matter of much moment in the mind of S. Malachy, and justly made
him fear, least standing out longer, in such an occasion, he might seem
apparently to wrestle with God himself. He accepted then the charge; but yet
without ever entering into the City, whiles the intruder lived; and the same he
did, for not to give on his part any manner of perturbation, by which otherwise
they might hap to loose their lives, to whom he was rather come to affoard the
same. So as for the space of two years, (for so long that ambitious man
escaped) did S. Malachy attend to exercise the office, abroad through the
Province.

^ritius being dead, Nigrettus succeeded. A Diet is called to install S. (...)
Malachy: The opposers are defeated, and stricken by the band of God. (...) Chap.
10.
MAuritius being now dead, another of that danable race, called Nigrettus, or
Nigerrimus rather, with the like impudency, ^s anon to the stern; while the
malicious Predecessor, to add (...) to sin, had a pretty while before,
wrought notable practices, ^aue him first for heir in the world, and after his
Companion (...) follower into Hell. The rumor and disdain of this great
au^iousnes being spread through all parts, a new Diet was called, ^nstall at
last the good S. Malachy into the degree, now for so ^y years, and that for so
many reasons, due unto him. But be^d how the Sinagogue of the malicious
Hel-hounds, opposes a^st him. One of the Children of Belial, being a notable
favorer ^igrettus, and very prompt and potent to evil, as he knew the ^e
where the States were to assemble themselves, with a good ^ber of Russians,
laid himself in ambush in the next hill, with ^ll deliberation, when the
Council should be set, by treacheryes ^ome forth suddaynely, and to rush in
upon them without fail, (...) above all to take away S. Malachyes life; and
for the less danger ^euenge likewise to kill one of the two Kings, who was
there also ^eete. And now stood matters in a readynes, the Conspiratours (...)
wait for effusion of blood, and the Good men upon the point ^oing to the
shambles; when through the divine Benignity, the ^ocent S. Malachy opportunely
had intelligence of the cruel plot without making a noise, or putting his
people into a hurly-burly (...) no more but enter into the Church, and lifting
up his hands, ^ue succor of the Omnipotent, whose prayer was easily heard, and
^ke effect accordingly.

For behold on a sudden the heavens to be covered, the air (...) darkened,
flashes of lightning to break forth, cracks of thunder, ^etuous storms, and
hideous tempests to arise, the day of wrath (...) extreme judgment to be
represented to mortals. And to the end ^men might discern how forcible the
prayer of S. Malachy was ^isturbe, and to put the Elements thus in commotion,
those were ^y punished with so sharp menaces, and with so wonderful,
dreadful, and cruel a tempest, who more then the rest seemed to thirst to
take away the life of the Holy Man. The head of this devilish faction, with
three others of the principal, being stricken with a the^ derbolt miserably
perished: and the day following were their body seen to be blasted and
disfigured, one upon this, another upon the bough of the trees, whersoeuer
through the violence of the thunder each one was furiously cast. Three others
were found to be half de^ on the ground. The rest of the baser crew, were
dispersed into diverse parts very confusedly, and with exceeding great horror,
a^ they went about like men distracted. Whereas those of the part (...) S.
Malachy so near to the place amidst so perilous accidents, had no molestation
with such prodigyes, nor hurt at all, nay not so much as a hair of their heads
were diminished; Which bred a far great admiration in the mynds of the
people, whereby they evidently be held that God himself took S. Malachyes
part. The unhappy Nigrettus, with his co^plices, through the fury of the
people, was the out of the City, and with the greatest joy that might be, the
(...) Bishop and Primat of all Ireland introduced into his place, being (...)
that time of some thirty eight years of age. But yet for all this neither
within or without, was he wholly free from persecutions an^ troubles, as shall
presently appear.

Nigrettus his craft, as also the plot of his wicked Accomplices: and how all
turu^ to a perfect Reconciliation. Chap. 11.
THE Diet being now dissolved, and the aforesaid King, wi^ the other defenders
of the right and equity of S. Malachyes caus^ departed from Ardmach; that
viperous race not able to brook the privation of the ancient dominion, began
to exclayme bitterly, an^ complain for being over borne and oppressed by the
more poten^ and with all endeavor and art, gave themselves within the tow^ to
renew seditions and tumults, against the Servant of Christ: and the fugitive
Nigrettus without, was not wanting the while with fra^ and subtilityes to
stir up seditions abroad, and to put every thing into garboyle, rebellions,
and disorders.

In the Sacristy of Ardmach, among other things of best esteem^ are two famous
Relics very charily kept. Whereof one is a ce^taine Text of the Ghospells,
which had been heretofore belonging to the Blessed S. Patrick. The other a
Staff, all covered with gold, and beset with most rich Jewels, which they call
Jesus Staff, as holdi^ certain that our Savior himself had framed it, and
used it with own hands. Now these two relics, as I said, are by those ^le
had in so great Veneration, as the Simple, in whose possession (...) see them,
do hold them to be the true and lawful Successors of ^tricke. Which thing
Nigrettus knowing very well, flying had ^ily carried them away with him; and
with these tokens and ^ges, did carry himself as the true Archbishop, and went
about withdraw the people, as much as he could, from their Obedience (...)
Malachy.

But a principal man of the same stock, seemed to play the fury ^e the rest;
who not regarding either the promise made to King, not to molest the most holy
Priestof God, nor yet the ^ages given for that end; with a crew of servants and
kinsfolks ^ractize how to murder S. Malachy. And for as much as he could
publicly attempt the same without manifest danger, in respect ^e Devotion
which the people bare to so great a Pastor, he defined together with the
others, to rid him away by some trea^ous means, in causing him to come
improuidently to his house ^r the pretense of confirming a new amity with him.
With this ^cept in his head, the rooms being furnished in good time with ^ed
men, one day while the Archbishop was singing of Vespers the great Church, he
sent certain men in have, very humbly entreat him (the Office being ended) to
vouchsafe to come to (...), as soon as he could, it being so needful for them
to establish accord. Which thing seemed to be very extrauagant to the follo^rs
of S. Malachy; and being aware of the deceit made answer, (...) more fit it
were he should come himself to the Prelate; and that (...) Church was a more
competent place for acts of that quality. ^e Messengers replied, their Lord
could not come with safety, (...) durst he adventure for the multitude, who but
yesterday were ^y to cut him in pieces.

While such manner of contentions passed between them, the ^ine Man, who
desired peace, and feared not death: Let me alone ^ith he) Brothers for Gods
sake: let me follow the example of (...) Master. And shall I be a Christian,
if I do not in some sort imi^ Christ? Peradventure this my submission will
mollify the heart ^ur Adversary, and in the mean time, with this Example I shall
^e you some Edification. And if this savage people should tear in pieces, I
will willingly yield my life into their bloody hands, to the end I might leave
you a pattern how you should order the course of your life. Besides, by this
occasion you shall truly see wh^ there your Superior have learned of Christ to
be affrayd of death (...) Christ, or no. And with this, rising up on his feet,
he beganne^ walk on with an undaunted gesture: howbeyt his friends and
Disciples with tears trickling down their cheeks, humbly besough^ him not to
be so wilful, as to hazard the sheading of his blood among those
bloud-suckers: because a great multitude of the faithly were like to be left
desolate, who in all things wholly depended upon him. But he confiding, and
fixed in the Divine protection ((...) ears being stopped to sighs and laments)
went boldly on, accompanied which no more, then with three disciples only,
being pro^p^ and disposed to lay down their lives with him.

In this manner he came to the Enemies gate, he had no soon put in his feet,
but he was seen to be encompassed round with great Troop of terrible
Hacksters, he standing the while, like a^ innocent Victime, exposed to the
strokes of whosoever had the will to sacrifice the same. But (O force! O power
of Christian confidence!) while they were all expecting the sign to set upon
him he with the only cast of an Eye, with one serene look only, di^ mitigate
them in such sort, as there was none of the most forward est or courageous,
durst so much as offer any manner of violent unto his person, the divine power
did so bridle their fury. Nay, (...) there the Prince himself, and Captain of
them, suddaynely changed his inhumane intention, and instead of tearing him to
pieces, (...) destroying him wholly, arose to do him great Reverence and honor,
showing an incredible desire of a sincere concord. At which words, S. Malachy
exceedingly rejoiced, and was no whit slack in a matter sought for by him, with
so great danger of his life. A solemn peace then was ratifyed between them
with such sinceri^ as that he who before was so grievous and dangerous an
Adversary was not only satisfied now with the Election made, but showed
himself afterward always loving, and much devoted to S. Malachy. For which
success the good conceived an incredible joy, is beholding him to escape so
that day, who had no fault, and through his merits so many souls delivered
from the peril of eternal death. This action of his, made not only the name
and respect of S. Malachy now to dilate it self more then ever; but even
likewise wrought a great dread in all people, who understood that two of his
most fierce and potent Persecutours, were with a sudden and divine pow^ made
prostrate, though in a very diverse manner; the one, be^g terribly punished in
body, the other benignly compunct, and ^nged in mind.

^gretus is constreyned to render up the pledges to S. Malachy (...) the
Judgment of God is severely showed upon two bitter Raylers against S. Malachy.
Chap. 12.
SVCH difficult Encounters, and grievous disturbances being now passed over,
the holy Archbishop began very freely to or^yne and dispose whatsoever might
seem in any wise to belong (...) his Ministry, but yet never without some
eminent danger of (...) life, while he found no time, or place secure from
treacheryes. ^erupon by public counsel there was a Guard of select men
^poynted for his person day and night, although he was resolved (...) we have
said) ever to rely much more upon divine protection, ^n on human guards. And
because the banished Nigretus was con^ually working of no small damage in
stirring up the rude people ^d causing of separations and discordes in the
Church of God; it ^med convenient to S. Malachy to use his best endeauours
against a ^order and scandal of so great importance. And therefore the good
^chbishop applied himself withal care and industry to wype a^ay this great
scandal; and did use such effectual means to stop ^o the ways to the
minister of the Devil, as the wretched Man ^as constreyned, in despite of
himself, to yield, and restore the ^lne pledges, and for ever after to rest
quiet, and subject himself ^ithall humility. And thus S. Malachy, though
amidst so many difficultyes and Tribulations, notwithstanding with the favor
of God ^ent prosperously on, procuring the salvation of many Souls, and
^oceeding successively day by day. Nor were the malefactors ^ly, but even
likewise his detractours chastized by divine Justice. ^herof, among others,
upon a certain perverse fellow, was a noble demonstration showed.

This man not content to think unworthily of the great ^rchbishop, and to
malign him against all reason: but moreover ^deauoured to defame and wound him
with bitter speeches, and ^amefull calumnyes in public meetings and more
eminent places, ^lping himself therein with a certain pernicious Eloquence,
wherewith he was endued, and with the favor of Princes, and great Ones,
purchased through base flatteryes and scurrile jests. And now was he arrived to
such enormous insolence, as that wheresouer he met with S. Malachy, and
espccially in the more public assemblies, he would not spare to use him
discourteously both in words and gestures. But this manner of audaciousnes did
cost the wretch full dear; for the instrument of railing in him, was so
putrifyed, and swollen up, as that after he had for seven continual days done
nothing but spit out worms, which seemed to swarm from his devilish tongue;
being finally consumed quite, and pined away with abominable corruption issuing
from thence, he gave up the Ghost, leaving his filthy Carcass to be meat for
worms of the Earth.

The other was a Woman of that accursed generation, so envious, and always
bearing such an implacable hatred toward Blessed Malachy, as she ever abhorred
his very sight. Notwithstanding as she went to hear him preach to the people,
the wretched and shameless creature did not forbear to lift up her voice in
that assembly, and call him Hypocrite, and a robber of other men's goods,
adjoining besides, to so bitter injuries, outrageous taunts, upon the Baldenes
of the man of God: who being wise and meek, gave no answer himself of any
kind; but the great God (who reserues revenge and glory to himself)
sufficiently made answer for him: for that the wicked and damnable wreth
thereupon lost her wits, became furious and frantique, continually crying out,
she was strangled by S. Malachy, nor ceased she from horrible screeches, til
she likewise yielded up her vital Spirit. Insomuch, as having usurped the
ancient Nickname of Elizaeus, through the just judgment of God, she found to
her cost, another Elizaeus.

In the mean time there happened a cruel Plague to rage in Ardmach: by which
pestilence an infinite multitude of people consumed eueryday away. Whereupon S.
Malachy ordained a solemn procession, and sent up enflamed darts (both of
iaculatory and vocal prayers) which pierced the skies, and came to the Throne
of his divine Majesty; who granted his humble request, and very speedily
caused it to cease.

And this thing bred a wonder in the people, who did observe the sanctity of
the great Archbishop, and ever after caused them to have a far more reverent
respect to his sacred person; and likewise it stopped the mouths of the
malignant, and in particular those of the seed of Chanaan, who being by this
and other examples terri^d, and convinced by such soueraygne wonders, said
likewise ^ith the Egyptians: Let us fly from S. Malachy, because the Lord
seems to ^ht for him. But to late were they aware of their own wretched^es:
nor were they able to auert the heavenly Indignation, since ^ithin a little
while after, that unfortunate race was quite annihi^ed and extinguished, not
without the terror, and amazement of (...) many as knew the same.

(...). Malachy surrenders the Archbishopricke, and returns to Conerthen: and
soon after resolves upon a journey to Rome. Chap. 13.
BY these means the affairs of Ardmach, being now reduced to good terms, the
Clergy reformed, the rumors quieted, and the Enemies by this time taken away;
S. Malachy, whose breast was inflamed with the love of Humility, after he had
now brought peace to others, determines to procure the same likewise for
himself. And calling a new Diet of Priests and ^ayks, obtained in ver^e of the
former Pact (though not without their great sorrow and grief) to discharge
himself at last of that cure so burdensome, and in his room to substitute a
person of rare and approved virtues, by ^ame Gelasius. Whom as soon as he had
consecrated, and seriously ^ecommended to the principal of the kingdom, being
laden with victories and triumphs, he returns again to his first charge of
^onerthen, which by this time was reasonably well recovered of the ^osse
received from the barbarous people. And in this return see^ed S. Malachy to
give forth apparent signs now more clear then ever of Christian Modesty; or
to say better, of the greatness of a singular courage.

The Diocese of Conerthen of ancient times, had two Episcopal Seats; but
afterward through the covetousness, and ambition of a great Incumbent, they
were confounded together, and reduced to one only. Which thing our S. Malachy
dislyking, for just respects, divided it anew, and renounced that of Conerthen,
being the better provided with Rents, and more noble of the two, for another,
much inferior to the former for wealth; It is called Dune, a place obscure and
little, which our Blessed Man choose rather to reteyne to himself. And to that
purpose he passed from Con^rthen to Dune, acco^panyed with a few disciples; and
likewise immediately forsook the eminent Title of Archbishop of Ardmach, to a
poor title of Bishop of Dune. O pure heart! O eye of the Dou^! Let all men be
even ravished at this Example of exceeding great Humility, which shined bright
in the course of thy whole transitory life! Where are they now, who so
earnestly contend about their lymits and bounds? Who merely for a base
cottage, or a plot of ground, do wage Law, and stir up such fearful
tragedyes? But let us desist from entering into such manner of discourses, and
rather proceed to declare the rest of the life of this great Saint. From
Metropolitan and Primate of Ireland, being thus made Bishop of Dune, the first
thing he endeauours, is to have (as he was wont) a flourishing College about
him of Regular Clerks.

And behold now another time, how our new Souldyer of Christ, puts himself
again into spiritual combats; he harnesseth himself with complete armor of
Mortification, and perpetual Meditation, although by this his desire, he
seemed to obtain the merit, rather then the effect; it being impossible for
him to deny his endeavor, counsel, and presence to such a number of persons,
as either touched with good inspirations, or tempted with sundry temptations,
repaired to him as to a fafe refuge and true Oracle. Besides which, the
obligation he had of trauayling through the Province, to sow the word of God,
to visit the parishes, and to ordeyne all things as one of the Apostles, did
employ him not a little. And commonly there was none would say unto him; In
whose authority do you this? so great was the opinion and credit he purchased;
partly through the life he lead, partly also for the signs and Miracles which
he wrought. And yet for all that, while it seemed to him, that he could not
with security promote so high affairs, without the express commission of the
holy Apostolic Sea; he determined to travail in person toward Rome, and that
so much the rather, as he had many other occasions besides of no light
importance, moving him to this long and tedious pilgrimage: Whereof one the
most urgent was this which we shall now tell.

Within the costs of Ireland, are two Metropolitan seats, the one of Adrmach,
whereof we have spoken heertofore more ofren, illustrious, rich, and founded
even from the time of S. Patricke: the other (whose name is unknown unto me)
of a meane^ quality, and but newly erected by Celsus, and subordinate to the
first, and not confirmed hitherto by the Vicar of Christ. To both these Seas,
now, S. Malachy desired for their greater complement of honor and reputation
to obtain the use of the sacred Pall: and to the second as more late, the
consent also of Apostolical approbation. And to this effect, he went about to
prepare for his journey. But as the same came to be known abroad, not only his
domestiques, but al others likewise were infinitely sorry thereat: while it
seemed to be a very hard matter for them, to remain so long without him: and
fearing withal, in so great and difficult a voyage by Sea and land, some
sinister accident, might betyde him.

Their anxiety was increased the more, by reason of the death of Christianus
Bishop and Brother of S. Malachy, which happened much about those days: a
Prelate indeed, though second in glory, yet for zeal and sanctity,
peradventure not much inferior to him. By reason of this fresh and grievous a
loss, came now the departure of the blessed Father, to be continually more
difficult. And they all affirmed with one voice, they would by no means
consent, their only prop should depart from them; the country in the mean time
abiding in so manifest danger of a total ruin, if both such pillars should
thence be taken away at one time. So as all from the highest to the lowest,
with one and the self same spirit, ran hastily to him, and having in vain
mixed their reasons, coniurations, and protestations to move him; did at last
plainly give him to understand, that when they saw Love would not prevail
with him, they would detayne him by force: When ^o, the Servant of God, with a
severe countenance, threatening them with chastisement from Heaven, endeavored
to pacify them: and yet was it not possisible for him to hinder them, but that
for a final conclusion, the matter should be remitted to a decision by Lots;
and yet notwithstanding all that, so great was the pertinacity of them, as that
after the first, and then the second being drawn in favor of the Bishop; yet
they with exclamations and plaints, would needs have him come to a third
Election: when still finding the same to be conformable to the before passed,
and for that they judged it to be enacted by the supreme Head, and Disposer of
all things, against their wills they yield to his desire. But before they would
let him go, they desired and humbly requested him to ordeyne one to supply the
place and Episcopal Seat of his Brother deceased. To which he willingly
condescended, and therefore calling into his presence some: three of his
Scholars, was much perplexed in mind and uncertain which of them were the
most sufficient for such a high and eminent Ministry. And when he had taken a
careful and diligent survey of them all: Do thou Edanus (says he, for so was
one of the^ called) take upon thee the charge. But the poor Wretch excused
himself, in the best manner he could, and powered forth a shower of brinish
tears. Fear not (replied he) since thou have been designed to me by our Lord
himself, and I have seen thee already with the ring of the mystical
Espousalls on thy finger. Whereupon Edanus assuming more confidence then
before, very humbly obeyed.

S. Malachy in his way to Rome goes to York. He visits Clarauallis by the way,
and arriues at Rome. Chap. 14.
SAINT Malachy having now consecrated Edanus Bishop, puts himself on his
journey, and with an easy and short cut passed over into Scotland. From thence
being come to York, a City in England, a certain Priest, Sicarus by name,
having the spirit of prophecy, beholding S. Malachy in the face, albeyt he
never saw him before, yet did he point at him with the fingar, to the sta^ders
by, saying: Behold him here whom I told you of, that a holy Bishop should
come out of Ireland, who sees into the thoughts of men. More over, the said
Sicarus, discovered to S. Malachy many hidden things, which were with all
punctuality found to be most true. And being demanded by some of the Bishops
companions, concerning the success of that pilgrimage of theirs, among other
things he answered, they were not al of the^ like to return back with him
into Ireland again. Whereupon they fell into some suspicion of their dying by
the way, but their prediction came to be verifyed indeed in another sense. For
as much, as in the return which S. Malachy made from Rome, as we shall set
down in its place, he left part of them in the Convent of Clarauallis. And so
much may suffice of the Prophet Sicarus.

In the same City of York came to the holy Bishop a Noble man, whose name was
William, being at that time Prior of the Canons of Circham, and now Monk, and
Father of the Monks, in our house of Mailros: who after he had very humbly
recommended himself to his prayers, did him a noble act of courtesy; which
was, that seeing the train of the Bishop to be some what great, and his
provision of horse but slender (for having with him besides Servants and
Clearks, some five Priests, he had no more then three horses for the^ al) he
made him a friendly present of a horse of his: which because he was outward for
the saddle, and of a naughty pace, William did ingenuously allege for
himself how sorry he was for the defects, and that he would have more willingly
given the same, if he had been much better. Whereto S. Malachy made answer:
And I like him so much the more, as you seem to depaynt him worse; and turning
himself to his followers: Make ready (said he) this Beast for me for he is
like to prove well enough, and will hold out for along voyage. And so got up,
and though in the beginning he found him to be rude, and of a very hard trot;
notwithstanding shortly through a meruaylous change it appeared he now had a
very dexterous Rider on his back: and for confirmation of whatsoever he had
prognosticated of him, for nine whole years together which S. Malachy
suruiued, he always served his turn, becoming really a very excellent and
prized horse; and for a later empromement, whereas before he had a coat of a
dark gray, he began to wax white, in such sort, as within a short space
there could hardly be seen a whiter beast.

These and other like Offices of friendship, found S. Malachy, in that
pilgrimage: and I my self likewise had the hap to know such a Man, and to be
fed, and enriched with his spiritual Discourses; and he mutually made show
likewise of some contentment taken in me a Sinner, and loved me dearly, even
to the end of his life. Moreover he seemed not to think much, to lodge in our
homely Cottages, giving also to all the Monks a rare and singular Example of
Christian Perfection, and we receiving always from his followers some manner
of edification. And so having taken the place and Inhabitants into those his
bowels of Piety, giving us all his holy Benediction, he departed from us, not
without sorrow and great lamentation of the people. Hasting now forward in his
journey, our blessed Pilgrim ariues at the City of S. Claude, where he
presently cured his Hosts child in the place where it lay in extremity. From
thence by the shortest way he passed to Rome, where Pope Innocent the second at
that time did govern the Ship of S. Peter; who graciously received him, and
took much compassion upon him for the grievous pains he had sustey ned, and
the hard trauayles he had taken in so tedious a journey.

S. Malachy remaynes a while in Rome. He is made Apostolical Legate: and
returns homeward by Clarauallis. Chap. 15.
ALbeyt S. Malachy were nothing unmindful of his principal busynes: yet
before all other things, he began to demand the favor to leave off the
Episcopal Office, and to retire himself to live and die in our Monastery of
Clarauallis. Which how beyt denied by the Vicar of Christ, because it seemed to
him not just, that a person so helpful to the world, should so be shut up in a
corner there of, he had notwithstanding obtained from Christ himself, some part
of what he desired; since it was afforded him by the Divine Goodness, if not to
live, at least to dye in Clarauallis, as shall be declared in its due place S.
Malachy remained for a whole Month in the holy City, visi^ing with singular
devotion those places which were consecrated with the blood of Martyrs. And in
the mean time, the Pope informed himself by him, more fully and at large of
the estate and customs of the Churches in Ireland. At last upon mature
deliberation with his Cardinals, he declared our Blessed S. Malachy his
Vicegerent and Apostolical Legate, through all that Island, in the place of the
Bishop Gilbert, who being surcharged with years, most humbly craved to be
discharged. After which did S. Malachy propose his demands, which were, for
the confirmation of the new Metropolis; and for the Pals both of the one and
other. And as for the Confirmation, he obtained it without difficulty. But for
the Palls, the Pope answered; It was convenient, the matter should be treated
of more sol^mnely. Wherefore as soon as you shall be arrived at home, shall you
assemble a general Synod: and by common Decree, you shall procure for the said
Palls that some worthy persons with speed may be sent hither, that the same may
benignly be affoarded them. So said Innocent, and then taking off the Miter
from his head he put it on S. Malachy: and besides he pleased to give him from
his own vestments of the Mass, a stole and maniple. And then with the loving
kiss of peace, and Apostolical benediction, very courteously licenced him to
depart.

In his return homeward, he reuisited Clarauallis, and revived us a new with
his most grateful aspect, he being exceedingly grieved that he could not
always make his aboade with us, and then with deep sighs he spoke to us, as
follows. Seeing it is not the Divine pleasure of Almighty God, that I shall
here remain with you: yet I beseech you at least, that instead of my person,
you would take some of my Clerks unto you: Who with you being made good
disciples, may serve to supply us afterward with Masters: adding moreou^r,
they shall serve us for seed, and in their seed shall people be blessed: People
(I say) who though by ancient Tradition have had some kind of knowledge of
Monastical functions; yet hitherto have never seen any Monks amongst them.
Leaving then some four of them behind, he departed from thence, who succeeding
very well in the probation, were admitted into the Order: and within a little
while afterward were some others sent thither, and those likewise being
admitted, and instructed with diligence, were together with the first, sent
back into Ireland, under the care of the holy Brother Christianus, (being of
the same family) with an addition of so many of ours of Clareuallis, as being
al together, sufficed for a formal Abbay: which like wise in process of time,
conceived, and brought forth some five daughters. From whence with multiplied
seed, the number of Religious every day increased, according to the prediction
and vow of S. Malachy.

S. Malachy arriueth in Scotland, and there cures King David's son. He
passes from thence into Ireland, and comes to the Monastery of Benchor. Chap.
16.
THE venerable Ghest being departed from us, and prosperously landing in
Scotland; found there King David, in a certain castle of his, with his only
Son, lying sick of an incurable disease. Where being entreated to stay, and
that he would be pleased to afford him health, he sprinkled him with water by
him blessed, and looking him in the face, said to him: Be of good cheer, my
Son, since you are not to dye at this present. These were his words; and
immediately the effect followed: For the day after, the Prince recovered his
health to the exceeding consolation of the King, and the infinite iubiley, and
joy of all the Court, and finally to the stupour and amazement of all that heard
and knew the same. The rumor thereof being spread there was nothing every where
but bon^yers, ringing of bells, and giving of thanks, and voices of praise, as
well for the unexpected recovery of their Lord, as for the greatness and nouelty
of the Miracle it self. This David the father, and Henry the son, being now
valourous, and wise Souldi^urs, are yet living to this day: and as at that
time, they used much importunity to retain S. Malachy their Ghest with them,
to make much of him; so while he lived, they always striued to honor him, and
to show themselves, not to be unmindful, and very grateful for such a
benefit, and therefore offered to him many rich Presents.

But the wise Contemner of transitory Rewards, and worldly pomp, by any
means, on the next Morning would needs depart from thence; and passing by the
way of Crugeldus, restored speech to a certain young Girl.

And in the Island of S. Michael, he cured, in the presence of all the people, a
woman so possessed with Devils, as her friends were enforced to hold her very
straightly bound with cords, and sometimes in chains of Iron.

From thence being come to the haven of Lapisperius, while he expected
commodity to pass over into Ireland, he was not idle, but among other things
gave order, and himself likewise put hands to a certain Oratory of grates or
lattuce-worke, and encompassed it round with a fense, leaving in the midst a
certain space for the buryall of the dead; and blessed the same. Which was so
efficacious, as that even to this day, from diverse parts are brought thither
many laguishing persons, and ill affected, and from thence return with
strength, and wished comfort.

That same also was very notable, which happened there to a certain insolent
fellow: who being entered into that inviolable Cemeter, with soul and impious
intents to profane the same; he was seized upon by an ugly and horrible Toade,
which suddenly showing it selfforth, with a swelling look fell a spitting of
venom upon him. Whereat the poor wretch being sorely astonished and
affrighted, threw himself over the sacred rayles, even headlong the shortest
way.

But to leave these degressions, and return to S. Malachy; after he had
embarked himself in the said Port, with a good gale, he very happily arrived
at the Monastery of Benchor, to the end that his first Children, perhaps might
likewise be the first, to gain his Benediction. And who were able sufficiently
to express the joy they felt in the reuiew and receiving of such a Father,
returned safe and found from parts so remote? Nor the said Congregation only,
but even all those people also thereabout, did show forth such joy for his
return, that even from Cittyes, Castles, and Towns they ran thither in great
troops, to do him Reverence, and bid him welcome. And he himself, not to hold
his new Legation in vain, without delay endeauours to visit all those
kingdoms, distributing on every side very wholesome gifts of Apostolical
Facultyes, in such sort, as no Sex, nor Age, nor Condition, or Profession
whatsoever remained without feeling of some part of the Comfort.

He celebrated likewise some National Counsels, in the more convenient
Cities. Where, for the sound and Catholic Religion, were most profitable
Canons and Decrees established: carrying in the mean while, his eyes
continually fixed upon the necessityes of every one, and applying remedies all
ways as need required; now with sweetness, and now with severity. Nor was there
here to be found any one that would seem to contradict his precepts, or
proudly contemn his admonishments, but they were rather accepted of all, as
wholesome medicines, and as constitutions derived from Heaven. And how could it
be otherwise, while al was confirmed by so many works above nature. In
testimony whereof, besides those others we have touched already, we will in the
Chapters following relate some others most to our purpose; since to recount and
unfold them all, were not possible: and I on the other side am more willing to
dilate my self in things conducing to Imitation, then such as may only excite
Admiration.

A brief Description of S. Malachyes manner of life, as an introduction to the
ensuing miracles, which he wrought. Chap. 17.
IN my judgment truly, the first, and most stupendous miracle that S. Malachy
wrought, was S. Malachy himself. For why; setting apart the interior man,
whose beauty, worth, and sincerity sufficiently shined most brightly in his
life and actions, what shall we say of the exterior only; which with
conformity of manners, to wit, most modest and decent, he would be always
showing in such sort, as not the least thing could ever be discovered therein,
that might any ways seem to offend the eyes of the beholders? Let us come to
the tongue: It is surely most certain, that for a man not to trip in talking
is a very great perfection. And yet what man, so curious let him be, was ever
known, that could ever espy, or note in S. Malachy, I say not a word, but so
much as an ill gesture? Who ever saw him to move either hand or foot with
vanity? Nay wherein gave he not Edification to his Neigbhours, in walking in his
habit, and semblance? He had so perpetual a serenity in his co^tenance, as
neither with the gravity of Melancholy, or leuity of Laughing, was he ever seen
to be distempered. All was discipline in him, all harmony, all Virtue. He was
an Enemy to scoffs, but yet not austere, or froward. Remiss would he be
sometimes, but dissolute never. Careless in nothing, though in many he knew well
how to dissemble, till time and place. Quiet oftentimes, but yet not once would
seem to be slothful.

From the day of his conversion, unto his last breath, he had never any thing
proper, not servants, nor farms, nor messuages, nor finally any manner of
rents, either Ecclesiastical or secular. For his Episcopal table, he had no
assignement made him at all: yea the good Prelate indeed, had not so much as a
determinate dwelling to put his head in; as he who spent all his life, as it
were, in visiting of Villages and Parishes; so serving the Gospel, and by the
Gospel therefore susteyning himself, according to the order and decree of
our Lord. It is true, that he and his companions, because they would not be
burdensome, or put any to expenses, would mainteyne themselves oftentimes with
the sweat of their brows, and labors of their proper hands. And when at such
times he had need of some rest, he would usually be taking it in pious places,
dispersed by himself here and there through Ireland: and if he chanced to
abide any where, he would always so conform himself to the customs and
obseruances of the house, as neither at Table, or elsewhere, would he seem to
have any thing in particular: nor even at first sight could there any the least
difference be discovered between him, and the rest of the Brothers.

What more can be said of him? Even enough to conteyne many Volumes, his life
was so admirable, and a mirror to all Mortals. But my scope and intention is
only, to demonstrate those things which in his life are most imitable, as I
said above. To proceed then; although our blessed S. Malachy, were now an aged
man, and Legate of the highest Bishop; yet did he never give over his ancient
use to go on foot, to preach himself in person, still causing such others as
he lead along with him to do the like; a form very truly Evangelical, and so
much the more recommendable in S. Malachy, as it is found to be less in
practice with others. Whereas he, who does such things, may worthily be called
the lawful heir, and Successor of the Apostles. What wonder is it then, if
the divine Man, did work such admirable things, he being so admirable
himself, though he wrought them not of himself, but God in him, since we
read; Tu es Deus qui facis mirabilia?

By occasion of the loud acclamations of these his transcendent Virtues, and
most notable working of Miracles; his fame began to spread it self through
out all the neighboring places, nay even over the whole Country; and there
resorted daily many to be cured by him of all kind of diseases; and among the
rest a woman extremely vexed with the devil, who dwelt in a City which is
called Cultafin. Her parents thereupon procured S. Malachy to be sent for: Who
coming into the house, presently fell unto his prayers, and commands the
unjust possessour in the name of the highest, to go forth of that body; he
obeys, but in stantly leapes into another Woman present. S. Malachy perceiving
this, spoke thus to the accursed Enemy of Making: I have not so quit thee of
her, as that thou should seem to assail that other. Therefore I charge thee
again in the name of the Highest, that thou let her go also. The Fiend being
constrained thereto, obeyes, his behest, but yet returns to his former
habitation. When the Blessed Servant of Christ, observing the deceypt of our
Adversary, expells him a new from thence, he then flies again into the second.
This bobb the perverse spirit gave to him for a pretty while, in chopping so
always, and flying from one into the other. At last S. Malachy being stirred
up with a holy zeal, and not without just indignation, to see him so mocked by
all unclean Spirit, recollected himself a little, and resuming more in tense
forces from Heaven, withal violence quite banished him from both: leaving the
cruel Serpent (so full of fraud and deceit) enraged thereat, thinking
perhaps by that policy to make the Holy man desist from further troubling
himself. But peradventure some will admire at this long delay herein, and
resistance of the Adversary, attributing the same (it may be) to the power of
the malignant Spirit. To such persons I answer, that it pleased the Divine
Dispensatour of all things, Qui omnia ben^ and suauiter disponit, to try the
patience of his Servant S. Malachy, and to the end that by such delay and
changes, both the presence of the Enemy, and victory of S. Malachy, more
clearly might appear. Which thing is yet more illustrated, and made to
appear to be true: therefore attend here a while to that which elsewhere this
great Servant of Christ seemed to work, not in person, as before is declared,
but in absence. Which yet surely had been^ great deal more easy for him to
have done at hand, then so same asunder.

A man is dispossessed of evil spirits, by the power of S. Malachy in his
absence. With diverse other miracles besides. Chap. 18
IN the Northern parts of Ireland, in a certain house, where S. Malachy before
had happened to lodge, lay one afflicted, and terribly tormented with Devils.
Who on a night, over heard some discourses they had among them; Wherein they
said to each other: Beware this wretch do not touch any of the straw there,
wherein that Hippocrit had sometimes slept, least perhaps he escape out of our
hands. From which words, the sick man did gather that those infernal Spirits
meant it of S. Malachy; and then taking courage began to approach by creeping
thereunto, as well as he could: but being weak in body, he could not get
thither by crawling; yet was he very strong in faith, for he desisted not to go
forward, as he was able. Whereupon you might hear in the air certain fearful
cries, and perplexed voices, Hold, hold him off, or we loose the prey. But he
tra^sported with hope and desire, made so much the greater have, to reach
thereunto: and through divine Mercy, being come to the blessed Litter of straw,
fell a stretching himself thereon, and wallowing up and down therein: While
the infernal furyes with howling and la^ most bitterly exclamed: Alas, alas,
we have bewrayed our selves: we have deceived our selves. For loc, he is even
now made sound. And so he was indeed, being whole in a moment of all his
lymnes, and freed of the diabolical affrights and horrors, which he suffered.

In Lesmor likewise did S. Malachy deliver a Lunatike person; and made him
whole and perfect in all his senses. Moreover, our great Saint did restore
another person to his former wits, who dwelt in Praginia. And in the same
Country, by causing a frantike woman to wash her self with a water which he
blessed, she was presently released of her chains, and disease. Another woman
in like sort being enraged, so as she would be a biting, and tearing her flesh
with her teeth, was by him through Prayer, and a simple touch only restored to
health. There was like wise a Man, who in phrensy could seem to foretell
certain things to come, and so impetuo^ and terrible withal, as the greatest
cords were hardly able to with hold him. And yet this Man in a moment was freed
also through the prayers of S. Malachy, and restored to his wits. I could name
the place where this fell out; but because it happened in a place of so
barbarous a name, that (as it happens often in many other words of that Nation)
it may scarce seem fit to be expressed with the voice much less represented
with the pen, I think it a thing very convenient, to let it pass namelesse.

There was in the aforesaid City of Lesmor, a certain young girl very dumb,
whom her Parents having humbly put in the presence of S. Malachy, as he passed
along, the man of God made a stop, and touching her tongue with a little of his
spittle, without more ado, in the sight of all, affoarded her the use of
speech. Another time going forth of the Church, with a great train after him,
a woman was presented to him at the Porch, by a distressed Man her Husband,
wholly deprived likewise of her pronunciation. When S. Malachy beheld this
miserable woman, he signed her with the most holy Cross, and commanded her in
the presence of all, to recite the prayer of our Lord: which she presently said
very punctually. The multitude seeing this Miracle, gave glory to the divine
Goodness. In a certain place called Ob^reb, a rich man being mortally sick, had
now for some twelve days continually remained without once being able in any
wise to utter a word, and consequently was hindered from making his Confession.
But S. Malachy coming to visit him, immediately he recovered his lost speech,
and being armed with the Sacraments, with singular Confidence of eternal life,
gave up the Ghost.

A certain Baron being in S. Malachyes Inn, while he was treating there with
him, about some affairs; at one full of faith, stole away but three rushes
only from his poor little Couch, and with that pious theft, wrought wondrous
things; which we have not time to relate in this place. The Man of God being
come to Duenu^ania, there came in to him a Gentleman of that City, as he sat
at table, earnestly beseeching him on the behalf of his wife, who was not
without great fear and danger of her Childbirth, being longer the^ the
ordinary term required. The Bishop of Mehome likewise with others that were
present at that sitting, did very earnestly recommend the case unto him. When
S. Malachy heard this, he answered: I am not a little sorry for it, in reguard
that the is a very good Matron. And without more a do, reaching to the
Husband, a cup by him blessed, added: Go your ways, and give her this drink
and bid her not fear any thing. So the Noble man did as he was commanded, and
the next night without any difficulty at all, the woman was safely delivered.
S. Malachy happening to abide in the Champion countries, with the Count of
Vlidia, behold a woman appeared before him, very great with Child, now at least
for fifteen months and twenty days gone: and who finding no humane remedy,
with piteous tears came seeking for succor from the Servant of Christ.
Malachy being moved with so new and unexpected an accident, puts himself into
Prayer, and sudenly there in the place the poor wretch without any travail at
all, brought forth the creature into the world,

A rehearsal of other miracles of S. Malachy, upon sundry occasions. Chap. 19.
ANother thing yet of no less wonder, though in a diverse kind happened in the
land of Vlidia. A certain Soldier of the Count of Vlidia, having no regard
unto Gods commandments, and without having any fear of his heavy
displeasure, kept the Concubine of his own Brother. Saint Malachy having
notice hereof, performed, like another S. John Baptist, the very same office
of charity in reprehending the wicked man. But that wretchlesse creature,
representing Herod, not only disobeyed him, but made him answer moreover,
with swearing, in the hearing of all, that he would never abandon his Mistress.
S. Malachy, the true servant of Christ, being fraught with the zeal of
Justice, answered, God may then disseuer you, against your will. For which the
incestuous wretch as caring but little, in a most despightfull manner, went his
ways from him. He had scarce gone a mile from that place, and within less
then a full hour, but God punished him for this his enormous crime; by being
assailed by certain men, and that so desperately, as wounds were the beginning
of their fray, and stabbes even to the heart, were the period. In this bloody
on set, his Soul paid for the transgression of his disobedience. For one of
the Ruffians sent him on a rufull message to Grand Lucifer. At this news every
one remained astonished, especially seeing the speedy execution of the sentence
of S. Malachy: and other wicked men being heerby gently admonished, were truly
converted. In the same country, Count Dermitius, through manifest disorders of
Gluttony, and and other Sensualityes, had layne now sick, and unweildy a long
time. This man being visited by S. Malachy, and first sharply rebuked for the
scandal, and ill example he had given, and after blessed with holy water, was
sudenly raised, and beyond the expectation of him and his, very nimbly mounted
on his horse. In the City of Cassel, came one to S. Malachy, with a son of
his, being sick of the palsy craving pity at his hands. The holy Bishop the^
litting up his mind to our Lord, said to the Father of that child: Go thy
ways, for thy son shall recover. He went then, but returned the next
Morning, with the child not yet cured. S. Malachy making his prayer for the
Child some what longer then before, cheered him up, and gave strict order to
the Father of the lame child, to dedicate him to the divine Service, which he
faithfully promised to do. But yet afterward kept not his word. Whereupon the
youth after some years relapsed again into the same palsy.

Another Man likewise brought his son to the holy Man, from parts far
distant. This child had withered feet, and was not able to move a whit. S.
Malachy demanded how the same happened. I think (answered the Man) it was the
work of the Devil, because my son, being, on a time, childishy disporting
himself in a certain meadow, that accursed Fiend (if I be not deceived) made
him to fall a sleep, and then awaking, I know not how, he was found taken in
this manner. And speaking these words, he powered forth abundance of tears, and
humbly prayed the Divine Man, to give his son some succor. Who being
mollifyed therewith (according to his custom) commanded the lame child, to
give himself to sleep while he prayed; who did as much: and when S. Malachy
had ended his prayer, the child immediately stood upon his feet, very iocund
and lusty. The holy man kept him afterward with him, a pretty while, and
iustructed him well in the Rudiments of the Christian Faith, carrying him along
with him, into diverse places with his other Domestiques.

A certain poor Man, served in a Mill of the Monastery of Benchor,
maynteyning himself partly with that labor, partly also with daily alms.
This man had likewise been lame now for these twelve years, in such sort, as
he was compelled to go with his hands on the ground, and trayling his dead
feet after him. Now S. Malachy, beholding him one day before his Cell, to be
somewhat sadder then ordinary; with the bowels of Charity, demanded of him,
the reason why he was so pensive? The disconsolate man answered: You see, alas,
how long now it is, that I miserable Caytiuehaue suffered this same: and how
the hand of God seems verily to oppress me, and for a greater increase thereof
how I receive daily nothing but scorns and reproaches of such, as should
rather compassionate my Case. The benign Father, being wholly moved with these
words, with eyes and hands lifted up toward the Mercy-Seate of God made his
prayer to that Sovereign Judge; and to the end they should be more
efficacious, he retires himself into his Cel, where falling prostrate on the
ground, he most humbly beseeched the divine Mercy, to restore that poor
creature to his formen strength. His prayer was quickly heard. For the Man
arising from the ground, stood up firm on his feet. This thing seemed to him
a Dream, for he did nothing but look about him, to see whether it were true
or no. And yet nevertheless making some proof to move his Legs, and to frame
his Steps, he at last acknowledged the divine Mercy to be showed upon him: and
then nimbly returned home to the Mill, with much joy, and with infinite
rendering of thanks to God. Whereupon his Companions, and the others who knew
right well who he was, remained astonished, and amazed, as it were, at the
sight of some phantasme; attributing the same to the Goodness of God, and the
Sanctity of their blessed Bishop.

In the same place, was a Man cured of the dropsy, through the only
Intercession of S. Malachy. Who afterward remained in the service of the
Monastery.

There was a certain Gentlewoman of parentage very well descended, but yet
far more illustrious for her virtue, which made her most dear to the blessed
Pastor. This woman, was grievously afflicted with the bloody flux; and this
her disease was so vehement, as she, in process of time, was brought to an
extreme debility, and even, through the abundant issuing of blood, was ready
to give and yield up her spotless Soul into the hands of her merciful
Redeemer. Her friends seeing her in this lamentable case, sent a messenger with
all speed to S. Malachy, to entreat him to vouchsafe to come and visit her,
and affoard her some Comfort in this her Extremity. When the holy Bishop heard
this heavy News, he was struck very sad, for the loss he saw would ensue of
a Matron of that great worth and rare Example, as she was of. And sudenly
determined to go his ways thither: but afterward fearing to arrive too late,
called to him Malcus a man of a singular integrity of Conscience, (of whom we
made mention before) and a very dexterous young man. Go your mayes (said he) in
have, it the sickwoman, and carry her these three apples blessed by me; I hope
in our Lord, that having once tasted of them, she shall not come to taste of
Death, before she see me, though I be not otherwise able to come so speedily as
I would. The good Malcus obeyed with expedition: and with efficacious means
exhorted the dying woman to taste of the Present, which was sent her by the
Bishop S. Malachy. She being comforted somewhat with the most grateful name of
her spiritual Father, beekens to her Maid, (being not otherwise able to
speak, or to move her self) to put up her pillow a little. Whereupon, taking one
of the apples, with a trembling hand she began to bite the same, and being
newly revived with the only taste thereof, brake forth into words and praises of
God. By and by her sleep, which together with her taste had now for a good
while been lost, returned to her again, and she reposing with great sweetness,
the blood in the mean time came to make a stop. In so much as being now a wake
without more ado, she found her self to be altogether whole although not
without some manner of weakness, the which notwithstanding by the next day did
likewise leave her, at the unexpected presence of S. Malachy.

A Continuation of the Miracles, which S. Malachy wrought, upon diverse other
Occasions. Chap. 20.
THere dwelt near to Benchor, an Honorable Knight whose wife being arrived at
the article or point of death, S. Malachy was speedily sent for to help her
with fit accomodations, and with the Extreme Unction. Who came thither, and
having cheered her at first with his only aspect, prepares himself to apply the
holy Oil without delay: It seemed notwithstanding to al her friends very
behoouefull (I know not upon what occasion) and far better, to diferre the
same till the next Morning. The good Father (very loath) yields thereunto, and
making the sign of the Cross upon the sick woman, retired himself into the
other Chambers. He had not been there long, but behold you might easily have
heard, some pittyfull cries, plaints, and noyses founding through all the
house, that their Mistries was dead. The blessed man of God hearing this
tumult, runs with his disciples, and approaching to the bed, certainly found
she had given up her last breath. Whereat he was full of sorrow and heauynes,
laying the fault on himself, for that she had so departed without that
Sacrament; and then lifting up his hands to heaven, with great affect. Lord
(said he) I cry thee mercy for I have played the fool, and been too negligent
herein. It is I, even I, that have sinned, with this prolongation, and not
this poor wretch, who for her part had a very good will thereunto. After he had
thus exclaymed, he vowed to take no more Comfort or repose of any sort, till he
had rendered to the dead, what he had wrongfully taken from her: and so standing
with his face over the corpse, endeauours to warm and foment those frozen
limbs with bitter tears, and burning sighs, supplying to his power, the
passed want: and turning toward his Company, from time to time, would besaying
to them: Watch, and pray, So as they with Psalter, and devout prayers, he with
deep Sighs, passed away the whole night, without a wink of sleep; when as lo
the Morning came, it pleased the Divine Clemency, to listen unto the
unspeakable sighs of his most faithful Servant. What more? She opens her
eyes, who was dead before: She sits up right, and knowing S. Malachy, with a
devout bow, saluted him. Whereat as many as beheld the sight, and heard so
meruaylous things, were exceedingly amazed; and all the sadness turned into joy.
Yet S. Malachy, (though there appeared no more danger for the present) very
piously would needs annoint the revived, as knowing well, how assuredly in
that Mystery sins are remitted, and how likewise the body feels a help.
After he had finished this good act, he departed from thence. As for her, she
(to the greater glory of God) suruined for some time in good health: and having
performed the Penance imposed her by S. Malachy, sell sick afterward again,
and with the wonted succors of the holy Church, very happily dyed.

There was moreover a Woman so afflicted with the spirit of anger and fury, as
not only her kinsfolks and neighbors seemed to shun her conversation; but
even her own children could hardly endure to inhabit with her. Wheresoever
she was, there was nothing but scolding, rancour, and a hideous storm, bold,
fyery, audacious, gibing, light of fingers, intolerable, and fastidious to
every one. By reason whereof, her afflicted Children not finding other way of
redress, from so continual and bitter grieuances, resolved to bring her (as
dexterously they did) into the presence of S. Malachy, where breaking forth
into tears and laments, they humbly demand succor of the servant of God. He
taking compassion, as well on the danger of the Mother, as on the Childrens
infelicity, took her a little aside, and dernaunds of her with great affect,
and gracious semblance: Whether she had ever been confessed in her days, and
she answering, No. Do you now then confisse (said he to her.) Which the furious
woman did through divine instinct: and he having enjoined her a convenient
penance, and prayed a while over her, commanded her on the behalf of Christ
our Lord, that from thence forth, she should be angry no more. A thing
incredible: there suddenly grew such a meeknes, and so great a patience in her,
that every one might know, there could be nothing therein, but merely a change
from Heaven. Which was so great a comfort to her children, as cannot be
expressed. She is yet living, and is said to be of so fair a condition, and of
so deep a Tranquillity, as where before she was wont to exasperate and offend
every one; she is now not troubled a whit withal the losses, injuries, or
tribulations that can befall her.

Now let every one, esteem of things as he please. If with the Apostle it may
be lawful for me, to abound in my sense, I dare say, that greater was the
exploit of this amendment, then was the recalling of the Gentlewoman spoken
above from death to life: because in the former was the exterior Man raised,
in the later, only the interior. But let us go forward.

A secular man of good quality, came to condole with S. Malachy for the
sterility of his soul; beseeching him to obtain for him at the hands of God
some plenty of tears. With that, the holy Man of God, with a cheerful
countenance approaching to him, in sign, as it were of friendship, laid his
cheek to his, and added withal, That grace be given thee. From that time
forward, had the lay man so great abundance of water in his eyes, as that
sentence of the Scripture, seemed to be verifyed in him: A Fountain from the
gardens: A spring of living waters. This abundance of tears the Man had to
his dying day, which made his sold white, and pure from the staynes of Mortal
sin. And being so washed and cleansed from those spots of Capital sins,
his innocent Soul ascended on high to him, Qui in altis habitat, there to give
him lauds and praises, and continually to sing the celestial Song of Alleluia.

S. Malachy, through his prayers multiplied Fishes: With other Miracles of that
kind Chap. 21.
SAINT Malachy in trauayling (as we have said) to preach the word of God, did
many Miracles, whereof this is one. The holy Bishop, endeavoring withal power
to spread the Gospel of Christ Jesus, throughout all the Kingdom of Ireland;
fell by chance on a certain Island, in former times very famous for fishing
(...) and for the (...) of the people, reduced in so great a sterility, as the
poor (...) were brought into very hard strayts for want thereof, and ready to
be famished. It was revealed, through the divine Clemency, to a certain woman,
that the intercession of S. Malachy were the only remedy to help them to their
former abundance of fishes. This was the reason that the people (...) about
him, as soon as he was landed, being a great deal more anxious and
sollicitous for fish, then for preaching, or doctrine: for they were never from
his sides, co^iuning him, that laying aside, for the present, all other care
whatsoever, he would vouchsafe to cast his eyes upon their foresaid necessity.
But the true servant of Christ, answered them, that he was come thither, not to
catch fishes, but souls: yet they not withstanding, went still recommending
themselves with so much more fervor, as at last it seemed good to S. Malachy,
not to see light by the notable faith which they showed. Kneeling then down on
the same shore, he besought our Lord to affoard the grace to these men, though
altogether un worthy thereof. His prayer no sooner came to the divine throne,
then a good quantity of fishes somewhat greater then usual ascended to the top
of the water, and even to this day does the plenty continue. What wonder is it
then, that the prayer of the Just, which penetrates heaven, should likewise
diue into the Abysses, and call from thence such like, and so many squadrons of
waterish creatures?

On a time S. Malachy, with three other Bishops, arrived at the town of (...),
where they all lodged, at the house of a certain Priest; who finding himself,
but ill provided for such Ghests as they, said to S. Malachy: How shall I do,
trow you, that have no manner of fish at all? Seek for some, answered he, of
the Fishermen. O, replied the Priest, It is now two years since that there
could none be found in the river, in so much as these poor men, through
despair have been faigne to abandon the trade. Then S. Malachy replied. Do you
cause in the name of God, the nets to be cast. Which was accordingly performed,
and at the first draught there came up some twelve Salmons at once, and as many
at the second: so as all the company had meat enough to feed on, and to
celebrate the Eternal Benignity. And to the end, that ^his thing* without all
controversy, might be attributed to the Me^its of S. Malachy, after the feast
was consumated, the former steri^ity did return, and so continued for two
years.

From these pleasant adventures, and as it were of sport, let us pass to a
grave example of the divine Severity, yet ever mixed with his wonted Mercy.
There was in Lesmor a Clerk, of good example for the rest, but of Faith not so
orthodoxe. This man taking much complacence in his knowledge, and for the
sharpnes of wit which he took himself to have, durst impiously affirm, that
in the Eucharist, howbeit the Sacrament were there, or Sanctification, to say
rather; yet was there not therefore, the Thing of the Sacrament (as Deuines use
to say) that is the real Body, and Blood of Christ our Lord. Upon which so
abominable error of his, being often secretly admonished by S. Malachy, but
ever in vain; at last he was cited to appear before a certain Congregation
of Ecclesiastical persons, without the access of, any secular person, that
with the least shame that were possible, he might come to acknowledge his
error. License was there given him, freely to propound and argue: he
endeavored withal the forces he had to maintain his falsehood. But S. Malachy
disputing against him, and with lively reasons, and found authorityes showing
how far he was from the truth (and besides S. Malachy, the rest likewise,
confuted him) yet notwithstanding that arrogant man persisted, still in his
diabolical opinion: he departed from thence indeed much confounded, but not
amended, shamefully alleging he was not convinced through force of learning,
but merely ouerborne and oppressed with Episcopal power. And thou Malachy (he
stuck not to say) should not have dealt with me in this manner, in speaking
thus against the truth, and (if thou will but confess the matter as it is)
even in truth against your own Conscience. The holy Pastor being exceedingly
contristated with so pertinacious an impudency as well for the loss of that
erring soul, as for the love of the Catholic Faith, causes the Clerk anew
to make his appearance in a more solemn and numerous assembly: and here the
fallacyes and vanity of that contumacious wretch, being afresh laid open, and
confuted he publicly exhorted him to acknowledge the falsehood, and depose his
pertinacy. The same admonition did many other Priests and the grauest Prelates
affoard him. But being not able to (...) move him an inch, at last they declare
him a manifest Heretic, and by consequence divided from Christian Society.
And yet notwithstanding all this, that ignorant and proud Wretch, perseuering
still in esteeming himself more wise and learned then all that were present,
and further vpbrayding them for partiality, whereas he only freely but defended
the Gospel; S. Malachy at last being preuoked therewith, spoke out with a
loud voice: Since thou (...) willingly confess the Truth, let God then make
thee to confess it by force. An^ the Heeretike answering, Amen, the Council
was dismissed: and that excommunicated person, not being able to suffer so
great dishonor and infamy, determined to run into some foreign parts; and
now with his fardell was in readynesse for the way, when behold him overtaken
on a suddayne with a grievous infirmity; and feeling his strength to fail him,
he cast himself on the ground very weary and anxious.

In the mean time, there happened to pass by, a certain vagabond distracted
fellow: Who seeing him lie on the ground i^ that manner, demanded of him; what
do thou here? And the miserable Wretch answered, he was not well, and
therefore not able to go backwards or forwards. This malady (said the mad man)
is nothing else but death it self; Get up then and go home again, and I will
help thee. Which words were not uttered by chance, but through Divine
disposition, that he might be co^streyned to obey a mad fellow, that would not
seem to consent to so many learned and wise men. I^ sum, being guided by
him, he was faygne to return back into the City against his will, where
having now better bethought himself, at last comes truly to repent his crime,
and with a great deal of contrition causes the Bishop to be sent for to him,
and as it were in a moment confesses the fault, detests the opinion, receives
absolution, and gives up the Ghost. In this manner that delict seemed to cost
him no less then his life, and as many as had heard the imprecation, were
astonished at the efficacy thereof.

Two notable accidents, upon certain faythles Men, for breach of accord with
S. Malachy and another Bishop, about certain differences amongst them, Chap.
21.
GReat, doubtless was the travail, which S. Malachy took, in the reduction of
that man we mentioned above. But he suffered no less pains, nor showed he
less virtue, in according certain people, now entered into a sharp
contention in matter of Confines. At what time S. Malachy resided in the
Conue^t of Benchor, those people happened to be in a great difference; to
compose which, on all sides they accorded to stand to the arbitrament of S.
Malachy the true Servant of Christ Jesus. But he was at that time very much
troubled with many cares, which was the reason he gave the charge to decide
that co^trouersy to another Bishop. But he also excused himself, saying, that
S. Malachy, and not he, was required for the effect. And therefore he desired to
be quitted of that toil, for that they would contemn him, and he take pains
to no purpose. Go your ways (says he) and our Lord shall be with you. And the
other Bishop replied: I am content to undertake the charge, but if they listen
not to me, then know for certain that I will send for you to determine this
debate, which is risen amongst them. At which words, S. Malachy smiling: Do so
then, answered he. Whereupon the Bishop condescended to undertake the task, and
so departed.

Within a short time after, this Bishop caused the parties to be assembled
together. The cause was thoroughly debated on both sides: and for that time they
were attoned, in such sort as they came to the signing of some articles of
agreement between them, agreed upon with full Consent on all sides: and
theerupon they went home to their own howses. But scarce were they gone on the
way, when one of the Company being tempted by the accursed enemy of Mankind,
raised a sedition between them, having a fair opportunity offered him. For
the other was turning homwards careless on the way, supposing they were now
out of all danger, and therefore were naked, I mean, without any manner of
defensive or offensive weapons about them. Whereupon that wicked Company whereof
we first spoke, began to say among themselves: What do we stand upon? We have
already the victory in our hands, and we may now work our own revenge. With
this fatal resolution they furiously turning back, made have to overtake them
on the suddayne, and unawares. Which the Bishop perceiving hyed him to the
Captain of that Rout, or assembly, and began to complain for so great an
injustice, and for so open and intolerable a treason; but his complaynt
auayling little, he adds protestations, he alleges the respect and
authority of him that sent him thither, he menaceth the wrath of God, and in
fine used all possible means to divert him from so great a perfidiousnes. But
the barbarous man, after he had let him a while conjure and cry, at last
turning himself to him with a proud countenance: Do you think (answered he)
that for your sake we should let the malefactors get out of our Claws, whom
God as a prey, has so delivered to us? Then the poor Bishop remembering
himself of the admonishment given at his departure, stretching his eyes and
arms toward the Monastery began vehemently to weep and exclayme: O man of
God, where are you now? Where are you? Did not I presage as much before? O
Father? Wretch that I am, unhappy (...) Hither I came to do good, and not any
hurt. And behold beer, through my occasion do those there loose their bodies,
and these their souls.

In this manner the good Prelate went up and down afflicting himself, and
calling upon his S. Malachy. When on a sudden among the wicked Persecutours,
was heard a terribly voice, (nor could it ever be known from whence it came)
as if certain other of their Neighbors with armed troops, had made some
incursio^ into their country, and put all to fire and sword, leading their
wives and children captives without mercy. At which rumor, though vain, their
boldness immediately being repressed, every one betook him to his heels,
leaving the rest to shift for themselves: and as it chances in like tumults,
the confusion was so great, as the hind most not having once heard the said
voice, nor knowing wherefore, let themselves be led by the foremost, until such
time as coming into their country, and fynding there no such matter as they
stood in fear of, remained ashamed, and came to know, how in recompense of the
malice and pride, which they had showed to the messenger of S. Malachy, they
had through divine Judgment, been given into the power of the Spirit of Lying.
Whereat the Bishop rejoicing, he speedily returned back to carry the news to S.
Malachy. Who seeing things notwithstanding as yet very broken, and still
fearing new disorders, determined to go thither in person, to establish
between those s^uage Nations, a sound and sincere concord indeed.

But yet neither could he for the present seem to bring his design to pass,
in regard the Conditions being freshly renewed, not without much ado, and
particular oaths having been taken of such, as the business concerned, those
who had been abused, being mindful of the injury done them before, did
impiously agree among themselves to cry quit^ance with the periurious and
perfidious people: And so they went after them, as sure to overtake them
embroyled with domestique cares, whereby they might handle them as they list.

But it fell out, through divine dispensation, that having easily passed over a
certain great River, which lay in the way, they were yet stayed with a little
brook, not far off, and in despite of themselves were constreined to make a
stop. For now to them it seemed to be more then the wonted brook, yea a very
huge water, which on every side denied them passage; in so much as being al in
admiration, they said: Whence comes this inundation? the weather is fair, the
mountains without snow, there has fallen no rain of late; and though it
should chance to have rayned, yet which of us can remember this little
torrent, with any waters ever to have been swollen in this sort, as to come thus
to cover the land, and to over flow the champaines? The hand of God without
doubt is here. He has cut off our way, for love of this Saint, whose pacts we
have not observed, and have likewise violated his precepts. So as these also
without satisfying their greedy desires, full of shame, and dread, now turned
their backs. The fame whereof was spread all about, and every one blessed the
Divine Majesty, that knows so well to catch the crafty in their own snares;
to pull down the crests of the proud; and to exalt such as humbly and
faithfully serve him. Which is likewise made more manifest in the case we shall
presently tell you.

Two other terrible examples of the judgment of God, showed upon the
contemners of S. Malachy; yet mingled with mercy for his sake. Chap. 23.
A Principal Gentleman of Ireland, falling out with one of those Kings, though
he dealt about reconciliation, yet by no means would he seem to trust him,
unless such a one as S. Malachy at least would seem to interpose himself as
surety between them. And certaynely not without cause, as the sequel will make
apparent. For as much as that Gentleman assuring himself, not so much upon the
word of the King, as on the authority and promise of the mediator, who was
even S. Malachy himself, while appearing in public he walked without fear
at all, behold unawares is cast into prison by the King; who could not subdue
the inueterated passion in him, nor Christianly forget that ancient hatred. The
friends and kinsfolks of the poor knight beholding him with their infinite
sorrow in manifest peril of death, recurre to S. Malachy; under whose surety
that other had put himself into the power of the King.

The Servant of Christ, being stricken heerwith, and affronted withal at so
just a quarrel, what he intends to do in this case, we will declare. Having so
sure a foundation, as the past promise of the King, he quickly reares up a
strong Bull warke against ensuing assaults, and endeauours withal power to
suppress this enormous treason; to effect which, he musters up a brave army,
to wit, a good company of his disciples, and with them presenting himself
before the king, demands the prisoner at his hands: and being shamefully
denied. You wrong (says he) at once the divine Majesty, your self, and me, in
violating the pact. And if you have no care thereof; yet have I truly. This good
man was persuaded by me; he founded himself upon my word. If he chance to dye,
I am he that have betrayed him, and am by consequence guilty of his blood: to
what purpose would you seem to make me a Traitor, and you disloyal? Then
know for certain, that neither I, nor these of mine, are resolved to taste any
food, until such time, as the innocent, be put into liberty, as be ought. That
said, he entered with them into the Temple, where all that day, with the next
night, they perseuered together in Fasting and Prayer. But the King who dwelt
hard by, fearing least their prayers, he being so near, might seem to have
too much force vphim, with a foolish caution and advise, took the resolution
to absent himself from thence. But he no sooner was departed, but God, who
reserues revenge unto himself, stroke him blind, and having lost wholly his
sight, was glad to restore the prisoner; and to be as an other Saul to Ananias,
so he to the holy Bishop, being led unto him, where humbly craving pardon, and
mercy, through the benign and fervent intercession of him, that could not be
mindful of injuries, with a double miracle he had presently his sight. And in
fine, the Gentleman being delivered, an inviolable friendship was accorded on.
This surely was a great demonstration of the divine Judgment; but perhaps,
this other, which (God assisting us) we intend to declare, will by the wise
arbitratours, be held no less.

We have related above, that S. Malachy accepting the Abbay of Benchor, being
content with the Church, and Seat, had voluntarily yielded the rents and
demeanes to a certain lay man. This man paying as commonly is wont so great a
benefit with great discourtesy and ingratitude, from the time he entered into
the administration of those goods, began to use many insolences against the
holy Abbot and against his Religious; annoying them in every thing* persecuting
them on every side, and endeavoring always to vilify, and denigrate their
actions and deportments; but he escaped not free for so great injustice. He had
an only son, who through the example of the wicked Father being likewise bent
to molest and offend the Man of God, within the term of a year only, made a
miserable End. The matter succeeded in this sort.

It seemed good to S. Malachy, for the increase of divine worship, to build an
Oratory of stone work, as he had seen done in other countries, and the
foundations now being laid, those barbarous people, fell a wondering thereat,
as at a thing very unusual with them. But that malicious and proud young man
above the rest, of whom we spoke, showed not only with the others an
admiration thereof, but such rancour withal, as he could not conteyne himself
from murmuring here and there against the same: and after he had with diverse
instigations and calumnies endeavored to stir up those people against the
Servant of Christ; at last coming with a shole of Townsmen, upon the heat of
the business, and with a scornful eye, beholding S. Malachy. Hold (says he) O
you Sir: what cappriccio is now come into your head, to bring such a nouelty
into our house? We are in Ireland, not in France: What a lenity is this? What
need is there of such a sump^uous and proud work? Where have you means to
finish it, poor thing as you are? Who shall ever see it come to the roof? It
is surely the trick of a mad man, to set hand to a work so beyond his
compass. Hold, hold your hand; Desist from, a vanity so great, or otherwise
shall we make you give over, nor will we suffer you to go forward by any means
about such a building, impossible to be brought to perfection. In which words,
the hayr^brayne and rash man came to discover his wicked intention: without
once reflecting on his small forces. Forasmuch as his followers* in whom he
confided so much, as soon as they came in sight of the venerable Bishop, being
suddenly changed in heart, returned home to their houses; that impious,
seditious and wretched Leader being quite aboandoned, as he deserved. To whom
with Fortitude and Meroy withal, the man of God, answered: Thou miserable
wretch, this work which thou here see begun, and beholdest with an ill
countenance; shall be finished without doubt, and many shall see it
accomplished. But thou, because thou have no will thereunto. shall never see
it: And look you to it, least Death surprise you not in your sin. So S.
Malachy said, and so fell it out. He dyed, and the work was finished: but he
saw it not, because, as we said; he dyed the very same year.

Now the Father of that wicked wretch, having known of the Saints prediction,
he has killed (says he) my son, and was so incensed against him for it, as in
the presence of the Captain and of the Chief of the Country there, he had no
respect to him a whit, but called him Envious, hollow-harted, and a mere
Cosener; and lastly for a greater spite, termed him a Moncky. To which bitter
contumelies, the follower of Christ answered not a word: But yet the great God
would not seem to hold his peace, through whose will, on that very day, that
impious wretch, being seized on by an infernal spirit, and cast into the fire,
was by his friends very hardly taken forth from thence, with his lymmes all
burnt, with his wits cracked, with his face awry and foaming as the mouth;
sending forth such horrible cries, and framing such strange gestuures of the
body, as put a terror into every one, and many together had much a do to hold
him. Heerupon Saint Malachy was called to the spectacle, and with wonted
clemency making his prayer for him, was heard, but not to the full; Because
that in chastisement and memory of the offense committed against the holy
Father; he had after that, even to this day, certain grievous fits, which at
changes of the Move, do most bitterly afflict him.

S. Malachy lights on a treasure to build with, the medell was presented to him
in a vision. Together with his gift of Prophesy. Chap. 24.
Return we now to the building: for which in truth, S. Malachy had no manner
of means at all, either little or much; but yet felt in his heart, a certain
firm confidence in God. Whereof he was not a whit deceived; since our Lord,
perceiving this Servant of his not to go founding himself in treasures any
ways by him purchased, made him to light upon one, within the situation it
self, never touched or known till that very hour. S. Malachy then seemed to
find in the purse of God, what he could not have found in his ownes and that
worthily truly. For what was more reasonable, then for him to have the coffer
in common with God, who had nothing proper of his own? While he in fine, that
has a lively faith, has all the riches of the world. And what else is the
world, but an inexhanstible Banck of the divine Clemency? The whole circuit of
the world is mine (says he) and whatsoever is contained therein. And hence it
is that S. Malachy discovered those moneys, not disposing the or laying them
up, but exposing them indeed; ordeyning so large a donary of the Creator,
should wholly without sparing a whit be spent in the service of the Creator:
and so much the rather, as by a passed Revelation, he knew that Edifice to be
acceptable to his divine Majesty. Because that having first before he once set
hand unto it, conferred the intent with his Domestiques, and finding them
somewhat dubious, by reason of the charges; he gave himself to prayer, to find
out by that means the will of God thereupon.

When returning one day from a certain Pilgrimage, which he made, being now
somewhat near to the place designed, he lifted up his eyes, and behold, he
seemed to discern a very goodly Oratory of stone, and of excellent workman
ship withal, and regarding the site, the former, and composition thereof,
impressed the same in his fantasy with that tenacity, as the thing being
communicated with some few of his own disciples of the more ancient sort of
them, he gave beginning to the building, and finished with such diligence the
site, the model, and prorportion, with all the circumstances, by degrees, as
the plot came just to answer the fold; as if he also with Moses had heard,
See you do all according to the plat-forme, which was ^hewed you in the
mountain. He had afterward a like vision to this of that other Oratory, which
he built in a place called Sabelline; saving that he saw the fashion not only
of the Oratory there, but eue^ of the whole Monastery like wise.

These said manifestations were of material and sensible things. But that which
now we shall set down, was of an edifice merely spiritual. S. Malachy
passing a long by a certain City, and a great multitude concurring thither to
meet with him, by chance he discovered among the troops, a young man very
curious to view him, who mounting on the top of a huge stone, was standing
there a tip^oe, for that purpose to behold him, exte^ding forth his neck as
much as he could: and S. Malachy being certifyed from heaven, how that person
stood there with the spirit and virtue of Zacheus, yet the friend of God held
his peace for that time, making show as if he had not ^eeded the same. But
after at night in his Lodging, he told some of his how he had not seen him
only, but also foreseen what should betyde him. The third day was not passed,
when that devout man ^ppeared at his Inn, in the company of a Gentleman his
Master: who courteously proposing to S. Malachy, the good defires of the young
man, besought his Paternity to accept him, among his children, and followers.
S. Malachy acknowledged him presently, and added: He had no need to be
reco^mended by men, who already by God had bin so recommended to him. And so
taking him Iouingly by the hand consigned him to other Fathers, and Brothers of
his, and lives (if I be not deceived) at this day, a chief Lay-Brother in the
Monastery of S^ria, with an excellent fame of religion and sanctity.

The Blessed Bishop, like wise showed a great gift of Prophesy, even at the
time of his saying Mass when being aware of a certain crime which lay hid in
the Deacon, for that time did no more but look upon him, and fetch a sigh, but
after the sacred Mystery was ended, he examined the minister himself in
secret, as touching his conscience and he ingenuously confessed, that night he
had felt an illusion. Whereupon the most chaste Priest enioyning him a secret
pe^nance; this day, said he, thou ought not to appear at the Altar, but
chastely and modestly rather to have withdrawn thy self, and to have carried
the respect due to the most holy Sacrament: to the end that being purged with
such humiliation, thou might have been found more worthy hereafter to so
noble an office.

And so another time, while he was offering the Host, with accustomed reverence
and purity of heart. There was a glorious dove seen to enter in at the window of
the Temple, which illumining the whole Church, that was somewhat obscure before,
after it had flown here and there, came lastly to rest upon the Cross, before
the face of the Celebrant. He that served was astonished at the nouelty as well
of the light, as of the Bird itself, (which is rarely seen in those cou^tryes)
and as half dead, fell groueling on the ground, so as he hardly came to
himself all the time of the ministry. When Mass was ended S. Malachy did
forbid him under mortal sin, to discover the thing as long as he lived. He
being at Ardmach, in company wi^ another Bishop his Colleague, they arose by
night together will others, to visit devoutly the Sepulchers of the holy
Martyrs there laid up in the Cemeter of the blessed Patrick. And behold how one
of those Aultars did seem to burn into lively flames. Whence S. Malachy
ghessing the great merits of such as reposed there, ran in of a suden, and
plunging himself into the midst of the flames, with open arms embraced the
Altar. Where what he did, or felt in the place there is no man knows. This is
true, that the Man of God came forth of that fire more enflamed with celestial
Love, then ever: as all his more dearest friends very easily perceived.

S. Malachy remembering his purpose, calls a Synod about the Palls. And
undertakes a second voyage to Rome. Chap. 25.
NOw at last, let us here make a stop to the signs and prodigyes from the
divine arm, showed forth in favor of S. Malachy by an entire catalogue
thereof. It suffices that noting the same with some diligence, which we have
already touched, the Judicious will assuredly acknowledge all the species, at
least of the ancient miracles; as Prophesies, Revelations, Chasticements of the
wicked, Healths of body, Conuersions of mynds, Resurrection of the Dead.
Besides which, through his so excellent virtues, he was magnifyed of our Lord
likewise in the sight of Kings, and the greatest Men: he was full of merits,
and after many and grievous persecutions, surmounted at last, even Envy it
self. From so honorable a Race, what might be expected here, but a glorious
issue? Let us now see then in what manner he went forth.

On a day S. Malachy, and the Brethren together were in a holy recreation,
conferring amongst themselves of the last passage: and every one being invited
by turns, discovered where, and when it would like him best to depose his
terrene carkas, while some insinuating one, and some another solemnity; some
this, some that Cemeter or Churchyard; S. Malachy (when it came to his turn to
answer) standing first a little in suspense, for the place distinguished: That
if he were to remain in Ireland, it would be most grateful to him, to be
where he might arise in the company of the holy Apostle S. Patricke: and if in
foreign parts, no where more willingly would he repose his bones, then in the
church of Clareuallis. As for the time he chose the day of All-soules: to the
end to be accompanied then with greatest number of suffrages, that might be.
Now if this were S. Malachyes desire, he had the favor afforded; If an Oracle,
it missed not a jot, as we shall see.

The fervent desire, which S. Malachy ever had to adorn the two Metropolitans
with the sacred Palls, was not a whit extinguished, though for a time buried in
the ashes of oblivion. Which now he vnraked, and was wholly enflamed with a
desire to put it in present execution. Which to perform effectually, after he
had recommended himself to our Lord, he gathered a general Synod in Ireland:
and after the dispatch of other particulars, came to the foresaid point of the
Palls. The proposition pleased all for the most; but with condition, that the
enterprise should be committed to some other, besides him. Yet notwithstanding
S. Malachy made great instance to go, in regard Pope Innocent was dead, and
Eugenius, a Monk of Clareuallis, was mutually chosen for his Successor: yet
had he no cause to fear a repulse, in renewing of his memorial; for he was a
Man of that benignity and sanctimony, as the fame thereof spread it self
throughout the world: and likewise in respect, Pope Eugenius for public
affairs, was then resident in France, which was a short way, and less
dangerous, then the first he undertook. The Prelates perceiving the great
desire he had to undergo that paynefull journey, durst not much oppose
themselves against the will of the holy man, but consented to his desire: Which
he undertook as soon as the Council was dissolved.

Amongst a great number of his friends, which accompanied him to the Sea side,
one was called by name Catholicus, who was sorely molested with an Epilepsy; in
such sort as often times in a day he would fall on the ground, to the exceeding
great brusing of his whole body, which to prevent he had always one to attend
upon him. This miserable wretch turning himself to S. Malachy, with a
lamentable voice, and full of tears, said. Ay me, Father, you go now your
ways, and know in how great, and how many afflictions you leave me, and yet
can you help it, if you please: and though I for my sins, have, and do
deserve all evil, yet alas, what fault have these poor Brothers done, to
whom for my sake is not permitted an hour of rest? with this plaint the heart
of the Blessed Bishop was as it were, now spilt asunder: When he deerly
embracing the sick man, made the sign of the Cross on his breast, saying:
Rest secure yet, and be confident that you shall not fall into the like fit
again, till my return. That malady the poor man had sustained for six years
together. But now at the only speech of S. Malachy, he was recovered in such
sort, as he never fell more thereinto, being in a moment delivered from so
grievous, and bitter a pain, and the assistants themselves from a long and
yrksome a custody.

After which, as S. Malachy was taking ship, came two of his most inward
friends to him, for to crave a notable boon at his hands; and he demanding
what their request was: we will not tell you, said they, till you promise us
first to comfort us: he promised so to do; then they replied. We will (said
they) that you faithfully promise us another thing, which is to make your
return to Ireland again, very safe and sound: the very same did all the
others beseech him. Whereupon the servant of Christ, retiring a little, as he
was wont, within himself; and being sorry first for having so engaged his
word, not knowing how to discharge himself, being ^ing on the one side to come
out of debt, and sorry on the other (...), leave Clareuallis. But after the
same, at last resolved with himself, to comply with that which pressed him
most, that is, not to fail in his promise, remitting the rest to the divine
pleasure. Then though with an evil will he answered, yea: and his disciples
being comforted not a little heerwith, he caused them to hoyse up sail. But in
the midst of the Sea, he was driven back again upon the cost of Ireland, by a
sudden contrary wind. Where he landed, and passed the night in a Church of his,
acknowledging and thanking the divine goodness, for that without the prejudice
of any, he had by that means acquit him from all wherein he was bound to his
Monks. And in the morning being afresh embarked, he landed very happily on
the same day in the Kingdom of Scotland, and after two days more arrived at
Verdestagnus, where leaving certain subjects for a Cistercian Abbay which he
had founded there, he pursued his journey, and being honorably received by King
David, in the confines there, staying in that place for some days, not without
a great deal of fruit, he passed into England.

In Gisburne in England S. Malachy cures a woman of a Canker. And after arriues
at Clareuallis, where he falls mortally sick. Chap. 26.
SAINT Malachy at his entrance into the kingdom of England lodged in the
Canonry of Gisburne: where he contracted a very straight friendship with those
Priests there of singular fame. Moreover in that place, a woman was presented
to him, very much deformed, and eaten with a horrible Canker: He blessed a
little water, and therewith sprinkled the soars so efficaciously, as the
pains thereof sudenly ceasing, the next day they could hardly be seen.

Departing from thence, he went to the Sea side, where he met withan unlooked
for impediment, caused through certain differences risen at that time between
the Apostolic Sea, and the King of England about jurisdiction; which were
then grown so hot, as he through abounda^t iealousy permitted no Prelate to
go forth of the Island; and for the same respect, was the Bishop Malachy
likewise retained for some time. Who on the one side though he were sorry to be
delayed in that sort from his businesses: yet was he not aware on the other
side, that this very delay seemed to favor his vows, and designs. Because,
if he had presently gone into France, he had been feign, leaving Clareuallis,
and passing the Alps, with diligence to have measured the greater part of
Italy; the Pope Eugenius being already gone forth of France, and approached to
Rome. Where as now by this delay through a sea-passage, his journey by divine
providence came to be disposed in that manner as he arrived at Clareuallis,
even at the point himself desired. Where being received by us, as an Angel
descended from Paradise; what a light seemed to shine upon this our habitation,
and what a solemn Feast was it for us al? and I my self now trembling, and
weak as I was, being revived with the news, ran full of exultation and
iubiley to his holy kisses and embraces; and he reciprocally, showed himself
to us, as he was wont, very pleasant and affable, and wonderfully grateful to
every one.

Now by this time were some four or five days of our common gladness passed
over, when behold on the Feast of the glorious S. Luke the Evangelist, after he
had with extraordinary devotion celebrated Mass in public, he was taken with
a fever. Whereupon falling down on his bed, he fell sick, and all our joy was
turned ^o sadness; though somewhat moderated the while, in that the fever as yet
was not very violent nor rigid. So as recovering hope, you might have seen,
what running there was up and down in the house, some to provide medicines,
some to apply some^tations, some to bring him meat, some to exhort and
entreat him to eat, every one striving to serve such a Ghest, and accompting
themselves most happy that could have most access to that holy and blessed man
When S. Malachy beholding the^ with a benign countenance: All these pains
(would he say) are too much for you to take: but yet for your sakes I refuse
them not, and willingly do what you command me. He knew right well his latest
hour approached: and to his companions, who would seem to comfort him with
saying there appeared in him no mortal sign, It is convenient (would he
answer) by all means that Malachy this year depart this life. The day
approches now, which I, as you very well know, have always wished to be the
last of my short days. I know well in whom I trust: and now that I have part
of my intent, I am certain, and secure in like sort that my desire shall be
granted in the rest. He that brought me through his clemency to this place I
desired so much; will not deny me the time nor term: and for as much as
concerns this weary body of mine, I will here repose it: for the soul he
shall provide for it, who gives salvation to such as put their trust in him:
Nor have I any small confidence in the same dya, wherein by the living is
purchased so great a help to the dead.

And now approached full near the day indeed, when he spoke so freely of it:
so as not to loose any time, he craved for the Extreme unction. And while the
Monks were about to descend into the Church to fetch the holy Oil with
procession thence unto his chamber, he would not seem to consent thereunto by
any means: but would in person be led down thither, where with the greatest
veneration that might be, having taken the holy Oil, as also the heavenly
Viatique, he returned to his bed, and recommended himself to the prayers of
the Brethren, as he likewise mutually recommended the^ to our Lord. And it is a
meruaylous thing, how from an upper chamber that was somewhat high, wherein he
was lodged, he came forth and descended on his feet, while he affirmed not
withstanding, that death had knocked at the door. And yet, who would believe
it? He was not pale in the face, nor meagre, nor wrinckled in the brow, nor had
his eyes funck, nor his nose sharp, nor his lips co^tracted, nor black his
teeth, nor lean and slender his neck, nor cru^pt in the shoulders, nor finally
had he the flesh of the whole body any whit fallen away. Thus far has my pen
gone on its course; now it seems, as it were, to run a ground, and loath to
pass to that which by all means is convenient to be written, as immediately
follows.

The blessed Death of the most venerable Bishop S. Malachy. With a miracle
which fell out after. Chap. 27.
THe joyful Commemoration of All Saints, arrived at last; when we entered into
the Quire, but with a doleful music, and yet was it necessity for us to sing
in mourning. S. Malachy though he could not sing, yet mourned not, but rejoiced
rather for his approach so near to the triumph at hand. His defect of voice he
supplied with a iubiley of the mind. He honored that Blessed Society, whereof
he was very soon to make up one he paid to others that tribute, which within
little after was likewise to be paid to him: The sacred Offices being ended,
as well as they could be, S. Malachy now approached, not to night, but even to
Aurora, as it were; not was it Aurora indeed, since darkness being now banished,
the day was come: so as the fever renforcing it self, the vital parts began
through all the lyms to put forth first a boiling, and then a cold sweat. To the
end that even that blessed soul it self like wised might seem to pass
through fire and water, into rest.

And now hope being quite lost on all sides, and each one resuming his own
prognosticat, and acknowledging those of the sick to be likewise true; we were
called on his behalf to the Cel where he lay, and he casting his eyes toward
us: With a great desire (said he) have I desired to make this present Pascha
with your Charities: Thanks be to the supernal piety, that I see not my self
defrauded of my hope. If I be able I shall not be unmindful of you. Go to, I
shall. I have put my trust in God, and every thing is possible to the belieuer.
I have loved God, I have loved you: Love is without term. Hereupon looking up
to heaven, he adds, O Lord conserve these in thy name, and not these only, but
all those who by means of thy word, and my ministry, have been dedicated to
thy holy service. After which imposing hands upon all, one by one, he makes us
to go rest our selves: alleging the extremest article was not yet arrived. We
went our ways then, and about midnight, being newly awaked, we ran to him
again, who was now upon departure. The chamber, and all the house was filled;
there having been besides our own family, many Abbots repaired hither from
other places. And so with psalms, hymns, and spiritual Canticles accompanied
we our friend in his way homwards.

Thus S. Malachy Bishop of Ireland, and Legate of the Apostolic Sea,
assumpted as it were from our hands by the Angels, in the year of our Lord.
1148. and of his age 54. in the day and place by him chosen and prognosticated
before, most peaceably slept in our Lord. And may be said to sleep; Since we
all having our eyes fixed upon that venerable face of his, were none of us
aware of his last breath; there not appearing in the dead the least sign to
distinguish him a whit from what he was living. And such was the freshnes of
that whole angelical countenance of his, as he might seem to have received
rather an ornamet from death, then any injury at all. And finally himself was
not changed a whit, but he changed us rather: For So Much as in a moment, our
mourning was turned to Iubiley, playnt to song, and the domestical discipline
also, which was somewhat troubled before with so grievous an accident, was now
retur^ed to its frame again.

The sacred Body being taken out of the chamber, upon Ab^ots shoulders, was
carried (according to his own design) into ^he Chapel of the most blessed
Virgin. There were the Exequies ^erformed with great celebrity; the Mass was
solemnly sung, nor was there any want of those diligences, which appertain to
such work of piety. Nor is it to be silenced the while, how a certain ^hild
standing in the mean time a pretty way off, with a dead arm ^f his, not
without a grievous impediment and deformity to him; I my self being aware
thereof, becked to him, to come to me, when ^^aking the withered arm, I
applied it to the hand of the glorious Bishop, and he publicly on a sudden,
retired from thence with is arm, and hand made whole and sound. That done,
those Organs of the holy Ghost, were deposed in the appointed Sepulcher.

In this manner the good S. Malachy, having happily run his ^ariere, went his
ways to the immortal crowns: leaving us all ^o less full of solid
edification, then of laudable Envy. It rests now O Savior, and our Jesus, that
as we being put in trust with this most ^oble treasure of yours, ready to
restore it whenever you shall be pleased tn require the same: so your Majesty,
would vouchsafe not ^o take it from hence, without the spoils of so many
companions and friends; but as we have had him, as a Ghest, and Conuictour ^n
this transitory life; so may we have him as a Guide and Conductor unto heaven,
for to reign there with thee, and him, world without and.

FINIS.
S. ANTONY.
THE ARGUMENT.
Speak, Oyee shores, near which the Sun does rise,
How bright from you his golden Chariot flies,
Reflecting his strong luster on your streams,
And makes your gemmes vye purple with his beams:
Express you this, and we may parallel
The glorious light that issued from the Cell
Of this dear Saint; which made the enamored sky,
To wonder at a State, so low, so high.
Behold his fasting, watching, daily strife
With hellish Foes, his troubles during life;
Yet like the Palm with greater burden pressed
Raised more aloft, by pains obtaining rest.
Contempt of riches did a treasure gain
Immortal, precious. He cast down, does raygne
Above the Sphaeres. And we from him may know
Heavens high way lies not through the world below.
THE LIFE OF S. ANTONY ABBOT.
Taken out S. Athanasius, from S. Hierome, Palladius, and others.
The Genius and disposition of S. Antony: with his Vocation, and Renuntiation
of the world. Chap. 1.
SAINT ANTONY of Egypt, that glorious Conqueror of himself, and triumpher of
the Princes, and powers of darkness, was borne in the confines of Heraclea, in a
place called of Sozomenus by the name of Coma, and by Nychephorus Conia; a
variety sprung peradventure from the error of the Copyers: and so it is to be
thought, since Coma in the Greek tongue does signify a Bourg, and therefore it
is a common opinion of some, that either of both the Authors had so written.
But howsoever it be, it appears very well, that S. Anthony from the first
beginning was destined to high enterprises; since Nature, Education, and grace
have concurred with so liberal a hand, to favor and adorn him. He had an
able, and lively temperature of body; an aspect both grave and pleasant; a
sacacious judgment; a memory tenacious; a wit docible, acute, and constant.
Besides he was bred of Christian parents, very honorable, with singular care
and custody, and with so much the greater facility, as the Child of his own
accord, being much aliened from childish sports, and profane studies, showed
him self most amorous of silence, and of Churches; attentive to the word of
God, content with simple fare, and without any delicacies. To such matters, and
addresses as these, the holy Ghost added the form, and the ornaments, which
presently we shall see. For that indeed in the most dangerous passage of his
age, which was of 18. or 20. being left an Orpha^, with one Sister only,
certain things began to come into his mind, which formerly he had heard, or
read, of the Counsayles of Christ, of the conversation of his disciples, and of
the marvelous fervor of the primitive Church, at such time as the faithful,
replenished with charity, selling their houses and livings, and whatsoever else
they possessed in the world, went voluntarily, bringing the price thereof, and
laying the same at the feet of the Apostles. Considering withal, the
inestimable rewards, wherewith for the same they were to be recompensed in
Heaven.

These thoughts, went S. Antony reuoluing in his mind; when as it happened
through divine disposition, being entered into a Temple, according to custom,
he heard in the very same instant, these words of the Gospel recited; Si vis
perfectus esse, vade, and vende omnia quaecumque habes, and da pauperibus, and
veni sequere me, and habebis thesaurum in caelo. The words were not sung to a
deaf man: they suddenly pierced with extraordinary feeling unto the marrow and
(...) Whereupon the Sacrifiec being ended, he returned home from the^c^ without
delay: and gave liberally the rents of his Patrimony to his kindred, which were
300. acres of very fertile land, as S. Athanasu^s affirms (to whose Greek
text I do particularly adhere, though others have accounted it for some 300.
trees of fruitful Palms) and this to avoid all manner of contention. For the
moueables he put them to sale, and taking from thence a sum of money,
distributed the same to the poor; reserving to himself, but a very small part
for necessities occurring, and especially for his Sisters sake. But within
little after, being returned to the Church, and hearing that other advise of the
chief Verity; Nolite cogitare de crastino: with a generous resolution he made
an end of selling the rest, and placing the child his Sister, in the company of
some noble and devout Virgins, he distributed the rest that remained, to the
poor. Thence leaving his house, and parents, being replenished with singular
confidence, he made his entry into the sharp way of perfect Virtue.

At that time, there were not on foot so many Monasteryes in Egypt, as were
afterward to be seen: and in the Deserts which were more remote (none can
remember) that ever any one inhabited, till that time: But, he that would with
particular study, give himself to divine Service, and attend to the salvation
of his soul, for the most, recollected himself into some little Lodging,
near to his country, and there would exercise and apply himself with sundry
means to pacify the heavenly wrath, to amend his manners, and to prepare
himself for death. The holy youth having got some notice of one of these
Exe^citants, being now of good years, and well experienced, disposed himself
to do as much. And likewise sequestring himself from the conversation of
seculars, began first to deal with him, and afterward with others, from time
to time, such as daily he discovered to be addicted to that manner of life: and
not for curiosity to know sundry inclinations of natures, or features of faces,
but with diligence only to observe the industryes, and virtuous qualityes of
all, and in each one to imitate whatsoever might seem more admirable in him;
and so like a wise Be, for the framing of his mystical honey, in visiting them
at times, and showing himself officious, obsequious, and obedient to them, he
went on with a great deal of judgment; collecting abstinence from hence,
thence affability, from one dexterity in conversation, from another vigilance
in praying, from this here patience and meekenes, from him there sharp
penance and mortification, and from all together a fear of God, and christian
charity to his Neighbor. And it is truly a thing worthy of note, that he
contending so with every one to his power in so noble an enterprise, would be
doing the same with such circumspection, and with so much sweetness; as not only
he was free from rancour and envy, but likewise highly beloved and esteemed of
every one. And moreover now having made the renunciation of his goods, and
having nothing to sustain himself, he would not live with the sweat of other
men's brows, but would give some time to the labor of his hands, and of the
price which he purchased with his trauells, reteyning only to himself, so
much as might suffice him for a little bread, he would divide the rest with
very great charity, among the poor.

S. Anthony is twice tempted by the evil Spirits: but reiects them both. Chap.
2.
TO so fair a beginning, and so happy a progress, the subtle and cruel
Enemy of human kind, opposes himself, using all art, and framing every engine,
to withdraw the new soldier from his glorious purposes. First he begins on
the one side, to reduce into his mind, his parentall inheritance, the commodity
and delights of his home; his nobility of blood, with the hope of new purposes.
On the other, the straight way of virtue, the frailty of flesh, the difficulty
of pennances, especially in the spatiousnes of a long life, which with apparent
reasons, he would seem to make him promise to himself. He added moreover, the
due solicitude of his kindred, and particularly of the virgin his Sister; who
though recommended to others, yet if peradventure any sad disastre should
betide her, she might justly in the sight of God and men, complain of him.
With these suggestions, gave Satan the first assaults to S. Antony: and
perceiving himself to be so valiantly repelled with words of the divine
scripture, through lively faith, and with the memory of the Poverty, of the
dolours, and Passion of Christ; he reenforced the battle afresh, with a
squadron of bestiall and carnal thoughts, enflaming in an instant, the
natural incentiues of youthful age, and representing in his imagination day
and night, sundry forms of beautiful and lascivious women. This new war, as
it was continual and perilous to S. Antony, so was it grievous and troublesome
to him beyond measure, and the Enemies so much the more audacious and fierce,
as their intelligence on earth was greater, and their enflamed darts seemed to
penetrate more near to the Fort of the soul.

Nevertheless, the stout and faithful Guardian, opposed so many rampires of
vigils, fastings, considerations of infernal pains and of the last judgment;
and above all obtained with humble and fervent prayer so much succor from
heaven, as even likewise from these battayles, he seemed to carry away always
a happy and glorious victory. Whereupon the restles Adversary did te^pt him
with arrogance, and vanity, hoping by that means to deprive him of the crown.
Within a little after, the Envious and diabolical wretch appeared to the
blessed young man, in the shape of a horrid, and young Blackamore, complaining
with a human voice, and prostrate at his feet, said to him: Many, and many, O
Antony, have I deceived in my time, but as by other Saints, so likewise now by
thee, and thy valor, am I put to confusion. Being demanded, who he was: I am
said he, the friend of Carnality. I am he that moves debates, and in sundry
manners, do cause perplexities in youth; and therefore they do call me, the
spirit of Fornication. How many, that have been disposed to live in Chastity,
have I made them already to alter their purposes? How many, that have begun to
keep the same, have I reduced again to their obscenes and uncleanness, as
before? I am he, through whose occasion, the Prophet so reprehends the lapsed,
saying: Spirit^ fornicationis seducti estis: and surely with reason too, since
I, and no other but I, am he that deceived them. And I finally, am he, who have
tempted thee often, yet hitherto could I never ensnare thee.

At these words, S. Anthony acknowledging, all good to come from heaven,
sudenly gave thanks to the divine Goodness, and thence taking new confidence,
thus answered the Devil. Thou then for ought I can see, art a very coward, and
have little in thee: and likewise the age, and hew thou have taken upon thee,
are right signs of great weakness and baseness in thee: and added, For this
reason alone, (quoth he) I will not care for thee. And concluded with great
iubiley of heart: Dominus mihi adiutor, and ego despiciam inimicos ineos.
Scarcely had he begun to sing this goodly verse, of the hundred and seauententh
psalm, when the infamous seducer vanished quite, full of rage, and confusion.
And it was but just, that the fierce encounters, and vercrate stratagems of
that immortal substance, which had once the impious boldness, to rise up
against the Highest; should remain thus scorned and reproached by a young man,
encombred with flesh, and encompassed with infirmity.

But yet for all this, S. Antony held not himself a whit secure, or out of
danger: because he had well understood ere now, how the wicked spirits, have a
thousand inventions to hurt with. Heerupon taking al wais new courage, at the
presence of God, he would never lay down the arms of justice; nor yet
discovered he only, from the strongest tower of holy faith, with high
contemplation, the country afar off, but even lay also in wayt with
particular attention to be always ready against the domestical enemies, not
suffering in the Ports of the heart any thought to have entrance, not thoroughly
examined, and well known. He had all his parts subdued and restreyned with
severe laws, and heasts. He would pass very often whole mights in prayer, and
when through extreme necessity it behooved him to rest somewhat, he had no other
bed, then a piece of a mat, or the bare ground. Some two or three days
together, would he be without eating or drinking awhit, and at last would
refresh himself with nothing else, but bread, and a l^le water, and salt.

And here it is to be noted, that he slackt not his rigor after he had thus
continued a while as if he had done enough: nor measured he the greatness of his
profit by continuance of time: But day by day, he would suppose he did but then
begin, remembering that saying of Elias: The Lord lives, in whose sight I do
stand to day. In which saying, S. Antony would ponder on that word, to day:
being well advised, that the soldier of Christ, were to make no reckoning of
the trauayles, and years now passed over; but as if every day, he had but
newly entered into the lists, so were he to be always in a readiness, to give
forth himself, as a glad spectacle to the divine Majesty, Men, and Angels. And
now since mention i^ made of Elias, I will not spare to add, how the blessed S.
Antony according to the light he had in raising up his thoughts, from time to
time, was purposed at last, with singular study to express in himself, the
life and manners of that lover, not of Prophecy so much, as of retirednes, and
solitude.

S. Antony betakes himself into a Cell in the Desert; and is therefore
maligned by the wicked Spirits. Chap. 3.
NOr far of from S. Antonyes Cottage, were many ancient ruins, not inhabited
by any. In one of which causing himself to be shut up, by a certain friend of
his, with order taken with him, to bring him bread within such a space; he
here would treat with none other, then himself, and God alone. For which the
Prince of darkness, being now anew enflamed with rage, and fearing if he put not
remedy to it in time, he should soon behold (to his irreparable loss) the
desert likewise filled with Monasteries and Monks: sending presently to the
Cell of S. Antony, a great number of cruel Ministers, caused him (through
divine dispensation) to be so sharply scourged and whipped, as he was left on
the ground, deuoyd of speech or breath: and he himself likewise related
afterward, that the smart of those strokes exceeded any tormens, which were
humanly supportable.

While then he lay along stretched forth in this man nor; behold through divine
providence) his coadiutour came now to him with ^is wonted provision. Who
opening the door, and finding the ^oore S. Antony in so ill a plight; took
him up for dead on his shoul^ers, and with much compassion carried him so to
the Parish Church. Here now, who were able to explicate the concourse of
friends, Parents, and Neighbors, who came suddenly to behold him, to, ^ewayle
him, and to prepare his obsequyes? Some lamented the ^red of so heroical
actions should so beyond al opinion be cut off. Others very bitterly deplored
the loss of such a Father and Master, and perhaps there wanted not those
(such is the nature of men) that ^r lack of consideration, would seem to
re^rehend him of immo^rate fervor, and foolish temerity. The Evening being
passed with ^ch discourses, while they stood about the Corpse with many lights
^fficiously, expecting the Exequyes; by little and little (as it hap^ens) they
fell a sleep. And now it was about midnight, when S. ^ntony being returned to
himself, and opening his eyes, was aware, ^at all the Standers by were
oppressed with a profound sleep, ex^epting his familiar friend, who through
his much solicitude and ^harity, was continually in suspense, and vigilant.
Which S. Antony ^rceiuing, coniured him so much, partly with signs, and partly
with a low voice, as in fine he obtained, without any noise to be ^onueighed
back into his cell again. Where being not able, through ^e many soars he had,
either to kneel, or to stand on his feet, ^e was feyn first, as he lay, to
make his prayer a pretty while, and after that with a greater courage the^ ever,
began he with a loud tone ^o defy the infernal squadrons, saying.

Behold me Antony, here I am, I fly not your shirmishes, how ^ierce soever
they be, nor shall ever any thing in the world be able to ^euer me from Christ;
and presently gave himself to singing of Psalms, saying: Si consistant
aduersumme castr^, now time bit cor^; when ^s the Author of Pri^ converting
himself to his cursed Crew, See you (says he) this untamed beast, how after
so many punishments, and bitter woes, he days yet to prouok us thus? Take up
your arms fresh, and assail him now more sharply then ever; that he may ^nce
come to learn, whom he has to deal with Lucifer had yet ^ow scarcely
finished his commands, when the foundation being taken with a horrible
Earthquake, and the four sides of the poor Cell laid open. There entered in a
moment by those chincks a h^ multidue of unclean spirits, in sundry and
dreadful figures of Lions, Bulls, Leopards, Bears, Wolves, Aspes, Scorpions,
a^ Serpents, beating the air, and bestirring themselves, each one, according to
its proper form, and nature. The greedy Lion roared, ready to devour: The
Bull lowed, threatening with his cruel horns: The Dragon hissed, with the neck
stretched forth, and (...) pestilent breath: The ravenous Wolf fell a houling,
with open mouth, and sharp teeth: and all the savage beasts, in fine, with eye^
enflamed, and open jaws, fell a brissling themselves, being each o^ power, if
not hindered from above, to tear S. Antony into a thousand pieces. But as they
had no power upon the life of the Saint: so on the person, as far as they had
leave, they strive now again, to work him what damage and outrage they could.

At which very time the invincible Champion, though otherwise groaning amidst
all those terrible blows, yet failing not ^whit of his courage, reproachfully
rebuked the malignant spirits, saying: If there were any force in you, some one
of you alone, were enough (I trow) for so light a conflict, but because God ha^
taken away your forces from you, therefore you do go thus abo^ to affright me
with multitudes, and with strange figures of beasts* being surely an evident
token of your misery. And manfully infe^red moreover: If you have any power in
you; If God has giu^ you any authority over me, am I not now here in your
hand^ Then do you swallow me up. and glut your appetites upon me: b^ if you
have no such license, why trouble you your selves in vayn^ See you not, how the
sign of the holy cross, and the Faith in Go^ serves christians, as
impregnable walls.

At these words, the wicked fiends, encompassed him round, and even fretted,
and gnashed their teeth at him: When the Servant of God, in lifting up his
eyes, beheld incontinent, the roof to open it self, and the air to appear
with a celestial ray; whereupon the room was illuminated at once, the Enemies
vanished, the payn^ ceased, and the building shaken and disioynted before, came
suddaynely now to be united again, and reduced to the former estate. And from
thence in a moment, S. Antony was informed of the present of God, and sending
forth a deep sigh, to the vision-wards, exclaymed. Where wast thou, O good
Jesus, where wast thou? Why w^ thou not here from the first beginning to
remedy my wounds? (...) answer whereof, was heard this voice: Antony, I was
here in presece with thee, but stood expecting thee. And since thou have
showed thy self to be thus stout, and daunted not awhit, I will always
succor thee, and shall make thy name famous through the world. With this
Visitation S. Antony rose up from the ground, with a great deal more vigor,
then before he ever received. And was even just at that tithe; of the age of
35. years.

S. Antony retires himself into more inhabitable places. He meets with the
illusions of the Devils: and shuts himself up. Chap. 4.
SAint Antony being now by this time enflamed to greater enterprises,
determines to penetrate further into the more inhabitable places, and most
remote from humane society: (...) yet thought it not meet to conceal this
determination of his, from his first and dearest Master, but rather
communicating with him his whole design, invited him also to be partaker with
him of so illustrious a conquest. But he excusing himself, through his oldage,
with other difficultyes besides, S. Antony does put himself alone on the way:
And while he having confidence in God, goes forward, very suddenly he beheld a
great silver Basin on the ground. At which sight, making a stop, and glauncing
his eyes, observing the apparition, did presently perceive the subtility of
him, that had forged the same, and began to discourse with himself. Whence
might this silver vessel seem to come hither? The place is quite out of the
way, here are no steps of any passengers, and when peradventure one should
loose it, yet such is the greatness thereof, as suddenly he must needs be aware
thereof, or at least would he afterward have turned back at leisure to seek
it out: so as this is thy trick, O Satha, nor think thou thus to hinder my
intention heerby. Go thy ways then with thy metal with a mischief.

This said, the Plate immediately vanished like smoke, when S. Antony pursuing
his journey, but a little way off discovered a very great wedge of gold on the
ground, and that not counterfayte and fantastical, as the silver was: yet
could not be discerned, whether it were by diabolical operation, or else (for
the greater proof of the Servant of God) by some heavenly power, there put in
that fort. But this is well known the gold was not imaginary, but true and
perfect. At the quantity and brightness whereof, while S. Antony wondered, to the
end so betwitching an object, might not penetrate the mind, starting away from
it, as it were from fire; he passed on his way, with his eyes shut, and flying
through the playnes, never made stop, till he had quite lost the sight of the
place. When taking some breath, and renewing his holy purposes again, he
arrived at a Mountain, where was a Castle half ruined, and inhabited with
serp^ and hurtful beasts, instead of men. Which at the appearing of the Saint,
as if they had been chased, went headlong away in all post; and he damming up
the gate, with stone and timber, remained within, with provision of bread for
six months: having left order with his friends, that twice a year (for which
space and more some Egiptians knew, and especially the Thebans, how to bake
break, and make it last) should supply be made him, from time to time: with
which sustenance, and with a little water only to be had in the same place,
continued he his admirable sobriety, and singular abstinence.

There came many to visit him, while he himself not withstanding being shut up,
saw them not, nor would suffer himself to be seen of any: and the bread I
spoke of, was let down to him by certain holes in the roof. In the mean
while, his friends, attending with great desire at the door, and passing that
way many times by day and night, might hear from time to time, a very great
noise within the room, with raylings and outcryes, which said to him: Get you
hence, out of our house. What have you here to do, in this desert? You shall
never be able to endure our persecutions. The friends of S. Antony now hearing
such quarrels, and menaces, without, did verily believe some ill disposed
persons, and enemies of the Saint, had been gotten in with a ladder, from the
top: but afterward, looking in very curiously through a chincke, they caused
some to get upon the roof, and by diligent search they could finally discern
no such matter: It was presently known, that those horrible clamours,
proceeded from none, but infernal spirits. Whereupon, the poor people, being
now affrighted, began suddenly to call upon S. Antony by name, and to crave his
succor: Wh^ regarding the good of these, more then the menaces of those,
approaching to the door, exhorted the^ with fair speeches to retire from
thence, and not to fear, since the Devil is commonly wont (if you be
fearful) to increase your vain and needles fears. Go home then on Gods
name, and do you make the sign of the holy Cross. Go your ways, home, I say,
in the name of the Highest, and leau^ them here in fine to be illude
themselves.

With this conge, the visible friends give back, and departed thence, and he
alone remained behind to stand in contest with the invisible Enemies: although
from henceforth in all bickerings, he had not much to do with them, partly in
regard, that they, through so many losses, became continually more weary and
feeble: partly also, because he felt himself every day more courageous and
stout, being very often comforted with divine Visitations, and with often
triumphs over his now vanquished Enemies. In the mean time, new troops of
people, ceased not to resort from Cittyes and Villages to S. Antonyes Cell: Who
making account to have found him already dead, beyond all hope, did hear him
sing. Exurgat Deus, and dissipentur inimici eius, and fugiant qui oderunt eum,
a faci^ eius: sicut deficit fumus deficiant, sicut fluit cera a facie eius, sic
pereant peccatores a facie Dei. And like wise: Omnes gentes circumdederunt me,
and in nomine Domini, quia vltus sum in eos. With such and other like darts,
the valourous Champion, transfixed so the rebels of Christ, as in all the
encounters, they had ever the worst.

S. Antony remaynes reclused. His fame spreads through all parts: whereby many
come to renounce the world. Chap. 5.
IN this manner of enclosure, the servant of God, remained for 20. years
continually, without once seeing to issue forth, or ever being seen of any
person. Whereupon, the fame of S. Antony was so spread, and was in so great
credit, of more then humane virtue; as day by day, there assembled about him a
greater concourse of diverse Nations, and conditions of persons, then ever. Some
came with desire to be instructed, and trained up by him: and others to be
delivered from the Devil, and from sundry infirmities. Others in fine desired,
to behold such an Hermit as he, with their proper eyes, and so rare and lively
example of perfection, and to speak in a word, such an Angel on earth. Who,
by how much more through humility retired, so much greater thirst was excited
in men of his conversation. And in brief, the matter went so far, as they
being able no longer to endure the expectation, pulling a way the obstacles by
violency, and breaking upon him with boldness and reverence alike; they
entreated him so much, as he was able to resist no longer, but forth with he
came out of a Sanctuary, where he had been, as it were, anointed with the
divine hands, consecrated and promoted for the government of souls. And it
may well be conceived the while, what a plenitude of graet, he received from
Heaven; since loc, the very same redounding like wise to the body, after so
many years of penance, so great fastings, and such meditations, combats, and
vigils, appeared to be of so good a complexion, as if in all that time, he had
attended to his health, and had entertained himself in pleasant pastimes.

With this was matched such a manner of composition, modesty, and gravity, as
well beseemed a foster-child of the supreme wisdom, and Citizen of the
supernall country. In such wise, as to have met him, after so long a retirement
in so great a multitude of men, applying themselves to him, and even profuse in
his praises and renown, yet should you not have seen any sign of
perturbation in him, or of vain conten^me^t, but was always found with Reason
in the Stern most firm, constant, and equal. He had so (...) refull and
serene a countenance, as all men that looked upon him, were comforted therewith.
But what shall we say of the other Gifts of the holy Ghost? The dispossessed of
evil Spirits may suffice to win belief: the infirm also whom he has
restored: And the many besides aflicted and disconsolate, through diverse
occasions, which with sweet and efficacious words he has recomforted. How many
emnityes, and how many strifes has he reduced to peace and concord? He would
exhort all with great vehemence of spirit, nory^ less with the weight of
reason, and examples, by no means to prefer any wordly thing, before the
love of our Lord Jesus. And he would also discourse of the future goods, and of
the excessive charity of God toward miserable mortals: since for their
Redemption and Salvation he would not seem to pardon his own most wellbeloued
Son, but rather in satisfaction of our debts, deliver him over to so cruel
and bitter a death. With which discourses and ad^nishments, S. Antony went
moving the people in such fort, as many conceauing a like desire of the
Eternity, and contempt of the world, determined themselves likewise to be
sequestered from the vulgar, and to give themselves to a solitary life.

From hence so many Monasteryes took their beginnings, where with in a very
short time, were all those craggy mountains and champians of Egypt filled. And
he, so long as he lived, had the superintendency and sollicitous care over them
all* receiving with singular affect of charity, such as for diverse occurences
of good go^rnement, would be making their repair undo him, and he himself
also would no less be visiting them in person, when time re^ired, without
sparing any labor, or respect of manifest perils, ha^ing always the heavenly
custody with him, which miraculously ^efended him from all disasters.

As it happened once among other times, in his visit of the cou^^y of Arsinoe;
whither trauayling with some of his, and being to ^ade over a branch of the
river of (...) full of Crocadills, and most ^uell Enemies and Deuoures of men,
having made his prayer a little, ^tred into the water, and passed quite through
it, both going and ^omming, without any manner of hurt at all of himself or
his Co^anions. Being now returned to his Cell, he gave himself to his ^onted
labors and exercises, as before: and above all to his pastoral care, by
inducing always the Monks to greater perfection, with words and deeds, full of
wholesome incite ments, and holy doctrine. Nor was it hard for him to assemble an
Auditory, so great was the ^unger which every one had of his words, and so
singular the grace (...) his discourse, vouchafed him by our Lord, But
especially, one day, ^ere being (...) together a very great ^course of people,
to hear ^im, the venerable Abbot with accustomed modesty, and candor of ^ynd,
in the Egyptian tongue, began to deliver himself, as it follows in the next
chapter.

The Exhortation of S. Antony to the Monks, and people of the Disart Chap. 6.
ALthough the divine Scriptures (my Children, and most beloved Brethren) are
sufficient of themselfes for the instruction, and erudition of men: Yet is it a
thing notwithstanding very reasonable, and just, that even Men no less knowing
themselves, with mutual incitements, excite one another to the execution of
that, which they have well understood; and with pertaking each one with the
rest, the inspirations and lights he obteynes of God, they may all come to be
every day more wife, and expert in his holy ser^ce. Wherefore you, my children,
whenever you shall have any good conceit, to propose, unto others, and to me
your Father; omit ^not, and I also as more ancient in years and most ready for
the glory of God, will participate with you, in a much of that kind, as I have
hitherto any ways, either by document of others, or of my own experience,
been able to comprehend.

The first then, and principal advertisement for all, is (...) that each one of
us, endeavor two things. The one, not to dimin^ a whit of our labor or
industry, reputing our selves, to have do^ enough. The other, not to loose
courage, while the affayre seem too prolix and tedious to us; but rather, we
are to make accompe that every day is the first beginning, and to be always a
conseruing and increasing our holy purposes. Because, that as the whole age of
a man, is very short, in comparison of what succeeds: so is all the created
time, as nothing, being paraleled with Eternity. And truly in this life, things
are ordinarily bought at a just price, and in human traffiques is account made
of so much, for just so much: but in (...) case it is not so: while the
Eternal Crown seems to stand us (...) deed, but in a very little.

We read in the Psalms: Dies annorum nostrorum in ipsis, septuag^ anni: Si
autem in potentatibus, octoginta, and amplius eorum labor and (...). Whence put
the case, we do spend the same whole space of eighty, or a hundred years, in
the divine service, think you the rew^ thereof to be equal? The travail
exceeds not an age, the guerdon endures forever; the toils are on earth, the
recompense in heaven; the body comes to be rotten and consumed, but recouers a
glorious, and incorruptible one. So as my Children, let us not go foulding o^
arms; Let us not think it to be over long; or that we have done already any
great matter, since according to the Apostle: The T^lations of the present
life, have not any proportion with the glory, which is (...) manifest in us.
Nor, casting our Eyes to the world, believe, that we have forsaken any great
matter. For as much as the whole round^ of the Earth, is but a point, in
respect of the universal fabrique of the world: and yet supposing we were
Lords of as much as the S^ warmes, and should have quite renounced such a
Monarchy, for the Love of Christ; yet for all that would it be nothing at all,
if we regard but the Realm of the Heavens, which is proposed to us. And who is
he, that would not willingly seem to cast away a dram of iron, to have for
the same a hundred of gold? Even so a Man, that should abandon for God, all
these earthly Signoryes, should afford very little, and receive a hundred for
one.

Now, if all the Earth at once, may not seem to contest with the worth of
Paradise; it is clear, that for one to deprive himself of arms, or houses,
or sums of money, he should not yet seeeme take either any vain glory, or
foolish sadness for the same: es^ially considering, that though we despoyle not
our selves of ^se things for the love of Christ, yet of force are we very soon
to ^go them, when we come to dye; and to leave them very often, (...) such, as
we think least of, as Ecclesiastes well notes. Why then (...) we not make a
virtue of necessity? Wherefore exchange we not, ^sitory patrimony, for an
incorruptible inheritance? And if it ^olly, to be tenacious of that which we
possess, much less be^g once disentangled from the same, should we be turning
our ^ought again upon such a purchase? but always aspire to the ga^ing of
such things, as follow us after the departure of the Soul ^m the body: such as
are the merits of Prudence, Temperance, lu^ce, Wisdom, Fortitude, Humanity,
Liberality, Faith in Christ, ^eekenes, Hospitality, and other such like
merchandise: where^ if we make us provision in time, being once recalled from
this ^nishment, we shall find them to have gone before us, as Har^ngers, to
prepare us a Mansion, in the City of the Blessed.

These things, being well considered, should surely shake off, ^om the mind all
negligence, and weak pufillanimity: but when ^ey suffice not, at least we
ought to be moved, with the strictnes of ^ligation we have to God. He truly is
our law^full Lord, and we ^s natural vassayles and slaves. Now then, as a
slave dares ne^r to matter thus much, and say, I have labored yesterday in
ough, ^o day therefore I will do nothing: No, but day by day (as the ^ospell
says) still show forth the selfsame promptnes, which he ^d before, presuming
not at all upon his passed toils, nor think ^ereby to be idle, either now,
nor hereafter; to the end, he ^ight conserne himself in grace, with his
Master, and not to be ^ust out of his service: so likewise should we, every
day be encou^ging each other to Religious Discipline, assuring ourselves, that
(...) we cease from working one day only, we shall not obtain re^ission, in
virtue of any former services done, but shall be punished ^ther for this days
demerits. For so said the Prophet Ezechiel; That ^ter death, every one shall
beiudged, according to the state, he shall then be and in. And Judas also for
his ill carrage (if I might so say) of one ^ght only, did loose the fruit of
all his years for passed.

So as, attend we, my children, to the true Observation of our Ru^s, and not
suffer our selves to be vanquished with tediousnes, as knowing, that according
to the Apostle, Our Lord is not backward whit to cooperate with him that has a
good will, and endeauours to help (...) self. It shall likewse auay le us not
a little, to chase away Sloth carry always, in the memory, that saying of the
Apostle himse^ Quotidie morior. And if we likewise would be always thin^ with
ourselves, that this present day were to be our last, and a wak^ in the morning
we would but suppose not to arrive to the Eueni^ and again being laid down at
night, not promise to our se^ to live till morning: If we would regard, how
uncertain the^ is, and how the divine Providence, seems to measure, and num^
our steps, and how it has continually the Eyes upon us; we sho^ certainly not
sin, nor sufferre our selves to be carried aw^ with unbridled desires, nor
should we be angry with our Nei^ bour, nor give our selves to lay up treasure
in earth: but we she^ hubly yield to others, in all, and through out, and
should abhore all (...) suall pleasures, as a lewd and transitory thing,
remaining alway^ with our wits about us, and with the Eyes turned toward the
T^ bunall, where we are all to be judged. And after this manner s^ the fear of
everlasting torments, be of more power to extingui^ then the delicatenes of the
flesh to inflame the desires of the (...) man. And with such a Stay shall the
Soul sustain it self, the enclining already to a miserable precipice.

S. Antony proceeds yet in his Exhortation: And gives them other (...) sides.
Chap. 7.
NOw, therefore, beginning a new, as if to day we but en^ into the way of
Perfection; let us enforce our selves, to ar^ to the End; and let no man turn
his face to look back, as di^ wife of Lot especially our Lord having said so
expressly, The soever having once set his band to the plough, should turn his
face to heed (...) remaynes behind, were not apt for the heavenly kingdom, And
this; (...) back, is nothing else, then for a man to repent himself of his go^
beginning, and to return yet again to wordly thoughts and acti^ But some
peradventure may be affrighted with the name of ve^ Go to then, yet let it not
seem strange or impossible, since ^ey (...) is it far from us, or
extrinsecall to us, but rather within us and (...) matter is easy to him, that
truly disposes himself to seek it (...) Let the Grecians, and other profane
Lovers of themselves, go the ways to seek it out, in foreign Provinces: let
them plough the ^as, cross mountains, run over the playnes and countries:
For ^s, there is no need to make any voyages for it, by sea or land, since ^at,
as the Prime Verity affirms, The Kingdom of Heaven is with in us. ^n so much
as to obtain the same (supposing the divine Grace, as ^nclined to all) on our
parts there requires no more, the^ a mere effi^acious will. For so much as
look when the superior part of the ^oule, should be reduced to its natural
state, it would come to ^aue in it self a solid and formal virtue indeed:
since the natural ^ate seems to be nothing else but the great rectitude, and
much good^es, wherein it was framed by the soueraygne Creator.

And hence it was, that the captain Jesus Naue said to the He^rew people:
Direct your heart to the Lord of Israel: And S. John Baptist; ^o you rectify
your ways. Because it is proper to the nature of a Soul, ^o have no wrinesse
or crookednes in it. But when it goes bending to ^his or that side, then
loses it the natural rectitude, and that ben^ing so, is worthily termed
malice. From whence may appear, that the enterprise is not so bad, as it
seems. For that if we, with ^he help of our Lord, but conserve ourselves,
such as we were fra^ed by him; we may come without more a do, to possess
Virtue: ^ut if through election, we adhere to the evil, we do voluntarily
^ecome wicked. If then the matter be not to be sought for elsewhere, but only
consists in our selves, let us beware of unclean cogitations; and since from
God we have received our soul, as in ^posito, let us so deal that in his
time, he may acknowledge his own workmanship in us, and find the soul to be
such, as himself had ^ormed at first.

Let us fight manfully, that we be not tirannized by wrath, nor yet ouerswayd
with concupiscence: While it is written, The anger of ^a man, works not the
justice of God: and concupiscence after its conception, does bring forth sin:
and sin being put in effect be^gets death. Let us then be circumspect, in the
government of our selves, and stand we always upon our ward: and as the
sacred Scripture advises us, let us guard our heart withal the warynes that may
be; because, though our enemies on the one side, be infeebled, and dejected,
notwithstanding on the other, are they very sagacious, great dissemblers, and
most subtle withal; and as the holy Apostle well notes: Non est nobis
colluctatio aduersus carmen, and sanguinem, sed aduersus principatus,
potestates, aduersus mundi rectores tenebrarum harum, contra spiritualia
nequitiae, in caelestibus. Great is their number, in this lower region of the
air, nor are they in truth far off from us: They are likewise very different
from each other, in nature, and species; of which differences surely might a
long discourse be had, but being a matter so little necessary to our present
purpose, and worthy of a more sublime understanding, then mine is; It shall
suffice me for this time, to touch that only which more imports us; to wit, the
frauds, and stratagemes, which those malign substances do work, to the
offense, and damage of our souls.

The blessed S. Antony, being come to this passage, made a pause for a while:
and then began more at large, to discover diverse arts and subtilities of
Satan, for that time as yet very new, and unknown; at this day notwithstanding
by the observation of so many ages, God be thanked, now very common, and
vulgar. And then began he afresh, to declare a certain remedy against them,
which was a vigilant, and continual memory of God, conjoined with spiritual
gladness, with the firm confidence of the fatherly Providence, and with the
care which our Lord, takes of his Serua^^s In which state so long as the
Christian stands, and the Religious also, he has no need to fear any thing.
Since as the Devils, withal their fury, and rage, when he stands in his own
defense, cannot endomage him, with force; so are they not wont to assault him,
with open war, but with ambushes, and snares: wherein yet lying in wait, if
they note the City of the soul, to be neglected, ill provided, and unquiet;
then rushing in on a sudden, they will enkindle seditions, multiply breaches
and put all in confusion and disorder. And this in sum said the blessed
Antony, for as much as concerns temptations, and invisible traynes.

But for apparitions, and visions, to be able well, and securely to distinguish
them; he counsay led the Monks, in such a case, not to be dismayed a whit, nor
to show any sign of fear at all: but be the Spectacle what it will,
courageously to speak unto it, and demand, who art thou, and from whence comst
thou? For that if it be good it will suddaynely clear thee in that point,
through divine power, and will replenish thee together with true gladness: If
naught, it shall loose its forces in a moment, in beholding the mind so stout,
and constant; since to demand in that manner, is a manifest sign of
assurednes, and tranquillity. In this manner we may see Jesus Name to be
cleared by the Angel of light; and others not to be deceived with that of
darkness.

The Exhortation ended; a certain Problem is handled among the Fathers of the
Desert: wherein every one passes his verdict. Chap. 8.
While the holy Abbot spoke in this sort, it canont be expressed, what comfort
and consolation the Auditory felt; so as the tepid, were enflamed with the love
of virtue, the pusillanimous seemed to pretend now great hope. And some on the
contrary, being full of vain persuasion before, came now to be humble, and to
think more modestly of themselves; and finally all remained astonished at the
discretion of spirits, wherewith our Lord had seemed to endue S. Antony. Of
which so precious a gift, since we are now fallen upon it; we cannot so
slightly pass over in silence that so famous a discourse, that to this purpose
John Cassian declares, with the Moral thereupon; which was, that some of those
ancient Fathers, on a time, being come to the blessed S. Antony, in Thebais, to
confer with him, about spiritual matters; the conference it self grew so
hot between them as it lasted from the beginning of ^he night, to the next
day morning.

The Problem was this. What virtue, or what observance, might seem more
efficacions, and more secure, to preserve a Monk always assured from
diabolical snares, and deceipts, and to lead him by the stricter way, and
with greater fredome to the top of Perfection? Concerning which doubt, each one,
according to his capacity, produced what he thought best. Some there were, who
placed al in fastings, and vigils, affirming for proof thereof, that the soul,
being extenuated thereby, and made pure of heart, and body, comes more easily to
be united with God. Others extolled entire poverty, and the total contempt of
worldly things; in reguard the mind, being ^aked, and quite stripped of all those
things, without doubt, being now ^light, and discharged of all, may sudenly
mount to the heavenly delights. By some others, was given the palm to the love
of solitude, and the deserts for being the true, and only way to become
familiar with God, and to be always united with his infinite Goodness. Nor were
they wanting, who preferred the works of mercy, and faternall charity, before
all other Exercises whatsoever: alleging that especially to these is the
kingdom of heaven promised in the Gospel. Thus every one, having now
unfolded his mind, and more spaciously enlarged himself, in proof of his
proper assertion the greater part of the night, as we said, being spent
already, di^ the blessed S. Antony, began to speak in the manner following.

It cannot be denied, my Reverend Fathers, but that the same propositions by
you made, are of singular avail, for him that hat^ the love of God in him, and
has a longing desire to come unto him Nevertheless to place a principal
foundation thereon, in numerabl^ proofs and several events, occuring to diverse
persons, will not a^ ford me to do it. For as much as I have seen heretofore
some me^ being given to wondrous abstinence from meat, and sleep, incredibly
retired from all human society, so addicted to Poverty, a^ they would not
reserve a penny to themselves, or a loaf of brea^ for the time to come, being
wholly employed with exceeding d^ uotion, and with singular fervor in
hospitality, and in the comfo^ and succor of Neighbors; to fall at last into
such errors and illu^ ons, as their issue proved nothing answerable to their
genero^ beginnings, and magnanimous enterprises. So as we may clearly discern,
which way is the better, to arrive to God by. If wi^ diligence we seek, and
search into the occasion of the ruin, and perdition of those unhappy ones, who
most certain it is, had bee^ gathering together, along time a notable treasure
of good, and holy works; what then was it, that made them not persevere vn^
Death? Surely the only lack of Discretion, they having not sufficiently
learned of their Masters, the rules and conditions of this Virtue, which
shunning either extremes, continually maintaynes (...) upon the high way, and
lets us be carried away with the rig^ hand of spiritual consolations, to
superfluous and unmeasurable seruours; nor yet with the left of temptations and
aridities, under c^ lour of care of the body, to fall into sloth, and
sensuality.

This Discretion is that, which by the Lord and Savior of m^ kind, is called
the Eye, and Lamp of our body. Which eye being simple, the whole body shall be
replenished with light: but when the Eye is too blame and naught, all the body
shall be as full o^ darkness: the reason is, for that to this faculty of the
soul it belonges, to weigh, balance, and discern all the thoughts, and
operations of man. Whence being corrupted, that is, not founded in true
knowledge, or some error, it comes to obscure the whole body, in blinding the
understanding and folding it up in the night of vices, and of disordinate
passions: and immediately our Savior himself ^dds the cause thereof; For that
if the light which is in thee, be darkness, ^ow great then shall the darkness it
self be? And in truth, who sees not, that when the judgment, through
ignorance, remaining in the dark, goes doubtful and wavering; but needs must
the thoughts and actions, depending thereon, come thence to be entrapped in a
greater and thicker mist of sins? Of which truth, he does give us ^ufficient
testimony, who by the eternal Majesty, being chosen the first King of Israel,
for not having this eye of discretion sound, but ^ll members ill affected with
darkness, deserved to loose the Kingdom; while he thought to be more
serviceable to God, in sacrificing to him, then obeying of Samuel; incurring
thereby the divine ^ffence in the self same thing, wherein he made full
rekoning to gain his favor.

The defect of this knowledge, after that glorious triumph, ^erswaded Achab,
that mercy and clemency were better then seuc^ity, and the execution of that
rigorous and cruel command, as it ^eemed to him. Through which considering,
being mollifyed, whilst ^e would needs seem to be contemning with an act of
piety, the ^loudy victory, as he thought, through indiscreet compassion, being
himself likewise obscured in his whole person, was without ^emission condemned
to death. This is that Discretion, which is not only called by the Apostle, a
Lamp, but a Sun also, where he says; ^et not the sun seem to set upon
your anger. This in like manner is called ^he Government of our life, according
to that saying: Such as have ^o government with them, do fall like leaves. This
is worthily termed Counsel, without the which to do any thing, is by the holy
Scripture, so precisely forbidden us, as neither are we to take otherwise the
spiritual wine it self, which is, that Gladness that cheeres up the ^hart of
man, while Solomon says; Do you every thing with Counsel; and with Counsel
likewise do you drink your wine. And elsewhere; Who works without Counsel,
is like to a City, which is dismantled quite, and destroyed: as showing with
this similitude, how pernicious to the soul, is the lack of such a virtue. In
this, knowledge, in this the understanding, and judgment consists, according to
that advertisement, which says; with wisdom is the house built, and with
understanding repaired; with judgment is the Cellar replenished withal the
best and most precious things. This I say, is that solid food, that cannot be
taken, but of strong, and perfect men. Whence the Apostle says: To the perfect
belonges a solid food, who through long experience, let t^ senses be well
exercised in the discretion of good and ill. What more? It is so profitable,
and necessary, as it comes to be numbered among the other divine attributes,
according to the sentence of the same S. pal: Quick and lively is the word of
God, and very efficacious, and more penetrate far, then the sharpest knife,
arriving to the division of the soul and spirit, ^ea even to the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intentions of the heart. Out of
which authorityes, it is manifestly showed, that with out the grace of
Discretion, it is impossible, either perfectly to purchase, or long to conserve
any virtue whatsoever.

This then in matter of Perfection, was the judgment, this the Doctrine of S.
Antony. The which, being first by that sacred Session of Fathers, without
reluctatio^ approved, and after, with good reason, by Cassian, as we said,
inserted into his Collations, has also seemed good to us, for the public
vtility, to transfer into our present discourse.

The multitude of Monks increases. The Angelical life of S. Antony: And of
the persecution raised by Maximinian against the Church. Chap. 9.
IN the mean season, the number of Monks did meruaylously increase, and
throughout all those hills, could nothing else be seen but Cells and
Monasteryes, like to Pauillions applied to a sacred warfare, full of Psalms,
Conferences, Lessons, Prayers, Fasts, and vigils, accompanied partly with a
iubiley of heart, through expectation of the future goods; partly also with the
industry, and labor of the hands, to purchase alms for the poor. Who shall
express then, the chaste dilection, and straight concord amongst the^ In such
sort, as casting the eyes upon those countries, a Man verily seemed to behold,
a Region as wholly dedicated to the worship and Justice of God. Here reigned
not, either open, or hidden factions, not practices or designs of transitory,
or terrene things, but only a multitude well ordered of men, all applied to the
study of the more eminent virtues. So as one beholding them, and the Orders
withal, might truly break forth, into that exclamation of Numbers the 23.
chapter. Quam bona domus tuae Jacob, tabernacula tua Israel, tamquam nemor^
obrumbrantia, tamquam Paradisus super flumina tamquam tabernacula, qua fix^
sunt a Domino, tamquam cedri Libani circa aquas.

But yet in so universal a fervor, did the Lamp of S. Anteny always seem
far to exceed, both in heat and splendor, the other lights: who never
ceasing his angelical customs, did always ^o his power keep silence, and
augment his pennances: aspiring day and night to the happy mansions of Heaven.
Whereupon, as ^ikewise the imitation of the more glorious Saints, he had so
fixed ^is mind, that whenever it was needful for him to eat or sleep, ^r in
any other manner to serve the body, he beheld the noblenes ^f the Soul, so
miserably abased with so vile an exercise. And thus through compulsion, he
would take his refection, now alone, and ^ow with others, not omitting through
occasion thereof, to reme^^er his disciples, how much it behooved them very
seriously to at^end to the soul, and to seek after the profit thereof, in
spending as ^tle time, as might be in the care of the body, that the spirit be
not ^ulled downwards by sensual delights, but the flesh to be reduced ^ather
into the servitude, and power of the spirit; and this said he, ^as the sense of
those words of the Gospel. Nolite soliciti esse animae ^estrae, quid
manducetis, neque corpori, quid induamini: haec enim omnia gen^s inquirunt:
Scit enim Pater vester, quod his omnibus indigetis: Querite au^m regnum Dei,
and haec omnia adijcientur vobis.

At the same time, while S. Antony was instructing, and gui^ing his Monks in
this manner; was raised in Egypt, that cruel per^cution of Maximinian, against
the Church of God. At the news ^hereof, the holy Abbot, being desirous to shed
his blood for Christ, ^ent his way in have to Alexandria, accompanied with
many, say^g: let us be present by all means at the glorious combats of ^e
Champions of Christ: for that God will either make us wor^y of that glorious
Fellowship with them, or at least, if our Vo^ation extend not so high, their
faith and fortitude will affoard ^s a noble spectacle, and of much edification.
In the mean time, ^e puts himself in public to help and encourage them.
First in ^e mines, and in prisons, and afterward much more, when they ^rought
them to the unjust Tribunal. And here is the manifest ^rouidence of God to be
noted, that as he had destined him to the ^ouernment, and example of Religious,
(and in truth many be^g invited only with the example, aspect, and manners of
the man ^f God, renounced the world) so he never suffered the Tyrant to lay
^ands upon him.

True it is, that having once understood, he was in the City, and succored
the Christians, he made an Edict, that no Monk ^ould approach to the prisons,
and that all should depart from Alexandria. But yet the valourous Confessor,
was not terrifyed with this, but rather on the day appointed for the wicked
Execution, and at the public Act of Matrtyrdome, while the other Monks, were
a hiding themselves, he alone, accompanied the combatants to the scaffold,
exhorting them always to persevere invincible, and courageous. From hence, to
the end to be more easily seen, or rather to draw the eyes of the Prefect
himself upon him, being clothed with a garment, which was very conspicuous; he
gets up on a place of advantage, somewhatneere unto the scaffold, and there
stood confide^t to the very end of al; with a holy Emulation for the Crowns,
which the faithful of Christ, seemed to purchase by their deaths: declaring
thereby the promptnes and fortitude, which in such occurences, they are to
have, who are truly Christians. In so much, as the Prefect descending from the
Tribunal, and with all his Guard, passing by S. Antony, remained astonished at
the gravity and fortitude of the Saint. Who since he saw himself, not without
grief, to b^ thus deceived of the hope, returned afresh to the prisons, and
caves to serve, and comfort the Confessors of Christ, as he was wont; until
such time, as the blessed Bishop Peter being martyred, the rage of the
Persecutours, came finally to cease.

Upon occasion whereof, S. Antony retiring to his Monastery, there gave himself
to participate as well as he could, of the Palms of the Martyrs, with bitter
austerityes, abstinence, and voluntary punishments: not wearing any other
within, but Cilices, and skins without; and never washing his body, nor so much
as his feet, but when he chanced on the way to wade over any water. And it is
held most certain, that until his buryall, he was never seen to be stripped,
or naked.

S. Antony dispossesseth one of the Devil: and hears a voice from hea^ which
directs him what to do. Chap. 10.
NOw S. Antony, being thus recollected, with purpose not to be seen of any,
for a time; a certain Captain called Martinianus, with a daughter of his,
very shrewdly tormented by the devil, and with a great troop of people,
approached to the Cel, and there stood knocking, and beseeching S. Antony with
a loud voice, to come forth in public, and to pray to God for the Maiden. To
which cries, having now stopped his ears for a pretty while, he came at last
of mere compassion, to a little chinck of the wall, and said. Hola, Who do you
call for? I am yet mortal: If you believe in that Lord ^home I serve, go your
waye^, and pray to him, and according to your faith, shall the grace be done
you. The Captain showed not himself to be any thing backe-ward to such
aduises, but immediately converting himself from Paganism, began to inuoke
the name of Christ; and on a suddayne, the daughter of that Captain was found
to be safe and sound. After this, many other as well Lunatique, as infirm
persons, who could not come to have any audience of the Saint, lay prostrate at
the door, and there recommended themselves, so long to his intercessions, as
they came thence wholly cured.

At which meruayles, and at the concourse of new troops of people, was S.
Antony sore molested: fearing in his mind, some motion of Pride, or at least,
the world might come to frame too high a conceit of him. Making then, mature
deliberation herupon, ^he determined to leave that Cell, and to co^ueigh
himself secretly into the upper Thebais, in some part, where he might not be
known of any living body.

To this effect, being departed, with some loaves of bread, to the shore of
Nilus, while he was sitting there, expecting commodity of passage, he heard a
voice from Heaven, which with a clear tone pronounced these words: Antony,
whither (...) thou going? and wherefore? And he not being troubled thereat, as
being already acquainted with such things, made answer: These people will not
let my rest, whereupon I am resolved to pass into the upper Thebais, as well
to eschew the said disturbances, as principally also for not to be requested in
things which exceed my power. The voice adds: Although thou go thy ways
hence to Thebais, and endeauourest to hide thy self (as thy design is) among
the sheapeards Cottages there: Yet know, thou shall thence but purchase to thy
self a double travail: Whereas if thou will find true rest indeed, thou must
go into the heart of the Desert. And S. Antony replying: who shall show me the
way thither to some place, to the purpose, since I my self was never there?
when presently was showed him a squadron, or to say rather a company of
Saracens, who coming to Egypt for traffic sake, were now in their return
into Arabia, and were bound to travail just that way.

Then S. Anthony approaching to them, entreated them fayrely they would be
pleased to take him along for a pretty way with the^, and so they did, as if
they had had commandment from God: and at the end of three days, and three
nights, they arrived at a very high mountain, at the foot whereof, went
gliding a fresh, and crystal water, and nor far from thence certain trees
were to be seen of savage, and wild palms. At the discovery of such a sight
S. Antony did exceedingly rejoice, and said within himself, that same was
surely the seat appointed for him. So as taking his leave, with a thousand
thanks, of the Saracens (who gave him moreover some of their bread) he
remained there alone in the Mountain, and took it as his dear habitation,
susteyning himself with wa^, and the Dates thereby, and with the now supply,
which the S^cen passengers, from time to time, admiring so great a virtue, di^
afterward affoard him: Until such time, as the Monks at last, being come to
the knowledge of the place, took upon them, the care to provide for him;
howbeit the holy, man, perceiving by this (...) casion, they were like to be
troubled much, and forced to take a great deal of pains for his sake, was
resolved to spare that labo^ and causing some plough-^ons to be brought unto
him, with a little seed corn, he began to till and sow a plot of ground, so
as every year, he reaped sufficient to live on: being much comforted the
while, that he was heerby no whit offensive or troublesome to any person of the
world, being a thing, to his power, which he had ever avoided. But seeing
afterward, for all this, that Ghests forbore not to resort thither, he sowed
there moreover, some herbs, for to be able to give some manner of
entertaynement, to passengers, we aryed with so long and difficult a journey.
And forasmuch as diverse savage beasts, being invited by the water there, came
thither to drink, and did withal some hurt to his corn; he catching one of
them, said very mildly to it, and the rest: Why do you wrong me so, that
offend nor you? Go your ways, and come you hither no more, for our Lords sake.
A very admirable thing; they being terrifyed, as it were, with such a
commandment, durst never more seem to return thither.

S. Antony is much troubled with the assaults of the Devil: He hears of S.
Paul the great Hermit, and goes to seek him out. Chap. 11.
A Midst such labors of body and mind, the servant of God being now grown
old, yet continued his wonted discipline, and never left to afflict himself.
Whereupon the Monks being moved to pity, did bring him Olives, with oil, and
pulse, for these were de^icacyes amongst the^. But in that place so remote, it
cannot be told what combats the blessed S. Antony continually sustained from
Sa^han. Such as went thither, for their devotion, were afterward wont to
relate, they had heard besides, great tumults, and noyses ^here, with many
cries and clamours, and clashing of arms, and seen the mountain all covered
over with sparkles of fire, and the Saint upon his knees, making his prayer,
against the fury of the outrageous Enemies. And surely it was an admirable
thing, that a solitary man, in so great a vastnes of regions, should have no
fear, neither of infernal spirits, nor of dragons, nor wild beasts: but
truly, according to the Psalmist, confiding in our Lord, like to Mount Sion,
had always his mind very peaceable, and quiet: so as the devils had occasion
to fear him, and the beasts laying their poison and cruelty aside, became very
meek and tractable to him.

But yet Lucifer ceased not to tempt him again, and to seek always to work
his annoyance, gnashing and grinding his teeth at him. And one night, among the
rest while S. Antony was busy in prayer, he had leave to set against him as
many hurtful beasts, as were to be found in those desert cliffs; who as forced
to come forth of their dens, were set on to encompasse the Servant of Christ,
making a proffer (as others heretofore) to swallow and devout him quite: but
the understanding the subtility of the Adversary, told them, That if they had
power from heaven, they might devour him, but if otherwise they came as sent
by the devil, without delay they should go their ways, for he was the servant
of Christ. With which protestations, the brutish troops, being affrighted and
scourged, did suddenly fly away.

From thence within few days, while he was making baskets, as he was wont, to
bestow on them that dealt very charitably with him; he perceived one of the
wickers of his work to be drawn to the doore-wards, and raising up himself,
sees a monster, from the head to the hips, which appeared like a man, and from
the hips down wards, was like an Ass. And yet was S. Antony not astonished a
whit at so new, and strange a spectacle; but rather making the sign of the
Cross on himself, defied it boldly, as he was wont: whereupon the beast being
scared, together with the spirits that guided it, so imperuously ran from
thence as falling down headlong, it dyed, representing in that fall the unhappy
adventure of such as would go about to drive away S. Antony from the Desert.

Now after so many toils of body and mind, the Servant of God was become
Ninety years of age, and could no more without manifest danger, endure
austerites as before. Whereupon, with a pious violence, the Monks enforced him
to accept of two of them, to boar him company, and to have care of him. The
one called Amtli^, and the other Macarius. About which time, the glorious
doctor S. Ierom declares, how S. Antony bethinking himself, that hitherto
never had any Monk gone further into the desert then he, it was revealed to
him, on the night following, that he was deceived, since there was another yet,
more ancient and perfect then he that likewise inhabited therein, and that by
all means, he should go to seek him. S. Antony was nothing flack to obey. For
scarce had the Aurora put forth, when without any other companion, then a
little staff, he puts himself into the voyage: and now was it about high
Noone, and the parching rays of the sun began to scorch the head of the
holy Old man, and yet nevertheless, would he not seem to desist from going
forwards, saying within himself: I have a firm confidence in God, that he
will show me him he has promised me to see. And standing to muse thereupon,
behold a Hippo-centaur appears before him, to wit, half a man, and half a
horse. At which sight, arming himself with the wholesome sign, on his forhead:
Hola, said he, where abouts I pray you, inhabits a certain man of God? To
which demand, the beast, with a confused voice, made offer to answer, and
withal stretching form the right hand, seemed to point him the way, and flying
vanished, nor could it ever be known, whether the same were a feigned
apparition, or some real thing.

With such direction, did S. Antony follow on his way, deeply considering with
himself on that strange figure, which he beheld a little before. He had not
passed far, thus musing with himself, but there appeared to him, in a craggy
valley, a man of a little stature, with a hawked nose, and horned countenance,
who with a grateful aspect, approaching to him, did offer him Dates, in sign
of peace. Whereat S. Antony stood still, and laying hand on his wonted arms,
doubted not to ask him, who he was, and he answered so plainly as S. Antony
was much astonished thereat. I am likewise mortal, said he, as you are, and
one of the Inhabitants of the wilderness, adored by the blind Gentility, under
the name of Fanus, Satyrs, and Incubi. I come to thee now, as an Ambassador of
my Companions, beseeching thee in the name of all, to make intercession for us
likewise, to the common God, for we have now understood he is come, for the
salvation of the world. At which words, the holy Abbot began to sheed tears
for joy, in beholding how the glory of Christ was dilated, and the power of
Satan annihilated, and smiting the ground with his staff, adds: Woe be to
thee Alexandria who gives the honor due to God, unto Monsters and Portents: Woe
be to thee meretricious City, where have all the superstitions of the world,
built their neast now, will thou say? The beasts do seem to confess Christ,
and yet do you nevertheless, stand adoring of Idols.

S. Antony had not yet ended these words, when the Satyr as betaking himself
to his wings in a moment, was quite vanished away. And to the end, that not any
may hold it for a fabulous thing, it is to be understood, that a like Monster
to this, was brought alive to Alexandria, where after it had been well seen,
and reuiewed, by all the people, it came to dye. Whereupon being opened, and
powdered with salt, it was lastly conueighed to Antioch, to satisfy the eyes
also, of that City there, and of the Emperor himself.

S. Antony trauayling on his way, espies a wolf coming forth of a Cave; where
entering in, he finds S. Paul the Theban retired. Chap. 12.
TO return to S. Antony, the good old man went on his way, and not discovering
ought else, then the tract of beasts, and infinite wastes of sand withal, there
remained now no other sustenance to him, then a firm confidence of the
Protection of Christ. By this time, two days were spent, and the night
following, the servant of God did consume in prayer; when in the dawning of the
day, he discouers a far off, a thirsty she-wolfe, which panting and seeking
for water, approached to the foot of the Hill. The wary trauayler look after
her, and as soon as she was departed from the den, he likewise coming
thither, began to look in, though in vain, because so great was the darkness
there, as he could not discern any thing. It was truly a horrible and
dreadful thing to behold, but Charity banished fear; he taking courage to
himself, and going very softly and tenderly in, as he could, at last amidst
those obscurities going forwards not far off, there appeared a light
wherewith being invited, while greedily he makes have thereunto, he stumbles on
a stone, and with the noise thereof, gave occasion to him, that was within, on
a sudden to shut and make fast the door upon himself.

The cave lay open on the one side thereof, but well shadowed the while with a
plan-tree, very great and full of leaves, and in the same plain arose a most
clear spring, from whence a little brook streaming along for a little space,
went creeping under the ground. The same place in times past, had been the
receptacle of those wicked Forgers, who in the time of Cleopatra, and
Mark-Antony, in that place, had been coining of false money; as do well testify
the many anuils, and hammers there scattered up and down in those tauernes.
And lastly for avoiding the persecution of Decius, and Valerianus, and to lead
a holy life, was the blessed Paul the Theban there shrouded from his youth, and
had there perseuered with incredible constancy to the age of 113. years. Now
S. Antony perceiving himself to be shut forth, in this manner, with exceeding
great grief lying prostrate at the door, remained there until the sixth hou^e,
and upwards, continually entreating to be admitted, and saying: You know well
enough, who I am, and whence I come, and though unworthy (I confess) of your
sight, yet without such a grace, I will not depart hence. Whereas you that
affoard harbor to beasts, why banish you a Man? who according to the Gospel,
having sought and found already, does now knock to be let in. Which if I
attain not, I shall dye here in the very Entry, and when that happens you
shall be constrained to bury me. Which will be to troublesome to you.

The Pilgrim having thus continued a pretty while, in this manner of entreaty,
at last S. Paul smiling within himself, made answer: This same is a pretty
custom indeed, to beseech in brauing thus, to charge so, and calumniate with
tears? And is it so strange to you, that I receive you not, if you seem to
come hither to leave your life? In this manner of jesting, did S. Paul open the
door, and the strangers, howbeyt new, and as yet vnacquanted, very lovingly
embracing each other, did salute notwithstanding one another by name, giving
infinite thanks to the divine Goodness. And after the holy kiss of peace,
being both set down. S. Paul began to speak in this manner: You see here,
Antony, him, whom you have sought for thus, with so much travail, rude,
worn, frail, and decrepit, and one in brief, who within a very little shall
become dust. But in the mean while, for Charity sake, tell me, what is done in
the world? Who rules? Go they about to reedify the cittyes again, already
destroyed? And is the Devil yet worshipped there, as he has ever (almost
generally) been here to fore?

Now while they fate thus sweetly discoursing together in lifting up their
eyes, they behold a Crow pearching on the bough of a tree thereby, which
descending down with a moderate flight; let fall between them, a whole loaf
of bread, and so went its ways. Whereupon said S. Paul: Go to, our Lord has
sent us our dynne^ here, truly pious, truly merciful. It is now full sixty
years, that I have hitherto received my half loaf every day: Whereas now at
your coming hither, he has redoubled the allowance to his Servants. After
which, the Benediction given, they both sat down, by the side of a cristall
fountain: but yet before they fell to their meat, there was no little ado
between them which of the two, should break the bread, in streyning courtesy
the one with the other, with religious modesty, and with diverse reasons, in the
point of preheminency before each other. S. Paul did principally ground himself
in the Laws of hospitality, whereto S. Antony opposes the maiority of years.
The strife seemed to last a good while, and the day in the mean time passing
away, at last, the duel ceased, upon agreement made to take hold of the loaf
between them, and to pull it, so as to each might remain his share in his hand;
and so it just fell out, and without more dispute, having taken the bread, and
finally stooping, sipt a little water, with thanksgiving, they passed that
night in Psalms and Vigils.

S. Paul discouers to S. Antony his death approaching. He dies in S. Antonies
absence, and is afterward buried by him. Chap. 13.
THe morning being come, S. Paul begins to speak to his Ghest in this so^: It
is now a good while, my Brother, since I have known that you have dwelt in
these parts, and your presence has been promised me heretofore by our common
Lord. But now in fine that I am arrived to my last passage, there remaynes me
naught else, but to go my wa^es, unto Christ, as I have always desired. Know
then, you have been sent hither by God to perform my Exequyes, and to cover
myilymmes with Earth. S. Antony hearing this, began to weep, and beseech
him, not to leave him behind, but to admit him for companion on the way. When
S. Paul replied: You are not to reguard your own content, but the profit of
others. He might seem to favor you indeed, having laid down the burden of
your flesh, to cause you to fly into Heaven; but he should not thereby answer
the expectation of the Brothers, that should remain behind deprived of your
guidance, and example. Wherefore I pray, be i^ not troublesome to you, for
Charityes sake, to return your ways home, to fetch hither the Cloak, which
was once given you by Athanasius the Bishop, to fold up my carkas in, and so to
commit it to the Earth. Which request the Blessed Paul made, not that he cared
much to be putrifyed, either naked, or clothed, especially not having for so
long time, used to cover himself with other, then with the leaves of Palms,
being wouen together with his own hands; but he did it, that he might not
grieve him, by expiring in his sight.

S. Antony remained amazed at the thing, which he heard, and particularly for
the Cloak, and with veneration, acknowledging our Lord in the person of S.
Paul, without reply, kissing the eyes and hands of the Saint, went his ways in
have to his Hermitage: and at his approach, his two disciples demanding of
him, with great anxiety, where he had been so long, he answered: Woe be to me
Sinner, and false Monk: I have seen Elias, I have seen John Baptist in the
desert, or to say better, I have seen Paul in Paradise. Then holding his peace,
in knocking his breast, he took the Cloak of Athanasi^ out of the Cell; when
as his Companions importuned him yet to vouchsafe to speak more clear, but he
differing the same to its time without more delay, or affording any nourishment
to his body so long fasting and well nigh spent; went suddenly forth, with his
mind wholly fixed on his sweet Host, fearing (as it fell out) least in his
absence, he might give up the ghost. And now by this time, he had gone in great
have, as it were, half the way, when as lifting up his eyes aloft, he sees
among the happy troops of elect spirits, the blessed soul of S. Paul, very
glorious and radiant, to ascend up to heaven. And suddenly casting himself on
the ground, began to sprinckle his head with sand, and to weep and lament,
saying: Why leave you me O Paul? Why go you away so before I had taken my leave
of you? So lately known; alas so soon parted!

S. Antony himself recounted afterward, that he had passed the ^est of the
way, with the swiftnes of a Bird: and so it was known in the proof, since
entering into the Cave, he found the holy corpse yet kneeling, and the neck
upright, and hands lifted up; insomuch as notwithstanding the triumph, which he
had seen before, he was almost of the mind that he was yet alive: but then not
perceiving any breath, or sign of life, he endeavored with bitter playnts to
kiss him; and ^olding him up in the said garment of S. Athanasius, he brought
him forth with Hymns, and Psalms. But then not having any instrument to digg
his grave with, and with great anxiety thinking, and bethinking himself what to
do: Behold two Lions, with their hair laid open to the wind, to come running
at that time. Whence he at first being somewhat affrayd, and then taking
courage in God, attended their coming, as so many Doves; and they being
arrived to the corpse, did humbly cast themselves at the feet thereof, with
fanning in their manner, and bitterly roaring in sign of the sorrow they felt:
and presently began with their feet to plough up the sands, until such time,
as there remained sufficient room for a man. Which being done, and as it were
for their hire, receiving the benediction of S. Antony, they quietly went their
ways: and he putting his shoulders to the sacred burden, did bury it in the
trench.

After this, surueying the Heritage of the dead, for not to go thence,
altogether empty handed, he took hold of the Cassocke of Palms; and being
returned home again as long as he lived afterward in the solemnities of
Easter and Pentecost, he would always reuest himself therewith. After these
works of charity were ended he was entreated by a great number of Monks, now
coming in have to him, where he was, to visit anew, and to recomfort the
Co^uents. He went then along with them, and while they were on the way, there
fell out another notable marvel. That way was al very craggy and barren, and
the heates excessive, so as it was not long ere provision of water failed them,
and the Monks not knowing what to do, letting their Camel go loose, being
scortched, and afflicted, lay down; When the holy old man, not a little
contristate at so great a peril of theirs, sequestered himself a little, and
kneeling on the ground, and lifting his hands to the stars, began to beseech
God, with so much faith and fervor, as suddenly in the self same place of
prayer, sprung forth the desired liquour. Whence all were revived, and others
being satisfied, as they anxiously sought for the Camel, did suddenly find him
by the cord of the headstall, through a new miracle, entangled in a rock.
Loading him then, to their great contentment, they came very safe, and found to
their Cells again.

S. Antony is very welcome to all at his return: and gives wholesome Documents
to each one, upon good occasions. Chap. 14.
NOw it would be long, and superfluous here, to explicate the joy, which the
Disciples showed at the coming of their most sweest Father and Master, and he
likewise rejoiced as much to see them all, to be so seruent, with his presence
and renewed in spirit. He had besides no small consolation, to find his Sister
so perseuering in the divine service, being come to be Superior of a most
Noble, and numerous Convent of Virgins. Now the arrival of the Saint being
known throughout all those Parts, a great multitude of persons of all
qualityes resorted thither, to salute him, and to visit him as they were wont,
and especially of the Religious: to whom he for entertaynement sake, instead
of presents, and gifts, would be giving of precious aduertisements and aduises,
saying: They should always hold firm their faith, and dilection to God, and
the Neighbor: They should guard themselves from unclean thoughts, and
delights: They should not not suffer themselves to be deceived with Gluttony:
and should fly Vain glory: continue their prayers: lay up the documents of the
holy Scripture in their breast: be always reuoluing the actions, and manners
of Saints, in mind; endeavoring to reform themselves, through the imitation
of them.

And principally, he advised them not to cease to meditate on those words of
the Apostle S. Paul: Sol non occidat super iracundiam vestra^, and added
thereunto, nor yet upon any other sin whatsoever: it being a thing very fit
and necessary, that neither the Sun accuse us of our diurnall malice, nor the
Moon of nocturnall sins. For which end (said he) shall the preceps of the
Prophet himself, help you much: Judge your selves, and examine your selves
well. Let each one, every day, take account from his proper soul of his
actions, words, and thoughts. And having erred, let him amend; having done well,
not exalt himself, but seek to persevere, and not become negligen^ and let
him beware, he judge no man, nor justify himself, (as S. Paul said another
time) until such time as our Lord comes, who shall discover the hidden things;
in regard, that we in our actions, many times do deceive our selves. But our
Lord beholds every thing very clearly: and therefore we should seem to have
the same reguard to others as to our selves, and to compassionate one another.
It shall be also very profitable for us to survey with our Memory, the motions
of our soul, and the works which we daily perform, and set them down in
writing, as if we were to give account thereof to others. Whence it shall come
to pass, that for shame to be manifested to the world, we shall keep our
selves from falling into things which are worthy of reprehension. And with such
a discipline refrayning the appetites, and subduing the flesh, we shall be
able, very easily to conserve our selves in the grace of our Lord.

These, and such like instructions, he failed not to give to his Monks, upon
good occasions. And for as much as among the secular multitude, there was
continually a great number of lame, and diseased people; he prayed afresh for
them, but obtained not equally forall: our Lord dispencing his graces,
according to his good pleasure. And S. Antony, even as when he was heard seemed
not to vaunt himself; so when he suffered repulses, murmured he not, but
always gave thanks to our Lord; and exhorted the afflicted to have Patience,
and to be satisfied, that their cure depended not on him, nor on men, but on
God only, who affoardes health, when he will, and to whom he lists. Whereupon,
the languishing receiving the words of the Old man, as from the mouth of God,
learned to atte^d, and suffer, and the cured came to acknowledge themselves
bound not so much to S. Antony therefore, as purely to God. But what shall we
say, besides all this, of the efficacy, which the Prayers of S. Antony had even
in persons, and places far remote?

He being in the Monastery, and on this side of the mountain, the Count
Hercolaus came humbly to beseech him to vouchsafe to intercede for the health
of Policratia virgin of the City of Laodicea, a great servant of God, who
through much abstinence, and maceratio^s of the body, did feel most bitter
dolours of the hips and stomach and was quite fallen away and come to nothing:
which the holy Father did with a very good will, and the Count noted the while
in a little scrole the very day of the prayer. And being afterward returned to
Laodicea, and finding the virgin to be now on foot, and free from all manner
of pains, to satisfy himself more fully, whether it were to be attributed to
the prayer of the Saints, or no; he demanded of her, on what day she began to
feel her self well; and having heard it, he presently took out the scrole,
and with the great astonishment of all, they found the Saints prayers, and
recovery to have happened on the self same day.

In like manner, a certain Courtier, called Frontone, that being tormented
with a raging infirmity would have eaten his tongue, and plucked out his eyes,
had recourse to S. Antony. Who without any more ado, said to him: Go thy ways,
and thou shall be healed. But Fro^tone standing yet still for all that, and not
departing thence for some days, the servant of God replied to him: Thou can
not be cured here; Go thy ways then into Egypt, and thou shall see wonders.
And so it fell out, for scarcely was he arrived in those confines there, but
his vehement sickness quite for sooke him.

Many others likewise, whom it were too long to recount in this place, were by
means of the Saint, delivered from sundry, and dangerous maladyes. Though the
miracle of Frontone it seems, apperteynes not so much to the gift of Curing,
as that of Prophecy. Which in S. Antony how eminent it was, though by diverse
things aforesaid, may seem in some manner to be comprehended: yet shall the
same more clearly appear, by that which we shall presently declare.

S. Antony relieues a Monk in distress: and sees the soul of Ammon, in a
vision, to ascend to Heaven. Chap. 15.
TWO Monks on a time, being trauayling in the desert, came to fail of water;
in so much as the one of them dyed thereof, and the other seemed to lie in
extremes. This, being revealed to S. Antony, he commanded the two which were
in his company, to go their ways, and run presently with a vessel of water
to the said place, being distant from the Monastery, a days journey at least,
and tells them wherefore. And they diligently performing the same, found the one,
as I said, departed, whom they buried, and brought succor to the other in
good time, and being so escaped they conducted him to the Saint. Now for what
cause, the same was not showed him before, and why God would conserve the one,
and not the other, seems not to concern me so curiously to seek into. It
suffices, that in so great a distance of place, was manifested to S. Antony
what passed.

Another day, he sitting on a hill, in company of others, sees one ascending in
the air, and many meeting of him, with very great joy. Whereat S. Antony,
remaining in admiration, and exceedingly desirous to know who it was; it was
revealed to him, to be the soul of Ammon a Monk, who dwelling in the Desert
of Nitria, about some 13. days journey from the residence of S. Antony, was
wont notwithstanding to come sometimes to visit him. He was a person of rare
virtue, and many miracles are likewise reported of him: and this one among
others, that being once to pass over the river Licus, which at that time, was
very much overflowed, he prayed Theodore his companion for his sake, to follow
some distance from him, to the end by wading together, they might not be seen
to each other naked. So did the other, and yet for all that was Ammon afterward
abashed at his own skin. And while he stood upon such points, and bethought
him thereof, I know not how, without touching the water, he sees himself on
the other shore, in the twinkling of an eye: where likewise the other, being
afterward arrived, and seeing Ammon to be all clothed, and without any sign
of wet upon him, demanded the manner how he passed over, and seeing he refused
to participate the same with him, he took hold of his feet, and wrong him,
and coniured him so much, as in fine he unfolded the quality of his passage to
him, with this pact notwithstanding, that he should not discover it to any,
till his death.

Now the Monks, as I said, seeing S. Antony with eyes so attentive and
suspended, very dearly entreated him, not to conceal from them, what he saw:
when as he answered, that Ammon was departed from these miseries, and was was
gone triumphant to Heaven. Whereupon the disciples noted the day, and after a
month some Brothers coming from Nitria, making a diligent comparison of times,
they found, that Ammon, on that very very day, had passed to a better life.

Another time, S. Antony sailing with some Monks and other Seculars, began to
smell a very loath some savor, and all affirming it to be the smell of salt
fish, and of dried figs, he replied, he felt another sent. And while he was
thus affiming, there was heard a horrible cry to come from a young man possessed
of the devil, who lay hid under the upper deck of the ship. Then S. Antony
rebuked the Devil, and on the behalf of Christ constreynes him to depart, as
he did, leaving the young man found, and the others astonished not so much at
the miracle, as at the purity of a soul, so quick of sent, as to favor the
neerenes of the unclean spirit. Besides, he was wont also to perceive before
hand, the coming of such, as came to see him, and the occasion wherefore: and
many times, would foretell the one, and other, some three or four days, and
somtymes a month before they arrived at him. But that which happened to
Eulogius of Alexandria, was a matter of particular edification, and caution to
all.

The life of Eulogius briefly set down, and especially a not able act of
Charity of his, concluded happily through S. Antonyes advise. Chap. 16.
THis Eulogius, was a man, (as Palladius declares) of a good disposition, and
having distributed already the greater part of his substance for the love of
God, yet nevertheless had not the heart, either to lead a solitary life, or to
live under obedience. Whereupon finding by chance a miserable wretch, to lie in
the streets, forsaken of all, maimed, without his hands and feet, deprived of
the use of all his lymmes, except his tongue: he made choice, for his
Mortification, and for the Exercise of christian virtue, to take care of that
poor wretch, to keep him at home, and to serve him til death: and to the end
the work might become more meritorious, being all in fervor, he made a votiue
promise thereof to our Lord. Having taken him then to him, he attended to the
government of him, to provide him of victuals, and clothing, bathes,
medicines, and physicians; in fine to serve him, as he had been some good
Benefactour, or Patron of his.

In which ministry having now perseuered, at least for fifteen years, with
equal solicitude of his, and gratitude of the other, at last the Cripple was
assailed with so strange and diabolical temptation, as he now began, not to
suffer himself to be governed any longer, making very earnest instance to be
exposed forth anew in public; alleging that he was now glutted with
Eulogius his entertaynement, and could endure no longer so retired a life, nor
so much abstinence. Eulogius wonders at such a manner of mutation in him, and
though he had no small occasion of just indignation against him;
notwithstanding ouercoming himself, he wet about to cherish the Wretch, more
now then ever, in giving him dainty meats, and procuring him some good and
pleasant conversation, but all in vain: The more he labored therein, the more
did the other persevere, requiring the good Father with nothing else, but
complayn^s, grumbling, and iniuryes. At last, the devil had brought him into
that rage, and desperation, as he was even upon the point as it were, to kill
himself.

Now the matter having passed thus a pretty while, the trouble on the one side
was intolerable to Eulogius, and he was now even ready to acquit himself
thereof: on the other it seemed to him a great folly to loose through
impatience, the trauayles and toils of so long a time. Moreover he was stung
with the offering, which he had made to our Lord God. Amidst these perplexityes
and agitations of mind, he resolves for a last dispatch to communicate the
whole with some neighbor Monks. Of whom he was counsayled, that since the
great S. Antony was alive, he should be contented to repair to that Oracle,
and seek fit remedy at his hands. Whereupon Eulogius did think it best so to
do, in regard he had heard much commendatio^s of the great Sanctity of that
Holy man, and was glad to have this opportunity to see him. To which end,
Eulogius had prepared, though with great difficulty, a bark to put the Criple
into, but not without much ado he got the miserable Wretch to be conveyed
thereinto, with him: and so both of them went by water to the Monastery of the
Saint, where being once arrived, Eulogius gladly attended his coming from the
Hermitage, to visit the Brothers, and Ghests, as he was wont. Nor was it long;
for on the night following the servant of God, came into the public view,
intermitting for a time his divine contemplations, and attending now to the
good of his Brethren; and causing all the strangers to be assembled, according
to custom, he sudda^ynely calls for Eulogius, very often by name, not known to
him before: Who thinking there had been some other Eulogius present, held his
peace for that time: But afterward hearing himself to be called upon a new,
being half astonished, made answer; Behold I a^re.

S. Antony requires the cause of his voyage, ann Eulogius replies: There is no
need, Father, that I should tell it to you: He that has so manifested my nam^
unto you, may as well like wise discover my necessity. I know it very well,
replied the Saint; but yet for edification of the standers b^, I would have it
declared from your own mouth. Eulogius obeyed: when he had ended the narration,
the holy A^oot stood up, and with be^ded bro^es, looking him in the face: Thou
art ready to abandon (says he) this poor man, and le^st thy^ self to be
vanquished with perturbation and tediousnes: Know then, if thou leauest him so,
that God will receive him by the means of another, that is better then thee.
With which words, Eulogius being much terrifyed, durst open his mouth no more.
When S. Antony turning himself to the infirm man, with a severe countenance,
and with a terrible voice, beyond all expectation, said to him: Thou perverse
and abominable Wretch, un worthy both of Heaven, and earth: Thou never leauest
fretting, and quarrelling, to the offense of God: know thou not, that he who
serves thee is Christ? How dare thou then so to mutter against the divine
Majesty? Is it not clear, that Eulogius, only for the Love of Christ, has
undertaken to have care of thee, and to do thee good? This said, he attended to
give audience to the others, and after some space of time, returning to those
two again, with more benignity of speech, advised them, saying: Beware my
Children, you part not from each other: but laying aside all rancour, and
bitterness return you home again, where you have lived together, for so long
time, because our Lord will soon be calling for you: and know, that so cruel
a temptation, has not befallen you for ought else, then for being now so near
your End, and the reward of your labors: and take heed, you do not otherwise,
for that if the Angel find you not so, you are in great danger of loosing
your Crowns.

This manner of reprehension, with both, had the weight it ought to have, and
they departing without delay, by accord, went to their former habitation, and
there passed not 24. days, but Eulogius dyed: and after three days more the
Leaper followed him, very well disposed in the inward man, and exceeding
contrite. This success was attentively observed, not without a great deal of
glory to our Lord, and much profit to souls.

S. Antony enjoys sundry visions. And fortels diverse things of the Arrian
Heretics. Chap. 17.
TO this kind of visions, and Revelations, may others be added, no less to the
purpose of exciting the fear of God, and very worthy to be always conserved
in memory. Whereof one was, that S. Antony being one day in prayer, about the
hour of Noone, before meat, he felt himself sudenly to be ravished in
spirit, and it seemed to him that he was carried to Heaven, by some favorable
spirit. But in ascending some others of a proud and fierce aspect, opposed
themselves against him, who being repulsed by the Guard of S. Antony, began
to quarrel, and allege the power they had from above, to examine whosoever
passed. With this denunciation, they prevailed to perform their office, but
the wicked spirits being willing to demand an account of S. Antony from the
day of his Nativity, it was not permitted them to do so, but only from the time
he became a Religious person, in regard that all the transgressions behind,
were now cancelled, and remitted by the divine piety.

Then did the infernal Ministers dilate themselves against the servant of
Christ, in diverse accusations and calumnyes, but not being able to prove any,
so ashamed, and confounded, in spite of themselves they were feign to let him
pass. And at that very instant again, did S. Antony return to himself, so
struck and astonished withal, as that forgetting his refection, he remained
all the rest of the day, and all the night, a sighing, and considering, with
how many Enemies unhappy Man has to deal withal. It came into his mind
besides, how the Apostle not without good reason seems to call the devils, the
Princes and Rulers of this air: exhorting the faithful, to betake them to the
armor of God, that they may be able to resist him in that dreadful day, and
the spightful accuser may not have wherewith to convince them at that hour.

Another time, after he had a while talked of the immortality of the Soul,
with some that came to visit him; the next night, he heard himself called from
above, with these words: Antony stand up, go forth, and behold. Being gone out,
he seees a foul and horrible Mo^ster, who with the head seemed to reach to the
clouds; and some others besides, with wings, which endeavored to fly, but he
stretching forth his unmeasurable hands, struck some of them down to the
Earth; others he could not hinder from mounting on high: and as for the one he
fretted with rage, and gnashed his teeth; so he rejoiced for the other, and
made great triumph: When suddenly a voice said to S. Antony: Mark well what
thou see: and so coming a new light upon him, he perceived it to be the
passage of souls, and that great Giant to be the devil, who had power and
authority upon his Subjects only; but was wholly impotent against those, who in
life had not been obedient to him.

Another day, he seemed to behold infinite snares, gins, and pit-falls, to be
spread on the face of the Earth, saying with a loud ^igh: And who shall be able
to come off safe, ^midst so many nets, and traps? he heard this answer:
Humility only. With these and other such like illustrations of the
understanding, came S. Antony continually to be more enflamed to the study of
Perfection, and to vanquish himself: and as upon such accidents, he was ever
wont to stand musing, and be extraordinarily recollected; so the Disciples
would be easily aware, that some such like ecstasies or abstractions, or other
had happened to him: and they would be coming about him, with so many prayers
and coniurations, as he could not conceal them, especially considering the
fruit they might gather from them.

Another time, after these, he approaching now toward the end of his life, and
sitting in contemplation, he was rapt in like manner, and turning himself to
the standers by, began to fetch a deep sig^, and trembling all over, kneeles
on the ground, and so remaining a good while in prayer, he arose again, all
bathed in tears. Whereupon the disciples being affrayd, enforced him to
manifest to the^, that which happened to him. Then the Saint, with many sobs,
and with words interrupted, answered: O children, how much better were it to
dye outright, then to behold the things to fall out, which have now been
declared to me. When they yet urging him again, he adds, but with deep
sighs: The wrath of God hangs over the holy Church. Forlo, it is to be given up
into the power of bestiall persons. I have seen the table of our Lord
encompassed round with lascivious and unbridled mules, that with many kicks of
the heels, oppress the Priests, and turn every thing vpside down. At which
sight, I sighing amayne, and desirous to know the mystery, this voice seemed to
land in mine ears: My Altar shall be profaned, and full of abominations. But
yet together with this evil news, I have likewise learned, how the storm
shall soon pass over, and fair weather again shall return to the
Catholics. Both which Prophesyes, were shortly fulfilled. First in the
sacrilegious boldness and insolency of the Arrians: and then with the
demonstration of the divine justice, and with the punishments which in part, at
least they paid for all.

These Ministers of the devil, had sacked the Temple of Christ, and within
sacred cloisters had violated the Virgins and Matrons there, made hauock of the
pious people, and stained the Yards, and Chapels with innocent blood, brought
in the rabble, and the vilest artizans, the worshippers of Idols, to
contaminate the vessels, to trample the Baptisteryes, and Sacraments; and in
sum, committed such things, as without horror and shame cannot be related.
But so impious, and licentious prosperity of theirs, lasted notlong. For lo,
the ravenous wolves now fallen into hatred with all Nations, for such impietyes;
and chased away with the fury of the self same people, whom they had stirred
up, fled out of the Cittyes, and basely went lurking again in their wonted
holes. Whereupon the true and ancient Religion, came again to dilate it self;
and the saythfull saw to their great content and consolation, the predictions
of S. Antony to be verifyed. Whereof since we have now treated sufficiently
already; we will conclude this matter, with a notable case, which happened in
the time of Nestorius the Governor of Alexandria, to a certain man called
Balatius, a Captain in Egypt.

The Judgment of God showed upon Balatius the Heretic: and how S. Antony
opposes himself against the Arrians. Chap. 18.
THis Balatius was a great favorer of the Arrians, and consequently a most
c^uell Persecutour of Catholics, and particularly of the Religious: in so
much, as he made the Monks to be publicly whipped stark naked: nor was
ashamed likewise to scourge the sacred Virgins, and the Servants of Christ.
Where with S. Antony, being moved, resolved to write to him a brief Letter, of
the tenor following. I see the wrath of Heaven to come upon thee: Do thou
cease then to deal with the Christians in this manner, that it may not come
and overtake thee. The Heretic laughed and scoffed at these menaces of his,
and casting the letter to the ground, and spitting upon it, he bad the bearers
thereof (after he had vilely entreated them) to return to S. Antony, with this
message: Since you seem to take such thought for the Monks, it will be now
time for me to call you to account also. But there passed not over a full day,
when the divine vengeance appeared upon that unhappy Wretch. Forasmuch, as he
and Nestorius going to a place called Cherius, but a days journey distant from
the City, upon two horses, that of Balatius being the gentlest in his stable,
the said horses began to play together, when as that, whereon Nestorius fate
(being they stiller and quieter of the two) giving suddenly a gripe to
Balatius, pulled him down, and leaping upon him, most cruelly brake his hippe,
whence being carried to Alexandria, he dyed within three days, while all
remained astonished to see, how suddenly S. Antonyes menaces were executed upon
him.

In whose soul, besides so noble a gift of Prophesy, was seen also a rich
ornament of Wisdom; not sprung from the curiosity of understanding, but from
purity of affect: not founded in meerespeculation or discourses, but in a
sensible knowledge, and divine Love: not refined with the chayres, and
scholasticall disputes, or written Books, but with lively faith, devout
aspirations upon the meruaylous volume of this great fabrique: Insomuch as the
immensity, and most swift, and ordinate motions of the heavenly spears, the
generation and corruption of sublunary things, the discording concord of simple
bodies, the forms and differences of the mixed, the variety of inventions,
arts, customs, and accidents of men: but above all the sweet disposition, and
infallible government of the Eternal Providence, were to him, as well a
glass of verity, as an incentiue of Charity. And that which is more to be
celebrated with these so great gifts, and treasures of profound knowledge; he
was so far from being puffed up with them; or once to think but vainly of
himself, as how much more knowledge he got, so much the more he increased in
true Modesty and Humility. And especially he carried a very singular respect,
with an interior and exterior reverence to the Interpreters and Depositarians
of the divine Scripture, such as are the Clarks, and Prelates of the holy
Church, and as willingly demanded, and learned of them all, as if he had been
the most rude and ignorant of the world: albeit on the other side, when need
was, he would not stick to give a good account of himself, and of the faith he
embraced to any person of what quality soever.

The Arrians had spread throughout all Alexandria, with subtle lying, that S.
Antony was of their opinion: which the Servant of God hearing, admiring so
great impudency in them, by the judgment of the Catholic Bishops, and of the
Brothers withal, he descended from the hill, and being in the city, in the
presence of all the people, began to detest that perverse Sect, calling it a
pestilent heresy, and the Messenger of Antichrist; teaching, and aduertising
all how the Son of God is no created thing, nor made of nothing, but is the
self same substance, and wisdom of the eternal Father. Whence were it a
great impiety to say, there was once a time, when he was not: for as much as
he, the word of the Father, was eternal with him, whereupon he concluded:
Wherefore, have you no communication with those wicked followers of Arius, since
the light has nothing ^o do with darkness; and you that observe the due
Worship of God with reason do call your selves, and are truly Christians. But
they in ^earming the Son, and the Word of God the Father, a creature, are
nothing different from Gentiles; nay rather do you hold it most certain, that
the creatures themselves, are al incensed against such wicked persons, that
dare to number and put among things created, the Creator, and Lord of the
Universe, in whom, and through whom has been made, and has being,
whatsoever is therein.

From such like aduertisements and protestations of the Saint the hearers took
a great deal of pleasure, in seeing that pestiferous opinion so anathematized
by such a Man: and all the inhabitants of the City, as well the Laics, as
Ecclesiastical, as well Gentiles as Christians, did strive to be the first in
the Temple, to see the Man of God, (for so was he called of all) and there
likewise, in the sight of them all, would he work many Miracles, partly in
expelling devils, partly in curing: in so much as the very Pagans themselves,
made instance to be touching at least of the garment of S. Antony. Finally, in
that short space of time, there were made more Christians, then were in a whole
year before: and he himself, besides the truth of the doctrine he delivered,
and the virtue of the miracles he wroght, and the Prudence which in his daily
actions he showed; was of so attractiue, and gracious a countenance, as how
beit of stature he were not different from others; nevertheless the strangers
that arrived thither, having never seen him before, could easily distinguish
him from the multitude, and point him out with the fingar to be such a one. To
this serenity of countenance, were answerable his behauiours, so judicious, and
complete, as if he had always lived notin Caves, or in the Forests, but in
populous lands, and in conversation with the Nobles.

S. Antony sends away two Philosophers well satisfied, who came to prove, and
tempt him; Besides others, that came to jest at him. Chap. 19.
THERE came on a time, as S. Antony was on this side of the Mountain, two
Pagan Philosophers to him, to try him awhile, and to prove what was in him: and
he knowing a far off, what manner of men they were, went forth to meet them,
and said to them by means of a good Interpreter: Wherefore have you, being
sage, and Philosophers as you are, taken such pains, so to come to the house
of a fool? When they answering, he was no fool, but prudent, and wise; S.
Anthony replied, and pressed them with this dilemma: If you would seem to
visit me, your labor were superfluous: If you take me to be sensible, and
wise, then do ye become Christians as I am, since convenient it were, we
should seek to imitate the better: and, if I were to repair to you, I would
surely endeavor to follow your steps; so do you, that have procured to see and
know me thus, not refuse to do that which I do. With such like words as
these, with some miracles, which they had seen him but lately work, these
eurious men, being amazed thereat, departed hence, not without some amendment
in themselves.

Others came afterward of purpose to jest at him, as an Idiot, to whom he
said: What think you? Which was the first, either wit or learning? Whereto the
Philosophers answering, that without doubt, Wit was the first; and that by it,
learning was found out. S. Antony did reply: if it be so then he that has his
wits sound, has no need of learning. With this conclusion, as well the Doctors
themselves, as the standers by, with reason were astonished. After whom came
in others in like manner to demand of S. Antony, account of the Christian
Religion. These men also were very learned, and versed not only in Poets
fables, but no less in the imaginations of Plato, and Pithagoras. Now then,
they beginning to sophisticate with him, and gibe at the Gospel, the blessed
S. Antony, stood awhile as it were in a study, and thence with great compassion
of their blindness, discoursed in manner following.

What is more honorable, think you Philosophers, either to confess the
Cross, or to adore, as Gods, such as are announced for adulterous, and full of
wicked carnality? The thing, which Christians profess, at least, is the sign
of Fortitude, and contempt of death: your glories are nothing else, but passions
of intemperance, lasciuiousnes, and unbridled desires: which is better to say,
the Eternal Word, without leaving his Divinity, for the benefit of the world,
has taken human flesh, to make us partakers of the divine nature: or instead
of the great God, to worship (as you do) the brutish beasts, and dead men? And
with what face then, dare you to scoff at Christians for affirming Christ, the
Son of God, for the Redemption of mortals, without leaving what he was
before, to become what he was not, and to be so abased, as the humility
derogates not a whit from Majesty; while you others, so unworthily entreat a
substance so fair, and noble, as are reasonable souls? Forasmuch, as on the
one side, you would have them to be streams, branches, and semblances of a
supreme Intelligence, ^gendred of the highest God: and on the other, you do
seem to precipitate them from the top of Heaven, even down to Earth beneath:
Whereas indeed a less evil it were for you, to shut them up only in human
bodies, but you cloth them, or to say better, put on them, the shapes of Asses,
Dogs, Wolves, and Serpents, and that which is worse, with shifting and
thrusting them now into one body, now into another, you do make them perpetual
erratiques and vagabonds. With which villainy notwithstanding you perceive not
awhit, being so blind, how much you do iniure withal that soueraygne mind
whence they are derived, and whom they seem to resemble, since look what the
image is, the same by all likely hood, must the architype be, and yet that
which is worse by this means do you come also to diminish the dignity of God
himself, the father and origin of that most excellent Intelligence.

But come we to the mystery of the Cross, which you so much vpbraid. Now tell
me then, which of the two were fitter to be chosen, to suffer without default
the snares of the wicked, and for defense of Honesty and Truth, to expose ones
self to all bitterness of punishments: or else to give credit to fables, and
adore the errors of Osiris, and Is^s, and the deceipts of Tiphon, and the
flight of Saturn, and the devouring of children, and murdering of Parents, for
such are your opinions, and your articles. Besides this, you that flout so, at
the reproach of death, why seem you not to admire the glory of the
Resurrection? And yet those that preach the one, proclayme the other: and how
remember you the cross, and pass over in silence, so many dead men raised,
blind restored, palsy men cured, leapers cleansed, the walking upon waters,
and other infinite miracles? Al which seem to show very clearly, that Christ
was not purely Man, but true God and Man together. And surely it cannot be
denied, but you proceed very unjustly with us, and deal not with our
scriptures as you ought; forasmuch, as if you regarded them, with an equal
eye, you should find, without doubt, how all the actions of Christ, do manifest
and discover him to be God.

And now produce you awhile your tryumphs against us. Though indeed from
irrational substances, what else can you bring forth, but crueltyes and
bestialityes? And it forsooth (as I understand you would seem to answer) that
such things, are but all^gorically meant by you, and that they have a good in
terpretation with the^, while in Proserpina is understood the earth: in Juno,
the ay^ in Diana, the Moon; In Neptune, the Sea; and so of the other: y^ for
all that, you can not deny your selves to be servants and worshippers of the
creature, to the open disparagement and grievous dishon our of the Creator
himself. Whereas, if the beauty of the visible things, were it that moved you
so much, such a motion were enough indeed to make you to admire them, and no
more: but you instead thereof, fall a deifying them, and the honor which is
due to t^ Artificer, do you give to the masonry it self, the same of the
Archi^ed to the house, and that of the Captain to the Soldier. What the do
you answer to all those things? Do but tell us. I pray, that w^ also may
learn, if things so worthy of laughter, may seem to be contained in the
Cross.

S. Antony proceeds in his discourse: and what followed thereupon. Chap. 20.
THe Philosophers now being brought into streights, and forced to shift here
and there, S. Antony smiling, proceeded forward. The truth of the things, which
I have told you, is even to be seen with the very eyes; and yet nevertheless,
whereas you, as Professors of Logic, ground your selves upon sillogismes, and
without such instruments, allow not Religion: tell me first, The knowledge of
God, is it more exactly purchased by dialecticall demonstrations, or by
operations of Faith, occasioned through works, o^ demonstration founded in
words? And they answering, that Fai^ proceeding from works, without doubt, was
the more ancient of the two, and brought the greater certainety with it. You
have answered well, said S. Antony, because indeed Faith consists in a certain
interior disposition of the Mind; whereas Logique seems to lean merely upon
the artificiousnes of those, which put the words and the propositions together;
in such wise, as when one, by the me^nes of Faith, has the virtue to work, he
has no need of the art of argumentation at all; since the very same which
Faith teateacheth us, do you seek to prove by reasons and discourses, and many
times are you not able so much, as to express with words, that which we
penetrate with the understanding: and no marvel, beause the Christian law, is
not founded in specious and pompous reasons, but in that power and Virtue,
which by Christ, is subministred to us, from the Eternal God.

And that this is true, behold us here, who never having learned any letters,
do believe in God, acknowledging in his factu^e, the Providence, he has of the
Universe. And this our habit of mind, how operative, and efficacious it is, you
may gather at least from hence: That whereas, the foolish Inventions, Sects,
Phantasyes, and I dols of you Grecians, in effect do vanish, and come to
nothing: the Christian Verity extendes it self on all sides, (...) you with
all your Sophistryes, convert not the Christians to Gentilisme: but we, not
proposing, nor teaching any other then the Faith in Christ, go daily defacing
your unhappy superstitions, and diabolical ceremonies, in making Christ
manifest to all, to be truly God, and the Son of God: and you withal your
smooth, and elegant speech, are not able to hinder the progress of the
Christian doctrine: whereas we only with the name of the Cross, do suddaynly
chase away those very devils themselves, which you dread, and adore for Gods.
And where, but the sign of the Cross is made, can no art Magique avail, nor
have Sorceryes there any force at all. And if not, then tell me, I pray, where
now are your Oracles? Where your Egiptian Enchaunters? When ceased, and
vanished trow you these infernal arts, but since the coming of the cross of
Christ?

And do you now then think the Cross, to be worthy of scorn; and not rather
the things, by it convinced, annihilated, and destroyed? And that so much the
more, as your rites were never yet persecuted of any, but have been always
for the most part received, and honored of the world: Whereas the Christian
Faith with all the persecutions and tribulations, which it has hitherto
suffered from Kings and Princes, continually flourishes and multiplyes, now
more the^ ever. And when was there ever in the world, more light, and greater
knowledge of God? When ever attended they so much to Sobriety, Continency, and
Virginity? When was death so much ever conte^ned, as since the holy Cross has
been known, and adored? and he that belieues it not, may behold so many
squadrons of Martyrs, and such a number of Virgins, who for the love of Christ,
have conserved their bodies immaculate, and untouched. And howbeyt the things
already said, are most sufficient for the clearing of our Faith: nevertheless
since you yet stand requiring of demonstrations, behold the persons possessed
with ill spirits (and by good hap some were present at that time,) and causing
them to come forth in the midst, he said, as follows. Either do you with your
sillogismes, or with any other art you, have of Enchauntments, or inuocations
of your I dols, deliver this people; Or else if you cannot, leave of to
entercounter with us, and acknowledge the Omnipotency of our Savior.

Hereupon S. Antony inuoking the name of Christ, he made two or three signs
of the cross upon the possessed, who from the crye^ they gave, and from
prancks they played, and from the torments, and violences they suffered, being
suddaynely returned to full and perfect health, became now very still, and gave
infinite thanks to our Lord God. Whereat the Philosophers, with reason,
remaining astonished, S. Antony spoke to them in this sort. Why do you so
wonder heereat? These are no works of ours, but of Christ, by the means of
such as believe in him. Do you then believe in him likewise, and become
Christians, and you shall see, that ours are no bablings awhit, but merely the
effects of a lively Faith, which if you had, you should not need, to go
begging of arguments. These were the words of S. Antony, and they likewise
admiring the same, went their ways, showing him great Reverence, and
confessing withal how much they had been helped by him.

How the fame of S. Antony increased: And especially what credit he had with
Princes. Chap. 21.
BY these and such like things, may every one easily imagine, how much daily
the fame and renown of S. Antony, went dilating it self: insomuch as at last
not only persons afflicted with infirmityes, and evil Spirits, or such as were
desirous to be guided in the way of our Lord; came to the mountain to visit
him, and to request help and counsel at his hands: But even likewise the very
Magistrates, and Judges of Alexandria themselves. Who for to have more easy
access unto him, sent to entreat the same at his hands, by means of
prisoners, and guilty persons, who were subject to criminal sentences, as
knowing well such cases and necessityes, would not be despised of the servant
of Christ. Nor were they deceived, since being vanquished by their prayers and
tears, he went forth of his Hermitage, and came to exhort the Governor in
passing sentence upon them, by any means to prefer the fear of God before
any passion, or human respect: remembering them withal of that saying in the
Gospel, What measure you affoard to others, shall be likewise given to you.
And with such manner of aduises as these, obtained he, very many dispatches of
suites, and releases of Innocents.

For other personages, he forbear not with admirable modesty to remember them
likewise of the vanity of the world, and the felicity of a solitary life: nor
the same without fruit, for that many having left great riches, and honors,
as well of war, as of peace, have converted themselves to a religious life.
And in sum, in the person of S. Antony, Christ had affoarded a famous
Physician to all Egypt. What heart oppressed with sadness which parted not
cheerful and content from him? What dolorous soul, for the death of their
dearest friends, deposed not on a sudden their heauynes and murmuring? What
wrathful person, was not presently reduced to concord? What beggar or Wretch,
with his words and examples, that came not to make little reckoning of money,
and willingly to suffer the necessityes of life? What tepid Monk, resumed not
again new fervor? What young man, with the sight and discourses of S. Antony,
was not suddenly enamoured with chastity? What conscience afflicted and tempted
of the Enemy, or molested with irksome thoughts, that was not immediately
quietted. Because indeed among the virtues of this holy man (as we have said
above) one was so acute a discretion of spirits, as in the twinkling of an
eye, he would know their inclinations and motions; and would not only suffer
himself to be deceived, but likewise give opportune and excellent remedy to
others, according to the necessityes of every one. Besides, How many Virgins;
already destined to matrimony, that with the only beholding of S. Antony a far
off, have been consecrated to Christ? And finally, as many as repaired to him,
have come their ways from him much encouraged against the Devil, instructed
against evil cogitations, comforted in tribulations, and full of virtuous, and
holy purposes.

True it is, that such manner of conversation with men, was very cautiously
dispensed by him, nor did he so give himself to the care of others, as to be
any whit unmindful of himself, but rather as soon, as could be, in imtation
of Christ, leaving the multitude, he would retire himself to prayer and
solitude. Nor was the sweetness of friends, or power of Princes, able to
withdraw him from such manner of observance. To which purpose, we are not to
pass over in silence, how a certain Captain, after he had visited him, being
willing to entertayne him further in discourse, he gently excused himself,
with that similitude of Fishes (so renowned afterward, and brought into a
Proverb) that even as those, remaining on the land, give over and dye, so
Monks abiding too much with Seculars, do loose the fervor of the spirit; with
which comparison, the Captain was well satisfied, though much grieved the
while to be severed from him. But what great matter may it seem, that S.
Antonyes friendship, should so be desired of Rulers or Prefects of some
Provinces only, since we see it sought for no less of very Monarkes
themselves, and of the Emperors of the world?

It is a known thing, how Constantinus Augustus, and the Princes his sons,
Constans and Constantius, sent him letters, as to a Father, entreating him to
vouchsafe to send them greeting, and good counsel: but he was so alienate
from worldly favors, and so abhorred he every least appearance of vanity, as he
was upon the point, not to accept the Epistles sent, saying to the Monks, to
whom it seemed to be some great honor to be so courteously greeted by the
Caesar's: Why marvel you that a King should write to a man? Nay wonder rather,
the immortal God, should write so his law to mortals, yea even speak to them
face to face by means of his only begotten Son. The magnanimous Abbot then
(as we have said) within a little had refused to receive the letters, at least
he was resolved not to answer them at all, if through the prayers of his
Monks, and scruple which would arise of little Edification, he had not been
enforced in a manner to write back, as he did: first with praising those
Lords, for the says they professed, and then exhorting the^ to make no great
reckoning of their present greatness but to have always the future Judgment in
mind, and to acknowledge Christ only, for the true, and eternal King; he
concluded lastly in persuading them to be courteous and benign, and to have
special care of the poor, and of Justice. Which aduises, were received of the
Emperor and Princes with great joy and confolation.

This was the credit and reputation, whereto the Servant of Chist, even in his
time, was arrived, surmounting the Envy, and detraction of the world; and the
same not so much, through same of great learning, or of extraordinary
Eloquence, or of Books ^ut forth to light, or of any of those arts, which are
in price with ^he world, as through a sanctity of manners only, and by the
grace of God, who is delighted to exalt the humble, to manifest such as are
willing to hide themselves, and withal to give the world to understand, how
the divine precepts and counsayles, are not impossible to those, that will
disentangle themselus, and walk courageously in the way of virtues. But be
this sufficiently said for the present of the glorious acts, and rare parts of
S. Antony, rather as intimated to the faithful only, then any wise explicated
as they deserve. And now remains it for us to touch somewhat of his Death,
that to him was a sweet, and blessed Birthday.

S. Antony being now come to the end of his days, presageth his death. With
his happy departure out of this life. Chap. 22.
THe holy Old man, was now arrived to the age of one hundred and five years
old, with a great ability of body. He wa^ted not a tooth, though his gumms
indeed were somewhat fallen: He had his sight very excellent good; having his
eyes yet sound, and quite without blemish: his feet, and arms he had still
very active, and that which is more to be merueyled at, was this; that
notwithstanding he was so given, from his childhood, to Fastings, Vigils,
Solitudes, Cloisters, with other of the sharpest penances that are, without
shifting (as we said above) his garments, or ever bathing himself; he had yet,
so fresh, and fair a skin, as if he had been always trained up in feasts,
and banquets, stoues, and baths, and other addresses of human delicacyes. In
this state, had he an interior feeling in himself, of the speedy approach of
his last days. Whereupon going forth again from the in most part of the
wilderness to reuisite and comfort the Conuents abroad, and causing the Brothers
to be assembled together as to a Congregation, he clearly spoke to them in this
sort.

This is the last visit, and surely is it much, that in this present life, we
have enjoyed one another so long. But now it is time at last, that I go my
ways. For I have lived in the world my part already. The disciples in hearing
this, began to weep, and to give very dear embraces, and holy kisses of
peace to their Master, Who being now very glad to go forth of this exile, and
to pass into his Country, in the mean while he went about, to put them in
mind, that they would not suffer the trauayles of Religion to seem tedious to
them, but daily seem to expect death: that they endeavor to keep, the soul
from unclean thoughts: that they purpose to imitate the manners of Saints, and
wholly fly the co^merce of Schismatiques, and Heretics, not suffering
themselves to bend this way, or that way; through fear of Magistrates, or
Princes, whose forces are but little, and not durable.

With these, and other such like aduises, making an Epilogue as it were of the
rest, he took leave of his children, who using all violence to retain him
there, that they might be receiving his last spirit, they could not procure the
favor, as well for many respects which he co^cealed, as principally, to avoid
a certain abuse, which the Egiptians had, to conserve with some art or other,
the bodies of persons of quality, upon certain beds, in performing their
wonted Exequies indeed, and en wrapping them after their manner in sheets, but
yet avoiding to put them under the ground, as a thing wholly unworthy of them.
Now was this abuse always very much displeasing to S. Antony, and he had been
reprehending the people for it at sundry times, and entreated the Bishops,
often to remedy the same: alleging that even from the ancient Prophets
themselves, were seen to be sepulchers extant, yea that the body of Christ our
Lord himself, had been put in to a Monument, and was covered with a great
stone, who arose the third day With which examples, howbeyt already, he had
reduced many persons, to bury their dead; yet nevertheless, knowing the
custom, and inclination of that people, he would not trust the multitude with
his spoils, but retiring himself into his Cell, from whence had he departed,
within few months after fell sick: and calling his two disciples to him, who
had now some fifteen years been present with him, he spoke to them in manner
following.

I am now (my dearest) upon walking the way of my Fathers, and I feel my self
to be called of our Lord. As for you be you wary and vigilant, and take heed,
you loose not the labors of so long a time: but as if you had but now begun,
do you enforce yoursel^es to maynteynly out wonted fervor and study. Then know
yo^ the snares, and rages of the invisible Enemies, and know you likewise, how
through divine Judgment, they have lost their forces. Do you not fear them
then, but always aspire to Christ, and fixing a ^iuely faith in him, expect
every moment to be cited before him, and so attend to your selves, still
remembering the rules, and documents, you have had from me; especially to fly as
fire, the conversation of Arrians, and Meletians, and whosoever shall have
severed themselves from the Faith, and communion of the Catholic Church,
since you know, how I no less have always abhorred them. But rather seek to
unite your selves with Christ, and with his Saints; that after death, they may
acknowledge you as Friends, and be receiving you into the Eternal tabernacles.
Be this your opinion then, and this your discourse.

And if you have any care of me also, as of a Father, do not suffer my Corpse,
by any means, to be carried to Egypt, with the hazard of being put up in some
house, according to the perverse custom of the Country there; but hide me
rather in the earth, in a place, where no person of the world, may know besides
your selves, because if it be consumed for the present, it shall yet be
restored again very glorious in the Resurrection. You shall distribute my
Garments in such sort, as that Athanasius the Bishop may have one of my Melots
(which were only poor sheep skins sowed together) and the Mantle whereupon I
was wont to lie. To the Bishop Serapion, you shall give the other Melot: and
you, in memory of me shall keep the Cilice: and with this my Sons, remain
in peace, for Antony passes, and shall be no more abiding with you.

These were his last words, and then with a cheerful countenance, showing the
Angels and Saints to rejoice, who came to meet him, he gave up the Ghost. And
the disciples, though sad for loosing such a Father on earth, nevertheless
being recomforted, for having purchased such an Intercessour in Heaven, did
bury him, according as he had ordyned. And to the Bishops, they gave the
garments, as welcome, and as much esteemed of them, as those who had gotten a
very rich inheritance. And the great Athanasius, recounts of himself, how he
wore the same afterward, very willingly: whereby it seemed to him, that he
carried about him, a perfect Memorial of the wholesome aduises, and documents
of S. Antony. Such a course, and end, made the great Servant of Christ: whose
life (as we insinuated above) Athanasius himself first wrote, in the Greek
tongue; who though he were of another vocation, notwithstanding in faith and
will was he most united with him. The blessed Euagrius translated the same into
latin, who lived very near those times, and was the disciple of both the
Macarius, enriching the same with some things received, as it is probable, of
such as had much familiarity and conversation with the Man of God. Moreover, as
many as have framed the Ecclesiastical History, and other most grave Authors
besides, have likewise touched his acts, and made very pious, and honorable
mention of him: God undoubtedly so disposing the same, not so much in
recompense of the labors of S. Antony (who enjoying eternal felicity in
heaven, should seem to care very little to be renowned in earth) as for the
profit of all man kind. To the end, so perfect, and noble deeds, words, and
manners, might not seem to be shut up within the terms of one people, or of
one age only; but should dilate themselves into all parts, and serve for
instruction, glass, and incitement to all Nations, and to all posterity.

FINIS.
S. PACHOMIVS.
THE ARGUMENT.
I BORNE of misbelieuing Parents, gaind
Not by my self but Heaven, the saving light,
Quickened the grace which I had entertaind,
And left the world, that I more safe might fight
Against my foes: I victory obtaind,
Finding this way to countermand their spite:
And slighting what the world does most commend
More easily I did my self defend.
What ere he be that strives to have a share
Within the mansion of Eternity,
Let him in this bestow his greatest care
To shun th'indearements of Mortality.
Souls have no parts, hearts undivided are,
Heaven and the world have no affinity,
Like as of Sense, on several objects bent,
The strength is weakened, and is less intent.
THE LIFE OF S. PACHOMIVS ABBOT.
Written by Simeon Metaphrastes.
Of the Birth of S. Pachomius, and his miraculous Conversion to the Christian
Faith. Chap. 1.
IN the same age (some few years after) the blessed Pachomius did flourish, a
great Father likewise and an excellent Master of Monks: whose virtue, and
Religion, no doubt was so much the more memorable, as the help of Education,
which he had was less, being borne of Gentiles both Father and Mother, and
brought up in Thebais, without any knowledge of our Savior Christ, until such
time, as he arrived unto military age. Some notable signs did forerun his
Vocation. One was, that when they gave him to drink any wine, or other
liquour, which had been offered to the Idols, with a certain hidden auersion
of the stomach, he would suddenly be vomiting it forth. And another sign also
was there yet of more wonder: for that, he being once conducted to a Sacrifice,
which was to be performed, by a rivers side, hard by, there could be nothing
done; for that at his presence, the Priest could neither finish his ceremonies,
nor would the Devils seem to enter into the Statues, to give forth answers,
from thence, as they were wont: so as their wicked Minister, having finally
understood the occasion thereof, with furious brawling, began to control the
Parents of Pachomius, as having brought thither, an enemy of the immortal
Gods: and commanded them, suddenly to thrust him forth, as fearing least some
heavenly wrath, or vengeance might light on their Son.

Amidst so impious superstitions of his house, and the rudiments of Egiptian
learning and doctrine, S. Bachomius being arrived to the twentieth year of his
life, was enrolled as a Soldier in a new leuy of men, which in the name of
Constantius, was then made in diverse parts, against the Tyrant Maxentius. And
with this occasion, being conducted by water with others, to a certain City,
near unto Thebes, he fell into great necessity, together with the whole army,
through the small provision that was made of victuals for the^. Which being
understood, by those of the Country there, who by good hap, were of the
faithful people of Christ, and very friendly to the Neighbor, they suddenly
provided for the afflicted Soldiers, what was needful for them; and that
with so great solicitude and charity, as S. Pachomius was astonished thereat:
and demanding what nation they were of, that was so hospitable, and benign;
answer was made him they were Christians. When demanding again, of what
manner of life and institute they were, he understood, that they did believe in
Jesus Christ, the only Son of God, and did well to all sorts of persons, with
firm confidence, to have some large remuneration for it, at the hands of the
same God.

S. Pachomius, had scarcely heard these words, but that full, as well of
interior consolation, as of an unusual light, retyring himself from the
company, and being somewhat in a deep study with himself, he lifted up his
hands to the stars, saying: Lord God, who framedst the Heaven and earth, if
thou shall vouchsafe to regard my baseness, and my trauayles, and give me the
knowledge of thy Divinity; I promise to serve thee, and obey thy precepts while
I breath. With this prayer, and promise, the love of virtue so increased in
him, as he began, from that time forwards through the divine Grace to resist
all sensuality, and valiantly to suffer Tribulations; helping himself with the
memory of his first purposes, until such time, as the Emperor, having gotten
a glorious victory upon the Tyrant, he was cashiered with others: and not
seeing opportunity there to become a Christian, he immediately went his ways
to Chemosium, a Town of the higher Thebais, where remained some notable and
venerable Servants of God. Of whom, being instructed in the holy Faith, he was
baptized: and the very same night, that he received this wholesome Sacrament, he
sees in his Sleep his right hand to be filled with dew, which falling from
heaven, did incorporate it self in form of honey, and withal heard a voice,
which said: Open the eyes of thy understanding Pachomius, and know, that this
is a sign of the grace, which is affoarded thee by Christ. This vision was not
in vain or unprofitable a whit, but rather Pachomius felt himself so compund
therewith, and enflamed with divine Love, as he determined, without delay, to
renounce the world, and to consecrate himself to a monastical life. And
having heard of a famous Hermit, called Palemon, that dwelt in those deserts,
he went his ways to him, to submit himself to his discipline.

S. Pachomius craves of Palemon to be received into his discipline, and is
admitted: with the manner of their lives together. Chap. 2.
THis Palemon for years was very grave, severe of countenance, and so rigid
and mortifyed in his conversation, as by many he was judged to be inimitable.
So soon as he heard then, one knocking at his cell, opening the door, he said
to Pachomius. Who art thou? and what seeks thou? To whom the good young man
answering: God sends me to you to be admitted into your estate of life. The old
man replied. This is no work for you, not so easy as you think; for some
three or four others, have come hither likewise that have not been so well
able to stand to it afterward. Then Pachomius: All men are not made of the
same mould. Do you receive me, and in time (I trow) you shall be cleared in
that point. I have told you already (replied the Hermit) that you cannot brook
the labor. Go your ways then first to do penance in some other place: and if
you shall then think your self able to endure it, do you come to me, and then
perhaps I shall accept of you. Because indeed my manner of living (for to tell
it you) is very sharp, and difficult. I sustain my self (God be thanked)
with no other thing, then bread and s^lt. Neither wine nor oil ever enters
into my mouth. Half of the night, or there abouts, do I spend, part in prayer,
part in reading, and ruminating the divine Scripture.

These and the like words, though delivered. with a harsh voice, and a horride
brow, were not sufficient to terrify the constant Pachomius, but rather, as a
little water spurted on a great fire, enkindled such a flame in his breast, as
with much reverence, he most cheerfully affirmed, that he felt in his mind, a
firm belief, that the divine Goodness, by means of the intercession of the
same Palemon (whose life was a mirror to all Mortals) would make him a
disciple not unworthy of so noble a Master. From such perseverance, united
with like piety, the Anchoret, now easily gathered, that Pachomius had an
extraordinary feeling, and a manifest vocation of God. Whereupon, having now
some confidence of a happy success, without more ado, he admits him into his
Cell, and gives him his habit. And from thence, they began to live together,
spending the greater part of the time in devotions, and the ^est, in twisting
of Camels hair, and making of sacks, and that not to pick out money for their
own profit, but to relieve the poor with, as the Apostle counsayles.

At night then, in time of prayer, and Psalms, if Palemon perceived the
disciple to be somewhat pressed with sleep, taking him forth of his Cell, with
a basket in hand, he would employ himself with him, in carrying of heaps of
sand, to and fro, until such time, as the superfluous vapors of the body
being dispersed by this means, he might come to be prompt, and nimble again,
and have the spirit now thoroughly awaked; and would besides be admonishing him,
saying: be you sober and attentive O Pachomius, that you be not ouercaught by
the Tempter, and all our labors prove not to be in vain. But the seruent
Nouice, gave not much occasion unto spurs and incitements, and the holy Father
exulted in himself, and glorified the Divine Clemency, to see him become every
day, more obedient then other, to see him more addicted to mortification, and
abstinence, he not sparing in the mean while to go always before him, with a
lively, and continual example.

So as once upon Easter day, Pachomius to solemnize that Feast, having dressed
him a little Oil, seasoned with salt, when Palemon saw him to reach it to him,
suddaynely striking his forhead, and casting forth a deep sigh, with tears he
said: My Lord was put on the Cross, he was laden with iniurye^s, cuffs, and
buffets, in his greatest thirst he was made to drink both Vinegar and Gaul,
and shall I be pampered here, and be soothing my palate which oyled meats?
Nor with all the instance, and intreatyes, that Pachomius could use by any
means, he would seem to break his Fast, vn^ll such time, as that seasoned
Oil being taken away, and some other brought him which was pure, and simple
(in blessing it first, with the sign of the Cross, and rendering most humble
thanks to the high Creator for it) he finally fell to. In such like acts
Pachomius continually beheld himself, as in a glass: and as from the
excellency of the Master, he was hourly encouraged more to follow the good;
so from others defects, became he always more cautious to beware the evil.

The judgment of God showed upon a Monk. S. Pachomius founds a Monastery, and
Palemon dies. Chap. 3.
AN audacious Monk but ill founded in the knowledge of himself, and human
frailty, came on a time to see Palemon and Pachomius, while they had made by
chance a very good fire: and after he had sat down with them a pretty while,
entertayning themselves with spiritual discourses, arising on a sudden, said
to Palemon: if you, and your disciple have true Faith, show me here some
Evangelical experience thereof, and make your prayer, here barefoote, upon
these burning coals. Palemon reprehending him for it, and aduising him, not to
suffer himself to be deceived so by the enemy; he puffed up with greater
pride, and presumption, went voluntarily upon the Coals, and the Divine
Majesty, permitting it so, the Devil had power to preserve him without hurt at
all. Whereupon that miserable Wretch, with malapert insolency, vpbrayding
Palemon and Pachomius, with saying: where was their faith? went his ways very
proud, from thence. But it was not long, ere he paid very soundly for it.

For first, being deluded by the ancient Adversary with lascivious shapes, and
thereupon very grievously struck and afflicted, he repaired again, after some
days to Palemon, with sighs confessing his error, saying: Know that I am
undone, for not having obeyed you, and now I do pray you, to succor me, with
your prayers, for that I stand in great danger, to be slain of the infernal
Enemy. The wretch was yet a speaking, and Palemon and Pachomius a weeping for
compassion; when lo, on a sudden, the devil assaults him, takes him out of the
Cell, and like a savage beast, chasing him a good while through the Crags, and
Mountains, finally in the City, which is called Pun, took away his wits, so
as he cast himself headlong into a furnace of a bath, where suddaynely he dyed.

S. Pachomius being admonished with these so horrible, and strange accidents,
from thence learned to fear the Judgment of God, and to re-enforce the guard
upon his heart, by resisting the appetites, brideling anger, and the other
passions, and endeavoring to found himself, by all means, in true humility.
Besides, when he read or recited any things of the sacred scripture, he posted
not in have, as many are wont, but tasting, and ruminating the sentences, and
precepts, one by one, he sought to derive profit from them, and to serve the
Highest with fit attention. Being often sent barfoote, to make wood, in a
certain forest, very full of sharp thorns, while he ^elt his flesh to be
torn, and wounded, he would be suffering all the dolours thereof with
alacrity, in remembering the Nails, which pierced the sacred feet and hands of
our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, and continually treating with God in those
solitary places would he pray for himself, and for all human kind, that he
might be preserved from the snares of the common Adversary. In sum, with
these manner of Exercises, was he arrived to such a point of perfection, as the
Master himself remained much comforted, and astonished thereat.

It happened to him afterward, on a time, by a certain occasion, to arrive at
the Island, and Town of Tabenna; where, being in a long, and profound Prayer,
he heard a vovce to say to him: Pachomius, stay here, and set up a Monastery
in this place, because many shall come unto thee with desire to be saved whom
thou shall guide according to the instruction which I shall give thee. And with
this, an Angel appeared, and gave him a Table, wherein the same Institute was
contained, which for many ages afterward, the Monks of Tabenna observed. Then
Pachomius, with the discretion of spirits which he had purchased, very clearly
perceived, that as well the vision, as the Rule was a heavenly thing: and
receiving the same with great Reverence, he went to his Master, and
communicated the whole with him: beseeching him to be pleased, to put to his
helping hand, in the execution of what, had been ordained him, by the Angel.
And though Palemon otherwise, would very unwillingly have left his ancient
Cell, notwithstanding to comfort so good and virtuous a disciple, he was
persuaded to go thither, and they both set up there a poor habitation, in
form of a Monastery. But it was not long, ere Palemon, being now spent, partly
with old age, and partly with maceration of the body, arrived to the end of his
days; and Pachomius, as in life he had always obeyed, and served him, with
exquisite diligence; so after death, with extraordinary feeling, buried him,
with his own hands, with a great deal of Lamentation, but not without
Canticles and Hymns.

A Brother of S. Pachomius ioynes himself with him in his manner of life; and
what followed. Chap. 4.
AFter this, a natural Brother of S. Pachomius, becoming a Christian, and
called by the name of John, being likewise touched with a laudable desire of a
perfect life, came to seek him, and to inhabit with him. They remained full
fifteen years together continually exercising themselves, in acts of
religion, and penance. At the end whereof, while now it seemed to Pachomiuhs,
it would not be long, ere that came to effect, which had been promised him of
the multiplication of Monks, he began anew, to enlarge the dwelling, to be
able to receive them all. This fact of his, was displeasing to John, and as he,
who was the elder in years, and perhaps, knew not, or not fully believed,
what was signified to Pachomius from Heaven, esteemed such a building, to be
against Poverty, and therefore reprehended his Brother, somewhat bitterly for
it, saying, he should cease from committing such follyes, so to seek to
enlarge himself, more then needed. To which words, though he answered nothing,
yet did he in wardly think upon the and after having some remorse at such a
thought, retyring himself at night in the new building, he puts himself into
bitter Laments and turning himself to God, with great dolor cried out in this
manner.

Alas, that the prudence of the world, should be yet continually reigning in
me! I am still a carnal man, and after so many years of Religious warfarre,
do I yet suffer my self to be vanquished by wrath, under a colorable pretext
of good. Mercy Lord, least I utterly perish, because that if thou establish me
nor, in thy patience, and that the Enemy come to find somewhat of his in me, I
shall be subject to him, since it is written: That if any one but fail in one,
he is made guilty of all. I believe thy benignity is exceeding great, help me
Lord, and I shall walk in the way of thy Elect; aduauncing my self always
forward, and forgetting quite what remains behind. Even as they likewise
through thy grace, have done, to their everlasting praise, and crown, but to
the great affliction, and utter confusion of the adversary: otherwise, how
shall I be able to instruct those, whom thou saydst, thou would give me in
charge, if first I shall not subdue the passions, which by means of the flesh,
make war against the spirit, and if I shall not have learned to observe thy
Law inviolable? But I hope Lord, through the help of thy high and mighty hand,
I shall do that, which may like thee best, and thou pardon all my defects.

In such accusations of himself as these, joined with bitter playnts, with
burning prayers, and with solid purposes, spent he all that night, and at the
apearing of the day he found on the ground, a certain dirt which was there
caused through the continual tears, that streamed from his eyes; as also with
the excessive sweat, which tricked down from all his body. Nor let any one
seem to attribute this, to an exaggeration of words: for that besides the
humor, which contrition wrong from him, and affliction of mind; it was then
likewise the season of Summer, and the place of its nature was exceeding hot:
nor was the servant of God, then making his prayer in a careless kind of
composition of body, but either on his knees, or prostrate, or bolt upright,
with the arms erected and distended in form of a Cross, without letting them
once to fall, or leaning himself to any thing, until the time he had purposed
to himself; and this, as well to suffer something with Christ, and for Christ,
as by that means to keep his mind more vigilant, and attentive.

With this sacrifice of an humble and penitent heart, he obtained so much favor
from heaven, as for the time to come, he perseuered with his Brother, in
meruaylous Peace, and Patience: and as soon as he passed into a better life, he
interred him, with all due piety, and with the wonted Exequyes. From hence,
remaining quite alone, as he had but then entered into the Wilderness, he gave
himself with a fresh vigor to his accustomed spiritual exercises, not
forbearing the while, like another No^, to be building the Arc for those, that
were to be saved therein, according to the Angelical prediction, which howbeit
slow in coming to pass, yet was he certain, it would not fail.

S. Pachomius is tempted by Devils in sundry sorts. He sees a vision; and many
repair unto him, to be admitted into his Institute. Chap. 5.
IN the mean time S. Pachomius was very grievously molested by Hellish
Monsters, being all enflamed with Envy against him, and desirous to put any
obstacle soever to so great a good; so as putting in practice whatsoever was
permitted them, with diverse apparitions and strange phantasmes, they sought to
affright the servant of God. Among other on a time, being about to kneel to
his Prayers, the earth on a sudden fell a gaping before him, in form of a
deep Cesterne, to swallow him up. At other times, returning from the more
remote deserts, where sometimes through desire of greater solitude, he was
accustomed to retire himself; upon the sudden, the same perverse spirits were
before him, marching as it were in order of battle, and saying with a loud
voice: Give place to the Man of God. They endeavored likewise to shatter the
new building in such sort, as it seemed they would have turned it topsyturuy
from the very foundations. Besides, sitting on a day at some handy work, after
he had made his prayer, there seemed a Cock to be represented to him of an
unmeasurable greatness, which redoubling very fierce, and horrible crowings,
adventured from time to time to fly in his face, and with the claws, and spurs
most cruelly scratched him.

These, and other affrights and iniuryes S. Pachomius, being full of a high
confidence in God, very easily repelled, now with the sign of the most holy
cross, now with some verse of the sacred Psalter. Whereupon the malignant
spirits, perceiving the way of fear, succeeded not with them; turned
themselves by agreement to tempt him, with laughter, in showing themselves very
busy and earnest to remove certain leaves of a tree thereby, tying them with
great ropes, and exhorting one another to pull hard, with voices and united
forces, much after the manner, as Carpenters are wont to do, when they lift
some huge piece of timber. But this trick of theirs, was not any whit
sufficient to move the gravity, and constancy of the Christian Philosopher; but
rather sighing, instead of ^aughter, and setting his mind on the Crucifix, he
attended to prosecute the exercise in hand, in such wise, as the powers of
darkness, being thus scorned by a mortal man, and put to confusion, went their
ways.

But yet for all this, they ceased not afterward, to renew the battle
again, by taking the habit and form of beautiful women and endeavoring to
sit down at the Table with the Man of God in time of refection, and to be
impudently putting their hands into that poor fare, which he had before him;
when seeing themselves to be howerly vanquished and despised, changing their
figures by divine dispensation to the greater crown of the Saint, they
afflicted him more then once with sundry pains and cruel torments. Wherein as
he, through the help of Christ, remained always, victorious; so according to
the saying of the Scripture, it often happened, that he walked, and that
without hurt, upon venomous beasts; and which is more, being to pass the River
of Nilus, when need was, the Crocodils themselves, instead of a bark, would
securely be wasting him over.

With such proofs, and so glorious victoryes, S. Pachomius now being arrived
to the highest degree of hope and charity, the Angel appeared to him anew, and
said to him: God is pleased, O Pachomius, with thy service, and would have thee
reconcile the Gentiles unto him. When not many days after, some persons,
desirous to save their Souls, and glutted with the world, began to repair
unto him from diverse places, who benignly received them all, but yet gave the^
not the Monastical habit, till first he had proved every one with a long and
exact probation.

The manner he held in the instructing of all together, and each one in
particular, consisted, in keeping them free, and far off from all traffic,
and transitory cares; and to unite them, first from the world, then from the
having of things proper, and lastly from themselves. And forasmuch as to exhort
others to the Cross, examples do move a great deal more, then words; he was
the first in observing of Silence, in Edification, Lessons, Fasts, Vigils, and
other labors, and austerityes of the Monastery, to prepare the Table, to
cultiuate the garden, to answer at the gate, to be serving of the Sick both
night and day, and hence with loving aduices, and remembrances withal, would
he afterward very easily conduct others, to live according to the obligation
of such a vocation. It was not long ere the good odor, and same of this new
Institute was spread every where, in such sort as the multitude of Monks, came
soon to ariue to the number of a hundred.

S. Pachomius highly regards the Clergy; and visits the great Athanasius.
Chap. 6.
Among these Monks, was not yet seen to be any Priest: whereupon when they
were to communicate, some Priest was called for, of the neighbor Villages, so
rare was Priesthood in those days, and held in the esteem it ought to be. And
as for S. Pachomi^ he suffered not any of his disciples to ^spire to such a
dignity, or any other honors, or degres at all, affirming that from like
desire, do grow emulations, s^rifes, and contentions; and added, that as a
least sparckle of fire, falling in a barn, if not speedily oppressed, will
unluckily consume the whole years harvest: so Ambition, or the thought of a
Clerkship, with what pretext soever it enter once into Cloisters, and be not
suddenly extinguished, will come to put all the Religion in tumult, or ruin
rather and utter destruction. Notwithstanding afterward, if any one being a
Priest already, should offer himself to follow the Rule, Pachomius would not
refuse to accept him, and with such quality of persons, so carried himself, as
how much more respectfull, he showed himself toward them for the sacred
Orders sake which they had taken; so much more humble and meek would they
become through the Virtue, and example they saw in him.

Besides that, he was full of Piety to all, especially toward the aged and
infirm persons. To young men likewise, he would use discretion, dexterity, and
longanimity to save their Souls, whereof he was meruaylously zealous, and
sollicitous. And because not fat from his Convent, was a certain Village
without a Pastor, and consequently deprived of the word of God, and the holy
Communion, he dealt very charitably about the same with Aprion Bishop of
Tentiri, in whose Diocese the said place was; and with his consent, set upon
the building of a Church, where afterward a Parish was appointed. And he in
the mean time, not failed to go thither with some companions, to instruct the^
in the Christian doctrine, performing that exercise with such devotion, and
with ^o much grace, and composition of body and mind, as to the Seculars it
seemed they ^eard, and saw an Angel, and no mortal man, nor were the
^aythfull only confirmed, by this means, but many Infidels likewise converted
to the Faith. And as S. Pachomius received those who believed in the Gospel
with extraordinary joy; so for the ^osse of the obstinate and incredulous
persons, he would seele ex^reme dolor, and for the same be sheding of
continual tears.

At that very time, the great Athanasius had taken possession of the
Bishoprique of Alexandria; and being gone in progress, as a good Pastor, in
person to visit the Churches of Egypt, and especially of the ^pper Thebais, and
Siena, by that occasion he was likewise to pass by Tabenna, when S. Pachomius
knowing some part of the travails, and persecutions which the holy Bishop had
suffered for the Catholic says, went forth to meet him, in company of all
his Monks with iubiley and festiuity of Psalms, of Hymns, and Canticles.
True it is, that having understood before hand, how means was made by the
Bishop of Tentiri to Athanasius, for his promotion to a higher state, for not
to be seen nor known by him, he hid himself of purpose, in the throng.
Whether he spoke with him afterward, or no, is not found written any where.
But as this Chanpion of Christ, was a great friend, and much devoted to the
Catholic Prelates; so could he not suffer so much as the name of Arrius and
Meletius, and the other Heretics and Scismatiques to be mentioned of any by
name: and for their writings he could not endure them by any means to be had
o^ read of his Monks. He was likewise very cautious in forbidding them to
murmur at all, especially against the Clerks and Prelates of the church, and if
by chance they had fallen into such a default, he would suddenly oppose
himself against them in ci^ing some verses and sentences out of the holy
Scripture to that purpose, together with the example of Mary the sister of
Moses, so severely punished by God, for having murmured against her Brother.
And finally by how much more sweet and pliable he was to all, in that which
lawfully he might; so much more rigid, and inflexible he showed himself, where
it stood not with the least point of the honor of God, or the Neighbor.

S. Pachomius is visited by his Sister, who afterward retires herself in^
Monastery. Chap. 7.
SAint Pachomius kept himself wholly from the conversation and familiarity of
his Parents, except when he had good hope to help them in Spirit. And therefore
lastly being visited by a Sister of his, (...) sent her answer by the porter
in these words. Behold thou have heat I am yet alive: Go thy ways then, and
take it not ill, that I let thee not see me. I will promise thee, that if thou will happily imita^ this manner of life of mine, to obtain together with me
pardon and Mercy of our Lord, some fit dwelling or other shall be assigned thee
in a convenient place to live in peace and silence, and by that occasion
peradventure, it may happen the divine Goodness will o^ some other women
likewise to do penance with thee, since in (...) there is no other consolation
on earth, then for one to do well, and to serve God.

With this answer, the good woman was so compunct, as s^e brake forth into
plaints, and without more ado, determined to obey the counsel of her Brother;
who according to promise, caused cer tayne Lodgings to be built for her, not
far from the Monastery very apt for the end pretended: wherein she exercising
her self, according to the directions and orders of S. Pachomius, it was not
long ere there came many other women likewise to her for the same purpose, who
increasing continually in number, she was elected to be the Mother and Abbess
of them. Whence he attended with more solicitude then ever to instruct them
well, and to conduct them safely to a good Port.

A certain venerable and discreet Father, called Peter, had the
superintendency over that Convent, by commission of S. Pachomius, who at his
times would visit, and exhort them to Perfection; and if it happened now and
then to any Monk, having some kinswomen there to have occasion to go to any
such, he was accompanied thither, by some ancient, and grave person, or other,
of approved virtue: nor could he speak with such a one, but in the presence of
the Mother, and some of the principal of the Monastery. To give, or take any
thing with them, or else to eat, or drink in that place, under any pretext
whatsoever, was wholly prohibited. When any of the Sisters came to dye, the
others very decently composing the corpse, would depose it with Psalms in a
determinate place, near ^to the convent, Whence after the Monks would convey
the same (...) manner of procession, and bury it with devout prayers and
accu^omed Canticles in the hill near at hand. Through the fame of ^ese things,
a certain young youth (among others) of some four^ene years old, by name
Theodore, a Christian of noble Blood, be^ag moved, gave himself likewise to
the discipline of S. Pachomius, ^y the occasion which I shall presently tell
you.

The history of Theodore, and how he and his Mother entered into the discipline
of S. Pachomius.
THeodore once on a festival day, beholding the riches, the delights, and the
ornaments of his own house, felt himself sud^enly to be interiourly moved by
the divine grace, and began to dis^ourse with himself in this manner, saying:
What shall all these ^ases, contentments, and momentary pleasures avail me
(Wretch ^s I am) if I come to be deprived of the Eternal? Forasmuch as ^one
for the present can attend to these, and in the future enjoy the others: and
fetching suddenly a great sigh, retired himself into a ^ore secret place of
the house, where prostrate in tears, he said: (...) Lord, who see the
secrets of hearts, thou know, I prefer not any thing of this life before thy
love: vouchsafe then to illumine ^e, so as I may be able to understand thy
will; and that perfectly ^xecuting the same, I may glorify, and praise thee
forever.

After this, refusing the commodityes and the cherishments of ^is Mother, he
began to give himself seriously to abstinence, and ^astings, with other
mortifications and asperityes, wherein having ^xercised himself for some two
years together, he recollected himself in the company of some Servants of
God. One of which, (the ^espers being ended) discoursing according to the
custom amongst them of spiritual things, he entered in, to speak of the
Tabernacle, and of the Saencta Sanctorum, of the ancient Law; interpreting the
exterior Tabernacle (as that which was of the manner of manufacture) to
signify the first people of the Jews; but that of the Sancta Sanctorum, should
figure the vocation of the Gentiles, as having a more sumptuous and mystical
entry with it; whence in the place of Sacrifices of beasts, and instead of the
Thurible, of the Table, of the Arc, of the Candlestick, of the Propitiatory,
and of all those other ancient symbols, for our salvation, has succeeded the
divine word it self: who assuming our human flesh, has taken us from the
pains of our sins, through the holy light of the Gospel, and with the
satisfaction of his infinite merits.

This said, he confessed he had heard this interpretation from the great
Pachomius himself, who had lately gathered together good number of Monks in
the Island of Tabenna, and governed them with merueilous discipline; and I hope
(added he) that the mention of this Man of God, now made by me, may impetrate
for us some indulgence of our sins. The good Monk had scarce finished his
discourse, when Theodore was enflamed with the relation made, with an exceeding
desire of knowing S. Pachomius by sight, and to give himself wholly to be
governed by him. In so much, as a virtuous and good Old man, called Pecusius,
being come thither from Tabenna, for to visit that Congregation there, was by
Theodor entreated at his return, with great affection, he would be pleased to
conduct him with him to the blessed Pachomius, as he did with a very good will,
and being arrived at the holy place, the youth, not being able to conteyne
himself from tears of Joy, was received by him with a great deal of charity,
and numbered with the others; when in a short time, he profited so much in all
manner of virtues, as S. Pachomius himself, did wonder at it.

There was afterward an occasion presented to make the constancy and fervor
of this Nouice more renowned. In reguard the Mother, being now become a widow,
and not brooking the absence of her son; came to Tabenna in person, bringing
letters from the Bishops with express order to have him restored her again.
Here now, she being received by the Nuns, as a guest, she speedily sent the
letters to S. Pachomius, urging the execution thereof. When the servant of
Christ, having called Theodore to him, said to him in this sort: I understand
thy Mother is come to see thee, behold the Letters of the Bishops, which she
has brought me, for that end. Go thy ways then, and comfort her, especially
for the Prelates sakes who have recommended it to me. Theodore answered. Do you
give me security then, Reverend Father, that this little edification, which I
shall give unto others, with such an enteruiew, be not imputed to me, at the
day of Judgment? Forasmuch as if in the times before grace, the children of
Leui, did quite forsake their Parents, howbeyt most dear unto them, for to
serve the Lord God wholly: how much rather should I, that have received so great
mercy and light from the ^ame Lord God, keep my self from preferring in any
wise the affection to flesh, before the love, and service of his divine
Majesty? seeing our Savior has said openly to us: He that loves his Father,
or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me. Then S. Pachomius declared
himself better unto him, with saying: If it seem not expedient to thee my
Son, I will not urge thee to it, but rather confess the other to be of more
perfection; because indeed the Monk is to fly al worldly commerce, and be
loving, with an ordinate affection, and without passion, all those who through
faith, are members of Christ. And if any would seem to oppose, that he may not
desist from wishing well to his own blood, let him note that saying of the
Scripture, That every one becomes the slave of him, that vanquitheth him.

By this manner of speech, the good Youth, being now confirmed more, and more,
would by no means, show himself to his Mother. And it pleased our Lord,
through this austerity of his, that she remained so astonished and moved to
devotion as she determined likewise herself to leave the world, and with the
approbation of S. Pachomius, was received into the number of the Servants of
Christ. Whence may be gathered, that things being done to the greater glory of
God, howbeit in the beginning sometimes, they may seem perilous and bitter:
yet nevertheless through divine disposition, do they produce many times most
sweet fruits.

The Grief which S. Pachomius took for the lapsed: Together with this
Discretion, and Patience in all occasions. Chap. 9.
FRom these, and other such like successes, look how much consolation S.
Pachomius took in our Lord; so much grief and sorrow felt he for the ill
proceeding of some, who tired with labor, and to much given to carnal
prudence, would never thoroughly renounce themselves, nor be desployed of the
old man. The holy Man would seek to help such by all means possible, but in
vain. Because they, partly not knowing how to deny their proper will; partly
affrighted with the difficulty of virtue, and with the examples of the
pennances and Mortifications which they saw in others; finally being vanquished
by the spirit of pusillanimity, and vain fear, did suffer themselves to be
carried from the port, into the dangerous tempests of the world: Yet this
departure of theirs was not altogether unprofitable to others, since the field
of our Lord hee^pon, being purged from weeds and cockle, became continually
more pleasant and fruitful. And besides, from thence might be gathered, how
that even as the austerity of the Monastical life do^ not hurt Seculars, if
they will but help themselves with it, in some part; so neither the advice, good
carriage, nor the Prayers of others do benefit Monks, if they resolve not to
shake of quite, very manfully all manner of Sloth and Cowardice.

But to conserve, and to promote Men of good disposition, one of the principal
industryes of this great Lover of the Cross, was, not to permit, that in the
treating of his person, should be used particularityes with him, of any sort
whatsoever, as we shall see by the ensuing acts. He being gone on a time, in
company of some Mon^ to reaping in an Island called Threa (where every one had
built him a houell to retire himself to, in due times) the good Father,
whether it were, through age, or with overmuch work, fell sick of a fever, and
Theodore, in his cold fit, being ready to cover him with* Shepherds mantle
wouen with hair, S. Pachomius would by n^ means suffer it, but willed him to
take it away sudenly, and to cover him only with a Mat, as the custom was to
do with others; which done, Theodore brings him a handful of dates, exhorting
him to refresh himself with them: Whereat the good Father, with tears in his
eyes, replied.

Why, Theodore, because we have power over the labors of our Brethren, and to
us the care belonges to provide and distribute the portions among them; should
we therefore at our pleasure, and without any regard be treating of our selves
in this sort, or be taking of any thing superfluous, or out of time, and common
custom? And where should our holy Fear be then, if we should do so? For tell
me; Brother, have you run through all the houels, and certifyed yourselfe,
that there is no other sick body, more necessitous then I* deceive not your
self so, Theodore, iniquity is abominable in the sight of God, not only in
great, but even also in smaller matters. If others then, with divine help, can
patiently suffer afflictions, and discommodityes; why should not I seem to
suffer the same? And with this answer, he sent the Disciple a way exceedingly
edifyed and instructed. S. Pachomius likewise had obtained of our Lord,
together with the discretion of spirits, that same likewise of the Infirmityes,
so as he could very well distinguish, which proceeded from natural causes, and
which from the operation of the Enemy; who many ^ymes, for to ^hinder the
divine service, is wont to alter the humors of human bodies, and to cause
indispositions in them. Whereupon S. Pachomius being assailed on a time in the
Monastery with a most grievous fever; it seemed to him very requisite, to cause
him thereby increase his abstinence (since by this means for five ^ontinuall
days, he remained without eating and drinking) but ^et slackt not a whit to
rise in the mean time unto Prayer. Wherewith, being cured, he went with the
rest into the Refectory, giving ^hankes to the Eternal Goodness.

But yet with all this rigor, which he used with him self, let ^o man think,
he was hard or mercyles toward others, but rather (as has been said above)
was he wonderful tender, and compas^ionate to all, and afforded all possible
succors to relieve their ne^essityes. Besides that, as far as reason of
government would permit, setting all arrogance a part, he would be showing
himself equal, or rather inferior to all. In so much, as being weauing on a
^yme, and controuled by a child with saying, Father, you work not ^ight, for
lo, our master weaues not in that manner; he arose up sudenly from his seat,
and whereas another would either have seemed, as if he had not heard him, or
have chastised his little modesty: The holy Old Man with a cheerful
countenance, approaching to the Master, and quietly taking instruction from
him, went sudenly to execute the same, with singular humility, and with the
great edification of as many as were present. With these and such like things
not only particular and profane men; being now invited at last, but even whole
congregations likewise of other Monks, came to join, and submit themselves to
S. Pachomius, to whom with equal charity, he afforded Rules, and Superiors.

The History of Jonas the Monk in the desert there. And S. Pachomius his
solution of a doubt. Chap. 10.
IN one of those Monasteryes, called Muchosa, there was a Religious man whose
name was Jonas a man of so great perfection and fame as we cannot choose but
step a little from our purpose, to say something of him. This Religious person
had continued in the divine Service, and in the cloister, some 85. years, with
very good example: and it is a memorable thing, that he having alone had
always care of the garden, and therein had planted diverse trees, ye^ he never
had tasted to his death, so much as one fruit of them, being notwithstanding
very francke thereof to the Brothers, and to the Ghests, and to all the
Neighbors about, who at their pleasure we^ satisfied with them. His clothing
as well for summer, as winter, was of three sheep skins, sowed together, save
only, to go to the holy Communion, he would put over a coat, somewhat more
decent, but being then risen from the sacred table, he would presently despoyle
himself thereof; and so had he conserved it near and clean, for all that
space of 85. years.

He was so great a friend of Labor, as he knew not, as it were what Rest was,
nor yet the Infirmary. He never eat any boiled thing: he lived upon herbs
chopped in vinegar: He never lay stretched forth in length, but labored by day in
the garden, and at the setting of the Sun, taking his refection, he would
retire himself into his cell, and sitting on a stool in the midst of the
room, attend to the knitting of bull-rushes, and to make ropes, until the
ringing to Office; shutting his eyes sometimes, scarcely as much as necessity
required. And this his work he performed, not by the light of a Lamp, or of
fire, but through much practice and dexterity, wholly by dark, for to be able
in the mean time, the better to attend to the Meditation of holy Scripture,
whereof he had committed a good part to memory.

We let pass besides, many other meruaylous things of this holy Man, for
breuityes sake, but yet we may not seem to pass over in silence, the manner
of his last act. Because he was found by the Mo^^ stark dead to sit in his
Cell, with rushes in his hands (according to his wont) and with his feet and
arms stretched forth, and stiff withal in such sort, as they would not seem
to change that composition of his, nor to pull off his furrd coat from his
back, but were feign so to sold him, as in a trusse; and in that manner were
they glad to carry him to be buried.

But now let us return again to S. Pachomius, who never ceased with words and
deeds to inflame and guide his disciples to Perfection: exhorting them
sometimes, and sometime again resolving their doubts, with a great deal of
wisdom, and no less charity. He was demanded once (among other things) by
one of hi^ Monks; What was the cause, that while a man, is in peace before
temptation, he discourses so well of Temperance, Humility, and other Virtues;
and when the time of execution comes afterward (...) put that in practice
which was in discourse, we find our selves so ^ayle and feeble to perform the
same? As for example, in the time (...) Anger, to show acts of Patience; in
bitterness and rancour, to be ^rgetfull of injuries received; when we are paysed
of others, to be ^ary of vayneglory; in these (I say) and other the like
occurren^es? Then the Saint: The reason is (answered he) for that, we ^now not
how to prepare ourselves, nor to meditate as we ought, ^or to keep the spirit
prompt and vigilant in the time of battle. Whence it behoues us every day,
and every hour, with a fresh re^olution to renew our good purposes, and to
power into the con^e^platiue part of the Soul, the oil of holy fear, which
may serve ^s well to re-enforce it to do good, as to illumine the same to
dis^erne, and distinguish the Objects, which are represented to it by ^he wily
and subtle Adversary. In such wise, as standing continually upon its guard, it
suffer not it self to be easily moved to disdain, ^orrancour, nor to other
disordinate passions: and besides that, raising it self aloft, and thinking of
invisible, and eternal things, it may come to assume great courage, and
consequently to contemn all diabolical suggestions, and finally to walk (as
the Scripture says) upon Serpents, and Scorpious, and above all the powers of
the Enemy.

With such aduertisements, and counsayles went S. Pachomius opportunely
encouraging, and instructing his Subjects. And howbeit in amending their
defects, he would more willingly be using of sweet remedies and lenitiues, as
more conformable to his proper genius, and to Christian clemency;
notwithstanding, when it was expedient for him, he knew well also, how to apply
more bitter and biting medicines; as by reading this ensuing discourse the
judicious Reader may easily perceive.

The life of Siluanus the Monk: And what a blessed end he made, through the
help of S. Pachomius. Chap. 11.
SAINT Pachomius had in his Convent, a certain Monk called Siluanus. This man
in the world had been a Comediant, and of a life (as commonly such persons are)
very wild and dissolute. Whereupon, at his entrance into Religion, S. Pachomius
had particulerly exhorted him to stand upon his guard, and to mainteyne
himself sober, and vigilant, that he might not be carried away with
sensuality, and the devil, to vices, and leuityes past. And so had he promised
to do: then he took the habit, and indeed so walked he, as long as the fervor
of devotion lasted; but afterward, through wearines of combating, and
subtraction of grace (as it happens, for one to be tepid without being, as it
were, aware of it) so began he by little and little to grow looser in his
conversation, and to return to his secular jests, and scoffs, as before. S.
Pachomius ga^ him many wholesome admonitions, which being not enough, (...)
likewise added sundry severe chastisements: and at last, while (...) seemed to
him to be incorrigible, some twenty years after he had received him, he
ordained in the presence of all the Monks, that he should be stripped of his
habit, and thrust our of the Congregation.

Whereat Siluanus being wholly confounded and contrite, did cas^ himself at the
feet of the Saint, with saying: Pardon me, Father, ye^ for this time, for I
hope in our Savior, that he will grant me tru^ Penance, and to your Paternity
much consolation in my action^ To whom S. Pachomius answered: Thou know,
how I have borne with thee all this while, how many chasticeme^ts have I both
against my will and custom inflicted upon thee? since then neither with fair
means, nor yet with foul, thou will amend thy self, how can I, or how should
I permit so contagious and infected a member, should go wasting thus, and
consuming the whole body of Religion? To this so bitter an answer, Siluanus
replied, with new humiliations and promises. And yet S. Pachomius stood firm
in his purpose, till being convinced with the perseuerant submission of the
other, he required pledges, which might give security of his change of
manners. When immediately a venerable man, by name Petronius, being moved out of
Charity, took the Obligation upon him; and full of divine confidence, gave his
word, that Silua^ should be renewed in spirit, and should give himself
seriously to the exercise of virtue. With this intercession was S. Pachomius
content to prolong his term. Nor was the grace afforded in vain, or the
promise any way temerariously made, since from that time, Siluanus began to
wage a sharp war with himself, and to go forward in such sort, as in a
short time, he became a mirror of perfection to all the Co^uent, having got
(among other things) so great a gift of tears, as they streamed from his eyes,
like a perpetual river: so as, neither in the presence of strangers, nor at the
Table, could he possibly conteyne himself from them: While that saying of the
Psalm agreed with him; Cinerem tamquam pa^ manducabam, and po^ meum cum fletu
miscebam.

He was instanced by some, that if he could not absteyne alto^ather, yet by all
means at least, he would forbear in the pre^nce of the Ghests. When he
affirmed, he had endeavored the ^me many times, but not by any means could he
refrain; they ^swered, that a devout soul may well abide always with
in^rnall compunction, without breaking into open demonstration ^erof; and in
sum, they brought him to repress them in time (...) refection, because many
being confounded, and moved with such ^spectacle, refrayned from taking their
necessary nourishment: when ^luanus not being angry with any other then
himself only, with ^reat feeling, brake forth into those words; Would you have
me to ^int my tears (I pray) in seeing so many Saints, with whom I (...) not
worthy to be numbered, to attend upon me, most vile wretch ^ith so much
diligence, having been accustomed heretofore to ^ayne my living on the Stage?
Whereas rather, I deserve not to ^sse the very place, where they set their
feet. I weep indeed, as ^aring every hour, least the earth should swallow me
up, as once (...) happened to the profane Dathan and Abiron: since I having had
^om Heaven, both light and grace, more then enough, should have (...) them so
ill, and have reaped so little fruit. Then am I not through ^ame to forbear
from discoueting my self to be a sinner, since for ^uch indeed do I
acknowledge my self to be. Whereas truly if I should lay down my life in
doing penance for the same, yet were ^t nothing in comparison of my demerits.

With such like answers, Siluanus stopped the mouths of such, as ^ealt with him
about this matter: nor was it contrition of words ^nly, as often it happens,
but his sayings and works accorded in ^uch manner, as S. Pachomius himself
being full of marvel there^t, for true humility preferred him before all in
the Monastery; and within eight years afterward, was certifyed, how be was
nothing deceived, when he beheld that Soul going forth of the body, to ^ly
unto Heaven, with a great troop of glorious Angels in company with it. This
then was the fruit, which sprung from the seasonable rigor of S. Pachomius:
and no less worthy of memory likewise, was another act of severity of his,
which we will put down in the Chapter following.

How a Monks was penanced by S. Pachomius for Vain glory, and anoth^ for
Disobedience. Chap. 12.
IT happened on a time, while S. Pachomius was sitting in company with other
grave Fathers, that a Brother who had made tha^ day two mats, with double the
labor he was obliged to do by the Rule, being overcome with vain glory would
by no means co^teyne himself, but needs must he set them forth to view, at
his cell, right over against the place, where S. Pachomius was, as thinking
verily to have been much praised and esteemed of him for his diligence therein:
whereof the wise Pastor being aware, fetching a deep sigh, said to the
standers by: behold I pray, this Brother hee^ who has been laboring all this
while from the Morning hither to, to dedicate afterward all his sweats to the
Devil, without leaving any merit or fruit thereof for his own soul, since
he hat^ had for end, the satisfaction of men, rather then the pleasure of God.

Heerupon, causing him to come before him, he gave him a sound reprehension for
it; and to the end, he might learn to rectify the intention, in whatsoever he
should work hereafter, enjoined him in penance, that while the Brothers were
in prayer, he holding both those mats in his hands, should cry unto them, with
a low voice: I beseech you Brothers, to pray for this miserable soul of mine,
which has preferred two small mats before the Kingdom of Heaven. And in the
same manner, caused him to stand in the Refectory, till the Table was ended:
and for addition shut him up in his Cell, for five months space, with order
that no man sho^ visit him the while, and that he should eat nothing, but
bread and salt. Such account was made in those days of purity of heart, and to
fly those sins, which in our age, peradventure, are accounted very venial
and light. And if yet this chastisement, perhaps, shall seem to any to be too
disproportionate to the fault, let him know, that to the Man of God, there
wanted no sufficient motives for the same.

The holy Abbot, made great account also of sincere Obedience, which especially
consists in simply executing what is commanded, without curiously examining the
designs of the Superiors, nor putting into controversy the quality of the
thing commanded. Now, he having committed to some Officers, that while he went
on a certain Pilgrimage they should have some respect to the tender age of
certain Nouices, who were not able to perform so much abstinence, as the
other: It happened, the same Officers, perceiving the Community had not eaten
the herbs, and Olives, which were boiled, had given over to provide any more
of them, contenting themselves with distributing of dry bread only, to ^ll the
Refectory. S. Pachomius returned, and all the Monks, being gone forth to meet
with him, and to receive him; one of the ^nnocents, began to say with a loud
voice. Verily Father, since ^he time, that you went from hence, to this day,
has there been ^o herbs boiled for us. To whom the Saint answered, with a
cheerful countenance. Trouble not your self (my Son) for I will provide for
you. Entering then into the kitchen, and the Cook being busy in knitting of
rushes, he said to him, in this manner: Tell me Brother, how long since is it,
that you boiled any herbs? It is now some two Months ago (answered he;) and
being demanded the reason, he alleges, that scarce any of them had eat
thereof, when they were before him, but only the youths: whereupon, he had a
scruple to bestow so in vain, both the labor, and the cost: And to the end,
this same might not be imputed as Sloth unto him, he had employed himself in
the mean time with his fellows, to work the Mats. And how many have you made
of them, demanded S. Pachomius? Some 500. answered he. Now bring them hither
then to me (said the Father.) Which being brought, he caused them suddaynely to
be all cast into the fi^e: giving clearly to understand by that act of his, and
with the words he spoke to that purpose, that as it is the proper office and
praise of the Superior, to moderate and discern: so from the subject, is not
required so much prudence, and circumspection, as a prompt execution, and
perfect Obedience. To this example, the same also was not much unlike, which
follows in the next Chapter.

How two Stewards of S. Pachomius, were checked by him, for doing against
Obedience. Chap. 13.
THere happened so great a dearth of corn, as scarcely was any to be found,
throughout all the Land of Egypt. Which S. Pachomius well knowing, sent one of
the Brothers, to make his provision thereof as much as an hundred pieces of
gold, of a certain coin, was able to procure him, being taken out of common
stock of the Labors of the Monastery. The Procuratour or Steward went his
ways there with, into diverse foreign parts, without finding the desired
co^merce, till lastly arriving at the city of Hermothen, it pleased our Lord,
that he should meet by chance with an honest Gentleman, who had the whole
corn of the country in his custody. This man, being required of the Monk, so
much corn, as might amount to the said sum, answered: Truly Father, I have
not any of mine own, but if I had, I would take it from my childrens mouths,
to spa^e it for you, whose virtue, and holy life, has now a good while since,
been notifyed to me. But hark you Father, I have yet now the public grain
under my charge, which hitherto the Magistrates have not seemed to require at
my hands, nor do I think, they will demand it, till the new be gotten in. If
you suppose by that time, you can restore it me again, do you take thereof, as
much as you please. When the Monk told him, how he durst not undertake to
return it so soon; but if it seemed to him, that he might well dispose
thereof, as he had said, he would willingly take a quantity to the value of the
price aforesaid of a hundred pieces.

I shall not only afford you so much (replied the Commissary) but even likewise
as much more, if it please you to accept the same. Do me but only the favor
the while to pray for me. Whereto the buyer made answer, that for the present,
he had no more money to bestow. When the other very courteously affirmed, that
it imported nothing, but he might take the grain with a good will, and yield
him the price thereof at his commodity, so liberal an offer seemed now to the
Monk, not fit to be refused. Wherefore he suddenly freightes a great bark
therewith of some thirteen Tun, so great indeed, as one half thereof, was not to
be found else where in all those countries therabout, and with great joy went
his ways therewith to the Monastery, as thinking he had done some great piece
of service to the whole company, and especially to S. Pachomius. But he was
very much deceived in his account.

Because the Saint had no sooner understood of the arrival of the bark, so
laden, and known the manner how it came to be so freighted, but he sent a man
to the wharfe in post, with express order, they should not unlade any whit
thereof, saying: Let the Steward assuredly know, that not a gain of that corn
of his, shall seem to enter into our house; nor shall his person appear
before me, until he have satisfied the error committed, in so governing
himself to ^e led with avarice, in taking the same upon Credit, and abusing
withal the goodness of him, that sold him the corn. Now there^re since he has
so exceeded the precepts given, let him go suddai^ely to all these
neighbour-places, and sell the same according to ^he price set him down by the
seller; and having carried him the ^mme, let him buy according to the price, so
much, and no more ^s he may have with the money which he received of us, for
that ^ffect. Which being executed, and no more then five measures and a ^alf,
conveyed to the house, the Monk was deprived of his Ste^ard-ship, and
restrained in the Monastery. Nor had the Procura^ur yet much better success.
Who was appointed to sell some of ^e labors of the Monks, at a slinted rate
how much he was to ^ke for them. He went then to the inhabitants with those
mer^handize, and finding them to amount to thrice so much, as he was prescribed
to take, it seemed to him a folly to put them away ^or less, and so returned
he his ways home, with his purse fuller, ^hen was pretended. Which being
understood, S. Pachomius made ^im immediately to return into the Market, and to
restore to the ^uyers, all that, which exceeded the rate set down. Whereupon,
^e like wise being deprived of his office, was shut up, and had a good penance
enjoined him. With these demonstrations the Saint, ^t seems, besides the purity
which he required in Obedience, would ^ikewise manifest, how far off they are
to be from all manner of ^ouetousnes, who seem to manage the temporals
affairs in Religion. But as this man of good; was an Enemy of tepidity, and of
^usillanimity; so on the other side, approved he not immoderate fer^ours, which
ordinarily succeed but ill, and such was the event we shall presently tell you.

An Example of the indiscreet ^eale of a Monk of S. Pachomius; and the happy
Life he led afterward. Chap. 14.
A Person there was of a good disposition, rather then of any great reach, who
after he had attended a while to a spiritual ^ife, of himself, came at last
of his own accord (as others did) to submit himself, to S. Pachomius; nor was
it ^ere being pricked forward with excessive fervor, and youthful heat, he
began very earnestly to instance the said holy Father to obtain him from
heaven, some commodity, and occasion to spend his blood, for the Catholik^
faith. The world, at that time, was all in peace, and the Church of God enjoyed
an unwonted tranquillity, through the devotion, and by the virtue of the most
Christian Emperor Constantine. In so much as the importunity of the Monk,
besides his being too bold in (...) certain manner, came likewise to be
unreasonable, and foolish withal. S. Pachomius then answered him, that
forbearing for the present to think of Martyrdom, he might do well to convert
his thoughts, to the taming of his Passions, and to combat with himself,
alleging that in a sort he was deprived of the glory of Martyrs, who
perseuered to the end, in Cloisters, without reprehension.

But that other, not satisfied heerewith: and renewing often the same request, S.
Pachomius at last said to him. Since you will not ceas^ to provoke me so, I will
pray for this thy intention, and I hope I shall be heard. But thou on the other
side, beware that coming afterward to the Trial, instead of confessing our
Lord Christ, thou co^mest not to renounce him quite. Because in truth, thou
do bu^ delude thy self, so to tempt thy God, and thus to seek, those
perils, which our Master and Savior himself, has taught us to shun. So said
the expert Captain: But neither authority nor reasons, were of power to bridle
the confidence, or to say better, the presumption of the Monk.

From hence, within two years after, it chanced to S. Pachom^, to send
certain Brothers to a place, not far from thence, to prouid^ some marish
rushes for mats and cottages, and a little after he sent the audacious Wretch
thither also: and presaging, as it were, the encounter he was to meet withal
on the way, upon his departure advised him to stand upon his guard; and in
manner of an Enigma, added those words of S. Paul: Ecce nunc tempus
acceptabile, ecce nunc di^ salutis: nullam in aliquo demus offensionem, vt non
vituperetur ministerium nostrum. These marshes where the Monks were working,
were situate at the feet of certain mountains, inhabited by savage and
barbarous people, and continually drowned in Paganism: some of which, at that
time being descended into the plain, to fetch water, found in those deserts,
the poor Trauayler alone; when causing him to a light on a sudden, they bind
his hands, and lead him together with his Ass into the Mountain: at whose
approach, the other Gentiles, who as then were ready to offer their sacrifice,
and had killed many beasts for that purpose, began with great laughters to
scorn him, saying: Come thy ways hither, O Monk, and ^ore our Gods: and
leading him before their Altar, they forced him ^o do, as they did. At the
first, he refused to do it, and showed them ^ome resistance thereunto; but when
the Pagans being angry, laid ^ands on their weapons, and that he saw the
poniard at his bosom, and the swords which glittered round about him, being now
for^etfull, in an instant of all the stout purposes made, the poor wretch
^elded, and being terrifyed, stuck not to taste of the wine and flesh dedicated
to Devils, being a thing which (as for the essential of Idolatry) was as much,
as if he had offered incense with them.

Hereupon, being licenced to depart by that wicked people while on the way, he
had leisure enough, to enter into himself, looking back into the foul enormous
and impious crime commit^ed, the unhappy wretch began to fill the air with
laments and ^ighes, and to lay on most furiously on his cheeks with his fist,
and to curse his temerity, which had brought him into those terms. With this
disaster, and with uncertain, and wandering paces, being now come home in this
piteous plight, and beholding the said Pachomius to meet him on the way, who
had the revelation of the whole event, falling down prostrate on the Earth,
and weeping a main, he cried out alowd: I have sinned before God, and you,
holy Father, with following my own will, and not obeying your counsayles. Then
replied S. Pachomius: Get up, poor Wretch, thou have indeed deprived thy self
of the chiefest good. Assuredly, the crown was already prepared for thee. Thou
wast even ready to enter into the Catalogue of the glorious Martyrs of Christ,
and thou willingly have made thy self unworthy of that blessed fellowship. Our
Lord was prepared with his Angels, to have environed thy head with an immortal
Diadem, and thou have renounced the Divine Majesty for a moment of life. And
while thou fearedst the first death (which by no means shall thou ever be able
to avoid) art thou fallen into the second, which shall never have end. Where
are the words now which thou vtteredst once? Where the enflamed desire of
suffering? Where those so many, and so great promises made?

To this, the Wretch could not answer a word, nor open his mouth, any
otherwise, then to detest his crime, and to confess himself, wholly unworthy
of pardon; yea now was his affliction, passed so far, as he held himself
altogether incapable of penance: whereof S. Pachomius being suddaynely aware,
least (...) might cast himself head long into the gulf of despair added: tho^
for thy part, have not failed to become the enemy of thy Creator and Lord; yet
nevertheless, so great is that divine goodness of his, as it i^ able to drown in
the Abysses all our sins whatsoever, so that (...) our part, we dispose our
selves with true sorrow, and due con^tion to be partakers of his mercies:
wherefore be thou not dismai^ for yet is there left thee some hope of
salvation, since the tree, though pruned, yet springs again. Go thy ways then
into thy Cell, and stay there recluded in watching, and making thy prayer, and
bewayling bitterly thy great offense. For a whole day thou shall eat nothing,
after that, shall thou feed of naught else but bread sal^ and water: and not to
eat of other men's labors, thou shall mak^ thy two matts a day; and if thou
shall persevere in this manner during life, I trust in the merits of Christ,
thou shall not be excluded from the divine Clemency.

From these words, it cannot be explicated, what comfor^ this poor soul felt.
He shuts up himself then sude^ly, and redoubling the labors, fasts, and
macerations of the body, gave himself to satisfy what he ought, with all the
power he was able. It is tru^ indeed, that for his spiritual help, it was
permitted him by the holy Abbot, to go forth sometimes to comfort him with
Theodore, and with some other Old men of the perfectest. And thus having
perseuered for the space of ten years, being surprised at last by a most
grievous infirmity, he changed the temporal miseryes for the Eternal
felicity, as S. Pachomius was afterward certifyed from Heaven. With whom God
was wont to communicate things very far off, and hidden, and by his means to
work other wonderful effects: as by the following Examples, we shall see in
some part.

A Woman cured of the bloody Flux, with other Miracles wrought by S. Pachomius.
Chap. 15.
THere was in Tentiri, a woman that suffered an incurable flux of blood: She
having heard the renown of S. Pachomius his sanctity, and not having the
audacity to deal with such a Father, she instantly prayed the Bishop
Dionysius, that under the pretext of some other business of importance, he would
procure him to come into the City. Having called him then, and after prayer,
being set down ^n the Church with him, while there they were discoursing with
^ch other of divine things, the woman by little and little stealing ^ehind
them, touched his hood, with so much faith, as she suddenly ^ecouered, and
feeling her self to be wholly delivered, did prostrate ^er self on the ground,
giving thanks to the divine Mercy. S. Pa^homius was aware of the practice had
with him by the Bishop, and giving his benediction to the woman without more
ado, returned ^ack again to his Connent.

There has been already mention made of a certain Monk, of great fame,
whose name was Jonas, being the Gardener of the Mo^astery of Muchosa. Now S.
Pachomius being gone to visit the same Monastery, at his entry thither, espied
some young Nouices, that ^ecretly had climbed up a fig tree, which was very
high, for to ga^her of the fruit, and to eat them without any leave. When the
Saint ^pproching nearer, perceiving a devil sitting on the top of the tree; ^he
expert Physician of souls, knew it presently to be the unclean spirit of
Gluttony, the familiar enemy, and impostour of that greener ^ge; and calling
for Jonas without delay, appointed him to cut down that tree, since it stood
not well within the cloisters, and did afford ^ut matter of temptation to
those, who were not yet so well roo^ed in virtue. Jonas was sad thereat, and
answered; Noe, for Gods sake Father, since every year it brings us forth no
little fruit.

Then S. Pachomius not to seem to disgust the good Old man (whose goodness
otherwise he well knew) held his peace. But the day after, behold, how the Tree
was withered; so as there was ^eyther fruit, nor leaf, which was not dead
thereupon: a thing so much more admirable, as the fig tree of its nature, is
more humid, and more repugnant to aridity. Whereupon, Jonas comprehending ^he
virtue, and heavenly grace of the Saint, was very sorry, for not having obeyed
him with all dexterity. On a day, as he was making an exhortation to his Monks,
according to custom, he was suddenly elevated in spirit, and being a while
in that manner, he afterward whispered in the ears of the vicar. Go your
ways into that next cell, and see what such a Monk is doing, since instead of
attending to the word of God, he lies sleeping the while, exposed to the ^ares
of the Enemy, who seeks nothing else, but to draw him into ^erdition, and the
world. The vicar went thither, and found him ^ery drowzy indeed. And a little
after, notwithstanding they aduises of the blessed Pachomius, though his
negligence, the miser^ Wretch, forsook the Religion.

Another, being now brought into the extremity of sickness i^ the Monaf^ery of
Cheneboscus, and desiring before he closed his ey^ to comfort himself with the
sight of S. Pachomius, and to have (...) holy Benediction; he sent to him, to
beseech him that he would (...) pleased to come unto him. At the news whereof,
the amouro^ Father, very suddenly puts himself on the way thither, with so^
companions: and while with diligence they went walking together, some two or
three miles before their arrival to the said place, S. Pachomius stopping on a
sudden, stood looking up into the Heavens, and beheld the soul of the Brother,
environed with Angel^ with a sweet harmony to mount up into Paradise. In the
mean^ while, the companions, not hearing the Music, nor seeing (...)
triumph, said to the Father, who had his eyes still fixed on the Stars: Why
stays your Paternity thus? let us make have to find the Brother alive. Whereto
he answered: Nay rather let us have to arrive, whither he is now conducted,
that is, to eternal beatitude. Whereupon they understood, he had a Vision of
the Salvation (...) the Soul, to represent it to them as well as he could. And
dilig^ inquisition being afterward made, it was found, the said sickm^
expired, even just at that hour, wherein S. Pachomius stood still i^ that
manner.

S. Pachomius procures through prayer, the gift of tongues. He falls si^k,
and appoints his Successor, and so dies. Chap. 16.
SAint Pachomius on a time, visiting (as he was wont) his subiect^ to see how
they carried themselves, and to demand particular account of profit, and
conscience of every one, found himself to be much perplexed with a certain
straung Monk, of great reputation: who being come from the parts of Rome, by
how much (...) was more skillfull in the Latin and Greek tongues, so much more
raw and ignorant was he in the Egyptian tongue. In such (...) S. Pachomius, not
having other language, then his own, it was impossible for him to declare
himself to him, or to understand hi^ well. To which was added another
impediment, that the Rom^ Monk, being desirous to discover to the holy
Pastor, his ancie^ miseries, and to confess his sins committed, would not
admit (...) other means, nor communicate his secrets to a third person.
Whereupon S. Pachomius with great sorrow, seeing himself to be excluded from
the means of being able to help that soul, causing the ^nterpreter to go his
ways, and having beckned to the Roman to expect a while; he retired himself
into a place apart, and there ^tretching forth his hands to Heaven, made this
devout prayer.

Almighty Lord, if I through defect of language, be not able to help such men,
as come unto me from countries so remote, to what purpose were it so send them
hither? And if yet thou would have me to be an instrument of the salvation of
others; Grant, Lord, (to whom nothing is impossible) that I be not ignorant
of that, which they would say unto me. Having thus perseuered in this prayer,
for full three hours continually together, with extraordinary fervor; he
espied a sheet of paper, in a hand written in form of an Epistle, to fall
from heaven. Which as soon as he read (a wonderful thing) he suddenly felt
within himself the gift of all Tongues: for which, giving thanks to the
divine Goodness, he returned very cheerful to the stranger, and began to talk
to him in the Greek and Latin tongues, with so much propriety and variey of
words, as to the other, it seemed the Abbot in eloquence out stripped all the
learned men of the world. Having heard his confession then, and with wholesome
aduices enjoined him due penance, he proceeded to deal with the rest.

These, and the like demonstrations, which the divine Majesty gave, from time
to time, in favor of S. Pachomius, especially joined (as has been said) with
a perpetual tenor of a most holy life, it cannot easily be explicated, how
much reputation and reverence they won him, not with Religious only, but even
Seculars also. Through which means, this great Gardener of Christ, after he
had sent to the table of his Lord, many fruits very seasonable and ripe,
himself also being called to the rewards of so great labors, fell sick; when
perceiving the deposition of his Tabernacle to draw near, causing the Monks to
be assembled together, and brought before him, with a loving and grateful
countenance, he said to them, in this sort: I, Brothers, now at last, am
entering into the passage, which all the children of Eve are to make, and do
feel, how our Lord now calls me to him. Do you then, reteyning in memory, the
fatherly aduices, which I have given you, endeavor to stand continually on the
guard of your souls. Eschew all things, that may any ways cool fraternall
charity in you, and bring in factions or discords amongst you. Attending to the
mark, which our Savior gave us to know his disciples withal, which truly is
no other, then a mutual love, and sincere conjunction of mynds. Wherefore, I do
exho^ you, above all things, to abhor the commerce, and dealing, not only with
Meletius, and Arrius, but even likewise with any other, who shall but step an
inch from the Apostolical Traditions, and from the holy universal Church. And
since I am to depart, as I have said, endeavor you to choose in my place, a
person, that may be a spiritual help unto you, and conduct you at last, to the
end you have all proposed. To which enterprise I do see none more sufficient,
them our most beloved Petronius.

This said, the brothers sent sudenly to the Monastery of Chen^boscus, to call
for him. And S. Pachomius in the mean time, composing his body, and
recommending himself to our Lord with due preparations, very happily expired,
between the arms, and sighe^ of his dear Congregation, on the 14. day of the
month of May. As for the year, and other circumstances of times and places,
there is no memory to be found. The sacred corpse, with much veneration and
solemn offices, was committed to the Sepulcher, and the blessed spirit, with
singular feasting, received into the heavenly country, leaving on earth an
exact model of perfect exercitation to al those, who being aware of the false
flatteryes of the flesh, of the vain hopes of the world, and of the pernicious
subtilityes of the devil; aspire to the durable goods, and to the blessed
vision of the most holy Trinity. To which be all glory and benediction, and
yiedling of thanks for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
S. MARTIN.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN warfare bred, I chose a nobler foe
By nature, then the worlds vast realm does yield,
My self; I first then him did overthrow:
Subdu'de, I gaind the glory of the field.
Conquered, and Conqueror in one fight, I show
Our own depression is our strongest shield,
To check his fierce assaults, and souls to free
From Satan's rage, and hellish slavery.
Dead to the world, like Nigers streams I rose,
That in the earth his buried flood enwombes,
And having made a natural bridge, he goes
Far under ground, but up far greater comes;
When the dead world to quicken Heaven me chose,
And in a Bishops Chair, to show his doomes:
Who cloathd himself for man, in flesh of Man,
He clothes receives from me, his Expoliauit so Ionatha^ tunica qua erat
indutus, and dedit eam David. 1 Reg. c. 18.
Jonathan.
THE LIFE OF S. MARTIN BISHOP OF TOWERS.
Taken out Seuerus Sulpicius, and others.
S. Martin being the Son of a Gentill, becomes a Christian, and is enrolled a
Soldier of the Emperor. Chap. 1.
SAINT MARTYN a great Servant of Christ, and an excellent maintayner of the
Apostolical dignity, and discipline; was borne in Sabaria, a City of Pannonia
in Hungary, of Patents in repute of the world, very honorable, and noble, but
yet Gentiles, and far from Christ. The Father being enrolled in the Roman
warfare, in process of time, came to be a Tribune of Soldiers, or as we say,
a Coronell of a Regiment, by whom S. Martin, being lead into Italy, yet a
child, was trained up in Pauia, in feats of arms; howbeit, though natural
instinct, he was inclined a great deal more to the acts of peace, or rather to
Christian Religion. In so much, as being yet but ten years old, against the
will of his friends, he went secretly to the Church, and with instance demanded
to be made a Catechumen. Within two years after, he desired likewise to retire
himself into the desert: and he had done it in effect, if his tender age had
not been an impediment to him. To which disturbance of his holy designs, was
further added a new leuy, which then was made of military men, with express
order, that all the sons of old Soldiers, should be put into the roll, and
conducted to the war. Whereupon S. Martin, being now some fifteen years old,
being discovered by his own Father, was against his will, enforced to repair
to the Ensigns of Constantius the Emperor. He would have no other in his
company, then a slave only, whom yet he would be serving rather, then be
served by him, to wit, in often pulling off his shoes, and brushing his
clothes, and furnishing the table with what was needful.

With this disposition of mind, being come to the field, some three years
before his baptism, he always preserved himself wondrous pure, and
untouched of those vices and debauchements, ^n which Soldiers are for the
most part wont to be inuolued. First for his person, he would seem to content
himself with fare so moderate and simple, as from that time he seemed to be
rather a Monk, then a Soldier: besides he would seem to content himself
with those kind of meats, which others utterly refused to eat off: moreover
he would show himself very benign and courteous, to his Camerades, and to all
others, bearing with their defects, and supplying the necessity of every one,
with extraordinary charity, patience, and humility. He would comfort the
afflicted with love and dexterity, and be very helpful to the sick: and
without thinking of the morrow, he would feed most liberally the hungry, but
with particular tenderness cloth the naked; in which work of piety, was a
certain act of his very memorable, which we shall tell you in the next Chapter.

The singular Charity of S. Martyn to a poor man. And how he leaves the
wars, and betakes him to another Course. Chap. 2.
THe Roman Army, at this time, was lodged in France, in exceeding cold places,
and in the heart of a winter much more cruel, then used to be in that place; in
so much as many men, even dyed frozen in the streets. Now it happened, in the
Gate of Amiens, that a poor man, quaking with his naked body exposed to the
sharpenes of the air, very pitifully craved some succor of the soldiers,
that passed then along, in the company of S. Martyn; and the wretch being not
heeded by any of them, M. Martyn apprehended straight, how that merit by the
divine providence, was reserved for him. But what could he do, in such a case?
He had not a penny of money about him, having now already spent all, in other
Alms: And in fine, had nothing else but his arms, and a short cloak on his
back. What resolution took then the Man of God? Taking out his sword, of a
sudden, he divided the same into halfes, and gives the one part thereof, to the
wretch, and the other keeps to himself to cover him the best he could. At the
sight of such a strange habit, and remnant of cloth, as some of the more
youthful of them, could hardly conteyne themselves from laughing, so others
more stayed then they, were worthily touched there with, as knowing how well they
might have clothed him, without despoyling of themselves.

Now in truth, how much God was pleased with this charity of S. Martyn, he
seemed to demonstrate the night following, appearing before him, with that
piece of garment, on his own person, and bidding him to look and mark well,
whether it were not the Garment he had given to the poor man, the day before.
Wherup^ with a sweet countenance turning himself to a multitude of Angels which
attended him, he added with a loud voice: Martyn, b^g but yet a Catechumen,
has clothed me with this mantle. Words surely well worthy of the bowels of
Christ, and agreeable to those other, which he said, conuersing with men, and
which he will repeat again, at the Judgment day: Quamdiu vni de minimis meis
fecistis, mihi (...) cistis.

From this so noble a vision S. Martyn took not a whit of vain glory, but
acknowledging and magnifying in all, and through all the heavenly grace; he
took rather a motive thence of greater humility and diligence, in the divine
service. So as without more delay, he hyed him to Baptism, being then about
eighteen years of age, and withal to give himself more freely to a perfect
life, he was even ready to bid adieu to the military state, but being
constreyned through the importunity of his Tribune (who having finished his
office, promised to follow him,) he differed yet the execution of his holy
purpose, for the space of two years: in all which (...), remaining in person
in the field, he had his thoughts in the Cell, and Quire, so as well he may be
said a Soldier, by name, rather then exercise.

In the mean time, a huge Army of Almans, being entered into ^ance, which did
nothing but wast the Roman Empire, Iulianus ^sar, being sent by Constantius, to
that service, made the leuy of his ^en, in the territory of the Vangion, which
at this day is called Spire, (...) as others would have it, to be that of
Worms, where before his co^^ing to encounter with the Enemy, he would needs
have given a ^rgesse to the Soldiers. They began then, according to custom
(...) be called one by one, before the Master of the Camp. Whereupon S.
Martyn, esteming this, to be a good occasion for him to take ^is leave, when it
came to his turn, with Christian liberty, said to ^esar. Hitherto, have I
been at your pay, now then do but grant ^e leave to become a soldier of
Christ: as for my part of the do^ation, be it given to others, since it is not
lawful for me any more (...) embrew my self in blood.

At these words, the Fyrant being angry, looked sowrely upon ^im, and said, that
Martin had craved license, not so much for deuo^on sake, as for fear of the
battle, which was to be on the day fol^owing: Then the servant of God, so
much more bold and vndauned, as the fear was greater they objected to him:
Behold answered ^e, O Caesar, whether my refusing money, do seem rather to
spring of fear, then piety. Tomorrow, am I ready, on the point of ioy^ing
battle, to present my self, before the first ranckes, without Target, or
Helmet, or other arms, but only with the sign of the holy Cross, and with
this confidence alone, to thrust my self ^o the thickest squadrons of those
barbarous people. With this so courageous an answer, Julian being in censed
much the more, cau^d him suddenly to be put in prison, to come to the proof,
and ^o expose him unarmed, to the face of the enemy.

This thing gave much matter of talk to the whole Army, and with diverse
affects of mind, they were all expecting the issue; when betymes in the
morning, behold, beyond all ectpectation, ^e Ambassador of that fierce Nation,
came in with Heralds, and ^nterpreters, not only to crave peace, but also to
submit themsel^es humbly to the obedience of Caesar. This matter was held of
all, ^o proceed from Heaven, and such as were privy to the sanctity of S.
Martin, in particular, attributed without doubt, so suddayne a ^utation, and so
greet as Victory so easily gotten to nothing else, ^en to his merits, because
there wanted not means, to the divine power, to save him amidst a thousand
swords and lances, and to d^ comfite, and put to flight, as many as should
attempt to offend him: notwithstanding it seemed to be more conformable to the
sweet disposition of the eternal providence, and more agreeable t^ the
peaceful nature, and manners of S. Martin, to free him rather by the way of
such an accord, then by the means of death, and slaughter.

S. Martyn repayres to S. Hilary Bishop. And departing homewards mee^ with a
Devil, whom he stoutly foyles; and what followed. Chap. 3.
DVring the common joy above mentioned, S. Martyn being delivered, and the
war now wholly concluded, repaired (...) S. Hilary Bishop of Poytiers, a
person in those times of rare and eminent Goodness. Here did he give forth such
demonstrations of himself, as S. Hilary to retain such a labourer in that
vineyard, attempted often to make him Deacon, but S. Martyn always resisting,
an^ still affirming, and crying out, that he was not worthy of that degree, the
discreet Pastor was advised, there was no other way to constreyne this man
thereto, then to give him some kind of office, which in a certain manner might
rather be held a disparagement to him, then any dignity at all: nor was he
herein deceived awhit, finc^ offering him up the charge of an Exorcist, which
was held to be the meanest and lowest of all, S. Martin at last, not to seem
to have (...) in scorn or disdain, was persuaded to accept thereof.

Not long after, being admonished by God, in sleep, to go his ways to
reuisite his country, and help his friends, who as yet were not out of their
Pagauisme, he demanded leave for this end, of the holy Bishop, to go thither:
Who granted it, indeed, though with a very ill will; entreating and coniuring
him, not without tears, to return back again, as soon as he could. And so
likewise S. Martyn (as it is said) departed with no great good will himself,
foreseeing the difficultyes of the enterprise, and protesting to his Brothers,
that therein he was like to suffer great ^auayles and aduersityes, as it fell
out afterward in effect. For that first, in his passage over the Alps, he
fell into the hands of the Bandits, one of which lifting up his axe now over
his head, was stayed by the arm of another less cruel then he, who
notwithstanding binding his hands behind him, gave him to the custody and
spoil of another who for that end, leading him to a place more remote began to
demand of him, who he was? and S. Martin answered, he was a Christian. Art
thou not affrayd, replied the Thief? And he with an incredible constancy
affirmed, that he was never less afraid in his life, since he knew very well,
the divine Mercy, to be then most present, with such as trusted therein, when
they found themselves in the greatest perils of all: but I am sorry for thee
(quoth he) that make thy self wholly incapable, and unworthy thereof, by the
life thou leadest. And with this ouerture very dexterously falling into the
Gospel, with wholesome and efficacious words, so moved that soul, as he was
converted to Christ, and with a full deliberatio^ of changing his manners, did
secretly put the Pilgrim in his way, beseeching his Charity to vouchsafe to
reco^mend him to our Lord: which he did, and not without fruit, forasmuch as
this very Thief afterward came to be a Religious man, who even told us this
particular himself.

S. Martyn then pursuing his voyage, having passed Milan, was met by the
Devil, in form of a man, who would needs know, whither he went: and being
told by S. Martyn, that he was going whither God had called him, the Enemy
replied: Go whither thou will, or whatsoever thou take in hand, Know, that
the Devil will be always contrary to thee. Then S. Martyn answered with the
Prophet: Dominus mihi adiutor, non timebo quid faciat mihi homo. At which
words, the Impostour immediately vanished: and S. Martyn after some days,
being arrived in his Country, attended the first thing he did, with all
endeavor to procure the salvation of his Parents, but not with like success;
since the Mother came to be a Christian while the Father could not be stirred
from the impious worship of the Idols. Yet there wanted not in his place many
others, who through the example, and with the exhortation of S. Martyn, were
brought into the right way of eternal life.

Besides this, there was another occasion for him, to employ well the talents
which he had received, and to show forth the zeal he had of the holy Faith.
Because the Arrian Heresy, at that time, with particular success having
extended it self into the parts of Sclauonia, and all those confines there, S.
Martyn with all his might opposed himself to the Rebels of Christ, with so
much more toils and difficulty, as the favor and succor was less, which he
had from the Catholic Priests. Whence, taking the whole shock, and envy on
himself, being injured and rackt with diverse to^ments, and (among other
things) having been publicly scourged, he was constrained at last to turn
back again into France.

S. Martin is banished from Milsan, and after escaping poison, mee^ (...) S.
Hilary again. Chap. 4.
SAint Martin having now understood, on the the way as he went to France, that
things were there turned vp-side down, and that even S. Hilary himself was by
Heretics, sent into banishment; he determined till better times, to
entertayne himself in Milan, and there to set up a little Monastery: but
neither was he suffered so to do, by Auxentius the Head of the Arrians, who
aftermany outrages, and persecutions, finally expelled him the City.

Whereupon S. Martin, being thus molested on every side, falling into the
company of a certain Priest, a great servant of God, determined for that time
to hide themselves. To this end, they retired into a little desert Island, in the
Tyrrhen sea, called by the name of Gallinara. Here while the Man of God, lived
in great abstinence of roots and herbs, it chanced unawares, that he eat
some Hellebore, which is a medicinable herb: yet such notwithstanding, a^ that
if the quantity be not moderate, and the simple well prepared, and corrected,
through the great purgative it has with it, it comes to be poisonous, and
pestiferous, as de facto it had been to S. Martyn, if being brought to
extremes therewith he had not made his recourse to prayer, and with this
remedy had not suddenly expelled all dolor and danger.

After this, it was not long ere he knew, how S. Hilary having sound grace with
the Emperor Constantius, returned into France. At which news being exceeding
joyful, he trauayled toward Rome, to meet with him there, and to accompany
him to his Church. But S. Hilary being now past by already, he met him nearer,
and with great iubiley, being received by him, erected, out of the City of
Poytiers, a poor Monastery for him, and as many as followed him. Among these,
there was a certain Catechumen, who falling sick of a violent fever, while S.
Martin was far off (for three days only) about certain affairs of the
divine service, beyond all expectation, departed this life, and that which was
worse, without Baptism. The Convent was sensible of this case: and S. Martin
at his return, finding now the Exequies prepared, very sorrowful and sad
thereat approached his body. Here now conceiving in his pure mind new fervor
of spirit, he makes them all go forth of the chamber; and the doors being shut
stretches himself, like another Elizaeus, upon the cold bones of the dear
Brother, and so having made a fervent prayer, and very soon perceiving
already, through divine virtue, how the vital spirits were upon return,
standing something upright again, with his eyes fixed on the face of the dead
man, he stood courageously expecting the effect of his prayers, and of the
divine clemency. There were not yet two hours of time past, when he saw the
dead to move his lymmes, by little and little, and panting to open the eyes, and
to recover the use of his senses. Then S. Martin giving thanks to our Lord,
cried out so loud, as they who expected without, being moved with the noise
thereof, came rushing in, and all perceived, to their infinite astonishment, the
corpse to respire, and take vigor again, which even now they were ready to
carry to burial.

After so great a benefit had, the Cathecumen delayed not a whit to receive the
holy Baptism, whereunto he suruiued many years after, and was wont sincerly
to recount of himself, how being departed from the body, he was presented
before a Tribunal, and by sentence confined to darkesome place, among the
baser sort; but how at the same instant, two Angels relating to the Judge, how
it was he for whom S. Martyn had besought, to them was then Commission given,
to restore him to life again, and to make a present of him to the servant of
God. This was the first wonder S. Martyn showed forth in those parts; whence it
followed, that being now held for holy, he began afterward to be esteemed also
as a man very powerful with God, and a person truly Apostolical. Not long
after this, passing through the fields of one Lupicinus an honorable and rich
man, there met him a troop of people all full of laments, and tears, telling
him, how one of the servants of Lupicinus, had hanged himself, and so
miserably had ended his days. S. Martin here with being moved to compassion,
without delay intred into the chamber, where the unhappy Wretch was deposed,
and so from thence also dismissing the people, distending himself in like
manner on the corpse, made he his prayer: which was no less efficacious then
the other, since that his heart now cold, already resuming the natural heat,
began by little and little to yield to the arteryes, and their pulse again, and
motion to the nerves: so as the dead, with stretch^ forth arms, taking S.
Martin by the right hand, arose on his feet* and accompanied him to the gate
of the house, in the presence of all that multitude; who replenished both with
wonder and joy, ceased not to glorify in S. Martin, the immense goodness, and
omnipotency of the Creator.

S. Martyn not without great contradiction of many, is chosen Bishop of Towers.
Chap. 5.
AT the very same time, the Church of Towers, being vacant, (...) Martyn, by
the universal consent of the people there, was destined to that dignity. But
he not being so easily to be taken fort^ from his Monastery; a certain
Citizen, being called Ruritius, his wife faygning to be grievously sick, cast
himself at the feere of the Saint, and coniured him so much, as he made him to
come forth, to bless her. With that pretext, a number of persons being
covertly set in opportune places, S. Martyn was taken by them, and with a good
guard brought into the City, where was already assembled together, a great
concourse of people of all sorts, being met, according to the use of those
times, to pass their suffrages, for the election of a new Prelate: nor was
there any person, great or li^e that desired not to see S. Martyn installed in
that seat, esteeming the country happy, under the care of such a Pastor.

Some Bishops only of the Neighbour-diocesses being called ^o the consecration,
and some other principal persons stood earnestly against it; alleging him to
be a Person mean, of no Presence* with ill clothes, worse put on, and in
sum, unworthy to be nu^bred among Bishops. With such oppositions, did these
men seek to alienate the people from the devotion and savor of S. Mar^. But
the matter fell out quite contrary with them, because the same objections, as
they were held of the people (who had the sounder judgment) for the praise and
reputation of the Servant of Christ; so on the other side, they came with little
edification to discover the envy and malignity of the Prelates. Whence they
began also, by little and little, to relent, one only excepted, more blind and
obsti^e then the rest, who continued in vesistance, till such time, as by
divine providence, a notable Judgment was showed upon him, as we shall now
declare.

This Prelate, in the Church of Towers, had the title of Defender, and ^y
reason of that dignity was known of all. Now he being one day with the people
in the Church, at the hour of divine office; it happened, that the Lectourer,
being not able to press through the great ^rung of people which was there, to
approach the Quire, one of the Standers by, in the mean while, laying hold of
the Psalter, ^egan to read the first verse, as it lay before him, being just
that same of the 8. psalm, which says, Ex ore infantium and lactentium
perfecisti ^ude^, propter inimicos tuos, vt destruas inimicum, and defensore^,
the last word (...) that Text being so translated, instead of vlt^rem. At which
word ^o pronounced was lifted immediately a cry of the people unto ^eauen, to
the extreme confusion and shame of the adversary: and S. Martin with out more
resistance of any besides himself, was elected, ^r rather forcibly constrained
to the Bishopric. In which administration, it may not easily be explicated,
how fully, or rather su^er abundantly, he gave correspondency, to the full
expectation, which was had of him: forasmuch as being disposed to that degree,
with the exquisite addresses of a most chaste mind, in the sacred Vn^ion besides,
he received so great abundance of new graces, and gifts of Heaven, as
continually outstripping himself, he retained ^oth the virtue of a private
person, and further added to his singular praise, all the good qualtyes of a
public man.

S. Martin retires himself out of the Town, with his Monks: and their manner
of living there. Chap. 6.
SAint Martin, in the treating of his own person would change nothing of his
wonted manner; his fare, and apparel, was still the same as before, for
habitation only he betook himself into a little Cell, hard by the Cathedral
Church: but even likewise from thence, through too much importunity of frequent
Visits, he suddenly retired himself out of the City, into a maruey lous
commodious place, to distribute his times unto Martha and Mary, since it was
about two miles distant from the Town. On the one side, it was girt in with a
high in accessable rock, on the other environed with the river Loyre: in so
much, as there could be no entrance therinto, but by a narrow path. Within that
enclosure S. Mar^ had built him a little Cell of boards, and a part of his
Monks, who were some eighty in number, had done the like* and some again with
instruments had dug them in the rocky hill, certain receptacles, but
narrow, and more fit to medicate upon Death, then to co^ life withal.

Here no man held any thing proper to himself, all things were in common. To
buy or sell, was not there permitted. To no manner of art, applied they
themselves; but to writing, and to the only, were the yo^ger deputed. Those of
the more (...) attended as it were, to nothing else, then to things divine. Very
r^rely went any out of his Cell, but when they all assembled together in the
Oratory to pacify God: besides, they did eat all together in the Evening. Wine
was not affoarded to any, except to (...) sick. The great part would be
wearing of cilices: clothes whi^ had any fine^ ^sse in them were abhorred of
^ch one (...) manifest scandal: A thing so much more admirable, as many (...)
them were Noble of blood, and dainetily bred. But for the lou^d Christ, and the
Cross they did all very voluntarily, submit them^ues to such a pe^ance. Of
which number afterward were many of them seen to be Bishops; while Ci^ties
striued to be governed (...) spirit by the Children of such a discipline. Nor
could it be o^ wise, but need^ must succeed very excellent men under S. M^
because not only: with aduises and words, went he always (...) them; but even
with works and lively incitements also of all p^fection, and especially
sincere humility, together with an ardent ^oue of the Neighbor.

Sulpitius Seueras declared (who lived in those times, and knowing the Saint
domestically as he did, very diligently wrote his life) how that going
sometimes to visit him from countries somewh^ remote, he could never hinder him
from washing his feet, and ^ing to sit down at table, from reaching him water,
as well ^t his hands* as for those of his fellows. The same man adds, how
after he had fed the bodies of his ghests with moderate vict^ (...) would be
afterward affoarding them a most sweet food of ^tuall discourses for their
souls, exhorting them with like modesty and efficacy to nothing more then to
fly the sensualityes of the present life, and to leave the perilous trash of
the world, to be able t^ more ^imbly and free, to follow Jesus.

And to this purpose, he would set before them the fresh example of S. P^
Bishop of N^a, who after he had distributed very ^mple (...) ^or the love of
God, and help of the poor, did finally with an example of Christian piety,
never heard of before, sell himself into a most cruel bondage, for the
ransom of his subjects, who were held in Affricke slaves to the Saracens. With
such manner ^f comparisons as this, and moreover with precepts taken out of the
^red Writ, went S. Martin exciting in spirit, as many as came be^re him. Nor
was it any great matter for him, that he should have (...) much to give to
others, who so continually treasured up for himself, remaining even amidst
exterior actions always with the heart (...) united with God, as neither in
words nor deeds, he would ever ^o forth of his presence. And as Smithes,
without other matter to work on, through use, and for their pleasure only,
will sometimes ^e laying on the anuile: so S. Martyn, not only in the times
depu^d to the Sacrifice, and divine worship, but likewise at all hours ^sides,
would either read or write, or be dealing with men: and through the great habit
he had gotten, he would be continually ^collected in the interious man,
conuersing sweetly with the hea^enly Spouse, and with the giver of all Graces.

He would never loose time in the day, and whole nights he would often pass
over in labors, and watchings. To the body ^e gave that refection, and that
repose, which extreme necessity re^uired, lying on the bare ground, covered
only with a sharp cilice. He took heed with all caution from judging the
intentions of o^ers, interpreting what he could each thing to the better part,
and ^wayes very highly esteeming the reputation and fame of the neigh^our: the
iniuryes, detractions, and the enuyes of Persecutours, which (...) the whole
course of his life were not wanting to him, he would ^compence with weeping
bitterly for their offenses, and also (as ^ccasion served) with affording them
benefits, and serving them; not ^xcluding any, what lay in him, from his holy
freindship. He was ^euer seen to laugh vainly, or to be contristate at any
thing, con^ruing always the same tranquillity of heart, and serenity of
counte^ance, amidst all the varietyes of human accidents, either prosperous and
cheerful, or how straung, and adverse soever they were: Whereof, those few
actions, which we shall tell you anon, shall give ^rth, a very evident
testimony, though in each one of these preci^s examples, do shine withal (as
often it happens) many other ver^es besides.

S. Martyn is much honored by a miracle from God, for a charitable act of
(...) Chap. 7.
SAint Martin going one morning to the cathedral Church, to (...) lebrate in
the winter time, was on the way demanded an alms of a poor ragged wretch,
that was ready to die for cold. No^ he, who in compassion, was still the same,
calling his Archdeac^ before him, commanded him sudenly to be clothed; from
the^ he pursued his way, and having adored our Lord, entered into (...) Sacristy
to vest himself. There were in those days, certain roo^ adjoining to the
Church, somewhat sequestered from the vulg^ which were called Oratoryes: In one
of these (while the Cha^ else where, were passing the time in Conversation) S.
Martyn according to use, was alone in his Pontificalibus, sitting on a play^
and simple seat, (for he would never use any better) for that (...) the
Church, he would never be seen, but on his knees, or standi^ upright. Now while
he was expecting there, amidst his holy meditations, at the hour of the
Sacrifice, the very same Beggar, w^ seen again to appear before him, who as
it seemed (as necess^ makes one ingenious) could tell how to co^triue it so, as
the Cle^ unwitting thereof, finding the Bishop retired, presses in to him, and
with a lamentable voice, complaynes for that he was not provided by the
Archdeacon. Then S. Martyn without more ado, causing him to step aside, took
off his own Cassocke, not witho^ some trouble, from under his vestments, and
gave it to the Wretc^ who as for soliciting his suit had entered in without
noise, so no^ obteyning what he would, he went quietly away. A little after, t^
Archdeacon enters to advertise the Bishop, that now it was tym^ for him to come
forth, for the people were al expecting his coming when he answered: It were
fit the while the poor (meaning hi^ self) should first be clothed, or
otherwise, he could not appe^ in public: but the Archdeacon (for that S.
Martyn was outward^ clothed with the vestment, and could not penetrate the
Enigma,) (...) ter many excuses finally added, how the poor man could not
(...) found. Bring hither (said S. Martyn) the Garment prepared, for the shall
not want one to put it on. With these words, the vnper^ man came to be troubled
in himself, and being constreyned through necessity, went his ways suddenly to
a shop at hand, where hastily having bought a poor coat, for some half a
Crown, being course, ^cant, and illfauourdly made, casts it down with a
disdainful gesture, at the feet of S. Martyn, saying: behold the garment, but
for the beggar now where is he? When the Venerable Bishop, without loosing
awhit his holy peace, causing the others to stand forth somewhat without the
portall, procuring to be secret as much as he could, did reuest himself with
it; howbeit at last through the diverse circumstances of the matter, the thing
could not be concealed.

And besides that, it pleased the divine goodness, to illustrate such a fact,
with an evident sign, because the admirable Priest, going forth in that habit,
while acording to the use, he blesses the Altar; behold a ball of fire to
shine from his head, in manner of a comet, which blazing toward Heaven, sent
up a fyery stream. True it is, that howbeit the same fell out on a solemn
day, and in a great co^course of people, yet did not any other see it, then one
of the Virgins, one Priest, and three Monks only: as for the other, why they
had not the favor to behold it, appertaynes not to us, to examine here: it
suffiseth, that the testimonies, as well for number, as quality, are sufficient
to take away all doubt.

S. Martin travailing alone, was hardly used by Soldiers, not knowing who he
was. Chap. 8.
THE divine Man, going in a visit of his Diocese (which he performed with
singular care, and edification of all) his Companions by some accident or other
remained behind, while he going on his ways, met with a Ca^och of Soldiers
trauayling upon business; but the horses starting at the sight of S. Martyn, in
a cassocke of hayry cloth, and a dark mantle which hung down on one side, and
affrighted therewith, were troubled in such sort, as the harness being on a
sudden entangled together, could not easily be freed. Heerupon the cruel
Soldiers being enraged alighted, and with stripes, and cudgells set upon S.
Martin: Who as he was very amorous of the Cross, as holding every occasion
very dear, to be ill entreated, without once opening his mouth, stood to the
blows, until such time, as being torn and half dead, he fell to ^he ground,
when those spightfull fellows, having now achieved so goodly an exploit,
returned again to their Ca^och.

This done, the companions of the Saint, being now arrived, and seeing him in
that manner, to (...), all (...), being sad and heavy (...) up and lay (...)
him (...), and with all the have that might (...) go^ a way out of that ^ursed
place. But now, th^se impious fellows (though they had the advantage to (...)
the harness, and to set them in order again) (...) ^ad they not the power to
go forwards one foot further, but rath^ through divine justice; the horses
stood still, immovable like statues, in the (...) same place, nor with ^yes,
threats, (...) strookes, could they be made to go on a step. Finally, (...)
they had spent in vain, their whips; and Cudgells, which they (...) out of the
next wood, these wicked fellows began now to reflect, how this accident could
not be human, but by divine justice; and having remorse of conscience, for the
grievous outrage they had committed on the poor passenger right now, they went
to enquire of some, that passed that way, who he was that went before in such a
habit, and with such marks; and having understood to be S. Martin (whose name
was a great deal mo^ famous then his person) they acknowledged the Sacrilege
committed, and the vengea^ of God upon them, and fearing yet worse, they all
striued to follow the Servants of God; and having overtaken him, with deep
sighs and lamentable voices, casting themselves prostrate on the ground before
him, sprinckling their heads with dust, and knocking their breasts, they humbly
besought pardon of him, and license to be gone.

The Saint, by divine revelation, had foreseen the success already, and also
acquainted his companions with it. Whence such penance was not awhit new to
them, nor did he upbraid any of them, for the injury done him: but received
them all, with (...) benign countenance; and with seruent prayers, having
obtained their dispatch, he sent them a way confounded, and astonished (...)
great a Clemency.

A notable Example of a dissolute Monk, converted by S. Martyn to a better
life. Chap. 9.
WE may not seem to conceal here the Patience, and Meekenes, which S.
Martyn showed to a Priest of his Church, by name Britius. This man, being
trained up in a Religious life, with the Observance of Poverty, and Modesty, as
he was assumpted to the Clergy and Benefices, so suffered he himself to be
drawn away, with the concupiscence of the Eyes, as without regard, either of
his Life past, or present Degree, or the speech of people, he began to give
himself wholly to pleasures; to maintain horses, and to buy very costly
Slaves. These things now pierced the very heart of the holy Pastor, who after
he had prayed to our Lord for him, stuck not with much sweetness, and gravity,
both of words and countenance, to set before him the enormous scandal that
followed of so great a mutation of manners in him, entreating him withal to be
think himself of the ancient purposes, and to consider, how the state of the
Clergy, did not acquit him at all of the perfection of a Monk, but that rather
the name did seem to oblige him; to have in horror and contempt all the
delights and pleasures of the world, since thereby was understood, he had left
to others their transitory things, and with the Prophet had chosen, for portion
and inheritance, God only.

With such aduises, S. Martyn went about, to awake that unhappy man from this
deadly sleep: but as he was given over already in prey to sense, and found
himself to be but little disposed to admonishments, for the present he held
his peace; but feeling himself afterward to be gauled with the truth, and
with this occasion also more enflamed by the Devil, he was so incensed
therewith as that on the very next day turning the medicine into poison, with
great fury, he came to the Monastery, where the Man of God was sitting near
unto his little Cell. Here Britius, full of anger, or full of phrensy rather,
with sparkling eyes, and trembling lips, and changing often color, vents forth
his rage conceived against S. Martyn in presence of many, loading him with
infinite contumlies and injuries, and hardly also abstayning from laying
violent hands upon him. Nor yet was the sacrilegious temerity of this man, any
thing new, or sudden, to the Servant of Christ, having first before his
arrival, seen on the top of the hanging cliffe, two wicked Spirits, who
triumphing, and joyful, calling Britius by name, with voice, and gestures,
stood egging him on, to revenge the affront, and to handle the Bishop in that
sort, as he might not dare hereafter to molest him any more.

Whence S. Martin, composing himself to all manner of Patience, endeavored,
with admirable dexterity and sweetness, to mitigate the Wretch, the whilst he,
letting wholly the reins loose to his Tongue ceased not to abuse him with
extreme insolency, and (...). And now having suffered his tongue to range a
liberty (...) every side, with the (...) fury he entered in, he went forth (...)
when by the prayers, no doubt of S. Martin, the darkness expelled he began to be
aware of his grievous offense, and was so comppunct for the same, as that
suddenly turning his steps back again, with blushing and shame; prostrating
himself at the feet of the holy Man, besought him benignely to remit his
fault. No^ was it any thing hard to obtain this grace of him, who was sorry,
not for h^ own abasement, but rather for the precipice of the other, yea, and
to help him more, plainly expressed to him, how he had seen the two infernal
furyes, that set him on.

In sum, with all affection he received him into his friendship again*
Wherein he was ^ound so constant* that howbe^ he had afterward many, and
grievous complaints of him yet notwithstanding, he could never be brought to
deprive him, of hi^ Priesthood* least under the shadow of public
chastisement, the private offense might seem in some manner to be punished by
him. And to persons of quality, who seemed to wonder much at him* and not to
like very well so much indulgence of his* S. Marty^ would answer, among other
things: (...) was tolerated by Christ, and shall not I bear with a Briti^s?
In this manner, went he still (...) seuering in these most intense acts of
Charity. But who would say ever, that so ob^inate, and unbridled a man as
Britius was, should come afterward* to be so gracious in the eyes of God, as
to become a Bishop, and a Saint?

And yet so fell it out, thanks be ^o the divine Goodness for (...) and to the
intercessions of S. Martin: who on a time, holding his ey^ fixed on Heaven for
a pretty while, and being therefore of (...) taxed of madness: Know (said he to
him) Son, that I have obtained of our Lord, that thou may come to be Bishop
afte^ me* Though thou must understand, that in the Bishopricque it self, thou
shall want no adversities. Then Britius said: Lo you now* did not I affirm the
truth, how this man was merely out of his wits? But howsoever, in time he
understood, he was deceived. Because that S. Martin, being once departed this
life, it pleased the divine providence, that Britius, though vain and proud
before, yet notwithstanding being held in high esteem for Chastity, (...)
without opposition, elected by the people* and Clergy, to the supreme
government of souls. In which office, acknowledging, ^d amending the errors
of his youth, he most notably demean^d ^mselfe. And to the end, the Prophecy of
his Predecessor, might (...) verifyed, with his great glory, he suffered, from
the impious, ^d slaunderers, most grievous persecutions.

^ow a certain Virgin refused to be visited by S. Martyn: and how patiently he
took it. Chap. 10.
TO return now from whence we were digressed; a like fortitude to this, showed
S. Martin of an equal courage, and serene ^ind in another case, though light
in esteem perhaps* yet very dif^cult in practice: there was in the Diocese of
Towers, a Virgin, a^ong others, of excellent fame, and ver^uous behavior; who
now (...) these many years, of her own accord, had made her abode in ^ertayne
farm of hers, very straightly reclused, and only at^ending to God, did fly
the conversation, and sight of men. S. Martin ^ow, being invited with such an
odor (who otherwise was ex^eeding precise from spending any time with women)
yet chan^ing to pass by those parts, determined to honor with his present so
rare a virtue, being a favor so much more notable, as known ^o be more
unusual with him: but the matter succeeded not accordingly, because the Spouse
of Christ, would not give way to remit awhit of her rigor, so much, as at the
request of such a Prelate to be ^isited at all. So as S. Martin, with many of
his company, being ^ow arrived where she was, not doubting awhit of being
admit^ed to her presence, having sent in a messenger to her, and that in ^ayne,
so repulsed he departed thence.

Now what would an ordinary Priest have done in this case? If ^ot happily,
taken it at least in ill part, and perhaps have judged ^he Virgin to be taynted
with heresy, and worthy of excommuni^ation? But the divine man, was so far
from being offended ther^, as rejoicing at such a repulse received; began with
magnificall words, to extol the constancy and chastity of her, who had so
re^yred herself from him. Nor with words only showed he forth, the high
opinion he had framed of her, but with facts also: forasmuch as she afterward,
in the Evening having sent him certain presents of refection, and refreshment,
S. Martin, who in his whole visit, till that time, had never accepted of any
thing which was offered him, yet of what the Virgin sent him, he refused i^
not* (...) ledging, it was not ^itting for a Priest, to refuse the benedict^
(...) her, who deserved to be preferred before many Priests.

With such like words, and works, from time to time, g^ S. Martin evident
signs of a full victory gotten over his passions* and of the peaceful
possession he maintained in himself. But in regard, some will say perhaps, how
these manner of praises, are (...) mon also with private persons; let us come,
to the proper (...) of a true Prelate, and Apostolical Guardian. Among which,
it seems that the zeal of the holy, and orthodoxe faith, and of (...) sincere
worship of God, does ho^d the first place. For whose conservation, S. Martyn
was always wonderfully sollicitous, and vigilant, keeping himself, and all
all his flock, from every le^ contagion o^ Heretics, or of others severed
from the Roman S^ Here with did burn in his breast, an inextinguishable thirst
to ^state, and propagate the Christian verity, on every side, and p^ ticularly
in the neighbor parts; where it seemed to him an in^lerable thing, that any
relic of Paganism, should yet be exta^* He endeavored then maynly to
extinguish the same; and Almig^ty God most commonly for his part, with a
powerful hand, (...) stupendous works, concurred thereunto.

S. Martin restores a Woman's son from Death to life: with other (...)
things. Chap. 11.
SAint Martin on a time going, by occasion of the divine ser^ to the City of
Cha^es, chanced to pass through a Village (...) Gentiles, who at the fame of
the Saint, going forth of the Tow^* put themselves in the high way to behold
him; and at the same ^mour, concurred so great a multitude of the neighbor
countries, (...) all that plain was seen to be covered with an infinite
people. (...) the fight of which sheep, for that the most were led astray, the
(...) Bishop sighing, and elevated in spirit, begins to preach to the^ (...)
word of God, and to inuit them to eternal salvation, and that wi^ such a
feeling, and with such a voice, and action, as doubtless seem^ to them some what
more then humane.

Now while he thus discoursed, it pleased our Lord, that a Woman, whose only
Son was dead at that time, coming be^ him, with hands lifted up, presented
him to the blessed S. (...), saying: we understand, that thou art the friend of
God, restore me ^y Son, which is the only Child I have. To the prayers of the
^us Mother, were added the fighes, and intercessions of the ^tanders by. So as
S. Martyn perceiving, how for the conversion of that people, some miracle were
fit, lifting up his eyes and mind ^o Heaven, and conceiving therice an
undoubted certaynty of the ^iuine aid, he took the body in his arms, and in
the presence ^f all, put himself on his knees: and after a little space the
party ^rose up, and so restored the child revived to the Mother, astoni^hed,
and almost besides herself for joy: whereupon a cry was lif^ed up to the
stars, and all these people confessing Christ for true God, began in troops
with great vehemence to run after S. Mar^in, most instantly entreating him to
make them Christians. And he ^ull of iubiley, lifting up his hands over them,
made them Cathe^mens all at once, giving order besides, that they might be
instru^ted; affirming it, not unfit to make Cathecumens, in the open ^ields,
since in fields in like manner have Martyrs been consecrated.

With this manner of purchase, our S. Martin rejoiced much more then with the
increase of rents, or tytles: and not only from manners, and minds of persons,
but even from their memo^y also, and eyes, endeavored he to take away all
appearance of ^rofane, and Centill worship: nor were the difficulties of the
enter^rise, nor magnificence of Antiquityes, able to divert him from it. In the
Castle of Ambatia, was a Tower of pollished stones, heerto^ore dedicated to a
false God; which from the solid, and spacious ^oundations, a^sing more and
more, came at the top, to finish in ^me of a Pine-aple, a work both of art,
and cost alike, and not ^nly curious to behold, but also very firm and durable.

Now the holy Bishop, having appointed Marcellu^ a Priest ^here dwelling, by
all means to destroy such an abomination, and ^ter some time finding the
same, as yet on foot, rep^ded his ^cknes. But Marcellu^, excusing himself
with the difficulty thereof, ^or that the making was such, as hardly would an
Army be able to demolish it, much less a small number of Clerks, or feeble
Monks which lived with him* S. Martin, without more reply, having re^ourse to
his wonted tacklings, spent all that night and morning ^n prayer: When behold
on a suden a vehement tempest of winds, ^ightning, and thunder, impetuously
smiting the building, fetched (...) up by the ground, and laid it flat on the
Earth*

In another place, stood a pillar of an unmeasurable great^, on the top
whereof, was an Idol. And S. Martyn, being not able to endure so great an
offense of the true God, determined by (...) means to level it with the
ground, but not finding commodity, either of Masons, or instruments to affect
it, he craved likewise the divine succor, with so much ardour, and such
efficacy withal, (...) the prayer being ended, the effect very sudenly
followed: because that in the sight-of-all the standers by, these appeared from
Heaven another Pillar no less then that, which descended with such a force
upon it, as reduced it into dust, together with the Idol.

How S. Martyn by the sign of the Cross, escaped Death: And how the peop^
were converted thereupon, to the Faith of Christ. Chap. 12.
SAINT Martin, in a certain Bourge of the Infidels, having (...) stroyed their
Temple, would needs presently upon it, command a tall Pine Tree there, that
was consecrated to the Devil, to be felled to the ground. But the
Country People, who through the divine will had been quiet at the one, very
tumultuously afterward opposed themselves to the other. S. Martin endeavored
to pacify the blind people what he could, and to make them capable of the Tru^
showing by diverse reasons, how one sole God was the Maker of every thing, and
that to him was due from the rational creature, all honor, oblation, and
Sacrifice, and not to the Angels thurst o^ of Paradise, deceiptfull, and proud,
whom hitherto they had miserably served; and went proving withal, how in that
Tru^ could be no matter worthy of veneration at all. Now while he w^ preaching
in this sort with great charity, one of those Pagans, more impudent and more
saucy then the rest, lifting up his voice, said to him: If thou have such a
confidence in this thy God, we ourselves will cut down this tree for thee, and
do thou but set thy shoulders thereunto, and be propping it up; and if thy Lord
stand for thee, (...) thou say, thou shall not suffer a whit. The
magnanimous Bishop accepted the Condition, and all that barbarous company
accorded likewise, exchanging very willingly the loss of such a plant, with
the death of one, that was so great a Persecutour of the Idols.

That Pine, of its nature, was bending in such sort, as it clee^ly appeared, in
cutting it down, wherabout of necessity it must light. On that very side, did
S. Martin suffer himself to be placed, with his legs tied, by those rude
rustiques, where he stood as a statue. And ^e people presently upon this,
divided themselves, very glad and ^oyfull the while at so new a spectable, and
some with axes, in have began to cut down the Pine Tree. The man of God, from
thence ^ad made his Monks to sequester themselves, who labored in vain ^o
hinder such a proof, and being pale, and full of sadness, with tender eyes each
moment stood expecting the loss of their dear Master, and the tree now ready
to to^er with redoubled strokes, seemed to threaten the ^al. And yet stood S.
Martin very firm and undaunted; when finally the ruin, with a terrible noise,
directly bended toward him, and now was eue^ ready to oppress him, when he
without being troubled a whit, lifting up his arm, opposed thereto the sign
of the Cross, and nothing else besides. A thing truly very admirable, that even
at the wholesome sign so made, was sudenly that great trunck, as it were beat
back with a violent Engine, and went with such a fury to the contrary side, as
it almost had crushed the very Infidels themselves, who were hewing it down.

What effect now this so sudden event might cause in their minds may more
easily be imagined, then written. The Monks beholding now beyond all hope, S.
Martin to be safe, and sound, with consolation and iubiley giving thanks to
our Lord for it, wept out right, and the rude people being convinced with so
great a miracle, holding up their hands and voices to Heaven, did finally
yield, and acknowledge the error of their life past, and were willingly
conuerred to Christ; insomuch as where before, there were no faithful, as it
were, to be seen thereabouts, within a little time, by means of the virtue, and
diligence, and the exemplar manner of the holy Bishop, there remained not a
place, that was not very full of Christians, of Churches, and Monasteryes:
Because the servant of God was wont, as soon as he had demolished any house of
the Idols, to erect in the same situation, some devout Oratory, or Religious
Convent, or other.

S. Martin stays the flames of fire from doing any harm. With other wonders
which he wrought. Chap. 13.
WE may not seem to let pass in silence, a thing, which if it had not
happened in public, might perhaps have seemed incredibie to some. S. Martin,
having in those countries therabout, set ^ire to a very noble, and most ancient
Temple of the Idols, it happened, that a wind arising, did carry the flame to a
house hard by, not without manifest danger of dilating it self further, and of
stirring up, with the sense of their private losses, the tender minds of that
Community. S. Martyn then being aware of the danger, with the wonted courage of
a lively faith, mounted up speedily to the roof, and puts himself against the
flames; and it is certain, that at the only appearing of the Man of God, the
flames, as timorous to offend him, in a moment seemed to fetch about, and to be
retorted, and gathered within themselves, and in the sight of all, in striving
against the violence of the wind, to retire in such sort, as the private
buildings remained very safe; and S. Martyn with his only presence, effected
that which all the people, with their instruments, and water, could not so
easily have brought to pass.

In the Leapers Bourge (as they called it) likewise, having attempted to ruin a
temple, very famous, no less for the great riche^ thereof, then for the much
superstition used about it; he was repelled by the Gentiles, not without much
outrage, and iniuryes d^ him. Whereupon, retiring himself in to some place
thereby, he remained in fasting for three whole days together, and praying in
(...) and ashes: and at last appeared two champions unto him of the heavenly
warfare, being armed with spears and shields, saying how they came, as sent
from our Lord to succor him, against that multitude of swaynes. That therefore,
he might return bouldly to the enterprise again, and not fear any impediment
whatsoever. So S. Martin did, and in the presence of all those Pagans, who
through divine power, stood the while immovable, he ruined the profane bulk
from the very foundations, destroyed the Aultars, and reduced the images unto
dust. Whence succeeded another great benefit, that the Gentiles, perceiving
themselves so bound and stupifyed, without being able to rise against the
Bishop, knew the effect to be caused by a supreme power, and they all, as it
were, came to believe in Christ, exclayming with one voice, and confessing,
that the only God of S. Martin, was to be adored, and that, for the Idols, they
were to make no reckoning of them, since in such a necessity of theirs, they
were not able to help themselves.

Two other stupendous things, are recounted in this matter: one was, that in
the country of Burgundy, there being a great number of country swaynes risen
against S. Martin, in defense of a Temple, one of them drawing out his sword,
set upon him; when the holy man, suddenly laying his cloak aside, offered him
his naked neck, nor was that impious fellow any whit slack, to have given the
stroke: but lifting up his arm, in the presence of all, fell flat backwards
himself, and cried for peace, and pardon. The other was, that from a like
disdain, another wicked fellow, being minded to kill him, the very sword fell
out of his hand, in such wise, as it was never seen more. True it is, that he
rarely came into such terms, because for the most part, S. Martyn with
meekenes, and with preaching, would be tempring and persuading the people, in
such sort, as themselves understanding the truth once, would condemn their
own madness, and destroying the Idols with their proper hands, be converted to
Christ. To which effect of conversion of souls, S. Martyn was wont very
industriously to make use of the great gift he had, in curing the sick, and
delivering possessed persons of evil spirits; as among others, he did here
with a person of great quality, by name Tetradius.

This man, being moved to compassion, for a dear servant of his, very cruelly
oppressed and tormented by the infernal enemy, with great instance entreated
S. Martyn to vouchsafe so much as to cure him. The holy man then, willed him to
be brought before him: but the malign spirit would not endure, to be led from
home resisting the same very obstinately, ever with biting, and scratching.
Whereupon Tetradius, repayring to the holy Bishop, puts himself on his knees to
beseech him, he would be pleased to come to the lodging himself. And with this
occasion, S. Martyn began very dexterously to help this soul, with showing
himself somewhat backward therein; and with saying, that it was not lawful
for him to enter into the house of a Gentile, and profane man; and could ^ell
how to discourse so well, as Tetradius promised him to become a Christian, if
he could see but his servant delivered once of his pain, and malady. Upon this
pact, S. Martin was content to go thither, and so holding his hand over him, on
a sudden expelled the Devil. Nor did Tetradius fail of his word, being made a
Cathecumen ^ut of hand, and a little after baptized, and while he lived
thenceforth, did always bear very great reverence, and love to S. Martin.

The gifts, and natural talents of S. Martin: with a certain miracle that he
wrought. Chap. 14.
THus did this great Captain by all means continually wage war against the
Prince of this world, and went dispossessing him apace from his ancient
tyranny. Nor let any esteem this zeal of his, to be awhit deuoyd of prudence,
or discretion: forasmuch as S. Martin being assisted with divine grace, and
profound humility, could very well distinguish of inspirations, good or evil,
as of the Angels themselves, of light or darkness, (which in diverse figures, and
with sundry intentions, would visit him often.) Moreover howbeyt, through many
impediments, he was not able to attend to the schools; yet with a viuacity of
wit, and with sobriety and vigilance, together with such reading, as his
businesses would permit, and much more through an excellent purity of heart, and
by keeping the mind ever fixed in God; he arrived to so high a degree of true
science, and of a solid, and masculine eloquence, that he was able to expound
very difficult places of divine Scripture, with incredible cleerenes. And in
answering to cases of conscience could always touch the very point of matters;
as also in discourses, as well public, as private, teach and move the
Auditors, with so much more fruit, as he sought ever more, the only glory of
God, and abhorred his own.

But above all, he would give a very singular account of the Christian faith,
and was sufficient to refute with very pregnan^ reasons, whomesoeuer should
seem to have the impious boldness to assail the same, He was wont also, to
gather very profitable, and spiritual conceits, from things which daily would
occur unto him. As once when he saw a sheep newly shorn, he pleasantly said
to the standers by: This sheep here, has already fulfilled the precept of the
Gospel, because of two coats, he has parted with one, to such as had need;
and so should you likewise do. Beholding one, that was keeping of swine, very
cold, and but half covered with a poor, and curtayle coat of skins, he
said: Behold Adam, chased out of Paradise; but let us, leaving the old Adam,
cloth our selves with the new.

There was a great and goodly meadow, where in one part the oxen fed; another
foully rooted up by swyne; the third as yet untouched, and diapred with pleasant
colors, gave wonderful de^ight to human eyes. Now S. Martyn, turning to his
companions, said: That piece which you see so fed on, may seem to demonstrate
the ^tate of Matrimony, because that howbeit, it have not wholly lost the honor
of its greenesse, yet is it deprived of the grace, and ornament ^f the Hours
thereof: that other so grubd, and turned up, as you see ^y those unclean
beasts, resembles the filthy vice of Fornication: but ^he remaynder, which has
not hitherto, suffered any manner of ^iury, represents the glory of Virginity,
since being clothed with ^ery frequent and fresh herbs, rich of fruits, and
distinguished with ^leasant flowers, in manner of fine pearls, emeralds, and
rubyes, ^hynes above all the beauty of art, and workmanship of hand. O ^lessed
semblance, and right worthy of God, forasmuch, as there is nothing in the
world, that may seem to compare with the gift of ^oly Virginity!

In the visit of his diocese, arriving once at a certain river, in ^ompany of
many other servants of God; he saw a great shole of ^oule, very busy a fishing,
and greedily attending to gorge themsel^es. Then said ^e to such, as were about
him: these reuenous birds, ^esemble much the infernal enemies, that lie
always in wait, to ^atch the unwary souls, to take them on a sudden, and to
devour them up, without end of satiating themselves. To these words, he ^dded,
a notable miracle, which was, to command the foul, with ^he powerful virtue
of words, to leave the waters, wherein they were floating, and to go their ways
to the vplands, and desert places. At which voice, being suddenly assembled
together, leaving the waters, they flew to the woods and mountains; while the
multitude of Spectatours with reason remained astonished to behold, that S.
Martin should have likewise power to command the birds.

In this manner then, each creature served the purifyed eyes of the Saint, as a
lively glass of truth, and without labor, or rather with delight, gathering,
as I said, the best documents from every thing, he came always to maynteyne
his heart, and of those he dealt with, in chaste thoughts, procuring with all
possible industryes, that rational souls, should dispose themselves, to
afford a clean and grateful lodging to the divine Goodness. To which effect,
likewise he sought to keep his subjects exercised in prayer, to be prompt in
pardoning iniuryes and offenses, and lastly to exchange the delights of the
Sense, with the pleasures of the Spirit.

S. Martyn through fasts, and prayers to Almighty God, appeaseth the (...)
Valentinian the Emperor. Chap. 15.
THe charity of S. Martyn was not contained within those (...) high and Noble
works of Mercy alone, but extended it self very tenderly also to the
Corporal works, and exterious necessityes, in curing of the sick, in
visiting, and defending of the Orphans and widows, succouring the afflicted,
and oppressed with unjust power, or by any other human accident, showing no
less promptnes in undertaking such like enterprises, then greatness of courage,
in susteyning them, and setting them forwards by all means possible. To which
purpose, we may not conceal, how (...) being gone upon such occasions, to the
Court of Valentinian the Emperor, a man very proud, and haughty by nature, and
besides by his Arrian Wife, much provoked against the Catholics; he had here
a large field likewise, to show his constancy in. In regard, that the Emperor,
having heard before hand of the coming of the Man of God, and of the affairs
he was to treat of, suddenly gave order, he should not be admitted into the
Palace. So as S. Martin, after he had once, or twice, endeavored in vain to
get audience, no^ loosing awhit of his courage the while, nor yet troubled for
the repulses had, with his wonted faith, and fortitude, laid hold of his
ancient remedies. He puts on a course Cilice, sprinckles himself with ashes,
takes leave of all sorts of meat, and drink. From thence entering into sighs,
and prayers, he perseuered so long, till on the seventh day, an Angel from
Heaven appeared to him, and bad him boldly go to the Palace, for the gates,
though of purpose shut against him, should now stand open to him, and the pride
of the mercylesse Prince, should fall by one means, or other.

With this confidence, S. Martyn going thither, found his entry so easy, as
without any impediment, he came to the room, where Valentinian himself was,
who seeing him a far off, was exceeding angry therewith at the first, and
with frowning looks, cried ^ut upon his Guards for admitting him in; and
thereupon stood immovable, without saying any more, or giving any manner of
entertaynement to the blessed Bishop: When behold on a sudden, the Royal
Throne was environed with flames, which approaching to that part of his body,
wherewith he sat, enforced him against his will to stand on his feet; and was
affrighted thereat in such sort ^s being humbled, with many embraces, and
courtesyes, he now ^ceiued him, whom a little before he could not endure to
see: and ^mmediately, without expecting supplications from him did favor ^im
with whatsoever he desired. After which, he would inuit him ^ery often to
familiar discourse, yea, and to banquets also: and lastly ^t his parting,
offered him diverse rich presents. But the faithful ^iend of Poverty, with much
edification of all the Court, without ^ccepting of any one, repaired to his
cure, and diocese, as soon as ^ight be. In this manner, the Servant of
Christ, with patience, and ^ith prayer ouercoming all obstacles, guided his
busynesses to a ^yre port: and as he suffered not himself, to be dejected a
whit with ^dignityes, and affronts; so kept he himself amidst favors, and
^rosperityes, perpetually immu^uable.

^ow S. Martin was honored, and esteemed by the Emperor Maximus, t^ the great
honor of the Clergy. Chap 16.
IF ever any Prelate were welcome and made much of, by great Princes, this holy
man had as much respect of them as any: for (...) the number of his most rare
gifts, shined no less Apostolical Majesty, then Religious modesty. Whereof
Maximus the Emperor among others, has given us a very good testimony: who
within a ^hile after the Death of Valentinian, being assumpted by the
soul^iours to the Empire, though on the one side, he were very tenaci^us, and
committed many extorsions; yet on the other, showed he ^imselfe, to be desirous
of eternal salvation, and a man of time^ous conscience, being much furthered
therein by the Empress his ^ife, a woman of great virtue, and no less ready
to favor, for her ^art, the Catholic Prelates, then that Arrian was
sollicitous, to ^inder them.

By these two personages now, it cannot be expressed, how (...). Martyn was
reverenced, and esteemed. So as going at those times ^ikewise to the Court, by
occasion of delivering of certain priso^ers, releasing of Bandits, and
recovering from the Treasury some goods confiscated, and of other such works
of paternall charity; Maximus did receive him with singular veneration, and
after he had ^ispatched with him the aforesaid businesses, he would call him
a^de, and very willingly hear him discourse, of the uncertainty of present
things, of the Eternity of the future world, of the glory (...) the Blessed,
and of the unspeakable greatness of God. At which discourses, the devout
Queen was always present, being his de^ consort no less in Religion, then in
the Empire, sitting humbly (...) the ground, still hanging in suspense, with
all recollecton, and silence, on the words, and gestures of the man of God;
wherewith now being warmed, she was soon enflamed with so great a fervor, as
acknowledging with a lively, and most chaste faith in the person of her Ghest,
the same of Christ, she determined to represent in her self both the Sisters
of Lazarus: and as in sitting at the feet of the Saint, and hearing of the
divine word, she had imitated Mary; so in serving, and feeding him she would
not be a whi^ inferior to Martha.

With this purpose, she entreated him, very earnestly to daign^ to receive a
sober refection particularly from her: which S. Mar^ precisely denying her, as
he, who abhorred all vanity, and such li^ familiarity with women, yet she very
firm in her deliberation had recourse to her husband, and with him together,
began afresh to importune the Bishop; in so much, as partly not to contristate
such Princes, and partly not to prejudice the cause of the poor, which then he
handled, at last suffered himself to be overcome. Where^pon the good Empress,
without other wayters as all, having (...) him at the table, began to put
before him the meat which she had dressed and seasoned with her own hands,
and likewise present him his drink, and in sum, during the dinner, like an
humble handmayd, stood attending with her eyes modestly fixed on the Table, and
with her whole person attentive and prompt to the service. And finally, the
cloth being reverently taken away, and the remainder, with the crumbs, with
diligence voyded, she took the with her, most triumphant, and glad, with
infinite thanks to God, as one laden with many exceeding rich spoils*

Surely, not without a great confusion, and shame to some women of our times,
who not bearing respect, either to the Decre^ of Counsels, or even to the
dreadful Mystery of the Altar, are won^ themselves no less impious, then
impudently, to be served by the Priests of the Highest, instead of Wayters, and
Pages. Though indeed the Clerks themselves for their parts, are not wholly
witho^ fault, since they for the vile interests of ambition, or gain, perm^
that degree to be trampled on by men, which even the Angels themselves do
reverence. From which adulation and baseness of theyrs, how far off S. Martyn
ever was, and with what decorum, especially in public, he conserved the
Episcopal dignity, may be easily gathered by that which we shall set down in
the next Chapter.

How S. Martyn was feasted by the Emperor: and how he bare himself therein.
Chap. 17.
THe aforesaid Maximus had very oftentimes invited S. Martin to dyne with him,
but always in vain; yet notwithstanding he so perseuered with intreatyes, as
finally he yielded thereunto, with no less gladness of the Emperor, then if he
had conquered a kingdom. There were thither invited withal, as to a great
feast, three principal Lords of the Court, the Consul Euodius, and two
Counts, the one the Brother, the other the uncle to the Emperor: between these
two, was placed the Priest, who was S. Martins companion. The holy Bishops
Chayr, was put besides Maximus himself. The Feast was now by this time, pretty
forwards, when according to custom, there was a Cup of wine presented to the
Emperor, who commanded it sudenly to be commended to S. Martyn, expecting
with a kind of ambition, to receive it afterward from his hand. But the great
Prelat, having tasted thereof, drank to his Priest, giving to understand thereby,
in that assembly was none more worthy then he to pledge him; esteeming he had
done ill, if either the Emperor himself, or his chiefest Fauourits, or
nearest to him, had been preferred by him before that poor Servant of God.

They received all much edification heerat: and being slighted in that case,
took it so much the better, as the most of the other Bishops in Court were
subject to base flattery, and with much indignity sought the grace and favor
of the Officers, and Ministers of Caesar. True it is, that this liberty, and
confidence of S. Martin, had not been so convenient and fit for all, not having
equal splendor of life, nor such divinity of miracles, as he. Whereof, though
we have mentioned some already, notwithstanding of an infinite number of others
yet remaining, we shall not spare to set down some few, which without
prejudice to the Reader, and in some manner without injury of the Saint
himself, may not well be let passed.

How S. Martin miraculously escaped burning. Chap. 18.
SAINT Martyn being gone, in the midst of winter, to visit a place of his
diocese, a lodging was prepared him by his Clerks, in the precincts of the
Church, and to air the chamber there w^ a great fire made underneath, and
instead of a bed, was strewed a good quantity of dry litter and straw; whereon
S. Martin at night reposing, and settling himself to sleep, and being
accustomed (as we have said) to lie on the hard ground, could not away with
such softnes, and as it were displeased therewith, immediately putting the
straw aside, returned to his ordinary manner of lodging: but a^ the flore was
broken, and full of cle^s, it happened, that the force of the fire piercing
through them, by little, and little, it came to enkindle the straw, and
furiously to burn. Whereupon, S. Martyn awaking, and seeing himself sudenly
in so great a danger, without having time, or to say better, aduertence to call
upon the divine aid, with a natural motion which he had, got up on his feet,
and ran in have to open the door, but it pleased God he found it so b^red, as
that while he labored and toyled himself, to put back the bolt, the fire
approaching had now taken hold of his Cassock.

Then finally S. Martin returning to himself, and perceiving that his remedy
consisted not in flying away, but in craving aid from heaven, taking hold of
the shield of faith, and prayer; (...) himself on his knees in the midst of
the flames, which even hee^ likewise sudenly, as it were affrighted thereat,
withdrew themselves, while he stood immovable still pursuing his prayers. In
the mean time, the Monks, who were companions to the Saint, ^emayning in the
next Chamber, being awaked with the noise, and terrifyed at the chance, by
force, and not without some delay and difficulty, brake open the door, and
thinking by that time to have found the blessed Father consumed and dead, they
saw him, beyond all hope, amidst the flames both alive, and entire; and coming
boldly unto him, took out his body from thence. The blessed man confessed
afterward, not without sighs, his own fault. For that he having among other
his spiritual employments, an ancient custom, in awaking always, before any
other thing, to lift up his mind to God, and to sanctify with the perfume of
prayer, the Altar of his heart, and so to shut up the Temple of his soul, that
no unclean, or hurtful beast of evil thoughts, might seem to put their
foot therinto; yet howsoever at that time, either out of human fear, or
subtility of the enemy, being quite, as it were, besides himself, and wholly
unmindful of his good custom, he had first made his recourse to visible
remedies, then to the invisible: affirming for certain, that he was in extreme
danger of burning, being alone, while he labored, with a troubled mind to open
the bolt. But that after he had betaken himself to the arms of the holy
Cross, and prayer, the flames were on a sudden (as he said) so contracted
within themselves, as they left him untouched, through divine power.

How Euantius was cured of a grievous sickness by S. Martin: and what other
notable things he wrought besides. Chap. 19.
ABout this time, a certain honorable person, and a man of much piety, by
name Euantius, fell mortally sick, and being now as it were despaired of by
the Physicians, with a great deal of faith called for S. Martyn, who without
all delay, went his ways thither. An admirable thing: he was not yet gone
half way, when the sick man felt the benefit thereof, and having suddenly
received health, came in person to meet with him, and to entertayne him as a
Ghest. And S. Martin being willing to depart the next day, with humble
intreatyes and much importunity, he was enforced at last to remain a while
with him. In that interim, a Page of the house, was stung with a venomous
Serpent, so pestiferous indeed, as he was now even ready to give up the last
breath. When lo, the same Euantius, taking him on his shoulders, with great
confidence, carried him to the feet of the Saint. And now was the evil
already spread through all his lymmes; when you might have seen the skin to
swell in every vein, and the vital parts to stretch like a bladder, till S.
Martyn which his blessed hand feeling them here and there, at last with his
finger touched the wound it self. At the point whereof, might clearly be
seen, the poison retyring it self, to run to the fingars end, and thence by
the narrow mouth of the wound, with long spinning to gush forth mingled with
blood, like the milk which sprinkles from the tea^, being hardly wrung.
Wherewith the youth arose up ^ound, and the standers by remained astonished,
confessing under Heaven nothing to be any awhit comparable to S. Martin. Nor
was the work less famous, that follows after.

There was in the City of Chartres, a young girl of twelve year old, so
dumb, as till that time, she could never frame a wor^ Now S. Martin being in
the company of other two Bishops, V^ tinian and Vi^us by name, the said little
girl, was presented to him by her sad Father, that by his means, her tongue
might be loosed: when as S. Martin, with much modesty began to put of that
office to those two Prelates; alleging, that to their faith, and virtue,
nothing would be impossible. But they on the other side, uniting their
intreatyes with the Suppliant, began to urge him much to vouchsafe to comfort
him. Whereupon S. Martin, without more delay, showing no less piety, in the
prompt execution, then humility in the first refusal, gave order, that the
multitude of people, should stand off, and he remaining only, with the Bishops,
and with the Father of the child, according to his custom puts himself into
prayer: then blessing a little oil, with the preface of the Exorcisme, and
taking hold of the tongue of the dumb Creature with his fingar, he dropped a
little of that holy liquour upon it, not without present effect. Because the
Girl, being demanded what was her Fathers name, suddenly answered thereunto
very readily* Whereat, the said Father, lifting up his voice with joy, and
tears at once, very deerly embraced the knees of the Man of God, affirming
this to be the first word, that he had ever heard his daughter speak; who
afterward, with the universal wonder of all, retained still the use of her
speech. And this truly was upon one alone* but that which now we shall tell
you, concerned many together.

For there being entered into the family of a principal man, by name Licontius,
a kind of disease, so grievous and contagious withal, as that throughout the
whole house, there was nothing to be seen, here and there, but the sick to
lie, up and down, without hope or strength: Licontius for a last refuge,
craved succor of S. Martyn, by letters; to whom the blessed man answered, it
would be a very difficult thing to do, forseeing in spirit, that the scourge of
God, was over that house: and yet notwithstanding for compassion, he disposed
himself to pacify by all means the heavenly wrath, and retiring himself, he
continued in fasting, and cilices for seaue^ whole nights and days together,
with so fervent prayer, as finally he obtained what he would. Whereupon
Licontius, being exceedingly comforted, went flying in have, with a thousand
thanks, to bring ^e good news to S. Martyn. And offered him moreover, a
hundred ^unds of silver: Which the holy Bishop, neither refused, nor alto^ether
accepted, but with a mean between both, and not suffering ^e same to enter
into the gates of his Monastery, applied it sudainly (...) the ransom of
Captives; When it being suggested to him by the ^o^ks, to retain some part
thereof, for the necessityes of the house, which at that time, was in some
distress, he answered, that the or^nary assignement of his Church, was
sufficient for that purpose.

This cure wrought S. Martin, and many others of sundry infir^ityes, as we^ in
presence, as in absence. But what wonder is it, ^at he should have power upon
humane bodies, who had so much ^ower over spirits? This is certain, the
possessed being brought to ^e Cathedral Church to be delivered by him, as soon
as he put but ^s foot forth of his Cell, to come to the City, they would
begin to ^hreech with horrid gestures, and houlings, full of dreadfulnes to
^ehold: insomuch as the Clerks, with this sign only, were wont to ^nderstand
before hand of the Bishops coming thither. And he be^des, not as other
Exorcists are wont, who through force of threats, and cries, use to cast out
Devils; but being sprinkled with ashes, with wearing sharp cilices, with
prostrating himself on the ground and with the arms of holy prayer withal,
would master them. Nor yet let any think the while, that among so many graces
from Heaven, that S. Martin was wholly without the Gift of Prophecy ^lso.
Forasmuch as diverse accidents being far remote in time, and ^lace, were
manifested to him, partly immediately from God, part^y also through the
ministry (as has been said) of the Angels. Of which, and of many other
meruayles besides (for breuity sake untouched by us) whosoever would seem to
have a more distinct ^otice, let him read Sulpitius Seuerus in his Dialogues:
howbeyt, he also, not to be tedious, confesses, that of purpose, he had
concealed (...) great part of them. But now, it is time, in fine, for us to
come to the last act of this representation, certainly no less notable, or
less perfect, then the others; but so much more worthy of applause, as it more
assures us of the reward.

The Death of S. Martin, with the Lamentation made by all, and the great (...)
for his Body. Chap. 20.
THE blessed Man, was now arrived to the 81. year, or as others will have it,
to the 87. of his age, when through divine revelation, he himself knew, that
his end approached, and clearly foretold it to his disciples. But yet for all
that, continued he his wonted devotions and abstinences, and diligently
attended to his pastoral office. And because, in those days, there fell out a
scandalous discord, among the Clerks of a certain place, which is called
Candacum, he determined in person to go thither, to quiet them; esteeming he
could not more happily end his life, then by leaving all his Churches in good
peace and concord. Being gone then thither, and with divine grace, having
settled matters, he was now ready to turn back to his Monastery again, when
he began to feel in himself, some notable defect of forces: and therefore
gathering his disciples together, he told them how his Tabernacle was now
ready to be dissolved, whence of necessity he must needs leave them.

When lo, amidst very doleful sighs and tears, there was raised this common
voice amongst them, saying: And why do you leave us so, holy Father? To whom
do you recommend us so disconsolate, and afflicted? The ravenous wolves will
assail your flock, and the Shepherd being lost, who is he that can defend
us? We know very well, you desire to go to Christ, but your rewards are safe
enough, and guerdons which differred a while, are not lessened a whit: then
take you pity on us rather, who remain in such manifest danger. The Servant
of Christ, being mollifyed at these words, could not conteyne himself from
weeping, but with great affect, turning himself to Heaven, said: O Lord, if I
yet be necessary to this people, I fly no labor, thy most holy will be done.
Wherein, being as it were put in balance, he showed, (...) knew not, which of
the two was dearest to him, either to remain on earth for Christ, or to leave
the earth for Christ. Wherein he gave example to the faithful, how in such
prayers, they are not to incline with desire, either to the one, or other side;
but a with real, and simple indifferency, to remit themselves in all, and
through all, to the divine arbitrament.

The good Bishop, for some days now, was tormented with a ^uell fever, and yet
nevertheless continued he night and day in ^editation and vigils, susteyning
with the vehemence of his spirit* ^e weakness of his body, lying so, in that
his soft and delicate bed (...) ashes, and hayrecloth; when being with much
instance intrea^d by his Monks, to suffer at least some vile ^ackloth to lie
under ^im: It is not fit, said he, O children, that a Christian should seem
(...) dye otherwise, then upon ashes: and if I give you not example ^ereof, the
fault is mine. This said, he turned with his face upwards, to cast up his eyes
and hands to the stars. In which posi^on now immovable, lying as drawing to
his end, he was v^ry ^rnestly entreated by the Priests (who in great number
were ^ome to visit him) to turn himself at least on one side, to take some
^st, but he replied: Let me alone Brothers, and suffer me rather to ^oke to
heauen-wards, then to the earth, and to put my soul into ^to the right way,
being even now ready to pass to the Creator.

After this, seeing the Devil to appear before him: What do ^ou here (said
he) thou bloody beast? Thou shall find nothing (...) me. O Thief! Arahams
bosom lies open, and ready for me. And with these words, he yielded up his
spirit, upon Saturday about ^idnight, in the time of Honorius, and Arcadius
Emperors, in the ^eare of our Lord 397. or as others will have it 402. having
his ^ce so resplendant, and all those members and fle^h of his, so ill in^eated
before, and mortifyed, now so white, fresh, and sweet to ^ehold, as they
seemed already to be transformed into the state of ^ory. At the very same time,
were heard most sweet ha^onyes ^boue, of Angelical Quires; and this not only
in those parts, but ^uen likewise in the City of Colen, where the blessed
Se^erinus Bi^op, together with his Archdeacon, was pa^ of so grateful ac^ents
also: and the same Bishop, had reue^ besides, how in that ^und, so continued in
his ears, the severe ministers of the eternal justice, were, at his passage,
though in vain, withholding and ^xamining S. Martyn. Whence every one may
consider with what ^gour, sinners are there handled, since so without respect,
the very ^st are so strictly dealt with.

The news being spread abroad of his des^e, who were ^le to express the
mourning of all, and the solemnity of the Exe^uyes there made? When not only of
Towers, and all the Country ^ereabous, but even from sundry other neighbor
Cittyes likewise all the Inhabitants came forth to honor the body, while the
co^ trary affects at once then combated in their souls, both of joy and (...)
nes: notwithstanding the number of those was much greater, (...) moved with the
loss of such a Father, Pastor, and Master, and (...) their only refuge, went
sighing and lamenting bitterly amidst (...) hymns and canticles. But
especially the assembly of two tho^ Monks, all trained up by the S^int; and
partly a chaste and (...) Quire of Virgins, all elevated in spirit, and divine
praises, gave for pious, and noble spectacle to behold.

With such a train then, a great deal more glorious, th^n (...) triumphs of
Emperors, and of Caesar's, were the sacred spoyle^ (...) posed, in (...)
certain place of that Country, until it was thro^ determined, where it
should be placed, in a proper and stable (...) pulcher. Now there being in
those days, a great controversy (...) thereabouts, between the inhabitants of
Towers, and those of (...) tiers; in the one of which places, S. Martin had led
a good while (...) private life; and in the other had governed the Church to
his dyi^ day: And they being not able, in so great diversity of minds, by (...)
mane ways* to come unto accord therein; and both the one and (...) there people
co^tending with each other about the same, in strict (...) and custody of the
sacred treasure: It pleased our Lord, that (...) of Poytiers, about midnight
should remain all oppressed, with (...) profound a sleep, as that their
adversaries being aware thereof, (...) the space to let down the body quietly
by a window, into a Ba^ there ready in the river. Whereupon look with how much
joy and triumph for so great a purchase, they went conducting it home: (...)
the others, became as sorrowful and perplexed for the loss, the next day
morning.

There was afterward, by the Bishops, successors to S. Man built to his
honor in Towers, a sumptuous and magnificent Church, where with great
veneration was kept, that noble instrument (...) divine wisdom, until this
unhappy age, in which the Sun ha^ not seen a worse deed, then the impious
scattering of those blessed Relics in the river of Lu^ra, by the hands of
sacrilegious Heretics. But howbeyt, through divine permission, they had the
force, to disperse the bones, and ashes of the Saint: Yet were they no^ able,
nor ever shall be, to extinguish the memory of his manifold miracles, nor the
good odor of his excellent Virtues.

FINIS.
S. FVLGENTIVS.
THE ARGUMENT.
NAture and Art, behold conioyn'd in one,
A Genius, void of affectation,
Most affable; Victorious grace to fight
Against rebellious sense, and appetite:
The world overcome by ^lighting it, a Crown
Of glory got, and by contempt Renown.
See how, although a thousand crosses band
Against the good, in spite of all they stand
Firm in their godly purpose; moved no more
Then rocks by waters, forced on the shore.
Happy Self-will, when Will it self subdues,
And for a guide, and sternes-man Heaven does use.
THE LIFE OF S. FVLGENTIVS BISHOP OF RVSPA.
Written by a Disciple of his.
The Parentage, Birth, and Education of S. Fulgentius: and his Vocation to
Religion. Chap. I.
AT such time as Hunnericus King of the Vandals took Carthage, Cordianus
Senator of that City, with all the others of the same Order, being spoiled of
his goods, and driven into Italy, dyed there, leaving Sons behind him, whereof
two of them, with hope of recovering their Fathers estate, returning into
Afric found their house to be given away already to an Arrian Priest, so as
they had no commodity to recover the same, and to inhabit in Carthage, though
they had the favor to enter into some part of their substance, with which they
got themselves into the City of Lest; where one of them, by name Claudius,
having taken to wife, a pious and honorable Woman called Mariana, by her had
the blessed Fulgentius, whose life we take in hand to write.

This woman having in her fi^ years lost her husband, took ^o small care to
set her son to school. And forasmuch as in those times, was made great
account of the Greek tongue, the suffered him not to attend to the Latin,
until such time, as he had the works of Homer by heart, and was also well
vers^d in the Poet Me^ander: and as the youth was of a noble wit, and of a
happy memory, he so profited in that study, as in the Greek pronunciation and
accent, he seemed, as it were, a natural Grecian. After this, he gave himself
to the Latin, wherein likewise he made a happy progress: but as it chances in
like cases, very suddenly he was forced to leave them both, while the
government of the whole family fell upon him; but yet so, as in that manag^ of
his estate he would never subtr^ct himself from the obedience of his Mother.
Who in her widdow-hood, took meru^ilous consolation from the good deportements
of her prudent son, perceiving how dexterous he was, in entertayning friends,
reasonable in opposing enemies, how meek toward servants and severe withal,
how diligent in the care of his patrimony, and discreet in purchasing the grace
of Princes, whereby he came very soon to such reputation, as he was made (...)
chief Magistrate of the Common wealth.

Now while in this Office, he endeauours to proceed with all sweetness, and to
gather the Imposts without exaction, o^ the offense of any; it was not long,
ere the weight of secular businesses appeared very grievous, and the vanity of
pomp and vain felicity, came to be tedious to him. Wherewith he began to give
himself to prayer more then ordinary, to the use of d^out books, and to
converse with Religious: through whose conversation he was well advised that as
transitory pleasures and delights, are not there among them, so are neither the
disgusts, nor molestations of the world: he perc^iued them secure, and free
from calumnye^, and with holy l^e to be most conjoined within themselves: he
considered many young men amongst them, who with a glorious victory over their
appetits, co^^erued perfect, and perpetu^l chastity. With whose examples being
moved, he did finally break forth with himself, into these words.

Alas! we wretches of the world to what end is all ^his toyling, without hope
of eternal goods! What shall the world be ever able ^o afford us! If we like
^oy (though indeed better it were to mourn with safety, then to laugh with
danger) how much more ^cond ^e these men that have the (...) settled and quiet
in God! Who have nothing to do with these Sergeants, or Prouost-Marshals! h^
fear, but of sin: who attend to nothing but to observe the divine Precepts;
nor are anxious a whit to loose their possessions, in gayning their living with
their proper hands, day by day. Let us imitate so virtuous a people: Let us
likewise undertake so commendable a a manner of life; and let not the light be
in vain which God has given us: Change we, our former customs, and alter we
our employments, so far forth, as whereas hither to we have contended with
our friends about points of Nobility, we may now strive no less in poverty
with the servants of God. If heretofore, we applied our selves to solicit
debtours, we may now attend to conue^ Sinners. Our Lord Christ, is wont to
frame holy Doctors, eue^ of the profan^st exactors. From Custom House it
self was S. Man called to the Apostle ship: Which is not yet spoken to make
comparison between him and us, but only that if he having left the ministry
of the Tole-howse, have received the office of preaching, why may it not be
lawful for me, laying down my Procuratour-ship, (...) take penance in hand?
Our refuge is God: whence I am not to fear at the age I am of, since he
himself, who affoarded the gift of continence to so many young men that live in
the Monastery, may likewise afford it me a Sinner. With such thoughts as these
reuolued in mind, at last he resolved to leave wholly the delights of the world
and to give himself to a Monastical life.

S. Fulgentius presents himself to Bishop Faustus, to be his Disciple* (...)
the difficultyes he had with his Mother Mariana. Chap* 2.
TRue it is, that not to pass with hazard from one extrem^ (...) another, S.
Fulgentius began first to ^ast secretly, then to shu^ by little and little, his
ancient acquaintance, and now more (...) ever to attend to his devotions. To
which effect, being re^yred (...) the country, through divine grace, he went so
far, as that being yet a Layman, he seemed to be a perfect Monk. His
familiars in the mean time, were astonished therea^; nor wanted there some*
according to custom, who attributed such abstinence, and retirement of the
young man, unto baseness of mind, or to some other sinister accident. But he
being enflamed every day more and more, in the (...) of perfection, while it
seemed to him* he had made sufficient (...) of himself, being touched with a
discourse of S. Augustine* upon (...) (...). Psalm, he determined to put off no
longer the change of his ha^t, to discover his vocation, and to quit himself
wholly of the dan^r of those secular commer^es, with further hope besides, to be
able (...) help others with his example: and not without reason. For that man
how mean a condition soever he were of, would once (...) ashamed, or affrayd
to become a Monk, in beholding such a one (...) S. Fulgentius was, with so
notable a contempt of all sensuality, and (...) greatness, so to walk by the
way of abstinence, and humility? ^d thus having great familiarity with the
Bishop Faustus, who for (...) Catholic Faith, being put forth of his Church,
by the wic^d King, had built him a monastery in those confines, and there ^ued
very holyly with others; where it pleased Fulgentius, to linck ^imselfe with
him, and under his obedience to dedicate himself to ^e divine worship.

But he well understanding the Parentage of the young man, and ^w deliciously he
had been bred, began to suspect some manner ^f fiction in the matter, and said
to him: Wherefore, my Son, do ^u jest so with the Servants of God? For a^ thou
likely to be a ^onke, and to relinquish so on a sudden all thy delicacyes* and
ex^ange thy banquets into gross fare, and those sumptuous (...) of ^pparell,
into course and abject clothing? Thou had first need to ^e a less dainety
Layman, and so perhaps we shall believe thou will, and may forsake the
world. But the young man, heerewith being more enflamed, taking, and reverently
kissing the hand of (...), with his eyes fixed on the Earth, replied: He is
well able, O Father, to give me power* who has affoarded (...) the will; do
you but only give me leave to follow you: Open me the door, admit me as one of
your disciples, and God shall, I trust, find ways ^ough to deliver me from my
iniquityes. The blessed old man hea^ing this, had a scruple to resist the
diuin^ inspiration, and without ^ore ado, consented to the young man, saying:
Remain the^ with us, my Son, as thou will thy self. Let us try for some
days, if deeds, will accord: with words, or no: God grant my fear may prove
to be in vain, and thy desire stable. And thus S. Fulgentius, being received
into probation, the matter was sudenly diuulged, to the joy of the good, and
confusion of the wicked: no^ was there wanting some of his dearest companions,
that being pricked therewithal, even spurned like wise at the world, and no
less then he, became religious.

But the forlorn Mariana, as soon, as she had understood (...) had passed, as
if she had presently lost her Son, wholly anxi^ and troubled, being full of
tears and laments, flew immedi^ to the Convent: Where being half besides her
(...), with a (...) of Outrages, she began to exclayme against Faustus, to
render (...) Son again to his Mother, the Master to his Servants; and how
it was no office of a good Priest; so to ruin the house of a (...) widow. Such
words as these, notwithstanding were not of (...) enough to sting the prudent
old man; but rather with a fair and se^ countenance, compassionating the
motherly affects, h^l so (...) to appease her, as he suffered her not yet to
see her son. Then (...) riana, as knowing well, how much otherwise that swee^
Chi^ ^ers esteemed and reverenced her, and how great love he ba^e (...) thought
it expedient to plant her self at the gate of the Monaste^ and there to fix
herself, as ^he did, lamenting outright, and wi^ great exclamations
exaggerating much her sad misfortune, in (...) ling again and again upon her
deer Fulgentius by name.

This first temptation, gave a great shake to the good yo^ man, while the
sighs and groa^es of his so dear and loving Mo^ even pierced him to the heart;
but yet nevertheless, lifting up (...) mind unto heaven, with a pious cruelty
enforced himself not (...) hear them; until such time, as being assisted by
divine grace, (...) remained triumphant over flesh and blood. Whereupon the
blessed ^austus, not without cause framing a great conceit of such a vo^ tion,
turning himself to the Monks, and with a cheerfulnes wi^ said to them: This
young man here* shall well be able to suffer any pains of religion whatsoever,
since for Christ he has been ab^ so to neglect the dolor of a Mother. Who
going and coming to and fro more then once, after in vain she had given many
mol^ lestations to the Bishop, and laid many snares before her Son being now
quite tired withal, she finally gave over.

S. Fulgentius makes a donation of all to his Mother: and was after^ terribly
persecuted by an Arrian Priest. Chap. 3.
IN the mean while, S. Fulgentius giving himself to the man tion of the body,
among other voluntary afflictions, and (...) ties, did whol^ (...), not only
from wine, but even from (...) also, being the common cates of those places.
Whereupon in short time he became to be spent, in such sort, as the withered
skin ^s ^left on all sides, and by little and little all filled over with a
(...). ^ence truly, whereas some thought he should be faigne to cool^ ^anguish
in divine service, he endeavored notwithstanding to go ^ayes forward, and to
attend to the health of his soul, remitting ^t same of the body, to the
providence of the Creator; and was not ^hit deceived of his trust the while,
since without other help, his ^alth was very soon restored him again to the
great consolation ^f all. And now the time of renunciation being come, he
thought ^xpedient to make a free donation of all his goods unto his Mo^er, as
well to solace therewith the sad desolation of the afflicted ^iddow, and
likewise to bridle a certain obstinate and stiff-neckt ^nger Brother of his,
making account, that the (...) at least of ^osing hi^ goods, would force him so
to be very tractable, and o^dient to his Mother.

After this, there arising a new persecution against the Catholi^ue Bishops,
Faustus was enforced to fly away, and to hide himself ^eer and there, to the
great damage and prejudice of his Monks. ^hereupon Fulgentius, with his leave
retired himself into ano^er Monastery thereby, where a great friend of his, by
name Felix ^as Superior, who knowing the wo^ and sanctity of Fulgen^us,
received him not only with great content, but further vse^ all ^dustry, to
substitute him in the government: which being not ^le to gain of Fulgentius;
after a long contention and stri^e between them about (...) of subjection, he
obtained at last, (...) would accept of part of the (...) and so was (...) car^
divided betwee^ them both* in such (...), a^ (...) (...), and had the care of
the spiritual matters, and Felix of the ^porall affairs. In which offices
they both d^meaning themselves with great concord, and much edification* there
happened a (...) of the Moor^s: whereupon* the holy Family was ^onstrayned with
their Pastors to forsake that coun^y, and to ^eeke ^m a securer mansion in
p^rts more (...).

Now then, after a long voyage, and sundry adventures had* ^eing arrived at
last, at the fruitful territory of Sic^a, they were in^ed, as well through the
quality of the soil, a^ the g^ntlenes of ^he inhabitants to remain there, as
they did, attending each one (...) office, and especially (...), to (...) the
Heretics unto the true faith, and ^o help ^ose soul^ both with words (...)
examples in all virtues. There preached at that time in the vill^ of
Babardilla, an Arrian priest, very rich in substance, in be (...) barbarous,
and a most cruel persecutour of the Catholics. The man, understanding of the
life, and goodly works of S. Fulgen^, and suspecting he was come, under the
false habit of a Monk ^o alienate men from Arianisme, laying some wayt and
ambu^ (...) diverse places, caused him, and his Colleague Felix, to be taken
(...) brought before him, and with fierce eyes, and a wry countena^ said to
them: Wherefore are you come hither from your house (...) pervert the
Christians? And without otherwise attending an answer, commanded them to be
cruelly beaten.

When the good Felix, being moved with compassion, for (...) Fulgentius: Be not
(said he) so cruel against this my Brother, (...) companion here, being so
tender of complexion, as he is like (...) dye in your hands; but do you wreake
your selves rather on (...) lone, for all the fault is in me only. With which
words, the Minister of the Devil being astonished, made Fulgentius awhile to
sta^ aside, and more severely appointed Felix to be sm^ten then befo^ who
amidst the blows of the hangmen, tempered his sorrow s^ what with the joy he
had to behold Fulgentius exempted. But (...) contentment of his, lasted not
long: forasmuch as that wicked (...) rian, being pushed thereunto of his native
fiercenes, after he had (...) ill entreated the one, began to handle the other
worse; nor suffi^ the example of so rare a charity, nor the noble and venerable
(...) of S. Fulgentius, to move his obdurate heart to compassion.

But S. Fulgentius rather amidst the smart of the blows, ((...) to him was as
it were intolerable,) having with humble voy^ demanded so much favor, as to
speak some three or four wor^ he gave him truce and respit the while, as
thinking him inclined (...) confess the Arrian opinions, and to renounce the
ancient religion but noting him to enter into a formal discourse, about giving
(...) count of their life and pilgrimage had; being fraught with rage* (...)
caused him to be more, cruelly entreated then ever; and lastly (...) and
stripping them both, bad them be gone: and they rejoicing within themselves, for
having suffered for Christ, so dispoyled of the rayments, but invested with
glory, returned home to their Cells (...) gain.

The ^ame, and rumor of this accident. S. Fulgentius himse^ being a person age
so illustrious as he was, dilated it self to the General discontent of all,
even to the City of Carthage. So far forth as the Bishop of the Arrians
himself, resented it much, and was ready to make demonstration thereof, if the
offended had made but any complaint thereof, at all. Whereunto many exhorting S.
Fulgentius, he suffered not himself to be induced; neither withal their
persuasions nor yet with the grieuousnes of the injury received to seek
revenge, saying, that besides that such things are to be remitted to God, it
would be also a scandal to see a religious Catholic man, to recurre to the
tribunal of an Arrian. Howbeit, to mitigate the fury and persecution of that
perverse sect, he determined to go into some place where it ruled not. Wherefore
withal his Monks, he passed to his former dwelling, as choosing rather, to
have the Moors his Neighbors, then the Heretics.

S. Fulgentius leaves Carthage, and goes to Alexandria, where he met with
Eulalius Bishop: and returns back again by Rome. Chap. 4.
NOt far from the City of Loda, began S. Fulgentius and Felix to found them
a new Monestery: Where while they attended to their accustomed offices of
piety, S. Fulgentius lighted on a book of the Lives and spiritual Conferences
o^ the Monks, and Hermits of Egypt. Through this reading and meditation, he
became so enflamed to the greater study of al perfect virtue, as without more
ado he resolved to go his ways secretly into those parts, as well to lay off
the name, and charge of Abbot; as also to ty^ himself to a more rigorous and
straight Rule. Which mutation of place, was in those days tolerated, in
certain Religious, as then not having made any express vow of any particular
congregation.

So as S. Fulgentius, under the pretext of dispatch of some affairs in
Carthage, being arrived to the walls of that City, with only one companion, by
name Redemptus, instead of entering into the Town took shipping for
Alexandria, without other viatique with him, the^ a firm confidence in God,
through whose disposition being carried by the winds to Siracusa of Sicily, he
there met with the holy Bishop Eulalius, a person of great sanctity, and much
affected to Religious persons, as having moreover a proper Monastery of his
own where he would recollect himself sometimes from his other Ecclesiastical
occupations. S. Fulgentius with other Pilgrims being courteously received by
this good Prelate, while at table they discoursed of spirit and learning, it
could not be, but the (...) dent Bishop, must needs be aw^re of (...) doctrine
and (...) After dynner then calling him aside, he said to him: Thou (...)
mention at table of certain Institutes, and Collations of the Fathers, I pray
thee now, bring me the Book if thou have it: which S. Fulgentius did without
delay, and withal at the earnest instan^ of the Bishop, declared the whole
argument thereof, in a few and very apt words.

The Bishop admiting the young man's wit and erudition, and solacing himself,
with having such a Ghest in his house, began familiarly to request of him an
account of his travail. And S. Fulgentius, to cover with humility his design,
said he went to seek his (...), whom he understood to live in the parts o^
Egypt; and he (...) but truth in saying so, since he held all the^ for his
parents, that might further him in spirit. The Bishop perceived the answer was
ambiguous, and easily gathered by discourse from the other companion, who was a
man of much simplicity, what passed in effect: When the blessed Fulgentius, now
finding hims^ besides expectation to be be discovered, confessed of himself,
how the matter stood with him; to wit, that he had left his home, with the mind
to enter into the inmost solitude of Thebais, to be able there, being
altoge^ther unknown, and dead to the world, to lead his life more perfectly,
with having every day new examples of virtue and pe^nance from so great a
number of the s^ruants of God. Thou (...) well answer^ ^ulalius, to desire
continually a greater perfection but know on the other side, it is impossible
for any to pl^ God* without the ^iue ^ayth. The land whereto thou ^endest, is
separated now long since from the Sea Apostolic. Al those Monks, who^ rigor
and abstinence is grown ^o renowned, will be ware of comunicating with thee.
And then what shall it avail thee, with fastings to afflict the flesh, while
the soul shall want its nourishment? Wherefore return my Son* whence thou
came, least whi^ thou desire a more holy conversation, thou suffer
shipwrack^ of a sound Religion. I likewise, for my part in my youth, before
unworthy as I am I was assumpted to this degree, have had the se^ same thought,
which now thou have, but the respect which I no^ told thee of, did quit me of
it.

The blessed Fulgentius, yielded to the counsayles of the holy Bishop: yet
nevertheless, for the more perspicuity in that point, ^dged it expedient, to
seek also thereupon the judgment of the Bishop R^nianus; who being fled out of
Affricke for the persecution of the Vandals, as has been said, hid himself
under amonasticall life, in a certain little I land near unto Sicily. From
whom having likewise received the same answer without seeking any further, he
determined by all means to return back again; yet so as he failed not by
the way, to repair, of mere devotion, to the City of Rome. Where after he
had liumbly visited those holy places; it chanced besides, beyond expectation,
that he was present there, at a spectacle of the greatest pomp and
magnificence of that Court; there ariuing at the same time. Theodoricke King of
the Gathes, where in a place called the Golden Palm, ^e made a speech to the
whole Nobility, distinguished according to the degrees, and the honor of each
one: and where like wise were heard the acclamations and applauses* which the
people universally gave.

Through which sight notwithstanding S. Fulgentius being nothing caught with
those transitory things, but lifting rather up the mind and affect to the
celestial glory, said to his Friends: How ^e (...) you, must the heavenly
Jerusalem needs be, since Rome so glitters here beneath? And if here in this
world, so great a pomp and splendor be affoarded to the friends of vanity;
what glory ^ow you, and triumph, is due in the other to such as contemplate the
truth? And after he had spoken many things to this purpose, with the profit and
consolation of the hearers; taking his journey again, with diligence, he
passed into Sardinia, and from thence into Afric* where he was received with
extreme joy, not only of the Monks, but even of thelay men also, and strangers
there; among which, a wealthy gentleman, noting with how much petill and
incommodity, the servants of God there inhabited in those confines; being moved
of piety, offered them a good and secure sci^uation in the Province of Bizacco.
Which proffer Fulgentius accepting, with great thanks, here founded a new
house, with a notable increase of Monks, and extraordinary help of souls in
those countries.

S. Fulgentius to shun the title of Abbot, hides himself in vain: and (...)
afterward a Bishopric, is made Bishop of Ruspa. Chap. 5.
NOtwithstanding the great pleasure and contentment, which S. Fulgentius took
on the one side, for the great fruit of soul^ which was made, yet on the other
he felt exceeding sorrow, in p^ceiuing himself by such occupations much
hindered from his union with God, and sweet contemplation of invisible things.
Besides the which, the title of Abbot and charge of commanding others, was of
small contentment to him, while he called to mind that Christ our Lord
himself, had said, that he came to serve, and not to be served, and to
perform not his proper will, but that of the eternal Father. With such kind
of thoughts as these, being newly pushed on to abase, and hide himself by all
means; after a long consideration, atlast he took the resolution, which we
will show you now.

There washes the banckes of Vinci, and Bennese, an arm of the Sea, full of
shelfs and rocks. In the one of which, being so dry (...) day by day, they
were feign to procure fresh water to be brought them with little boats, was
found to be a Convent of Monks, who under the care of two Reverend Prelates
there, perseuered in extreme penance, and poverty. To this Monastery now the
blessed Fulgentius being retired, he began to relish again the desired fruits
of a private life, and of holy humility, mortifying through obedience all
proper will, in taming continually the flesh with fastings, prayers, and
vigils, and diuing at pleasure in to the profound mysteryes of the Eternity:
and yet interupting withal, at times, his mental exercises, in copying forth,
with his own hand, ^ome good book or other, which he could do very
excellently well; or else in weauing, for sundry uses, the leaves of Palms,
wherein likewise he had been very dexterous heertofore; so as it seemed to him
h^ was now in that state he wished for so much: but yet was it not affoarded
him, to remain therein, as long as he would.

Because that Felix his Colleague, and the other his Monks, having notice
thereof, first of all, used all the means possible they could themselves, to
have him again: but while their prayers and persuasions, were not of force
thereunto, they finally interposed the authority of the Venerable Faustus the
Bishop, by whom S. Fulgentius was constrained at last, to return back
again; and (...) the end, he might be engaged to remain there with a new
obli^ation, he was forthwith ordained both Priest and Abbot: with which chains
being now tied, he began to set his heart at rest, and (...) attend with all
study and care, to that which God had commen^ed unto him: whereupon in short
time was spread so good an o^our, as the Abbot: Fulgentius, in all that
territory was held to be (...) common Father and Pastor of all, with a
universal desire to ^hoose him, and no other for Bishop, when time should
serve: of which conceit S. Fulgentius was aware, but in regard that as then,
^y Edicts of King Trasamond, the ordinations of Bishops were pro^ibited, he was
acquit of all doubt thereof, esteeming it in vain to ^y the dignities, which
could neither be given, or taken.

But after that, the holy College of Bishops yet remaining, ^rough zeal of
the divine glory, and the common good, with public Decree had freely defined,
that notwithstanding the Kings ^rohibition, ordination of Bishops should be
made in every Dio^esse, and heerupon that holy decree was begun to be executed
^n all sides: and the people, the while striving to appear no less ^ious and
diligent then others, here it was, that the blessed Ful^entius, went about to
prevent their designs, and to hide himself in such wise, as there was no
possible means to find him out. ^o as the inhabitants were feign to resolve to
expect till such time, ^s he might appear in sight; but fearing in the mean
while, some ^ew inhibition should proceed from Court, they were enforced
against their wills to make one of their Clerks, a Bishop: and so in (...) very
short space, were almost all the Churches furnished with Pastors, and that
with so great dislike of the King, as he took order to banish the Bishops, and
caused the Archbishop S. Victor himself to be cast into prison at Carthage, to
the great lamentation, and disturbance of the Catholic part.

The which as soon as S. Fulgentius understood, as thinking himself to be now
out of all danger of any such honor, he stayed not (...) whit from returning
again to the custody of his little flock. But it pleased the divine
providence, that the humble Servant of God should be deceived of this purpose.
Forasmuch indeed, as among those people which as yet now were destitute of a
Bishop, was that of Ruspa, a famous City and very full of rich and noble
inhabitants. Which delay of theirs, had sprung from the ambition of a certain
Deacon there, one Felix by name, who the more (...) he pretended to the Chair,
was the more maynely resi^ by good men: and though himself, through favor of
his kindred and friends, had a faction sufficient to hinder others from the
dignity, yet not enough it seemed to procure it to himself.

Among those discords, and civil broyls, it was sudainely understood, that S.
Fulgentius, who could never be discovered before, at the time of the creation
past, did now appear at last. In the mean while, the Archbishop, happening
to pass by Ruspa, in his conduction to Carthage, the Gentleman of the City,
with some Catholic Bishops there, had access unto him, and easily obtained
full license, to create S. Fulgentius the Pastor of Ruspa. Heereupo^ many
Citizens with great have presented themselves to the Serua^ of God, who
remained in his Cell infirm of his eyes, and so ^king him up as it were, on
their shoulders, with main force they (...) him into their country, and then
consecrating him with d^e (...), placed him in the Pontifical seat. But in
conducting hi^ thither, there happened a notable thing which follows.

A Deacon lays an ambush to assail S. Fulgentius, but missed of his purpose*
He is confined afterward with other Prelates into the land of Sardini^ Chap. 6.
THE foresaid Deacon, having taken up the way with a strong guard, to hinder
the passage of S. Fulgentius, his company (...) while through the secret
instinct of heaven, took another way^ so was the adversary illuded, and the
new Bishop, with common iubiley, and with solemn preparation, having
publicly said Man communicated the faithful with his own hands; and then
after (...) vanquish evil, according to Christian perfection, endeavored
(...) honor his enemy Felix, in making him Priest: the which dignity in those
days, was esteemed according to the merit and greatness of the degree. But
howbeit S. Fulgentius, so benignly remitted the offense; yet so passed not the
malice without due punishment: since Felix dyed within a year, and the
public Procuratour of Ruspa, who had been his principal Fautour, being so
pot^nt as he was, came sudenly to loose his riches, and to fall into great
streights, and necessityes. Whence the others, were brought to dread the diui^
judgments, and for ever after to have the blessed Fulgentius in gr^ater
veneration.

Whose vocation, as it ^ad been wholly sincere and celestial, ^t affoarded a
large (...) ^o the holy man, to manifest himself to (...) alike invincible in
prosperity, and adversity: which he was to ^efull, while in such a mutation of
estate, with so moderate a de^rum of his personage, he always retained, not
only the same ^eekenes and affability, but even likewise the monastical habit,
and nothing as before: nor so much as in his diet he made any alterati^n at
all, save only for age he was constrained to use the seasoning ^oyle, and when
he fell ^ick, to mingle his water with a little ^ine, so as qualifying only the
rawnes thereof, he felt no whit of ^e sent, or savor of that precious liquour.
In the night, rising al^ayes before others, he endeavored to restore unto
study and ^ayer, those hours, which the occupations of the day, for the
^ublique necessity; had wrested from him. He was never seen to ^habit in any
place, without the company of his Monks. But ra^er the first favor, which he
demanded of the Citizens of Ruspa, ^as, the commodity of building there, a
convenient Monastery for (...) rule. In which many striving to have the merit
thereof, it plea^d him to ^ke use of the charity of one Posthumianus, a most
principal Gentleman of virtue, and of blood, from whom having a ^yre
situation affoarded him some what near to the Church, with (...) pleasant
grove of Pynes, which served likewise very fit for the (...), he conuayed the
Abbot Felix thither with almost all his congregation, leaving only some few
Monks in the other, under the ^are of one Vitalis; yet in such sort he did it,
as both the Conuents ^id live with the same discipline, and communicated
together, not ^s guests and strangers, but as Brothers and members of the same
^ody. And the blessed S. Fulgentius, howbeyt most seriously busyed ^n his
Diocese, ^ayled not the while to have still a paternall care and ^ouidence of
the one and other.

In the mean while the King of the Vandals, having already ^onfined the
Catholic Bishops to Sar^ia, ordained likewise that S. Fulgentius should be
carried thither. Which succeeded to the great comfort of those inn^ent
Prelates, since they reaped not only (...) notable help from the learning, and
conversation of the holy man, (...) likewise in the public acts of that
sacred College, and in the ^rticular occurences of their Churches, they did
greatly avail themselves, of the succor and charity of S. Fulgentius, as
being very eloquent in tongue and pen: so as all the letters they had to send,
for matters of importance, were dictated by him, and if any were (...) be
reprehended, or admonished, or else to be reconciled unto (...) Church, the
charge thereof, was most commonly recommended (...) him.

And for as much, as according to custom, S. Fulgentius had d^parted from
Affricke exceeding poor, and without provision, and accompanied only with a
few Monks, he persuaded two of the number of those Bishops, to wit, Illustris
and Felix, with their (...) mestiques to lead with him, in the City of Calari,
a religious and common life: so as they being assembled together, and swee^
lincked with the band of charity, both the Clerks and the Mon^ had the same
table, and the self same prayers, lessons, and spiritual exhortations. Whereby
not only, those of the Convent, but (...) also, the others of the City were
greatly assisted. There was (...) person distressed and afflicted, who in that
holy place, found not ^fuge, none desirous of the word of God, who there might
not freely hear the same; to the doubts of Scripture, and Cases of conscien^
continually answer and resolution was given; Peace and conc^ put between
playntifes, and enemies; Alms dealt to the needy (...) necessitous. And
particularly besides, S. Fulgentius would be ever ^ding them, not only by
absoluing them of their sins, but also (...) lowing the Counsayles of Christ,
in not reguarding therein, the (...) or much substance they had to leave, but
the affect they showed (...) voluntary and full renunciation.

King Trasamond seeks to entrappe S. Fulgentius with curious questi^ and the
Arrian Ministers do exasperate him against him. Chap. 7.
AT the same time, King Trasamond had found out another more subtle way to
subvert the faithful in Affricke, in pretending openly that he sought nothing
else, but truth in all things, and sometimes proposing sundry demands and
questions to simple Catholics: and howbeyt, now and then nevertheless, there
w^ted not men sufficient enough, to convince their heresies; yet would the King
seem to make but light account of them, still vaunting himself to have had
the upper hand in the disputes, and con^uersies of faith. Wherein, while he
labored now with this man, now with that, he was put in mind of the blessed
Fulgentius, as of a person of rare learning, and very able to solue all the
knots and difficultyes occurring in such matters. So as sending a Messenger
with diligence for him, he was conducted to Carthage: where in a poor lodging,
the first thing he attended to (and not without fruit) was to confirm the
Catholics, and to inform the Heretics of their blindness, in proving with
lively and pregnant reasons, that one only substance in persons distinct, was
truly to be adored in the most holy Trinity. There being afterward a writing
presented unto him, on the behalf of the King, full of ^allacyes, and cunning
quircks and demands; he, inserting there withal the words of the scripture it
self, answered from point to point, with so much acumen, perspicuity, and
breuity, as the King himself, though obstinate in his perfidiousnes, remained
astonished at the doctrine: and the people of Carthage, diuulging the said
answer, continued more and more, well affected to the Catholic faith.

After this, the King not contented with the former demands, proposed yet some
others a new, but without giving leave, or scope to S. Fulgentius, to answer
with commodity, that he might not quote his words, as formerly he did, and give
the world to understand the impertinency of them; but constreyned him rather,
having read the paper, to help himself, what he might, with his memory, and to
answer out of hand without more ado. The which condition, seeming, as in
truth it was, full of injustice, the holy man for a while, differred to make
his reply: but the King imperiously pressing him to it, and attributing the
caution to diffidence, least the Arrian Ministers might likewise seem to do
the same, and diuulge with their accustomed vanity, they had stopped his mouth;
Fulgentius disposes himself to answer unto it the best he could, reducing to
his mind, what was but once permitted him to read, and in three little
admirable Treatises of the Incarnation of our Lord (for the question of the
King, was of that subject) he apparently showed, how the same Son of God,
equal in all and throughout, to the eternal Father, in clothing himself with
our mortality, took truly and really a reasonable soul.

With which wisdom and subtility of his, King Trasamond being much
astonished, durst question him no more; howbeyt a false Bishop of his, called
Pin^, rather through intemperance of tongue, then sufficiency of learning,
would needs be replying, I know ^ot what thereunto, giving here with occasion
to S. Fulgentius, to frame another work thereupon, to convince anew the
temerity* and ignorance of the enemies of Christ. There was likewise moved
(...) to him, a certain controversy, about the holy Ghost, by a Priest called
Abrazilla, which further gave a fit occasion to S. Fulgentius, to let it
appear, with many and clear demonstrations, how the Holy Ghost, with the
Father, and the Son, ought simply to be confessed one God. Which things, by
how much they brought more honor and esteem to the servant of God, so much
the more, the Ministers of the Devil, conspired in one, to advise the King,
not to let the matter proceed any further, protesting withal the harboring of
such an adversary in Carthage, would be the ruin of the Arrian religion, and
that if he remedyed not the fame in time, he would come shortly to have so many
Followers, as that with all the forces of the kingdom, they could hardly be
resisted.

The King being terrifyed with these, and such like suggestio^s, though in a
manner against his will, commanded, without more delay, that S. Fulgentius
should return to his former confines, and for avoiding of all popular tumult,
he should be embarked in the night. Whereto he obediently yielded for his
part; but the divine Goodness, being not willing, with such a departure, the
faithful should seem to be deprived of the sight and comfort of such a
Father* deteyned the ship so long, with contrary winds, in the Haven, as well
nigh all the City had space to salute him, and to receive the most holy
Sacrament at his hands: When behold a fair gale of wind now coming about, and
a certain religious man, one Ginliatus by name, among others bewayling his
departure, the holy Bishop being moved to compassion upon him, and full of a
prophetical spirit, said clearly to him: Trouble not your self my Son, for
soon shall this whole persecution cease, and we shall return to you again:
but I pray thee, keep this secret, for I could not choose but discover it to
thee, being moved so with tenderness, and Charity toward thee. And this S.
Fulgentius added, for the great care he had to conceal his gifts, and to
eschew all human glory, contenting himself the while with the testimony of a
good conscience, and with the inward grace affoarded him; so as likely he did
not, nor ever would work Miracles: and if now, and then perhaps he did any, he
would still rather attribute the same, to the faith of another, then his own
virtue.

But for the most part, whenever he was sought unto, to pray to our Lord for
the sick, and affl^cted; he would frame his prayers, with these words, or the
like: Thou know, O Lord, what is fit for the health of our souls, while
thou succourest our corporal necessities, in such sort, as they hinder not the
spiritual profit. He was wont to say, that the Gift of miracles served not to
make a man more just, but to cause him rather to be renowned in the world: A
thing truly, which auayles, but little to eternal beatitude, where virtuous and
hood men, howbeit obscure and unknown, are not hindered awhit from getting into
Heaven. Though if we speak of supernatural effects, those works, which
others perform in curing of bodies, seem unto me not to be so admirable, as
those, which he wrought, in curing of Souls, in converting with his fair
exhortations, and good example, so many Heretics to the Church, and so man
sinners unto penance.

S. Fulgentius builds him a new Convent in Calari. The persecution cease.
Prelates are recalled from banishment. Chap. 8.
With these, and other the like exercises, which accompanied S. Fulgentius
still in each time and place, being now brought back to the Island of Sardinia;
he was again no small consolation, to the afflicted Bishops. And having led
with him from Affricke, a good number of Monks, with the leave of Brumas^us
Bishop of Calari, he built him there a new Convent without the City near to
the Church of S. Saturninus, attending with all care and solicitude to conseue
religious discipline most pure; having principally an eye, that none of the
Monks (who were about some 50. in number) should seem to have any thing
proper. And for to take away all occasion thereof, he would himself distribute
with great discretion, the necessary things appertayning to them, according to
the forces and infirmity of each one. True it is, that such, as enjoyed any
particular thing at his hands, he would require to be notable in humility:
protesting unto them, that in Congregations, whosoever receives of the public
substance, more then others, becoms a debtour to each one of them, to whom the
goods do belong; and how he cannot satisfy the debt, as justice requires,
without showing himself very obedient, lowly, meek, and tractable to all. By
these ways, the Saint would seem to remedy the scandals from such
inequalityes.

And as he was exceeding sollicitous in preventing the suites, requests, and
importunityes of the Monks, in giving them before hand what reason or
necessity required: so toward the importunate, and not resigned, he would show
himself to be very severe, in denying them sometimes, even that which they had
otherwise deserved; affirming, that they should otherwise incur the
displeasure of the Highest, if they should desire things superfluous; and that
it plainly denoted a weak spirit, and of little virtue. Forasmuch as such as
they, through a former renunciation now seeing themselu^ to be shut of all
manner of trafficque, and gain of the world, with such kind of demands, do
seem to supply the use of trading. He added moreover, that such only are
worthy of the name of religious, who mortifying quite their proper wills, are
ready to will, and not to will that only, which is insinuated to them by the
Superior. Nor made he any reckoning of those handy works, not well conjoined
with interior acts: as wishing, that the spirit of devotion* should be the
season of each operation. Besides, he would show himself to be sweet and affable
to all, without any arrogance or imperiousnes a whit (though in his time, he
knew also to use due gravity;) and the subject how simple and ignorant he were,
had full freedom to make any request unto him, and that as often as he would;
and the good Father would likewise hear him with all patience, or without
showing himself weary, with reasons and examples, until such time as the
party himself had freely confessed, he was thoroughly satisfied and contented.

In this time of banishment, he wrote to those of Carthage, an Epistle of high
Counsails, and Aduertisements, discovering among other things, with great
cleerenes, the deceipts, and flatteryes wherewith miserable souls are conducted
to Hell. And at the instance of one Monimus, a religious person, he composed
two books, Of theremission of sins, and instructed him besides, in the
matter of Predesti^tion, and of the differences of Grace. Moreover, he sent
often lette^ of edification into diverse places of Sardinia, and Afric, and
likewise to Rome, especially to the principal Senators there, unto Ladies,
and Widows of good name. To Proba, the Virgin of Christ, he wrote two little
books of Fasting, and Prayer. Furthermore with seaues books, he partly
interpreted the doctrine of Faustus, a French Bishop in the best sense, and
partly also openly con^uted some opinions of the same man, inclining to the
Arrian sect. Which work of his, well appears, how grateful it was unto God,
since scarcely had he ^nished the same, but the whole persecution ceased, by
the death King Trasamond, and the succession of Hilderick, a person of
merueilous goodness, by whom the Catholic Religion was sudenly ^tored, and the
Bishops recalled from banishment, according to ^e prophesy of the blessed S.
Fulgentius.

That glorious troop then of Confessors returned back again (...) Afric to
the great consolation of the people there, being desolate ^d disconsolate so
long, and was met with, and received, even at ^e very sea side, by an infinite
multitude of people, most especially for the love of S. Fulgentius; at whose
appearing in fight, were ^finite cries and shouts lifted up to heaven, while
every one made ^ast to behold and salute him, and to receive his benediction,
and ^uen to touch at least, but the hemne of his garments. And so great was the
concourse and press of people, in conducting him with the others, to the
Church of S. Agileus, that some Deuotes of his were ^ayne to make a ring, or
circle about him, for to pass without peril.

S. Fulgentius at his arrival puts himself into a Monastery again: and after
reconciles himself to Bishop Quod-vult-deus. And so makes ablessed End. Chap.
19.
THere happened likewise another notable thing in the same procession, which
was, that the heavens being darkened on a suddayne, and a great shower of rain
pouring down, there was yet not a Man to be seen, that left the company, to
retire himself to some shelter: but many rather, as in imitation of Christ our
Lord in Jerusalem, in taking off their proper ^oakes, made very readyly a
Pent-house thereof, for to shelter the Blessed E^lgentius. Who were able to
explicate the welcomes, with the honors, and festiui^yes, which were made him,
fir^ in the City of Carthage, and after in all the countries, and lands where
he happened to pass through in returning to his Diocese? With all which
things notwithstanding, that noble Follower of Christ, was not only not proud
awhit, but eue^ as soon as he arrived at his Church, put himself a new into
his Monastery, very freely deposing all superiority of the Convent; in so much
as the public government of the Church, depending wholly on him, yet in the
domestical and daily discipline, he would humbly depend on the Abbot Felix.

In the rule of the Clergy moreover, he had a singular care, to prohibit all
wanton and costly apparel, and to provide, that for secular busynesses, none
should be absent from home, or exempt (...) the Quire; for which cause he would
have all to inhabit close (...) the Church, and for the time they had to
spare, they should spend partly in cultiuating some little garden, with their
hands, partly (...) exercising themselves in singing of psalms, and
pronouncing the words very well. He ordained besides, that all the Clerks, and
all the widows, and likewise all the other Laymen, who had no (...)
impediment, should fast on the Wednesdayes and frydayes throughout the year,
and that all should be present every day at the divine Offices. He would
chastize the unquiet, as need required, now with private and public
reprehensions, now with pennanc^, and scourges, to the end, that with the
penalty of one, all the other might take example. Through which proceeding, and
perpet^all innocence of his manners, he was now in such veneration, as not only
his subjects, but even very strangers also that were well disposed, would remit
their contentions and strifes, though never so spleenfull and inueterated, to
the arbitrament and decision of the Saint: and among others, the people of
Massimiana who by no means would accept the Bishop that was ordained them,
were finally with the authority and admonishments of S. Fulgentius, well
pacifyed with him, putting an end to that so contumacious, and se^dalous a
contention between them.

Notwithstanding all this, the Saint wanted not his contradictours, and
emulous, as is wont to happen; whom he striued to overcome which patience, and
submission. Among others, a certain Bishop by name Quod-vule-deus seemed to
take it very grievously, to have S. Fulgentius preferred before him, in the
Council (...) Vinci. Whereof the Servant of God being aware, expected the
occasion of the Suffetan Council: And at the commencing thereof, sought and
obtained with an excellent example, there to have the lower place of the
aforesaid Bishop; endeavoring with such an act of humility to reconcile unto
him, and to gain that soul, though without any fault of his so disgusted and
alienated from him. Now here what will they say, who are every foot striving
for precedence? Let them learn here of the blessed Fulgentius, to execute the
precepts of Christ, and to seek always the lowest place.

In Sermons moreover (whereof he made, and wrote many) he was wont to have
reguard not to the applause a whit, but rather to the motion and compunction of
the people. Wheerin he had so great a grace, as that (among other ^ymes)
preaching once two ^yes together one after the other, at the dedication of the
Church Burni, even Boniface himself Bishop of Carthage being there present,
^uld by no means hold from weeping outright, in giving God ^anks, for that of
his infinite mercy, there were always found very ^cellent Doctors in the
Catholic Church. After his return from ^nishment, besides the Sermons and
Books already written, he ^rote a new ten others, against the lies and
falshods of Fabianus; and ^ree of Predestination, and Grace. Amidst such manner
of exercises as ^ese, S. Fulgentius approaching to the end of his life, as
presaging what was shortly to follow, with a few Brothers for a year before
^tyred himself a fresh, to do penance, and bewail himself, in ^ittle rock
of the Island of Cercinna, until such time, as through the ^ayers and
lamentations of such, as he had left behind him, he was ^nstreyned to return
to his Diocese again, and to resume the ^ouerment.

But long it was not, ere he fell into a grievous infirmity, which for 70.
days afflicted him sorely, with most bitter pains; wherein looking up to
heaven, he was wont to utter no other words, then these: Lord, do thou give me
now patience, and afterward in^ulgence. Finally feeling the hour of his
passage to approach, and ^alling all the Clerks and Monks unto him, he humbly
besought ^ardon of them, if perhaps he had disgusted any, praying withal ^ur
Lord God, to provide them a good Pastor. After this he dispo^ed of the monyes,
which as yet were left him, as a most faithful Steward, as he had always
been of the Ecclesiastical rents: and ^ecounting by name, all the widows,
Orphans, Pilgrims, and other ^f the poor, as well of the Lay, as Clerks, one
by one, he orday^ed what he had to be given by poul, without leaving so much a^
(...) farthing vnbequeathed.

Hereupon, turning himself to prayer, and tenderly blessing ^s many as entered
unto him, he remained in his senses and iudg^ent unto the last breath, which he
rendered up to our Lord, toward the Evening, in the year of our Lord 461. on
the first day of January, in the 65. year of his age, which was the 25. of his
Bishoprike. In the mean space, while the province of Bizac^na, was ^acked, and
harrowed with fires and assaults of Moors, the country and City of Ruspa
(through the merits doubtless of the holy Pastor) ^ad always enjoyed a secure
and quiet peace. His body was watched all the night, with psalms, and
spiritual Canticles. Th^n (...) morning being come, with an infinite concourse
of people, (...) carried, and laid by the hands of Priests, in the Church which
(...) called Secunda: where himself had devoutly placed the ve^ Relics of
the Apostles; and where for the reverence of the pla^ till that time, no man
had been buried.

FINIS.
S. THEODOSIUS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Dear Saint: The ancient Ages did esteem
Thy Countrymen The Cappadocians were esteemed Pigmyes, as the Chaldean (...)
Ezech. 27. interpre teth the Hebrew word.
as Pigmyes; so they seem
Compard to others: yet thy Towering mind
Did ouerlooke the world, which thou did find
A painted Harlot, whose discolored face
Did ma^ke in faygned beauty, borrowed grace.
Her thou discovering with a piercing eye,
Such base indearments quickly did descrye,
And taughtst to others: thousa^ds did thou free
When her impostures blazond were by thee.
Both friend and foe one action does auerre,
Thee to the world no friend, no foe to her.
Might time, but like the billows of the maine
Reduce it self into its spring again;
O^ Eagle-like could once it self renew,
That we its ancient offspring might reuievv;
We should confess, past Ages hardly saw
One from the world, the world more to withdraw.
THE LIFE OF S. THEODOSIUS ABBOT.
The Parents, Country; and Education of S. Theodosi^: His Vocation, and how he
met with Stelites. With his a^ (...) afterward at Jerusalem. Chap. I.
THE great Father and Master of Monks S. ^dosius, was one of the number of
those, who not receiving from their Native Country, either splendor or
renown, have yet through (...) proper actions, and eminent virtues, enobled
the same. The blessed Ma^n, was borne in M^assus of Cappadocia, a place
obscure, and unknown before, but after by so happy a pla^t, deservedly famous
and illustrious. His Parents were (...) and ^gia, both Christians, and
according to the quality of the land there, very honorable, and wealthy. By
these, the Child being nurtured with great care, both in the fear of God, and
in some knowledge of good literature; as soon as he arrived to years of
discretion, (as he was among other his gifts, of a prompt and ready wit, and of
a clear voice, and distinct pro^ciation) he was (...) to recite the ^ine
scriptures to the people assembled in the Temple, on determinate days. In
which exercise, while many examples, and precepts of sanc^y, were presented
(...) him; and while he notes in the old Testa^nt, (...) obedien^ of Abraham,
in going forth of his Country; and ^ing h^ only begotten son; and in the
sacred Gospel considers the rewards proposed to such as leave their Pare^ets,
or goods for the love of God; ^his doctrine anon ^unck very deep into the heart
of the pr^dent youth: so as now generously contemning the delights of that age,
and rejecting with a stern brow, the (...) flatteryes of the Sens^, he
determined to walk by the narrow, and unbeaten way, unto the glorious confines
of the true Beatitude.

To which effect, knowing what need there was of the celestial grace, to
obtain it more easily, and in greater abundance; the first thing he did, was,
that recommending himself to God, he applied his thoughts, unto the pilgrimage
(...) Palestine, to see and ador^ the Land, so dyed with the blood, and printed
with the steps of our Savior; and through the lively memory of his cruel
torments, to gather from thence abundant fruit of spirit, and perseverance.
Such in sum, was the Vocation of S. Thedosius, while the Council of Calcedon
was then assembling. And forasmuch, as at that time, the same of Simeon
Stelites the Greater, was very illustrious, who ^eare unto Antioch; standing
day and night on the top of a pilla^, wholly exposed to the injury of the
elements, to the great admiration of the world, performed very sha^pe penance;
it seemed good to the devout Pilgrim to go that way, to take thereby the
benediction and spiritual precepts of so worthy, and admirable a personage.
T^yling the toward the same: Country, he no sooner approached to that strange
habitation, but that before he opened his mouth, he heard himself with a loud
voice to be called upon, and saluted by the holy old man, by his proper name;
who having ^otice from Heaven of the quality and intention of this new.
Tra^aylour, the began to cry out a^ the first sight of him: Thou art welcome,
Thou man of God, O Theodosius. At which very sound, the fresh Disciple of the
eternal Wisdom, being stooke with (...), as it were, and prostrating
himself on the ground, most humbly saluted him again, and then recollecting
himself from the fear he was in, and with a set ladder getting up the Pillar;
he was not only most dearly embraced by Simeon but also fully certifyed of all
his foture events and adventures, of the numerous ra^nall stock, which in
process of time, he was to assemble together, and to seed, and of the great
multitude of souls, which he through (...) help, was in time to take forth of
the jaws of the internal (...); and as much also in sum, as in the whole
course of his present (...), through divine disposition, were like to betyde
him.

To this prophesy were adjoined counsayles, and exhortation^ full of wisdom
and truth; where with S. Theodosius being much comforted, very cheerfully
proceeded in his way, and safely (...) at Jerusalem, while the Blessed
Inuenall did govern that Me^ Here having visited with great consolation those
most holy place, he began to think with himself, what manner of life, he
might choose to discharge himself of all terrene affects, and to be united
more easily with the eternal goodness. A consultation by how much more
necessary, so much the more dubious and perplexed it was unto him, as appears
in the Chapter following.

The conflict S. Theodosius had in himself about his vocation; with his
resolution thereupon. And how searing Prelacy, he flies into a Cave. Chap. 2.
THeodosius hereupon, on the one side, felt himself to be (...) with a
vehement desire unto solitude; while to him it (...) that therein, without al
impediment, he might give himself wholly to Prayer; and on the other he was not
ignorant, how dangero^ it was, with a mind not fully purged, to deprive ones
self of all human direction, and succor: since that in the desert, the
di^nate passions, like fire raked up in the ashes, or as wild beasts in the
woods, do lurk, and awayt occasion, to wreake their native cruelty: Whereas
amidst human Society, they being discovered through daily encounters, and
thrust out of their dens, are more ea^ly destroyed; insomuch, as the Soul
victorious of it self, and dissolved from the bands of corrupt nature, mounts
up very lightly (...) high thoughts, and to the free contemplation of
celestial things. The^ and other such like reasons, on the one and other side,
this new Philosopher puts into the balance, and having poysed them ma^rely, in
the divine sight, at last takes himself to the securer side, with resolution
to become, not a Doctor before a Scholar, and (...) enter on the stage,
before he had learned the art of fencing. So as being (...), that in David's
Tower (a place so called in the parts) was an old soldier of Christliuing, by
name Longinus, growing into friendship with him, he easily obtained to be
admitted ^to his house, to be guided and instructed by him, in all, and
^oughout. Whereunto he disposed himself, with so great submis^n of the
understanding, and with so much seruour of the will, as ^at through means of
the daily exercise of virtues, and diligent ^struction of the Master, with the
noble strife of his fellow-pupils, (...) became very sudenly perfect in the
rules of profitably taming the ^esh, of knowing and readily discerning of
spirits, of restrayning with a hard hand the motions of pride; and finally to
walk in the ^resence of God, with perpetual recollection of the bodily
senses, and of the powers of the soul.

S. Theodosius in this wise, having made, in monastical profession, (...)
notable a conquest of himself, as in the judgment of all, he ^ight well be a
Guide, and Master to others; notwithstanding see^ed to himself only, to be
still, but as it were, in the beginning. He had perseuered yet more years in
the same school, if an impe^iment had not happened, which here we shall
speak of. A cer^ine pious, and honorable Matron, by name Iulia, having at her
^ost built a magnificent Temple, to the honor of the Queen of Angels, not
far off from the habitatio^ of Longinus, obtained with great ^stance of him,
that he would appoint Theodosius by name, to the ^ustody of that sacred place,
while things were preparing about the ^ll exercise of Religion, with the choice
of Quiristers, and Clerks, and of all things else belonging to the splendor of
divine service ther^. Theodosius was but unwillingly drawn from his dear
conuer^tion, and going thereupon to the said Church, remained there until such
time, as he thought he might well stay there without ^rill; but in process of
time, being aware how business went, a^out preferring him to the formal
Rectorship of that College, he ^ayed not till the matter might be concluded,
when he could not ^e able to make resistance; but in imitation of the Savior
of the World, who in the like occasion, prevented before hand the inclination
of the people, he fled away secretly unto the top of a mou^^ayne, and got
himself into a great cave, where by ancient Tradition, it is held the three
Magi had lodged, when as they, having ^dored the King of Heaven, and illuded
that King of the Earth, they returned from Judea, into their country by stealth.

Here now, S. Theodosius being quite rid of all disturbance, began that manner
of life, which a good while since he had designed; where Prayer, and Psalms,
with order and devotion seemed (...) hold their turns; the vigils often endured
throughout the (...) night, and the eyes were become aperpetuall fountain of
(...) the habit, which was a gross, and course Cassocke, his food (...) very
well, as being the roots of herbs, windfall acorns, the (...) of palms,
some pulse; or when these failed, the shells of (...) soaked in water. In this
manner, the servant of God, spent (...) days, with so much the more
consolation, as he was further (...) ued from al testimony of men, that might
put him into vain glory and consequently diminish a good part of the merit.
With this (...) rinesse, concealed he himself to his power. But the divine
clem^ enclining always to the universal good, could not brook so great a
light, should be shut up, and enclosed so in that horrid rock. Where as soon as
some ray had appeared in those countries thereabo^ there wanted not Lovers of
the chiefest good, and contemners of the world to show themselves; who to be
guided securely to the (...) proposed, with all affection, craved to be
admitted, and to (...) the instruction of S. Theodosius. To whom, though he to
mainta^ himself in his secret intention, would willingly have given a constant
repulse; yet remembering himself, of the prophesy of (...) Stelites, and
weighing the great service, which is done to the highest wisdom, in
cooperating with it, to the salvation of souls; after (...) had excused
himself, to those suitors some while, at last he per^ted himself to be
vanquished, and won, to accept them for his discipline, with reteyning always
in himself the interior humility (...) before, and a vigilant care of
himself.

Two notable signs of the Providence of God, toward his Servants in their
(...) ter necessities, through the prayers and merits of Saint Theodosius,
Chap. 4.
IT followed hence, that S. Theodosius, showing himself such a ^uely mirror
of all laudable actions, increased day by day the coceipt was had of the
sanctity of the Superior, being a thing of inestimable moment for the
quietness, cheerfullnes, and incitement of the subjects. And God cherished this
opinion of others with ^uaylous signs now and then. Among which was one, that
the Feast of Easter being come, and the Monks having a desire to keep that day
sacred, and also very festival, with some recreation of the body and spirit;
there was in that Hermitage, no ^yle or bread, or any manner of food, to be
had, for the purpose of such a Solemnity. Whereupon being sad and disconsolate,
they stood, as it were, ^eflecting thereon and exaggerating their great
misfortune. Theodosius heerwith, notes their countenances to be changed, and
understanding the occasion of their sadness, commands on the Saturday over
night, that an Altar should be set up, and some form of a Re^ectory be put in
order for the next day. Which thing, seeming very absurd to those, who knew the
want there was of all manner of ^ictuals: Do you make ready notwithstanding,
said Theodosius, what I bid to be done, and for the rest, take you no care. He
that flourished so many thousands of Israelites in the desert, and after
satisfied five thousand persons, with five loaves of bread, will surely
likewise have compassion of us, being now no less provident, nor ^whit less
potent, then he was.

The venerable Father, had fearce made an end to speak, when behold, two Mules
appeared, well laden with all those nourishments, which were fit for the
present solemnity, and monastical profession. Whereat they yiedling endless
thanks to the divine mercy and acknowledging the truth of the promises, and
efficacy of the prayers of the Saint, the sacrifice being finished the next
morning, and the provision disposed in order, they all very cheerfully
refreshed themselves, in either kinds. And after some time, that poor family,
falling into streights again, and even ready to murmur ^hereat, not so firm
and assured of the former succor, as dejected and oppressed with the present
necessity; S. Theodosius encouraged them the while, with saying among other
things: Who ever trusted in our Lord, and has been abandoned by him? Who has
ever faithfully depended on him, and has not been comforted? Let Jeremy the
Prophet answer for me: he has replenished (...) soul, that was a hungry. Let
Job, and David answer likewise: He prepares ^ood for the crows, and their
young ones. So as ^ence we may learn at last, how much the divine Providence,
excells any human ^ndustry, which even of set purpose many times, lets things
be brought to extremes, that the remedy may prove more grateful, and be held
more worthy of acknowledgement. And we plainly (...) the while, even in this
life also, how largely he required all those things, which for his sake, we
have left in the world.

In this manner, went S. Theodosius, comforting those saint minds; when it
pleased God, that a rich distributer of alms, (...) along those craggy
mountains, to relieve certain others in necessity, as soon as he approached
to the side of S. Theodosius his (...), perceived on a sudden, his beast first
of all to stand still, and the after to bend very violently that way; whereat
the rider merueyling much, who as yet had no notice of the retirement of S.
Theodo^, after he had a good while been spurring and kicking the beast onwards
in vain, at last resolves to let the reins go loose, and (...) see whither
the secret instinct would seem to lead him: and the beast thereupon went
directly to the unknown cave, where the good man perceiving with his own eyes,
the distresses of those religious there, did bless the divine Majesty for the
occasion affoarded him, to merit so, and redoubling the alms he intended to
have (...) unto others, he left those souls, though feeble otherwise, and
inexpert Nouices, so provided and contented withal, as they had and occasion,
to rely ever after on the heavenly protection, and ne^ more to make any doubt
thereof.

The number of S. Theodosius his disciples increases. He builds a (...)
Convent, according to the miraculous direction of God. Chap. 4
IN the mean time, with the ^ame of S. Theodosius increased the number of his
Disciples, and Conuictours; insomuch as now the first habitation not sufficing,
with all the cottages adjoining thereunto; it was needful for him, to apply
himself to a formal building, that were capable of an extraordinary
multitude; nor was it any difficult matter for him, to take such an enterprise
in hand, while the wealthy and devout persons of all those countries therabout,
so readily concurred thereunto. He stood yet a good while (...) suspense, about
the election of the seat thereof: in which consultation, having more then once
considered many places, both (...) and further off, he finally resolved to be
certifyed of the best, and more grateful to God, in the manner following*

He took then a Thurible in his hand, full of ^oles, and putting incense
thereon, but without any fire, went his ways through all the desert, devoutly
singing of prayers very apt for the purpose as these: O God, who by the means
of many, and stupendio^ proofs, perswadedst Moses, to take the government of
the Israel^ in hand, and with them likewise, with affects above nature,
pro^uredst him credit, who changedst the rod into a serpent, the sound ^to a
leprous hand* and in a moment restoredst the same from le^rous, as clean and
sound as ever; who conuertedst water into ^loud, and the blood again into
water. Thou who with shew^ng the fleece, madst Gedeon secure of the victory.
Thou who have ^ramed all things, and still conseruest the same. Thou who
decla^edst to Ezechias, with Sunne-dyall reuerst, the addition of his yea^es.
Thou who at the prayer of Elias, for the conversion of Idola^ours, did send
down fire from Heaven, which in a moment, ^onsumed both the victime, the moist
wood, and the water there^bout, together with the stones of the Altar
themselves. Thou I ^ay say, O Lord, who art now the same thou wast then; hear
^e also, thy poor Servant, and vouchsafe to intimate to me, where it pleases
thee, I should now erect a Temple to thy divine Majesty, and a dwelling for my
children. And I shall understand that plot, to like thee best, where thou shall
cause these coals to enkindle of themselves.

With these inuocations, went he circling about all those moun^aynes, no^ ever
left, till he arrived at Cu^illa, and the banks of the ^ake Assaltite. But
seeing the coals in the Thurible to be yet cold, and dead, laying the default
on his demerits, he returned against his will; when not far from the Cave, he
suddenly sees a smoke to ^ise up from the coals, through divine power, as it
were, enkind^ed of themselves. Wherewith, being fully satisfied of the divine
will, while the large contributions of the faithful failed him not; first of
all, he began to erect a Church, with diverse Chappells, and Quires,
distinguished in such sort, as without hindering one another, the sacred
Offices, might there be sung at the same time, in ^undry languages, by several
nations. Whence it was afterward, (...) thing of great consolation to hear
Psalms, and Hymmes sunge ^t once with order, and sweetness, by Palestines,
Bess^ans, Greeks, and ^rmenians.

The house of God being finished, he passed to that of Men, with such
distinction, and so much scope and amplenes, as that the first Cloister was for
the use of the Monks, with all the Offices requisi^e, and with a partition,
which is called in the Greek tongue, (...), for the commodity of such, as
being toyled out with ^abours, and worn with years, were not able, to wield
themsel^es, or keep them to the observance of the order. Next to the same, the
Ghestory, or rooms for secular strangers; yet divided into two parts, the one
for persons of quality, the other for the (...). Then followed the Hospital of
the poor, and sick of every (...) and in the last the lodgings of persons
possessed with spirits. Because that among other works of mercy, S. Theodosius
gave himself, with particular diligence most benignly to receive a number of
Her^ who without first purging their soul with due remedies, through false
appearance of good, and proud presumption of their own knowledge, hiding
themselves, some in this and some in that ca^; were thereby, through the just
judgment of God, most miserably abused and oppressed by the Devil. To these,
besides corporal su^stenance, he would also give wholesome aduises, and seek
to take away the false opinions from their mynds: and a good part of the time,
which they had free from torments, he would cause them to spend in prayers, and
psalms. He would enter moreover by day and night into the sickmens chambers;
and with particular tenderness, comfort the lame, the wounded, and leaprous,
feeding them with his own hands, washing the stinking and noisome ulcers now
of this, and then of that man, and lastly with frequent kisses, and amourous
arms, be deerly embracing them.

The great Hospitality of S. Theodosius in the time of a Dearth, and (...) God
concurred therwithall: with his great zeal for the Catholic Church* Chap. 5.
AT the same of so great charity of S. Theodosius, were a great (...) of
persons of all qualityes, assembled together at the said place, to all which,
with much patience, and with very good order, was both diet, and lodging
affoarded: and it would fall out now, and then, especially at some principal
Feasts of the Mot^ of God, that at diverse hours of the day, they were feign to
furnish (...) hundred tables. And there happening afterward an universal dea^
almost through all the provinces of the East, there came such a multitude to
that noble Monastery, as that the Officers, fearing some disorder, resolved to
keep them out of the Cloisters, and with exist measure to deal them victuals
by weight. The which, as soon ^t S. Theodosius once understood; confiding now
more then ever in the divine Goodness causing the gates to be set open, in the
sight of all most cheerfully admitted the press of people; and in virtue of
his firm faith, and enflamed prayers, the prou^on in creased of it self in
the Cellars and Pantryes, in such sort, as that all being satisfied at table,
there was plenty enough yet left for such as waited.

Among which occupations of theirs, by how much fuller of distractions, they
are of themselves, so much the more vigilantly watched the good Pastor for the
spiritual conservation, and the (...) piety of his Monks, endeavoring by all
means, that at certain hours, they might be recollected in necessary
meditation of virtues, and of the (...) acknowledgment of their own defects;
and to the end, the ordinary means unto purity of heart, might not turn into
ceremonies, and their frequent victoryes oc^asion security, (to which perils,
religious are commonly exposed) ^esides his own example, as we said, with
works, he would likewise excite the Family from time to time, with enflamed
words, (...) thus: I beseech you, would he say, my brothers, by that Lord who
^ath given himself for our sins, let us once apply our selves in earnest,
and truly indeed, to the care of our souls. Let us bitterly bewail our days
unprofitably spent, and endeavor not to loose those same which remain. Let us
not suffer our selves to be slou^full in sensuality; nor the occasions of this
present day escape out of our hands, through the foolish hopes of the morrow,
least death surprising us void of merits with the foolish virgins, we come to
^e excluded from the blessed nuptials, whence we shall afterward bewail, when
it will be too late to repent. Behold now is the ^cceptable time, behold the
day of salvation. This is the course of ^abours, that same shall be the joy of
rewards. This the sowing of tears, and that the fruit of consolation. For the
present, God is very favorable to such as convert themselves to him: then
shall ^e be a terrible Judge, and a strict examiner of each work, word, and
^hought of ours. We now do enjoy his Longanimity, then shall we experience his
Justice, when we come to arise again, some to e^ernall felicity, and others to
the qualityes, and deme^nours of each one. How long then shall it be, ere were
fully obey the counsayls of Christ, who with so especial a vocation inuites us
to the heavenly kingdom? Shall we not awake from the sleep of slouthfulnes?
Shall we not raise our selves from base^ thoughts, to Euangeli^all perfection?
And yet, forsooth, we profess to aspire to the cou^^ry of the blessed, and on
the other side, we (...) the means that ^ades us to it. And surely this is a
great vanity of ours, that flying the labors of the warfare, we should promise
to our selves (...) crowns of the victory.

With such like reasons, S. Theodosius awaked his subjects, and confirmed them,
as need required, not only with ancient and modern examples, but also with
diverse authorityes of the sacred w^ explayning the difficult places thereof,
with such clarity, and impressing them strongly with such an energy withal, as
the Audi^ remained therewith much illumined in the understanding, and enflamed
in the will. He was more over exceedingly versed in the a^cient Traditions, and
in the Orthodox, and sincere doctrine of the Fathers, and especially of the
Great Basil, whose writings, and principally those of monastical constitutions,
he held in great veneration* Nor was this great zeal of his, restrained a whit
within the boun^ of that house, or among the inhabitants of that Province only;
b^ nobly dilated it self unto the common benefit of the Catholic Church, and
to the conservation of the right faith, against the subtilityes, and lewd
machinations of perfidious people, ambitious, and friends of nouelty, as
appears in the chapter following.

The ancient Heresies arising, are maynly resisted by S. Theodosius; (...) that
cause he is banished by the Emperor: who dying shortly after, (...) Church
flourished again. Chap. 6.
THere arose again in those days, through the secret iudge^ of God, revived
by diverse Sectaries, worthily called (...) the pestiferous opinions of
Nestorius, Eutiches, Dioscoru^, and Seu^ already condemned by four General
Councels, the Nicen, (...) Constantinople, and Calcedon; and among the other
multitude, was (...) Emperor Anastasius very miserably seduced by them,
insomuch as (...) labored to amplify his Sect, by all means possible. But the
pr^cipall assault he used, was to gain the holyer Prelates to him, o^ to take
them away, by disquietting, and assayling now this, now that, by himself and
his Ministers; now with prayers, and the with persuasions, now with monyes and
titles, and then wi^ menaces, depressions, and banishments.

In this manner, having tempted, and prevailed with diverse, he finally resolved
to s^t upon S. Theodosius, as seeming to himself* that he should make a great
conquest, if he could but reduce an (...) of so great a ^ame, and reputation
unto his part. To this in^ by men for the purpose, he sent him letters, full of
feygned friendship, perverse counsayles, and deep malice, and for the greater
efficacy, under the show of piety, adjoined thereunto a rich present, of thirty
pounds of gold, for the holy man to bestow at his pleasure in works of mercy.
With this devise the Emperor thought to batter the fortress of S. Theodosius;
but he found himself to be much deceived of his presumption. For the Servant of
Christ indeed, accepted the gift, and faithfully shared it amongst the poor;
but for the particular of Religion, most freely answered the Emperor, and his
Messengers, that he would please not to enter into such practice with him,
since he was fully resolved to loose not one life only, but a hundred lives,
rather then once to move an inch from the doctrine of the universal Church,
and from the articles, and Decrees of the Sacred Counsels.

To this effect was the answer of the glorious Abbot: which made such
impression in the Emperor at first, as he being touched therewith, and
acknowledging the error, returned him fresh letters again, protesting those
motions and troubles, wherein the Christians were then embroyled, were not
caused, or occasioned by him, but through the pride, and unquiet nature of some
Priests, from whom particularly he should rather have expected all care, to
maintain the people of God in peace, and concord. Wherefore now the more
earnestly, he exhorted the Blessed Father, to continue still in his good
purposes, and to renforce, together with the other Monks, the usual prayers
for the quiet of the common wealth. Such demonstrations as these, for that time
Anastasius showed being of a better mind; but (as he was of a nature exceeding
unconstant and mutable) it was not long ere that suffering himself ^o be ^rned
again, and deceived through perfdious Couns^ilours, he entered into rage more
then ever. And besides the placing in diverse Cou^tryes of false ministers of
the Gospel; he sent withal, a great company of Soldiers, to hinder by
force and Preachings, Consults, and assemblies of the maintayners, and
favorers of the truth. Which command was immediately put into execution.

But S. Theodosius for all this, ceased not to prosecute his generous actions:
but rather with redoubled fervor having made choice of exemplar, learned, and
zealous laborers, began with them to ^it and make his progress through the
villages, astles, and Cittyes thereabout, and to present with fit antidotes,
and wholesome medecins, the hellish poison of heresy; in catechi^ing the (...)
reclayming the strayed, encouraging the wavering, confirming (...) stable: and
in sum, not (...) slowing any means, which (...) to the help of (...); and
to the glory of Christ, whereby (...) he came to promote things so far, as
that notwithstanding (...) frowns of (...) soldiers, and subtilityes of the
adversary, mounting the pulpit, with a most extraordinary concourse of people,
(...) publicly declared, all those to be excommunicated, who departed from
the authority, and constitution^ of the foresaid (...) nerall Councels. Which
as soon as Anastasius the E^perour hea^ (...) forgetting quite the veneration
he had showed before to the person (...) S. Theodosius, and together without
conscience, having wholly (...) all shame, without ^spect disgracefully (...)
stery, and condemned him, with opprobrious and ini^ (...), to perpetual
banishment. Which notwithstanding, through divine Goodness, continued not long.
For that the Emperor, within a (...) months, being with a heavenly mace
sommoned before that (...) bunall which cannot err, ^ad for his Successor the
famous (...) through whose valor and prudence ^he clouds of (...) dispe^d, the
furi^s (...) o^ ^cutions ceased, and (...) tranquillity returned to the (...) of
Christ again.

S. Theodosius being returned again to his Charge, cured a woman of (...)
Canker. And works other miracles besides. Chap. 7.
NOw S. Theodosi^s, with the i^y and ^ubiley of all the ^ay (...), being
remitted again into his former) ch^rge, be took himself with fresh courage
to his wonted exercises; the which (...) acceptable and grateful they were to
the divine Majesty, besi^ (...) aforesaid signs, may likewise appear by the
merueilous the that follow. The (...) of the holy Cross, was kept (...) there,
in a ^ayne Temple built by Constan^ for that purpose, i^ those countries. And
to this Solemnity went S. Theodosiu^ wi^ many of his Monks. Whereof a certain
woman having got some ^tice, that had been cruelly tormented a long while with
a ho^ible canker in one of her breasts, and who had proved diverse med^cins in
vain; resolved at last upon divine remedies, and (...) bring her self of the
generous resolution of that famous* (...) with like ^ayth and greatness of
courage, (...) entered into the Church while the Office was celebrated. And
being she^ the Man of ^od (whom she knew not by ^ace) with ^ealing paces, and
with noise, approached behind him, and dexterously applying the ^greiued part,
to the ^ood of the Saint, most certain i^ is at the first ^uch of the sacred
cloth, all pain on a sudden aba^doned the breast and left no scarre of the
ulcer.

This sudden, and so perfect a cur^, to the great glory of God, ^as proclaimed
through the East. Besides which, that other which ^cceeded in his return from
Bethle^, gave great matter of ac^nowledging, and praising the divine power in
the person of S. ^eodosius; when as he being lodged in the Convent of the Abbot
^artian, caused through this benediction, from one sole grain of ^orne, in a
few hours, so great a quantity to be multiplied, as that ^e granary being not
able to hold the same, in the sight of all men, ^e corn brake forth at the
door.

Elsewhere again, a child being fallen into a deep well, through ^he same
intercession, being held past all human succor, in the ^sence of many, to the
inestimable joy of the afflicted and (...) Mother, came forth again, very safe
and ^ound. Through (...) ^me of these, and other such like meruaylous things, a
certain (...) of the East, whose name was (...), being to pass^ with his
(...), against the Persians, first visiting the holy City of Jerusalem;
^payred also to the Monastery of S. Thedosius, by whom being ex^ted, with
lively reasons, not to place his hopes of the Victory, (...) the multitude, or
fo^ce of his souldio^s, but in the aid of him* who as well can work won^rs
with (...), as with infinite (...), he became so enflamed with the admonitions,
and manner of ^he ^lessed Man; as that to enter into battle, he esteemed he
could not ^ake use of armor of better proof, then of the Cilice that S.
Theo^s was wont to wear on his naked ski^. Wherewith, being armed, together
with the benediction of the said Father, going his ways, with his army,
toward the enemy, he came very sudden^y to handy blows, and that with so much
the greater confidence; ^s he had besides the foresaid coat of male, the
person of S. Theo^osius also ever in his eyes; who in the heat of the
battle, with ^ointing, and signs of the hand, went sh^wing him still, what
(...) to enforce, what advantages to take, where the ensigns should (...)
advanced, and where courageously he should spur his horse. By which apparition,
the deu^ Champion, being greatly encouraged on every side where he seemed but
to cast his eyes, as that (...) the Pagans to flight, and terror; it was not
long, (...) ^e returned backefull of joy and glory, to give S. Theodosius a
distinct account of all that days work, with immortal thanks.

Many other apparitions, are recompted of this divine Man, (...) heertofore of
S. Nicolas. By means whereof, here one at sea very happily escapes out of
cruel tempe^s; and here another in the land from savage beasts; and some from
this peril, and some from that: There are likewise told diverse predictions of
his* whence (...) appears, how eminent he was in the spirit of Prophesy. But
setting apart such like graces, being common with men, sometimes (...) no good
life, my pen more willingly conuerts it self, to the (...) discourse of his
religious Virtue.

The Humility, and Patience of the Man of God, especially in his extremity
(...) sickness. And how sweetly he gave up the Ghost. Chap. 8.
AMong the virtues of this Venerable man, the solicitude (...) had of
manteyning continual peace, and true concord between his Subjects, not
deserved the least place. And this ^are (...) his, so boiled in his breast, as
that when any of them, by so^ accident had broken any friendship between them,
if by no other means, he could not piece, and reunite them again, he would
not stick to cast himself down at their fee^e, and to pray and conjure each
part so long, as that being mollifyed with tenderness, and confounded with
shame, deposing all rancour, they became reconciled to each other. From whence,
may likewise be gathered, how great was the humility of the holy man, most
worthy of admiration, were it only for this, that by such acts he lost no
reputation, but rather how much greater contempt he showed of himself, he wa^
so much the more esteemed, and reverenced by oaths.

With this submission of his, was the virtue of Patience seen (...) march hand
in hand with him, being a safe buckler, and secure (...) of the soldiers of
Christ, against the hot and furious assaul^ of the ancient adversary. Of which
kind of aims, how (...) the Man of God would be helping himself, he notably
(...) in his extreme age. Because, that being oppressed, through^ most grievous
infirmity, which made him more then a year to keep his bed, with most sharp
dolours; yet for all that, he failed not of his in ward peace, nor yet for s^ew
his accustomed prayer, and familiarity with God. And they affirmed who assisted
him day and night, that in the greatest extremity of all, and fury of his fits,
he did nothing, or said any word un worthy of Christian magnanimity, or of his
former behavior.

But even rather the said assistants auerre: That a certain venerable old man,
being come to visit him, and through compassion, bidding him pray to God, to
deliver him of so great affliction, and he should easily be heard; with no
pleasing countenance, contrary ^o custom, he answered thus: Of charity,
Father, speak not to me any more in this manner, for as often as such thoughts
have come unto my mind, I ever held them, as suggestions of the enemy, and with
all endeavor have expelled them from me, discoursing in this manner with my
self; that to abate the pride that may arise in me from the credit, which God
has plesed to give me on earth, these ^gonyes, and humiliations are to very
good purpose. And what share, trow you, are we like to have in the consolations
of the E^ernity, if in this short space, or rather moment of time, we suffer
^ot some manner of affliction? In truth, Father, we needs must resolve to
suffer at this present, if we would not worthily be vp^rayded with these words
herafter, Recepisti bona tua in vita tua. Thus S. Theodosius spoke: and the
Monk admiring, and touched withal, went his ways.

In the mean time, the Man of God, feeling himself to decay more and more,
and calling at last his sad disciples to his Cell, with his own and their
great feeling, he exhorted them to persevere in their vocation, and stoutly to
resist all temptations; and above all, to maynteyne faithful and prompt
Obedience, to whom soever with lawful election should come to succed him in
the government. Moreover, very humbly calling for three of the Bishops of those
countries, and communicating with them, some things of importance for the
public service; in the presence of them, and of all the Monks in tears, he
alone being joyful, and glad, having with diligence procured already all
things necessary for such a presage, did lift up his eyes and hands to heaven,
and then decently ^sting them on his breast, without any difficulty, yielded up
his spirit, being now of 105. years old.

And it pleased our Lord, that a man possessed of an ill spirit, who till that
time could never be delivered from so great a calamity; now finally casting
himself down, with many tears, and bitter sighs, on the couch of the Saint,
at the first touch of the venerable Relics (but yet more tormented then ever)
in the presence of as many as were there, was freed, and secure from that (...)
tyranny.

The blessed Pope Hormisda, had the care of the Universal Church at that time
(though others according to S. Cyrill, would have him to have arrived to the
times of Pope Agapitus, that is, to the year 536*) and in particular of
Jerusalem, in the time of the Patriarch Peter; who at the first advertisement
of the departure of S. Theodosius, came in have to the Monastery, while an
infinite number of people, of all parts, came likewise in to obtain some sh^ed
of the Garment, or Capuch of the blessed man, or at least to com^ near him,
and contemplate more freely on those chaste lymmes of his, which had been such
efficacious instruments of the high Cr^tour. Whereupon to satisfy the pious
desire of the multitude, the sacred corpse of force remained unburied, until
such time, as the throng being somewhat ceased, he was, by his dearest, and
most denoted friends, with tears and sighs, deposed in the bosom of the
common Mother, from thence to arise again, at the sound of the last trumpet,
with the other Elect, most glorious, and resplendant for all Eternity.

FINIS.
S. BENET ABBOT.
THE ARGUMENT.
Look how the Rosy Daughter of the morn,
The Star that glads each mortal with its sight,
Leaving at first old Titans bed forlorn,
About the Spheres does cast her Crimsom light;
Roses and Lillyes hurling through the sky,
Quenching the stars with rays from thence that fly.
So glorious was thy morning, so bright rays
Thy tender years did lighten, and foretold
The heavenly Sunshine of thy riper days,
Dispelling darkness, and inflaming cold
And senseless hearts with fire of holy love,
And drawing all to seek the joys above.
Thou taughtst the way, removing obstacles,
That as they rise depresse our mounting souls:
Thy doctrine thou confirmdst with miracles,
And heaven by thee both Death and Hell controules.
If Star, or Angel bring Heavens influence,
Thou art that Star, thou that Intelligence.
THE LIFE OF S. BENET ABBOT. Taken out of the Dialogues of S. Gregory.
The Infancy, and more tender years of S. Benet; with his inclination to piety
and religion: And how Romanus a Monk assisted him therein. Chap. 1.
SAINT Benet, Founder of the most noble Congregation of Mount Casin; gave with
his birth, no little glory to Nursia, though otherwise, a notable and famous
City, in the Confines of Marca, and Vmbria, It was in the year of our Lord
482. when Gelasius the first, governed the Catholic Church, and Anastasius
the Empire. The Father of S, Benet was called Proprius, the Mother Abundantia,
of the family of Riguardati, at that time, not only Honorable, but potent and
Illustrious. The Child of a rare to wardnes, in wit fa^re outstripping his
years, in showing himself to be aliened from all manner of pleasures and
sports, was sent to Rome, to study, under the tutelage of one, that had a good
care of him. Here now being entered into profane schools, he was soon aware
of the perils, that hung over him, through vain sciences, ill companyes, and
^he snares and intrications of the world. So as, fearing some precipice, he
made have to pluck out his foot betymes; with firm deli^eration to repair
unto the desert, and with all endeavor to at^end to the divine worship, and to
the salvation of his Soul.

With this deliberation, the Saint and Elect of God first retired himself from
the concourse of Rome, into the castle of Offida, without other company, then
only of his Nurse, that dearly loved him, from whom (as yet) he could not
conveniently quit himself. Nor was it long, err the Divine Goodness with
evident signs, began to show forth how gratefully he accepted the religious
purposes of S. Benet. For that a Scry wherewith they winnow corn, being broken
by chance in two pieces, which the Nurse had borrowed of her neighbors, and
she poor woman most pitifully lamenting for it, the pious youth could by no
means endure to see her so distressed. Whereupon putting himself into prayer,
with the two pieces thereof by his side, as soon as he had ended the same, he
found the^ suddenly united, and the Vessel as whole, and sound, as if it had
never been broken or hurt at all. The miracle was great, and could not be
concealed, whence all the inhabitants there-about, came running in to behold
the same, blessing our Lord, and magnifying the Child, with the words that had
been spoken heertofore of the holy Precursour of Christ: and further for memory
of the fact, they did hang up the said Scry publicly, at the entrance of the
Church, where it remayed, till such time, as the Country was sacked by the
Lombards.

These favors and acclamations were a great spur unto S. Benet, to fly away
thence, and to hide himself, as soon as he could. So that abandoning his
Nurse, and as many as knew him; he secretly got him to the Mountains of
Sublacum, about some 40. miles distant from Rome; a territory but obscure in
those days, though illustrious afterward, through the abode and long
conversation of S. Benet. And it pleased God, that before his arrival thither,
he should hap to meet which a certain Monk, by name Romanus, who courteously
examining him of his life, and understanding his heavenly Vocation, gave him
besides good counsayls, the habit moreover of an Hermit, with promise withal to
keep it secret, and to be assisting unto him, in what he might. With such
direction, the new Champion of Christ being come to Sublacum, puts himself
into a most strayt ca^e, and therein remained shut up, for three yea^ co^nually
together, without the knowledge of any person, in the world, except Romanus;
who living not far off, in a monastery under the Obedience of S. Theodosius
Abbot, failed not to steal some part of his leisure, and reserve also some
pittance of the food allowed him, to visit from time to time, and to sustain
his dear disciple. And forasmuch as from the Convent to the cave, no path way
was to be found, there hanging a very high cliff just over the same; Romanus
was wont to tie to a long cord, that little bread he could get, with a bell
unto it, by sound whereof S. Benet might conveniently understand, when his
refection was brought him.

Our Lord appears to a Priest, and sends him with victuals to S. Benet. He
(...) assailed with a cruel temptation, which he strangely puts away. And
afterward escapes poisoning. Chap. 2.
NOw the ancient Adversary, not brooking well the charity of Romanus, and the
life of S. Benet; in letting down the cord abouesayd, threw down a stone upon
the bell, and burst it to pieces, which notwithstanding Romanus failed not to
supply, and still to persevere in that work of mercy, until such time, as our
Lord, being willing to give him rest of such labors, and to others the example
of so high and sublime virtue, appeared in vision to a certain Priest of those
countries, who to feast himself on the day of Pascha, had made ready a good
dynner to that end, and said to him; Thou standst here preparing thee
banquets, when lo, my Servant the (...), lies staruing yonder for hunger. At
which admonishment the good Pri^ arising sudenly, on the same day of Easter,
with his victuals, pu^ himself on the way, and after he had fetched some
compass about those mountains and valleys, a pretty while, he found S. Be^ at
last, in the Cave. When saluting him fayrely, and making so^ prayer together
with him: Let us now, said he, afford some little nourishment to the body, and
rejoice in our Lord, for this is the Feast of the Pascha. It is truly a Pasch
to me, answered S. Benet (who in so great a solitude, until this time, have
not known the course of the year) and you have afforded me a Feast sufficient
already with your presence. Nay truly, not so (replied the Priest) to day is
celebrated the Resurrection of our Lord, not is it any ways fit for you to
fast on this day, and that especially so much the rather, as I am sent hither
of purpose, to communicate in charity with you on this day.

Then without more strife or contention they both blessing our ^rd, fell to
eating, and after a sweet, and spiritual discourse had between them, the
Priest went his ways. And now, as it were, at the same time, some shepherds
also lighted on the said place: Who beholding amidst those brakes, the holy
yo^g man to be clothed with ^kyns, at first they took him for a beast that
might lurk there, but after approaching near unto him, and illumined with his
admirable aduises, and christian doctrine; they knew anon themselves, who till
that time, had been but as brute beasts. Whereupon being touched with true
Contrition, they gave themselves from thenceforth ^o a more reasonable life.
From whence, the fame of S. Benet began to spread it self, and the poor Cave
to be frequented of many; who bringing him corporal food, returned from
thence, well refreshed with spiritual nourishment.

On those days, he being once all alone, was assailed by the Devil, in form
of a black Bird, being called a Moore-hen, which for a good space, did never
give over from flying in his face, with such importunity, and so near withal,
as he might easily have taken her in his hand, if he had listed. But he chose
rather to defend himself, with the sign of the holy cross. Whereupon the bird
flew away, leaving notwithstanding a cruel temptation with an intolerable
passion, enkindled in the members of the young man. In such wise, as the
soldier of Christ, stood now upon staggering, and deliberating, as it were,
to return back into the world again; when being sudenly fortifyed with divine
Grace, he reentred into himself again, and beholding a bush of sharp thorns,
and stinging net^les at hand, with a generous force pulling off his clothes, on
a sudden casts he himself therinto, and so long rouled his naked body thereon,
as that being full of wounds, and blood all over, with the external heat he
extinguished the internal, and through such a noble act remained so victorious
over the rebellions flesh, as that from thence forth (as himself reported to
his Disciples) he never felt any more trouble thereof.

After this, it pleased God, that diverse persons of sundry places should
repair to S. Benet, desirous not only of salvation, but even likewise of
perfection. And it was but just, that he now possessing so peacefully the
kingdom of his proper mind, should be applied to the care and government of
others. For that we see also in the wri^ten Law, how the Leuits, in the seruour
of their youth, were tied to labor, and to serve in the Temple; nor before
they were ^ull 50. years old (at which time, it is supposed their passions,
are in quiet, and the heart at rest) were they made the Guardians, and
Sacristans of the holy Vessels, which are interpreted the reasonable souls.
But among others, who approached to S. Benet the servant of God for his help,
were some religious of a neighbor Monastery thereby, who in those days being
destitute of an Abbot, besought him to take the charge upon him.

These men, were accustomed to a large, and more liberal life, and little
disposed to conform themselves with the manners of (...). Benet. And he being
aware thereof, for a while made a strong resistance to their request. But being
constrained through the praye^ and coniurations of the whole Family, he
accepted the government at last; and first with example, and after with words,
endeavored he to take away the abuses, and then to bring in a form of living,
worthy of the profession they made. But soon it appeared, how the good
inspirations and desires they had, had taken but little root in their souls;
because that shortly they were all aggrieued with the Rule, and reformation
made; and the diabolical instigations had gotten such power in some, as that
not being able to endure in their sight, such a lively and continual example
of extreme abstinence, and perfect manners, they determined to take him away,
out of hand, with poison. But the divine justice, suffered not their wicked
design to take affect: because that at the time of the refection, while one of
them, was presenting the holy Father with a cup of poisoned wine, it pleased
God, with the sign of the Cross which S. Benet, according to custom, used to
make thereupon, the glass, as with the blow of a stone, fell suddenly into
pieces, and the wine from the brothers hand, dropped down to the ground. Whence
the Man of God, knew presently, that drink without doubt to be the potion of
Death which could not endu^ the sign of life. And thereupon with a mind
composed, and a fa^ serene. turning himself to the Monks; God forgive you
(said he) what a plot was this amongst you? Did I not tell you at first, my
manners would never seem to agree with yours? Then rest you in peace, and
seek you out some other, that may govern you better, And heerwith, leaving
them quite confounded and astonished he retired to his desired Cave again, and
there attended seriously to himself.

How two principal Senators of Rome offer up, and dedicate their children to
S. Benet: and how a Monk was led away by a Devil, which S. Benet discouers,
and remedies. Chap. 3.
TRue it is, that S. Benet was not suffered to enjoy that estate any time,
because that the odor of such a sanctity, continually spreading it self more
and more; there repaired to him a new co^curse of people, much touched with the
holy Ghost, and cloyed with the world. With which multitude after a sufficient
instruction had, he founded in those countries, about a dozen Monasteryes,
appointing Laws, offices, and an Abbot to each. So as diverse personages, and
Senators of Rome, began now to hold it a great felicity to have any Children
at such a time, to send to S. Benet, and to dedicate the^ under the care of
such a Father, to the service of the divine Majesty. Among which, were two
principal, Eutitius and Tertullus. Whereof one offered Maurus, a young man of so
rare a wit and of such a spirit withal, as in short time, he became an
assistant of the Master himself. The other greatly addicted to the same
discipline, with much veneration, offered in person his eldest son Placidus
to him yet a Child, and then after made likewise, a free donation of a great
mass of riches, farms, manners, and Castles to the Saint, with cittyes both
maritime, and in land, whereof the Catalogue would be here too long: surely to
the great confusion of our times, in which as the entering into Religion is
ordinarily held desperatio^, shame and madness; so the taking away of subjects
reputation and goods from them, is reputed, and that even of those who call
themselves Christians, to be good prudence, valor, and Justice.

But to return to S. Benet, unto whom as well in the beginning, as in the
progress of his administration, there happened many notable things. The
vigilant Pastor, with the greatest solicitude that might be, was wont to
apply his subjects to the study of prayer, as knowing well, how necessary the
succor of Heaven must needs be, for the cutting off of disordinate affects,
and repressing of passions withal, which even from the mould whereof we are
framed, do continually spring, For which cause, besides the particular devotions
of each one, at certain hours, he would assemble them all together, in a
certain place deputed for holy exercises. Now it happened, that in one of
those assemblies, while divine office being ended the Monks were meditating,
and conuersing with God; one of them, being vanquished with rediousnes, we^
forth of the Quire, and partly went idly up and down here and there, and
partly busyed himself in some temporal matter of little moment. Which being
known to his Abbot Pompeanus, after he had admonished him thereof diverse times,
but all in vain, he brought him at last to S. Benet himself, who with a good
reprehension sent him back again.

But yet this auayled not much, because after two days, the Monk returned to
his old custom: and Pompeanus anew had recourse to the Saint, who being moved
with compassion for the sheep nigh lost, determined immediately to go in person
himself to apply by all possible means, some present remedy thereunto. Taking
then Maurus, for his companion, and Pompeanus withal, he went his ways
thither: and setting himself to espy, in a fit place, what happened in time of
prayer, he saw how a little black boy, took the Monk by the hemme of his
Cassocke, and went leading him forth of the Oratory. Then the vigilant Prelate
said secrely to Maurus and Pompeanus. Do you not see therewho it is, that
leads him thus away? and they answering, no: Let us pray then, said he, that
you may be likewise made partakers of the spectacle. And so they did all for
two days together, at the end whereof, Maurus did deserve to see the
revelation, while the other found not the grace. Which done, yet S. Benet
expected another day, and suddenly after prayer again, finding the Monk to be
yet gadding as before, he gave him a blow, which had so much efficacy with it,
as that the devil, as it himself had been lashed, had not the heart to return
any more to the same again. This acccident surely, was very memorable, but yet
this other which follows, is no less glorious then it, though in a different
kind.

S. Benet causes a spring to arise out on the top of a mountain: With other
accidents besides. Chap. 4.
AMong the Monasteryes, whereof we have made some mention above, three were
seated on a high and craggy rock, and so dry with all, as the Monks were
enforced, through those cliffs and steepy places, to fetch their water from the
Lake, which as then the river of Teneron caused, and that not only with
extraordinary travail and pains, but even also with the manifest danger, and
continual fear of precipices. Whereupon the Monks certifyed S. Benet of the
greatness of the difficulty they felt, and besought him humbly, that he would be
pleased to place them somewhere else. The benign Father, was touched with
tenderness at the request, and giving them good hope, dismissed them anon,
bidding them to return to him on the next day. In the mean while, the night
being come, without taking any other then the innocent Placidus with him, he
went secretly to the top of those cliffs, where he made his prayer, and in the
very fame place, putting down three stones, as a sign, with like secrecy as
before, he returned home to his Cell again. When day was come, behold the
Monks return; to whom S. Benet, without more ado: Go your ways, said he,
toward such a place, and where you shall find three stones laid one upon
another, there dig, for God is able to produce water on the tops of mountains
to ease you of the pains of so tedious a journey. And they going with great
confidence to the said place, found it already to wax moist, and to spring up
water, increasing at last in so great abo^dance, as unto this present day,
without diminishing awhit, it still runs from that top, to the foot of the
hill. With this remedy the Saint refreshed and eased his disciples of their
travail and thirst: and with this other that follows gave peace to a
timorous, and anxious soul.

A certain poor man in those days, was converted to the faith, a Goth by
nation, who putting himself into the hands of S. Benet, by whom being
exercised in his time, as well in spirit as in bodyly labor, he was appointed
after prayer, to fell down a piece of wood, upon the banck of the Lake there,
to make a garden plot of. Now it happened, while the prompt Neophit attended
with all his forces, to cut down the bushes and briars, that the head of his
axe, flying off suddenly from the helue, f^ll into the deep water, without
hope of ever recovering it again. Whereupon, being afflicted for the loss,
which it seemed to him, he had caused to the Convent, he went trembling to
accuse himself unto Maurus, and to do penance for the same, in case he had
committed any fault therein. Maurus was much edified at so tender a conscience;
nor was he slack the while to acquaint the common Parent, and Master therewith.
The^ S. Benet being moved to compassion, went his ways to the Lake, and taking
the helue of the hatchet out of the Goths hand, threw it into the water, and
the head of the hatchet of it self immediately floating, took hold of the
helue again, and came to the land: at which sight, the Goth being astonished,
and quite as it were, besides himself, S. Benet puts the hatchet into his hand,
saying: My son, Go to work again, and trouble not your self any further
in the matter. There follows yet another act, no less admirable then this,
and perhaps from the time of S. Peter the Apostle hitherto, not heard of before.

Placidus on a time, being gone to the said Lake for water, while he stoopes
with his vessel, fell unfortunately thereinto, and being snatched by the
stream, in a moment was carried away, the distance for space of a bows shot
from the land. This in spirit S. Benet did behold, being shut up in his Cell,
and calling Maurus very suddenly unto him: Go thy ways, said he, in all have,
for the Child is drowned. The good subject, was accustomed to hold the
Superiors becks as Oracles. Wherefore, without other reply, he demands only
his benediction of him: and having taken the same, ran violently to the
danger, and that with so much speed, as that going on the waters dry foot, he
took Placidus by the hair of his head, not being aware the while of the
nature of the way he went on, until such time, as he had pulled him safe to
the land. When returning into himself, and reflecting on what was past, his
hair stood an end, and giving thanks to the highest God, led Placidus to the
presence of S. Benet. Here arose a noble contention of profound humility
between the Master and disciple; while S. Benet ascribes the greatness of such
a miracle unto the faith and promptnes of Maurus, and Maurus attributes all to
the merits and intercession of S. Benet. The youth himself, in part decides
the controversy, affirming, that in arising aloft, it seemed to him, that he
saw the habit of Father Abbot over him; whereby, he took it that he was
delivered by him. But howsoever it passed, it is evident, the obedience of
Maurus was worthy of eternal memory.

Florentius a Priest, seeks to poison S. Benet, but is prevented. He
practices also to corrupt his Disciples; and is lastly punished by the hand of
God. Chap. 5.
IN the mean time, the Followers and Deuotes of S. Benet, do continually
multiply and increase, esteeming themselves amidst the snares of this
pilgrimage, very happy and secure, under the gui^ing of such a Leader. But as
Envy always spurns at virtue; a ^ertaine Priest of that country, called
Florentius, being of the number ^f those who covet the fruits of human
praises, and fly the pur^hase of solid virtues, could by no means endure so
much reputa^ion, and so prosperous successes of S. Benet. This unfortunate
wretch ^eing stirred up and excited through blind passion, began first, with
^uill words to detract from the merits, and actions of S. Benet, and ^hen to
hinder by all means possible, the concourse of people that went unto him.
After which perceiving how he travailed in vain, and that, by how much he
endeavored to vilify, and depresse him, ^e was the more exalted by God, and
reverenced of men; he suffered ^imselfe at last to be led into the same very
deuilish plot, whereinto those former traitors of the Saint had been carried.
True it is that whereas they hid the fraud under a cup of wine, this under a
loaf ^f bread. But as that was not able to deceive the eyes of the Man of God,
so was this also revealed unto him. Because Florentius under ^he show of
charity having sent him in alms, a Loaf of bread co^^empered with deadly
poison, the holy man stuck not to receive it with thanks giving. But being
soon certifyed, through divine power, of the wicked deceit, at the hour of
refection, he threw it ^owne to a Crow, which at that time was wont to come to
him ^o take her meat at his hands, and said to her: On behalf of our Lord
^sus Christ, take you here this loaf of bread, and carry i^to some place where
it may not be touched of any person living. At which words ^he Crow spreading
her wings, and opening the mouth, began to ^oure, with croaking, and showing a
will and fear alike to touch that pestilent food: but the Man of God urging
her to obey, with ^onfidence took it up with her claws, and flew away with
it, and ^hen after some three hours space, returned again to her wonted ^eate.

At such ill demeanours as these, S. Benet was exceedingly sorry, ^ot so much
for his own sake, as for compassion of his adversary. ^ut Florentius the
while, being full of gaul and obstinate in malice ^nce he could not murder the
body of the Master, endeavored to ^estroy the disciples souls. And among
other things, he had the im^udence to contriue in the very garden of the
Monastery, and in the ^ght of the Monks themselves, a lascivious dance of
naked women. ^t which spectacle, the Abbot, with reason fearing some notable
disorder, determined to give wholly place to the fury of the (...) and to
abandon the Country and mansion there built up by hi^ self, with so great
expenses. Setting then the affairs of the Co^uents in order, and exhorting the
Monks to persevere in the st^ of perfection, with some of his companions, he
puts himself (...) his journey, and through divine instinct, or rather through
a cle^ voice which came to him from heaven, he trauayled toward Castle, about
some two days journey from thence, by name C^ with full purpose to announce the
true light of the Ghospel unto t^ Country people that in habited there, which
miserably lay yet b^ in the darkness of Gentilisme, and the shadow of death.

Hardly was the servant of God, departed from Sublacum, wh^ as vengeance from
heaven, appeared upon Florentius: because (...) house, being otherwise safe and
sound, the roof only of the roo^ where he then remained, falling down on a
sudden, with a re^dyles ruin, burst all the bones of his body, and for his
soul, (...) went to the tribunal of the eternal justice. The accident was
(...) denly diuulged, and one of the Monks, ran immediately in have a^ the holy
Abbot, to carry him the news, as he thought, very gl^ and welcome to him: but
S. Benet, instead of rejoicing thereat s^ forth sighs unto heaven for that
soul, and with severe words ga^ a sharp rebuke to the Monk, who therein had
showed in himself not so Christian a mind, as he ought. From thence, proceeding
o^ his way, he arrived at last at the foresaid Castle, situated on the s^ of a
steepy and high hill, in the top whereof, was a Temple seen amid the thickest
of the woods, being dedicated to Apollo. Where S. Benet wanted not matter to
work on, or what to encounter.

But before he would enter into battle, he would seem (...) prepare himself
for that purpose, with especial care, by retyring him into some remote place:
and there for forty days continually together, remaynes he in prayer,
fastings, and vigils. After whi^ with the odor of so good a life, and with the
efficacy of his preaching, being the fittest batteryes to Faith; he sets
himself, through divine favor, courageously to destroy paganism, and so
brake the Idol, demolisheth the Altar, hewes down the woods; and where
before was the Oracle of the false God, he erects an Oratory to S. Martin, and
in place of an Altar builds a Chapel unto S. John B^tist, through whose
intercession, obteyning always new graces, and offering up most pure and
acceptable sacrifices to the Creator, he never left laboring to acquit, and
discharge poor mortals from the ^ruell servitude of the Devil.

The Devil appears to S. Benet; He throws down a wall new built up, and
kills one of ^he Monks in the ruins thereof, who is restored to life again:
with other illusions of the Devil. Chap. 6.
THe ancient Tyrant, no longer able to endure to foresaid enterprises of S.
Benet, besides the diverse difficultyes and impe^iments which in vain he
stirred against the messenger of Christ; ^egan also to appear unto him, not
through in imagination, or ^reame, but with open vision, and with dreadful
figures, casting ^rth, by the mouth and eyes, infernal smoke, and flames of
sul^hure, and with a raging voice, howling, and lamenting in such ^anner, as
that the disciples, though they were not permitted to ^ehold him, yet plainly
might hear him to say, among other ^ings; Benedicte, Benedicte: and while the
Man of God, vouchsafed ^ot to answer him, outragiously he added: Maledicte,
and not Be^dicte, what have thou to do with me? Wherefore do thou persecute
me thus? and here with, fell a vomiting of most horrible blaspemies, and
^enaces; whereof, though the Saint seemed to make but light ac^ompt, yet the
standers by even the while feared grievously.

That which increased his fury, was a certain building begun ^y the Monks for
their habitation, which in process of time, ^om mean beginnings, amounted
after to the magnificence we ^e at this present. Whereupon being incensed more
and more ^ith anger, he appeared one day to S. Benet, in his Cell, while ^e
Monks were a laboring, and fretting said openly to him, that ^e was then
going to work what mischief he could, both to the ^bourers, and to the work
in hand. Whereat the holy Father, sends ^ddenly to advertise his disciples
thereof, and to admonish them, (...) retire themselves without delay: but the
messenger arrived not so ^one, but that the devil had already thrown down to
ground, a ^ery high wall, which they had built, and thereby crushed to pee^a
Monk underneath the ruins: in so much, as to show him to (...) Benet, it was
needful to gather the pieces, and to put them up (...) a sack together: When
the man of God, causing them to be laid ^rth, where he was wont to make his
prayer, and dismissing the ^onkes, shut himself in the Cell, and prayed with
such fervor unto God, as even at that hour he restored the young man all whole
and sound again, and as able as the rest, to continue and go forward with the
work interrupted.

Nor did the malignant spirit only in weighty matters, the vent his choler; but
even sometimes also in things, that were half ridiculous in themselves: as was
that of a stone, of no great bigness, which being to be placed in the wall, he
sets himself upon it, insomuch, as they did but labor in vain, to place it
aright, being not able to stir it awhit, until such time, as the Man of God,
in person, had given his benediction thereon. Whereat the devil, a^ he is
wont, goes his ways, and the stone was suddenly lifted, and lightened, as it
had been of wax only. After which, it seemed good unto all, to dig somewhat
deep, and they found out an Idol of brass, which after some hours casting by
chance into the kitchen, it seemed to send forth fire on all sides, as it would
doubtless have burned up the room. This sight, put the Convent into a
hurly-burly, all striving to run in with their buckets of water, and calling
for help. At which noise of theirs, the admirable Abbot arriving, with one only
cast of the eye, was presently aware of the illusion; and the bowing the head
prays awhile, and bids the Monks, to make the sign of the Cross upon their
eyes: which done, the flames immediately vanished, and so every one understood
it to have been only a fantastical flame, and not true fire.

Through these persecutions, and troubles, Lucifer did in fine effect no more,
then to affoard new occasions to S. Benet, to illustr^ the name of Christ, and
to purchase to himself credit continually more and more, as well with the
faithful, as Gentills; and that so much the more, as to this so rare a grace
of miracles, was added an extraordinary Gift of Prophesy, as by the following
examples, may clearly be gathered.

A secular man, but exceeding pious withal, was wont every year, to go from
home, a good way off, to the Monastery; as w^ to take the benediction of the
holy Father, as also to visit a Brother of his, whom there he had in religion.
And to the end the voyage might be the more meritorious, he would make it on
foot, and remain fasting, until his arrival unto the presence of S. B^. Now
it hapened on a time, that another trauayler kept him company on the way, who
had brought along with him, good provision of victuals; and after they had gone
thus a pretty way together while it grew somewhat late, the trauayler invited
him very friendly to eat a bit with him, and to refresh themselves, as well as
they might. God forbid, Brother, said he, since my custom is, for to arrive
fasting unto Father Abbot. With this answer as then, the inuiter was quiet,
but yet after a space again, he urged him afresh, that now it was full time of
dynner. But the Man being resolved to keep abstinence, still denied him again
a second time; so as the other was feign to comply with him.

But not long after, behold a goodly meadow, with a limpid spring, presents it
self to them, which opportunely invited them to recreate themselves; when he
that carried the victuals, said: O what water! O what a pasture is this! O what
a place to repose in awhile, and to take some repast, rest, and breath of our
travail! The sun by this time was grown very forward on its way, the
members weary, the sound of the Byrds very sweet to the Ears, the flowers and
herbs, as seeming to flatter the eyes; besides which many fair pretenses
failed not the sensuality, to excuse withal. What more? The devout pilgrim at
last was overcome. But then at the evening, being come into the presence of the
Man of God, and craving his benediction, as he was wont, the Saint stuck not
very dexterously to upbraid him, with what had passed with him on the way,
saying. How goes the matter brother? The wicked enemy who spoke to thee so, by
the means of that Trauayler there on the way, neither at the first, nor second
time could move thee away whit, till at last, at the third he brought thee to
his bent. The poor man hearing this, and acknowledging his great inconstancy,
casts himself at his feere, full of tears, and confusion. A fair revelation
surely: but yet is this that follows, no less pretty, and admirable, then it.

The Gift of Prophecy, which S. Benet discouers by occasion of Totila,
endeavoring to abuse him by a trick. And how he discouers, and chastizeth his
Monks, through the same Gift. Chap. 7.
TOtila the King of the Gotes, having heard of the wonders of S. Benet, and
measuring others manners by his own perfidious mind; determined with a subtle
invention to inform himself better of the truth thereof. Trauayling therefore
to Mount Cassin, he stayed a little way off, and sent to certify the worthy
Abbet, that he was now come to visit him: and being answered, he might come
when he pleased, he caused a Favorite of his, by name Rigone, to be decked up
with his Princely robes, and commanded him to be accompanied by his whole
Court, and attended by three principal Barons, unto the presence of S. Benet,
as if it had been the person of Totila himself; and gave good order besides,
that no inckling of the fiction, might come to the convent. Rigone trauayling
with such Majesty, and so great a pomp, was hardly arrived at the Cell, but
the Saint, began a far off to call unto him, with a loud voice: Lay away, my
son, put off those things thou wearest so, for they are none of thine. At
which words, the Barbarian, as stricken with thunder, fell suddenly down to
the ground, and feared worse, for his great presumption, in abusing and mocking
so great a Man. At which terror likewise, all fell humbly prostrate before
him, and not daring to approach nearer, returned to the King, with pale
countenances, and with faltering speech, related unto him how suddenly the
deceit was discovered by the Man of God.

Then Totila himself, went thither in person, with so much submission, and
reverence withal, as that being come in the sight of S. Benet, who was sitting
a far off, he casts himself presently on the ground; and howbeyt the Man of
God, some twice, or thrice, said to him, Get up I pray; yet durst he not do it,
until such time as S. Benet, with his own hands, went and lifted him up. And
after this, in few words in private, he reprehended him shrewdly of his evil
manners, and acquainted him besides, with what was like to succeed with him,
saying: Thou do much mischief, and many euil^ thou have hitherto wrought,
but now refrain from thy iniquityes at last, and know thou shall enter
hereafter into Rome, thou shall cross the Seas, nine years thou shall
reign, and dye on the tenth. With these news, Totila being exceedingly
terrifyed, most humbly craving the intercession of the Servant of Christ,
departed thence: and from that time afterward, began to be less cru^l and
fierce. Not long after the same, he entered into Rome: from thence he sailed
into Sicily, and being arrived unto the tenth year of his reign, through
divine Justice, came to loose both life and kingdom at once.

The foresaid revelations of the Saint, and other the like, which for breuity
sake we let pass, have happened with strangers only: While these others have
succeeded, partly for amendment, and part^ for the consolation of his Monks.

Two whereof, being once goneforth, about some work of Charity, the business
held them so long, as the poor Monks were persuaded to eat in the house of a
certain devout woman. Whereupon returning late to the Monastery, and craving
the wonted benediction of the Venerable Father; he suddaynely demanded, where
they had dyned, and they answering confidently, in no place; he replied, why
tell you me a lie in this manner? For you did enter into the house of such a
woman; and did you not eat of such and such meats? And have not each of you
drunk so often? They being convinced with these circumstances, and with each
particular thereof, being full of confusion withal, cast themselves at his
feet confessing the fault, and demanding pardon at his hands. And the good
Father showed mercy to them, as knowing they would run no more into the like
default.

There was not far from the Monastery, a village inhabited by many, converted
by S. Benet, among whom; were found some Women, consecrated to the divine
worship, and the sollicitous Pastor, being careful to conserve that flock,
was wont often to send some one of his disciples thither, to make some
spiritual exhortations to them. One of which, having ended his discourse with
them, was persuaded through the entreaty of those devout Women, to accept a
small present of lynnen cloth, at their hands, and so he puts it up in his
bosom; but the Gift cost him full dear, because returning to the Monastery,
he had of S. Benet a most bitter reprehension for it: for among other things,
it was demanded of him, how crept that iniquity into his breast? when as he
half besides himself, had quite forgot his fault, nor could well tell,
wherefore he was so accused; when lo, the holy Abbot replies: Belike then, I was
present with thee, when thou receiuedst so that lynnen cloth of the Servants of
God, and did put in thy bosom? With this, at last the Monk came to
acknowledge his fault, and with a great deal of contrition, taking it forth of
his Cassocke, threw it away to the ground.

S. Benet discouers a temptation of Pride in the heart of one of his Monks: with
a brief Relation of the life of S. Scholastica his Sister. Chap. 8.
ON a time, in the evening, the man of God taking some little repast, a certain
Monk stood holding him a candle, who in the world had been the Son of a
certain Protector, which in those days was an Office of great dignity. Now
while he waited in that manner upon him, he was half vanquished with a
grievous temptation of Pride, saying within himself: Who is this here, that
sitting at the Table, I should not only not sit besides him, but stand holding
him the candle, and serve him as a Page? He had hardly given place in his soul
to these suggestions, but that the Saint, with great vehemence of spirit, began
to rouse him up, saying; Make the sign of the Cross on thy heart, Brother:
what is that thou think on? Make the sign of the Cross I say: and sudenly
calling in others, he made them to take the candle out of his hand, and willed
him to sit down at the table himself. He being afterward demanded of the
Monks apart, what was that which he was thinking of at that time, he
ingenuously confessed, the assault of pride which he then had, and the formal
words, he was then framing in himself. They all wondered the while, and were
much astonished thereat. Nor can it easily be expressed, what a spur to
perfection were these kind of discoueryes, and fatherly admonitions of his,
unto them. And thus S. Benet of purpose, used some acerbity with them, as
knowing that medicines for the most, are the more wholesome, as they have more
bitterness in them: whereupon the disciples of necessity must needs stand the
more on their guard, and become more vigilant upon their defects, in beholding
the masters eyes still so upon them, and always intentive, not only to what
they did, but even likewise to what they thought.

But as the divine Prelate, with such oracles as these, used to cause a great
fear and solicitude in his subjects: so with others in its turn he would
deal as sweetly, and give as much security and comfort. At such time then as
Mount Cassin, and all the arable Land thereabout was oppressed with a great and
extraordinary dearth, that sacred Convent also, what with the nourishments of
those of the house, as with the alms which were distributed to strangers, was
brought to such straits, as there remained no more, then five loaves of bread
in the Monastery, and the Granary quite empty. Whereupon the Monks, but little
acquainted with such manner of extremityes, were now so sad and constristate
with it, as they could not choose but in words, and countenance, bewray their
pusillanimity. The man of God then being aware thereof, very modestly
reprehe^ded such diffidence in them; and after that afforded them great hopes
notwithstanding, affirming that though they had but small prouisi^n for that
day, yet should they have the next day following a great ^oundance. Nor failed
he in his promises, since on the very next day were found at the Gate 100.
bushells of meal in sacks, without knowing ever by what way or means Almighty
God had sent them thither: whereby, the Servant of Christ, besides the help and
consolation they felt therein, had likewise occasion to di^ate their hearts, and
to trust in the divine Goodness, and in their greater scarcity not to doubt of
relief any more.

The news also of the happy passage of S. Scholastica out of this ^yfe, gave
them extraordinary contentment. This same was the na^ural Sister of S. Benet,
and wholly dedicated to the divine service from (...) child. Who being of riper
age was wont every year to visit her Brother, and to receive spiritual
instructions from him, who in co^^any of some disciples of his, would go forth
to meet with her som^ymes, at a certain Grange of the Convent. Now in their
last vi^it, there happened a thing of great astonishment; which was this, that
they having passed over a whole day together in sweet and devout discourses,
and then after, in the evening, having given ^ome refection to their body, S.
Benet being about to take his leave of ^er to return to his Cell again; the
holy Virgin, being then more taken with his sweet conceypts, and discourses
then ever; began to entreat him, with the greatest instance that might be, he
would please to stay with her, and there pass away that night in such
discourses, and particularly in treating of the future life, and of the glory
of Paradise. At which request, S. Benet being angry, as it were, severely
answered: What say you Sister? And know you not, that by no means, it is
lawful for me to lie out of the Monastery? And thereupon being ready to arise,
and go his ways, Scholastica obtaining yet some delay, and grasping her hands
upon the table, put her head thereon, and pouring forth a flood of tears, made
secretly her prayer to God. A strange thing! the Heavens before being so
clear, as no cloud appeared in the skies, on the sudden, in the lifting up of
her head, there followed such thunder, and hideous noise thereupon in the air,
and such a flood of rain withal, as it was impossible for S. Benet, and his
companions, to put forth of doors that night.

Then the venerable Abbot, perceiving himself to be thus laid up as it were,
being full of sorrow for it: God forgive thee Sister (said he) what have thou
done? When she answered; I entreated you, Sir, and you would not hear me, and
I prayed to my God, and he has vouchsafed to hear me: now then go forth if
you can, and leaving me, return to your Cell. In the mean while, the storm
s^ increased, as the holy old man was enforced to remain there, against his
will, for to satisfy the desire of the thirsty virgin to hea^ the word of God.
The morning being come, she urged no more, but taking her leave of S. Benet, he
returned to the Convent, and aft^ three days, remaining in a closet of his
chamber, and lifting up (...) eyes, beholds the blessed spirit of his said
Sister, to go forth of her body, in form of a dove, and thence to fly unto
heaven. For which, he first gave due thanks to God, with psalms, and hymns,
and the^ like wise acquainted the Monks therewith, to their extreme joy, and so
sent them without delay to fetch the sacred corpse, and to carry i^ into the
Church, where he caused it to be laid in the Sepulcher, which already he had
prepared for himself, to the end that as their mynds had been always united
in life; so their spoils after death might not seem to be severed and
disioyned. This same was surely a notable vision, and full both of iubily and
wonder. But yet w^ that other, more strange and admirable, which he had in the
Monastery of the Abbot Seruandus, not far from Mount Cassin.

A Notable vision of S. Benet, together with Seruandus Abbot: with di^ other
admirable things. Chap. 9.
SEruandus was a person of a great spirit, and very learned withal, and as he
often visited S. Benet, to confer with him about matters of the divine
service; so S. Benet mutually, from time to time, would repair to him: and one
day among others, after they had talked a pretty while together of God,
thirsting after the heavenly country, whither as yet they could not arrive;
the hour of rest being come, S. Benet retires himself unto the upper Chambers
in a tower where he then lodged, and Seruandus rested in another beneath; and
right over against the said tower the Monks lodged in a great house. Now S.
Benet arising by night, according to his manner, some while before the others
to contemplate, and treat with God, standing at the window, and looking up to
Heauen-wards, espyes a sudden light to illuminate the air, with so great a
splendor, (...) it far surpassed the brightness of the day it self. In which
speculation of his, happened an incredible thing, if the Saint himsellfe had
^ot reported the same, which was this: That the whole world was ^epresented to
his sight, as gathered together through, divine power, ^der a beam, as it were
of the Sun, And while he fixes his eyes (...) the purest light; he sees
also, by an inexplicable way, the soul ^f the blessed Germanus Bishop of
Capua, to be conveyed to Heaven, by the Angels, in a Globe of fire.

Then S. Benet, that he might have some companion of so glo^ous, and adnirable
a spectacle, with a voice, as loud as he could ^alled the Abbot Seruandus to
him, some twice or thrice: who being waked, and troubled with the noise, made
extraordinary have to ^et up to him; but yet came but to a piece only of that
great light. Howsoever, he was much astonished thereat, and so much the more
^hen he understood, what first his holy Ghest had seen. And how^eyt, the matter
was such, as there could be no doubt made of any ^se imagination therein, yet
for the greater evidence, it seemed not ^isse to send that night, a grave and
pious Monk, by name The^dosius, unto the City of Capua it self, to
understand what was be^ome of the holy Bishop. And in effect it was found, that
he was ^ead indeed; and informing himself more punctually of the matter ^e was
certifyed, his passage was just at that hour, or rather in ^at very moment,
wherein the man of God, had seen him to as^end to eternal glory.

The blessed Gregory the Great, relates other visions, and pro^hesyes of him;
which to declare at length, would seem a super^uous thing, and far from our
purpose: and much longer would (...) be, to unfold one by one, all the other
merueylous works, which (...) diverse subjects are recounted of him. While once
he lamented and ^oretold a long time before, the destruction of Mount Cassin,
which ^llowed through the incursion of the Lombards, and again of the ^ine of
Rome, not by the hand of the armed Barbarians, but through Earthquakes, winds,
thunders, and horrible tempests from Heaven; (...) appeared to some Monks in
sleep, who were sent to Terracina, ^o set up a Convent there, and gave them
the whole model, and ^rder of the building. He threatened excommunication to
two Re^igious women of a naughty and slanderous tongue, if they amen^ed not
the same, and after the menace given, without more ado ^e effect followed,
since dying in that vice, and buried in the Church, they were seen to go
forth, as often as Mass was celebrated there: nor ever found any rest until
such time, as the Man of God, with his own hand, had given an host to the
Priest to offer for them.

A certain young Monk, going forth of the Monastery, witho^ leave, to see his
Father and Mother, was suddenly at his arrival thither fallen dead in the
house; and there was no means to keep the body in the Sepulcher, until such
time, as S. Benet, had caused a consecrated host, to be put on his breast; when
the earth being so pacifyed, as it were, with the same, retained him still
still, With another Monk being fickle and unconstant, and who with great
importunity had obtained leave to go forth of Religion, ^e so wrought with his
prayers, as that going forth of the Monastery, he was assailed by a dragon with
open mouth; with which terror he calling for help, had the grace to return
into his Cell again, where gathering his wits together, he persisted always
after very found in his Vocation.

A child being covered all over with leprosy, insomuch as the hair fell off
his head, and his skin all swollen and puffed up, being brought into the
presence of the Saint, was suddenly cured. Through prayer he got likewise a
good sum of money for a man that was shrewedly vexed by his Creditour; and
that enough, not only to satisfy and defray the debt, but even also to live,
and ma^tayne himself withal afterwad.

In the time of the dearth aforesaid, he ordained that a little oil which
remained in the Dispense, should be given to Agapitus, (...) subdeacon, who
had demanded some of him: and knowing the Dispensier had not executed his
order, he commanded the vessel which was of glass, should be thrown out of
the window, which was done; and howbeyt the place beneath was all very rugged,
and full of the sharpest stones, yet remained the vessel as entire, as it had
fallen upon soft feathers. When causing it to be presently given to Agapitus,
he puts himself with the Monks in to prayer over another vessel which was
empty, and covered; and it was not long ere it was full of oil, insomuch as it
heaued up the cover withal, and tan over on the ground. Here with the Saint
made an end of his prayer, and the flowing liquor ceased. Whereby the
disobedience, and infidelity of that Monk, became justly reprehended.

Another old Monk, in whom the devil was entered, and whom he cruelly
tormented; a secular man being poisoned by his enemy; a Country swayn, being
miserably beaten, and tied with cords by a Soldier of Totila, were all quite
delivered. The first, with a light stroke; the second with a simple touch, the
third only with a glaunce of S. Benets eye.

Another country man, with much faith, and a great deal of tears, laying his
dead child at the gates of the Monastery, had him again restored by the Saint
alive and lusty. The like effects above nature wrought, through divine power,
by means of S. Benet, are worthily celebrated by Writers. But I for my part,
do make a far greater reckoning of the burning zeal, which he had of the
glory of God, and of the eternal salvation of Men, then of all these: in
reguard that the virtue of miracles, and other such like gifts of Heaven, are
seen also sometimes to be found in the reprobate; while Charity is it that
makes us grateful, and acceptacle to the divine Majesty.

S. Benet having founded many Conuents, and given a Rule to his Monk^, knowing
the time of his death before hand, made a most blessed End. Chap. 10.
SAint Benet, as we have said above, was no sooner taken out of the cave,
through divine providence (where for three years continually together, so
exposed to the iniuryes of the air, incommodityes of the body, and temptations
of the enemy, he had exercised a very sharp and strict penance) but that with
all his power he attended to the reducing of mortals, according to the capacity
of each one, partly to the precepts, and partly to the counsayles of Christ. Nor
being content with the founding of many howses of Monks well ordered in the
same Country, he went in person, with a few soldiers of his, to assail the
Idolatry of Mount Cassin, and to chase away the devil from those old lodgings
and ancient holds of his. Nor there only by himself, and others, did he
fortify and establish whatsoever he had gained to God: but likewise sent very
choice Captains into diverse and remote provinces, to promote and conserve the
Catholic Faith. Moreover, though he left good orders and rules of life to the
Conuents there which from time to time he had founded: yet nevertheless he
wrote afterward of purpose rules full of wisdom and equity for the whole
universal Religion, which being published to the world, were, and are
continually of (...)

THE LIFE OF S. STEPHEN THE first King of Hungary.
Ghiesa Prince of Hungary, endeavoring the conversion of that Country, sees a
comfortable vision to that purpose; and entertaynes S. Adalbert coming thither
to that end. Chap. 1.
OF all all the barbarous nations, which at diverse times, have through divine
justice, concurred to the ruin of the Roman greatness, were (as it is well
known) the Huns: who having left the in most parts of Scythia, or Tartary
rather; have more then once, gone forth, and finally entered into Pannonia, and
thence driving out the Lombards (for what occasion, it is not certainly known)
have been called by the new name of Hungars. From which time, with a native
fiercenes and rapacity, they have not ceased, to molest the Church of God;
being given wholly to the impure worship of Idols, and rather guiding
themselves, with unbridled wills, then with laws or decrees, under the heads
which sucessiuely they made choice of. Of these heads, Gheisa was the fourth,
who though cruel and severe by nature; yet never the less, either by instinct
of reason, or through the noise which ran every where of Christian Religion,
becoming more temperate, and (...) ou^ to have a distinctes knowledge of the
same Religion; prooured of purpose to make peace with all the neighbor
Provinces about him, and with public Proclamation, gave not only, secu^e
passage to as many Christians, as would enter into Hungary, but ordained
further that they might all every where be cheerfully received, and benignely
entreated: and particularly extending humanity toward the Clerks. and
Religious, he began to admit them into his sight without difficulty, and with
attention to listen to what they seemed to propose. In so much as what with the
example of their life, and the efficacy of the divine word, and the power of
the heavenly rays, and the excellent disposition of Gheisa himself; came the
wholesome seed of the gospel, by little and little to take root, and to bud in
his breast. And in short time, the matter went so fair, as that he, not only
with a good part of hi^ familiars, took the water of holy Baptism, but
likewise made a full purpose, to bring as many as were under his government, to
the same faith.

To which effect, according to the instructions of the feruants of God; he
designed missions of preachers, building of Churches, foundations of Parishes
and Bishoprics: when on a night, there appeared to him sleep, a young man of
more then human beauty who said to him: God save thee, O elect of Christ; Leave
of these plots of thine, for they are not to be perfected by thee, who have thy
hands too much embrued in blood; but thou shall have a Son, who through the
divine will, shall put the things in execution which now thou proiectst in
mind; and he shall be a King, and be of the number of those, whom God has
predestined, first to a temporal crown, and then likewise to an eternal.
In the mean while, shall come to thee a perfonage, with spiritual embassies.
See thou receive him honorably, and have him in much veneration, and give thou
full credit, and perfect obedience to his aduises, and exhortations.

Gheisa, being astonished at this vision, and considering the same with
himself, made his Domestiques acquainted therewith, and being humbly
prostrate, with infinite thanks, and abondance of tears, recommended himself
and his states, together with the son he was to have, to the care and
protection of him, that never sleeps, nor shuts his eyes. After which,
remaining in much suspense of mind, about the aforesaid Ambassador; behold the
news, that S. Adalbert, Bishop as then of Prage (which came afterward to be
the Metropolis of Bohemia) was coming to him, to proc^ the conversion, and
salvation of souls. This news was of great consolation to those Neophites;
when without delay, the Prince, with all the Court, went to meet with the Man
of God, and receiving him with all honor, showed himself most prompt and ready
to an entire and fillall obedience.

This Prelate, was of great fame, and of the illustrious blood of Bohemia, and
of science no less then zeal, and as one who having twice in person, visited
the Mother of all Churches, and humbly adored the Bishop of Rome, had among
other emprouements from thence sucked sorth the pure milk of Apostolical
doctrine, and further obtained a most ample leave, in case his Bohemians should
obstinately resist the Gospel, to pass into any country of the Infidels, to
announce the kingdom of Heaven. It cannot be then explicated, while he saw
through the goodness of God, so great a gate set open to him, unto the Hungars,
with how much fervor, and with what industry, he suddenly applied himself to
all the ordinary means, requisite to the eternal salvation of his Neighbors;
the secular Power for in part, concurring likewise to the same, as has been
said; the which every one sees, of what moment it is, for the happy progress
of the Ecclesiastical.

S. Stephen appears in sleep to Saroltha the Princess, delivered afterward
of a Son, by name Stephen; to whom his Father in his life ty^ surrenders his
Kingdom. Chap. 2.
IN those days, Saroltha the wife of Geisa, being now somewhat near to her
childbirth, for the greater confirmation of the heavenly promises; there
appeared to her in sleep, even he, who had the glory to be the first that shed
his blood for Jesus Christ, in the habit of a Leuit, and called to her with a
sweet countenance, saying: Be of good cheer, Saroltha, and know for certain,
thou shall have a Son, who shall bring into thy house, the title and crown
of a King, and as soon as he is borne, see thou impose my name upon him at the
sacred Font. At these words, full of wonder and consolation, the Woman demands
of the Saint, who he was, and how he was called? whereto having answered, that
he was S. Step^ the Protomartyr, without any more, he vanished away. This
happened about the year of our Lord 969. in the City of Strigonium, where
within a few days after, the child was very happily borne: and being baptized,
with due rites in the lauer of water, by the hands of S. Adalbert, according to
the precept of the vision and Crown that atte^ded him, had the glorious name
of Stephen imposed on him.

There lived as then, in those parts, an Italian Knight, thurst out of his
Country by Civil wars, by name Theodatus San-seuerinus, who by nobility of
blood, and much more, through his valor, and dexterity, was risen to a high
degree, both of reputation, and favor with Geisa. This was a wise, and
discreet Baron, and the Princes Godfather at his entrance into the Christian
warfare, and then after, his Master and Tutour in behavior: and therefore
after the Italian manner, with a childish simplicity holding him to be his
Father, he would salute him by the name of Tara; and Theodatus in memory of so
pleasant a word, founded a town and Monastery of Religious men hard by
Danubius, which being afterward increased by the great Matthias Coruinus, with
stately buildings, gardens, lakes, and fishpo^ds, even to this present day, is
called still by the name of Tara.

And as the pious child, was very diligently brought up by San^euerinus in
princely manners; so in the elements of the Christian faith and in those
virtues, which are most grateful to the eyes of God, he was instructed, with
great care by S. Adalbert, in such sort, as that hardly was he weaned from the
beast, but he brought forth the name of Jesus before that of bread; and in his
childhood, together with the Gra^mar, he became very expert in the Catechism;
and being now entered into his adolescency, with his acts, gave not only a noble
example of Christian piery, but even also in public meetings, he would ever
speak with merueilous efficacy, of the deformity of vice, of the beauty of
virtue, of the fear of God, of humility, of charity, and of all justice:
seeking by all means possible, to mollify the native fiercenes of the Hungars,
and to reduce them, through di^ine assistance, unto a feeling of humanity; and
to the use of right reason. And was so enflamed with the love of equity, and
amendment of the people, that as occasions happened, he would not stick ^o
accuse, and sometimes also to reprehend, in convenient manner his very Father
himself, yea and to supply now and then at his request, with the singular
approbation of al, the principal cares, in gi^ing audience, dispatching of
public and private businesses, in ^dmitting of the Ambassadors of Princes,
and giving them answers, with all satisfaction, that might be.

So that Geisa, being now weary with travails, and worn out with years,
acknowledging, with his infinite contentment, very able and sufficient qualityes
in the young man, for an ample government, wished nothing more, then to
discharge himself of the weight and to lay the burden on his shoulders, and
forth with to behold him with his eyes, invested in the throne, which he well
deserved. And to that end having called a general diet, he had no great
difficulty, to persuade the States, to dispose themselves to honor his son
before hand, by substituting him in his place, being now already spent, and
wholly unable, admitting him to be their lawful Prince and Lord, and affording
him all prompt subjection, and assured oath of fidelity. At so earnest
exhortations, and just request of Geisa, the mind of the multitude, remained so
enflamed, as that without delay, in the eyes of the old man (which even for joy
were pouring forth tears) Stephen was with great applause, proclaimed not
Duke, or Vayuod, but lawful King and on the shoulders of the great men, lifted
up to the highest throne, and thence conueighed, with the same applause, to the
Soldiers tents.

Here had he likewise, the title of King afforded him, with the greatest
veneration, and consent of all, that possible might be. For which benefit,
Geisa showing himself to be no whit vngratful, with ample donaryes, with taking
away the old aggreeuances, with seattering of money to the people, and words of
much courtesy, continually obliged to him, and his son more and more the
hearts of men, and (that which more imports) was not behind to acknowledge the
divine goodness, with solemn sacrifice, and extraordinary yielding of thanks.
Through which, in the space of a few days being oppressed with age, and with a
great Catarh, he dyed in the year of our Lord 997. and the new King, as he had
always borne due reverence in life to so worthy and well deserving a Father,
so ceased he not to perform the same, after his death, with devout prayers,
and most sumptuous exequyes.

King Stephen makes peace with his Neighbors, and seeks to pacify all at home,
but is resisted by one Cupa a Rebel, whom he labors to suppress. Chap. 3.
IN the mean time, Saint Stephen applying himself with more liberty, and
exacter diligence to the government, the first thing he sought for, was to have
the glory of God for his final end, in all his actions, esteeming him ever to
be no less a Censour and severe Judge, then a benign Father, and bountiful
rewarder. And that by so much the more, as he understood of what importance,
the Example of a Prince was, as well to the good direction, as the ill
government, and total ruin of his people. And not to be at the same time
distracted with internal and external cares and molestations, and with the
thoughts both of peace and war at once, he earnestly labored in the
reestablishing of friendship, and the Capitulations already concluded by his
Father with his neighbors, as well by Embassies, as letters, cutting off by
this means likewise all hope of foreign succors to any malcontent with the
present State, or who should othe^ise be any ways desirous of nouelty. And
forasmuch, as he well understood, how the nerves, and sinews of empire and
rule do principally consist in justice, as well toward God as to mortals, he
trusting but little in his own knowledge, would ordinarily recurre partly to
the docume^ts of divine scriptures, wherein day and night, he made himself very
conversant, and partly to the counsel of prudent and learned men, and such as
feared God, but especially of S. Adalbert; who now perceiving, through divine
clemency, and the valor of S. Stephen, how well matters had proceeded in
Hungary, determined to pass over into other countries more remote, and which
seemed to stand in more need of the light.

Taking then his leave of the King, though given with a very ill will; he went
his ways with two choice companions, and no more, toward Prussia, where till
that time had arrived no knowledge of the Gospel. Here while he trauayles,
to deliver the Pagans from the servitude of the devil, and from their ancient
warlique exercises, fierce customs of Barriers, Tourneaments, and the like,
unto the knowledge of the true God, and love of Christian meekenes; being taken
by that wicked nation, and tied to a stake on the top of a high and steepy
hill, and so transfixed with seven lances, was added to the merit of his
preaching, the palm of a glorious martyrdom. In this interim, S. Stephen
ceased not also to how down the woods, and to cultiuate the deserts of that
Gentility; being resolved, either to reduce all his subjects, unto the
knowledge of the Creator, or in the enterprise, to part with his Kingdom, and
life at once.

And for that a good part of that people being brought to be Christians, rather
to please the Prince, and for terren ends and designs of theirs, then through
any deliberate consent, and stable will; and many others, by no means would
seem to admit of such manner of doctrine, S. Stephen was enforced against his
will, to use now and then, somewhat bitter, and biting remedies, whereby he came
to exasperate some Nobles in such sort, as that shaking off the yo^e of
subjection, partly despising the simplicity, and partly hating the severity of
the Evangelical discipline, they rose up in arms against him, and in the
lower Hungary began to wast, rob, and destroy the devout places, and persons
there, and such as were found to be most obedient to the name of Christ, and of
S. Stephen.

The Baron of Singia, by name Cupa, was the head and Captain of the Seditious;
a man of exceeding power, and greatly followed of many, who a good while since,
having by indirect ways, aspired to the Kingdom, now taking occasion from
these noueltyes, went raising up the people in such sort, as that what with
large promises, what with subtle calumnyes against the persons of S. Stephen,
and Gheisa the Father, and with horrible blasphemies against the Religion
brought in of new, as enemy to the Gods, and of their ancient ceremonies and
institutes, as also of the glory of the Hungarian name, so always mayntayned
and augmented, not by the way of books, or of slouthlull ease, but with hardy
enterprises, and expeditions of arms, being not content with harrying the
Champ^enys, boroughs, and villages; with in a few days he lifts up his thorns,
to the assaulting even of the walled towns, nor doubts he awhit to the greater
despite, and contempt of the holy King, to besiege the town of Vesprinio it
self, being a City very especially beloved, and favored of him. Who at the
first tidings of the rebellion, having tried with all possible means, to
temper the mind of Cupa, to win the people, and to quiet the tumults, at last
after many, and earnest intreatyes, gathering a full and competent army, under
the ensig^es of S. Martin, the glory of the Hungars, and of S. George that
renowned Martyr, and marching along toward his Enemy, he entrenches himself
in Cupa his sight, along the river of Gara.

Saint Stephen makes Vencellinus his Lieutenant General, and gives battle to
Cupa, who is stayne. And the Rebels being defeated, the King ordaynes
Bishoprics, Parishes, and Monasteryes. Chap. 4.
SAint Stephen, among other personages of quality, had three noble Alman Lords
with him, very zealous Christians, and exceeding expert in feats of Arms, who
from the first news of the pious inclination of Ghiesa, had volunta^ily put
themselves into his service, to help and promote the holy Gospel, to their
utmost power. One of these, by name Vencellinus, was by S. Stephen declared
Lieutenant General of his forces; and between the other two Hun^e and Pasna,
was the Cauallery, or horse divided; while the charge of the Fantery, or foot,
were distributed to excellent Collonells and Captains: and as soon as the
Soldiers had taken a little breath, and repose, S. Stephen was not slack,
with great courage, and good order, to offer battle to the perfidious Enemy.
Nor was Cupa himself awhit behind to go forth to meet him, with great
vehemence, and with equal hope of victory. The encounter endured many hours,
not without a great slaughter between them, and still with uncertain and
doubtful event: the King himself went here and there very manfully up and
down the troops, encouraging the doubtful, inciting the valiant, hartening
the cowards, and very readily sending still succor where greater necessity
appeared; and above all, never ceased he to inuoke the divine a^nce, in a cause
(...) just: and his prayers were not cast into the winds, because, that
Vencellinus, who had the right wing in charge, perceiving himself to be
secretly renforced, as it were, with new breath; after he had ^ought a good
while, with his eye upon the disloyal Capa, finally knew him, and went
suddenly to meet him, and while they both were buckling together, hand to
hand, the King perceiving the encounter, with a good number of choice horse
made ^ast to succor him, when approaching nearer, he sees Vencellinus having
now vnho^sed his enemy, to be cutting of his head with his own hands; the
which to the great joy of the Christians, was put on the point of a spear, and
being carried here and there, did give great terror to the Rebels, for without
more ado, they fell into route, and direct flight: while our men pursued them
with hot executions, and with the same violence entering into the enemies
trenches, never gave over from cutting in pieces, as many as they found
therein, until S. Stephen, who grieved at the effusion of so much blood,
caused the retrayt to be founded.

The Captives as guilty of high treason, escaped not without convenient
punishment: one quarter of Capas body, in terror of the rest, was affixed on
the gate of Vesprinio; another of Strigonium; the third at Gauerino; and the
fourth, at Alba Iulia, the principal City of Transiluania. And if S. Stephen
in chastizing had used justice, he showed it no less, in largely rewarding his
Captains, and soldiers, according to the dignity and deportement of each one:
but his principal study was, amidst such prosperous events, to shun
vayneglory, and to show forth that piety and gratitude, which he owed to the
Author of all good, and the Court of Heaven. And to that end, devout
processions being made, with solemn masses, he began from the very foundations
a magnificent Temple to S. Martyn his Protector, in a site, which is called
the holy Hill; where is said, the great Servant of God, was wont to remain in
contemplation, for the little time he abode in that Country: and besides the
applying of the third part of the spoils to the fabricque, he assigned for all
the Priests that should inhabit there, the whole Tithes of corn, wine, and of
cattle; and moreover of the children themselves of the inhabitants of the
City and territory of Simigia. And the rest of the goods which he might well
have put into the Fiscall, he deputed part to the maintenance of the poor, and
part to the increase of the divine worship. And being inflamed with new fervor
of charity, he never left craving of the Highest, at all hours, and somtymes
in sackcloth and ashes, the grace to see before his death, all Hungary
converted unto the faith, as forseing for certain, that being so, it should
come to be (as it fell out afterward) a perpetual, and strong bull warke for
the Church of Christ, against the violence of the Barbarians.

Many difficultyes seemed to cross this pious desire of his, but none greater,
then the want of sufficient Cathechists, and Preachers; while the number of
them who had come to those parts, in the time of Geisa, through diverse
accidents, was much diminished. Whereupon in imitation of his Father, with
ample patents, and very liberal offers, he sent to all the religious Orders of
Christendom, to inuit the good, and learned unto him: In so much, as many
Monks, and Priests repaired thither, partly moved at so honest a request, and
partly also of their proper will. Among which, was one Astricus a Benedictin
Abbot, called Anastasius by another name, with some disciples of his, who in
the lower Hungary, received some wounds for Christ. From Polony, resorted two
famous Hermits, Andrew and Benet; whereof the one was famous for miracles, the
other honored with sacred martyrdom. By means of these, and others, who came
to that work; the King attended to instruct the Gentiles in the principles, and
manners truly Christian; alluring them with sweetness of words and works, and
likewise when need required, constrayning the^ by main force, to forsake the
impious worship of the Idols. Nor ever ceased he from the work until such
time, as he had purged all those lands of their profane rites, and abominable
filth of the Devils. And to the end, that all might proceed with due form,
and that the fruit of these labors, might be durable, he takes in hand, with
mature consideration, and with the counsel of the wise, to ordain in fit
places, with sufficient rents, Parochial, and Collegiate Churches, and diverse
Conuents of Monks; and divided the Kingdom it self into ten Bishoprics,
declaring the City of Strigonium the Mother of them all, and choosing Prelates
of honorable fame for each one, and such as were apt, with the word to feed the
flock, and to lead them with good works.

King Stephen sends to Rome an Ambassador, to submit himself, and his
Kingdom to the Sea Apostolic: and marryes with Gis^a, of the house of
Bauary. Chap. 5.
THe rumor and applause of these so heroical actions of S. Stephen,
immediately ran through all Europe; and there was none who understood the noble
proceedings, and spiritual conquests of the new King, that deemed him not
worthy of eternal praise, and royal Majesty. Yet he alone could not satisfy
himself, nor ever repute that Hierarchy Canonical, or the Title acceptable to
God unless the free assent, and full confirmation of the Pope were added
thereunto, who in those days was Benedictus VIII. Some four years then,
after the death of Geisa, the Rebels for the most being suppressed, the
public affairs put in good order, and the faith dilated now as far as
Danubius, he sent Ambassador to the City of Rome, with a goodly and decent
pomp the aforesaid Anastasius, by him named already Bishop of Co^otz: who
after kissing of the feet, and tender of obedience, and a full relation of what
had happened in Hungary in these latter years, was humbly to beseech his Holy^
for three things. First, that he would daigne to bless, and admit that new
Christianity into the my sticall body of the faithful. The second, to ratify,
with his supreme power, what S. Stephen had al ready disposed, about the
Bishopriques, and Metropolis. The third, to approve, and declare valid the name
of King, wherewith he had been voluntarily honored by his subjects; to the
end, that the judgment of the vicar of Christ concurring thereunto, he might,
with so much the greater authority, seem to promote the divine service;
whereto only had all his industryes, thoughts, and designs their whole scope.

The Pope at so noble an Embassage, and joyful tidings, felt extraordinary
consolation in himself, nor ever ceased from praising God for the happy
increase of the Catholic Church, especially there having been that year
likewise, Polony united thereto, under the Duke Mischa, and thither come from
thence in like manner an Embassage, to acknowledge the chief Sea, and to yield
due obedience to his Holiness: wherefore very freely with the general consent
of the sacred College, it pleased his Holiness to give full satisfaction to
the petitions of S. Stephen, and to accept the Hungars into the flock of
Christ. And for royal Ensigns (being a thing that seemed most just to all) he
made him a gift of a Crown of gold, of great price, and of excellent
workmanship: and more over sent him a Cross, to be carried before him in
public, in sign of the Apostleship, and adorning the presents, with these
very words: I am, said he, an Apostolic man, but he may worthily be called
the Apostle of God, since through his means, Christ has gained so great a
multitude: and therefore, do we remit also to this good King, the care of
reducing those Churches to better for me, with Parishes and Diocesses.

In this manner, Anastasius with a happy expedition, having now obtained what
he would, returned again very glad into Hungary. In whose approach to
Strigonium he was met by S. Stephen forth of the territory there, with a great
multitude of the Clergy, and Nobility. Then were the Apostolical Briefs read,
and the Crown and Cross presented; which things S. Stephen received, not only
with extreme joy, but also with much veneration, kneeling himself, among other
things, in public, at each mention which was made of the holy Father, to
excite, with his example his subjects to a great esteem and reverence due to
the Roman Sea. Then being anointed, consecrated, and crowned, with solemn
ceremonies and triumphs, by the Archbishop, he attended with more seriousnes
the^ ever, to take away the impediments quite from the course of the Gospel,
maynteyning the external peace with a good neighborhood, and loving offices,
and the internal, with Edicts, and Laws full of justice, and equity.

And forasmuch, as to conserve the state, and life of the Prince, and to
restrain the pride and animosity of the more stubborn subjects, it is of no
light regard besides the good intelligence of neighbor, Potentats, to have
like wise some number of Children, he determined, with the judgment of his
more trusty and wise Counsaylours, not to differ his marriage any longer,
especially there offering it self, the most noble condition of Gisla, of the
illustrious blood Bauary and Sister of Henry the second being he that coming
into Italy and crowned by the Pope, to his immortal praise had chased away the
Saracens, and their fauourits from Gapua; and those neighbor countries. The
Spquse then, was decently conducted to the Husband and as that Sacrament was
celebrated with all the circumstances, and respects due unto Christian Princes
so is it no wonder, the match succeeded to be one of the most blessed, which
for many years have flourished since in the world. Into that royal house
never entered any vain pompes, no importune iealousyes, no false suspicions,
nor bitter contentions; while the happy couple striued not between themselves
but in charity vn^aigned, and in the continual study of the divine glory. For
which end having obtained (as we have said) confirmation from Rome, of the
Strigonian Matropolis, and of the Seas subordinat thereunto to eschew all
occasion of strifes, he clearly determined and lymited the confines of each; and
the same did he also, to diverse Abbacyes, founded by him.

Saint Stephen and his Queen build many Monasteryes. His piety (...) to all;
and the marvelous elevation of his in prayer. Chap. 6.
IT cannot easily be expressed what solicitude, and magnifice^ce Saint Stephen
always showed in sacred buildings. He built a marvelous goodly Temple in
Alba-regalis, to the most Blessed Virgin (to whom he was singularly devoted,
and so would he likewise have all those under him, and to keep the vigils of
all her Feasts, and especially of the Assumption) providing it with most ample
privileges, of large rents, and sumptuous furnitures, of vessels both of
silver, and gold, beset with jewels, and so finely wrought, as the metal
though of exceeding price, was the least part of the value thereof. In the
ancient Buda, called Sicambria of old, he erected a most noble Temple to the
glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, having for that end, with great
rewards, caused certain Architects to come from Greece, and as many
artificers, as he could procure to come thither. And to the end, the Hungars
might converse more freely in Rome, and continue always firm in devotion to
the chief Bishop; he dedicated that gallant Temple of Mont Celius there, to S.
Stephen the Protomartyr, without sparing any cost, which for the figure is
commonly called the Rotundo, and there richly founded withal a College of
twelve Priests: and built in the Vatican, and sufficiently provided an Inn,
for a welcome receptacle of those of his nation, who should go to visit the
Princes of the Apostles. And extending his liberality also into Thraci^, and
Soria, he erected in Constantinople, a holy place very statly and goodly to
behold; and a convent of Religious in Jerusalem, that each day at the holy
Sepulcher, sacrifices might be offered for the public good.

These, and other very pious places, are recounted to be built by that holy
King. And the Queen Gi^a also, besides the participation she had with his
merits, in applauding her husband in all things, and concurring thereto as much
as she might, would needs build likewise at her proper assignements, and adorn
at all points, the Church of Vesprinio, and there maynteyne at her own costs,
a good number of Priests to say divine service. And if such were the greatness
of mind of these two happy Princes, and continual profusion of expe^ces, in
material walls, and other dumb works; every one may easily guess, how much
their benignity was, and how great their tenderness to men, created for the
heavenly country, and oppressed and afflicted in this banishment of theirs,
through various necessityes and miseryes. It is reported of S. Stephen, that
there never came any pilgrim to him, whom he lodged not, and after dismissed
with a viatique. He had an extraordinary care of the sick, he would send them,
besides daily relief, now and then some loving present or other, and
immediately cured some of those, whom he but commanded to arise in the name
of God. By night, with a pleasing, and cheerful countenance, he would put
himself, to wash the feet of most abject people, and then at last bestow money
upon them. He would further in the night go alone unknown, to visit the
Hospitalls of the poor with his full purse.

And it happened on a time, that some of them, either through greedines of the
present object, or for some other unjust occasion, meeting with the pious
benefactour, most furious and ungrateful as they were, fell a pulling of his
beard; with which fact of theirs notwithstanding he was nothing moved, but
passing from thence, to the Church of the Mother of God, gave her thanks, with
all his heart, for that through her intercession, our Lord had vouchsafed him,
in some manner, to make him partaker of the most unworthy outrages, villanyes,
and injuries done unto him. And from thenceforth, more earnestly pursued he to
give large alms, to all sorts of miserable, and calamitous people as well in
public, as in secret, with his own hands, and by means of his familiars,
and especially of the blessed Gunther of Bohemia, an Hermit.

And as often, as this Gunther the man of God, did come from his Country, to
visit him; King Stephen would put all the prouisio^s and store of the palace
into his hands; when the Hermit distributing what he found, unto widows,
Orphans, strangers, and beggars, would soon leave the Royal Palace void and
destitute of all things. Whereat Saint Stephen would take very great
contentment; feeling himself by such acts of charity, toward his neighbor
continually enflamed, more and more in the love of Christ, and to the sweet
contemplation of invisible things. And now and then was so highly ravished
withal; as that praying once, on a time, in his Pauillion, in the open fields,
he was plainly seen with the pauillion it self, quite raised a pretty way
from the earth.

The Bessians of Bulgary do forage Hungary, but are defeated by S. Stephen:
and Conrade the Emperor with great forces being ready to give him battle, is
miraculosly prevented. Chap. 7.
KIng Stephen had likewise through the great familiarity, which he had with
God, some revelations of no small importance: as then when the Bessians (being
a people of Bulgaria, with whom afterward they confounded their proper name)
and Pagans at that time accustomed to rapine, and most bitter enemies of the
Hungars, were even ready to forage and destroy Transiluania; whereof S.
Stephen in the night being advertised from Heaven, dispatched immediately with
all care and diligence, a Post unto Alba-Iulia, who arrived so early thither,
as that all the country people of those parts, had space sufficient, to retire
themselves, with their most precious commodityes, into walled towns: and there
remained exposed to fire and sword, and pillage of the Enemies, the houses only
with the beasts, and such like Cattle. With which notwithstanding that
rauenons people went not long away so triumphant and proud: Because S. Stephen,
being provoked with new injuries, made incursions into their Confines, with a
flourishing army, and coming to encounter with Cea, the head of the Bessians,
slew him, and taking his baggage, made a most rich booty of him, and without
co^uerting it to private uses, applied it to pious works, and to the ornament
of Churches.

Heerupon the fame of S. Stephen now continually increasing, and spreading it
self through the world; it fell out, that whereas at first, for the
instruction and conversion of Hungary there had come thither from diverse parts,
very learned and pious men; now for to learn good laws and laudable customs,
began thither to resort many rude and ignorant people, with desire of
instruction, and light. As among others some sixty of the principal Bessians
themselves, though not without great peril and danger, through default of the
garrisons appointed there by S. Stephen in those frontiers, who at the
appearing of such a troop (which besides the rich furnitures of their
personages, brought with them a good number of carriages) either allured by the
greatness of the booty, or moved of hatred, or iealousy toward them, without
more ado, set upon them, and not satisfied with the unjust spoils they took,
some they killed, and others they left half dead, and wounded. The King
receiving the complaint of so heinous a fact, caused without tumult and delay
the malefactors to be brought into his presence; and after a shrewd
reprehensio^ given, setting up gibbets in all the principal passages of the
Kingdom, he made them publicly to be hanged up by two and two. Through which
severity, besides the punishing of the insolence and presumption past, he so
wrought, that while he lived afterward there was no more any violence offered
to any stranger. To this zeal of Justice, and care of strangers, may be
attributed a great part of the continual protection, which the divine Majesty
had of him, in his greatest dangers: whereof besides the events declared
above, the adventures which now we shall speak of, do give ample testimony.

His Cosen Henry being dead, Conrardus Suenus entered into the Empire. Against
this man, while for diverse respects he differred his going to Rome, the Dukes
and Communaltyes of Italy making a conspicacy, to set themselves at liberty,
fell flatly into rebellion; and the better to stand against the power of
Caesar, besides the co^bining of themselves together, they further demanded
aid of strangers, and especially of King Stephen, and the Sclauonian nations
which extend themselves from the utmost bancks of the Adriatique Sea, through
Dalmatia, Bohemia, Seruia, Bulgaria and Polonia, even to the Artique pole, by
the means of commerce of a common language amongst them. With all which
preparation notwithstanding, Italy was not of power sufficient to resist the
forces of Conrad; who at the fame of such comotions, descended with a dreadful
army unto Millan, and so strayghtly besieged that City, as all the rest being
terrifyed therewith, laying aside all stubbornes of heart admitted him, with all
humble homage and obsequiousnes that might be. Whence applying himself to find
out the origin and trace of the whole co^spiracy; he found that among other
stays and vpholders, it was founded particularly on the succors promised by
the Hungars, as well for the natural auersion they had from the name of the
Dutch, as for the especial devotion they bare, from the time they received the
Holy faith, to the Italian name, and to the Bishop of Rome.

Conrad, being exasperated with these informations, and moved to a bitter
desire of revenge, was no sooner returned into Germany again, but he took up
arms a new to revenge himself of his adversaries, and after he had wasted
Bohemia, and the neighbor countries, and severely chastized Boleslaus the new
Duke of Polony, and chased away his Son Mestou thence, he sets forth a great
Army against Hungary: at which news S. Stephen, though a great deal inferior
in forces, endeauours notwithstanding to gather up an army, and to prepare for
his defense, confiding yet above all things in the divine succors. Of which
his confidence at this time neither, was he a whit deceived. Because the
High Dutch very fiercely entering into those parts, and being now encamped in a
place commodious, S. Stephen was not slack to meet them with his squadrons,
and now were matters disposed on both sides, for a cruel and bloody battle;
when besides all opinion, appears in the field, an Imperial Herald, who running
through all the tents of the Captains and soldiers, gave express order, to
take up the pauillions, and bagage, and to return again into Almany. There
could not happen to Conrad, a thing more strange, and new at that time, who
examining his officers with great diligence, and not finding he had given any
such commandment at all; was satisfied at last, how that Herald could be no
other, then an Angel sent from Heaven, in favor of S. Stephen; and being
touched with religion, not only for the present renewed a firm peace with the
Hungars, but holily resolved withal, perpetually to beware of molesting such
any more, whom he manifestly saw to be so safe, and secure under the divine
protection.

Gynla the uncle of S. Stephen rayseth a rebellion, and is overthrown: and
after that receives Baptism. With another notable conspiracy against him
discovered, and punis^ad. Chap. 8.
THe good King, being thus delivered from so great a danger, had soon after,
a new occasion, to acknowledge the eyes of the divine clemency to be cast upon
him. Among the remaynder of the rebellious and contumations people, against the
yoke of Christ, and obedience of the Prince; was an uncle of his, by name
Gynla, who had the mountains of Transiluania in his government. This man, after
he had often sought to recall to the ancient profane rites, not only the people
but even his Nephew himself; takes upon him through diabolical instinct, to
endomage with inrodes and incursions the Lower. Transiluania, and the Cities of
Hungary it self. While S. Stephen, on the other side, having tried all ways
to quiet Gynla, and to put him in the way of salvation; being finally enforced
to recurre to arms, had so much furtherance from him that can do all things,
as that passing into his Uncles government, in a few months, he subdued him
quite, and converting the neighbor people to the Faith, led Gynla with him
prisoner into Hungary, with his wife, and children: and lastly also having
induced them to Baptism, he set them at liberty and treated them always very
honorably. To this persecution, there succeeded afterward another, so much
more dangerous, as it was more secret.

Four of the principal Palatynes of his Kingdom, with many familiars of the
Court, being but ill founded in human and divine faith, and not able to endure
the present tranquillity and peace, and throwly resolved ere Christian religion
took deeper root, to reduce Hungary again to the ancient fiercenes;
determined first of al to take away S. Stephens life, and thences afterward to
put all into hurly-burly, and to stir up here and there, reuolutions and
tumults: With this purpose, one of the conspiratours, being the most
temerarious of the rest, hiding his Scimetre under his coat, and entering one
Evening into the Palace, in the shutting of the night, before that candles
were lighted (it being then (...)) m^ (...) went privily insinuating himself
into the Kings lodging; where while he goes feeling the walls up and down into
the dark, with dubious hands; behold his Fauchon unawares falls from him: at the
noise whereof the King crying out, the Palatyne being wholly terrifyed and
confounded, found no better evasion then to present himself unto his presence,
and humbly to crave pardon at his hands: (...) was the same denied by the Kings
who making nevertheless most diligent inquisition of the co^plices, for
public example, would have them by no means to be let without due
punishments.

The Sanctity, and virtues of B. Emericus, sumne to S. Stephen: bis special
gift of discerning the merits of others. And how Maurus a Monk was especially
honored by the said King. Chap. 9.
SAint Stephen, in the mean time, had many Children, and among them, one
Emericus, who being adorned with more then human virtues, was by posterity
afterward, with the authority of the Pope Beatif^. It cannot easily be
explicated, what consolation took, not only the Parents from the bud, but even
likewise all those, who being near him had any knowledge of him. For first,
being prevented from heaven, with plenty of benedictions, and always
afterward brought up with exact tendance of Nurses, Tutours, and very
excellent choice Masters, and principally assisted by the lively examples, and
wholesome documents and admonishments of the Father, (who not content with his
present aduices to help him, did write himself also a Book of that matter) he
came in short time to work those fruits which from so rare a towardnes, and
diligent education, the world might well expect.

And among other notable things, recounted of him, this was one, that even from
his tender age, through his great moderation of diet, restrayning himself,
with much watching; he would rise at midnight, to recite devoutly the divine
the office, and pausing between psalm and psalm, examine the distractions
suffered therein, and with heart contrite, crave pardon of God for them; and
would endeavor besides with heavenly grace, to reduce his actual intention to
a most perfect habit. S. Stephen sometimes beholds the same through a certain
chincke of the wall, and keeps it secret, rejoicing in himself, at so new and
pleasing a spectacle. Now the holy King was wont (according to his commissions
and facultyes, received from R^,) to observe the customs, and behauiours of
Ecclefiasticall persons, and to go in person to visit the Churches and Conuents
of his Kingdom: and among others, going once to S. Martyns hill, where (as
has been said) many Monks of the Order of S. Benet did live very orderly and
regularly together; it pleased him once, to carry his beloved Emericus thither
with him, and at his coming near to the place, perceiving the venerable family
to come in processio^ toward him, he sudenly sen this Son before to meet
them, and entertayne them the while, who being received with great honor by
the Servants of God, began in the sight of his Father, to kiss him one by one,
but yet not all alike, since that knowing by divine revelation the merits of
each one, to some he gave two kisses, to others three or four, and five to
many, save only to Maurus he gave seven. Whereat the King merueyling much, and
thinking it likely not to happen by chance, would needs be satisfied thereof;
when Mass was ended he familiarly demanded of Emericus, what was the reason,
that to one, and the self same habit of Religous, with the same manner of
salutation of kissing, he had observed so great diversity in the number:
whereto the Youth very promptly answered, that in such distribution he had had
regard to the purity and continency of each one, and that with the number of
seven so perfect, it pleased him to honor him so, who from a child to that
time, had kept his virginity entire.

The Father remained with this answer, much more in suspense, then before: and
to be the better certifyed thereof, taking his leave from thence for the
present, returned thither again, a little after unknown, with two only
familiars, and no more: and dexte^erously coming by night into the Quire, in
time of the Mattins, ^he office being ended, he noted how the greatest part of
those Regulars, immediately retired themselves, to repose in their Cells, and
how such only as Emericus had favored most, remaining behind, went to hide
themselves in certain corners, to continue their seruent prayer. Then S.
Stephen approaching first to one, and then to another a part, discovering who he
was, very courteously saluted them all; who at the sight of his Royal Majesty
interrupting both prayer and silence not failed to salute again with all
reverence: ^ut so did not Maurus, being wholly ravished the while with (...)
things; for being saluted by the King, with most sweet words, he opened not his
Mouth, and being sharply rebuked by him for it conttnued still mute. Whereupon
the day following the King for better proof of the in ward qualityes of
Maurus, causing the bell to sound to a Chapter, in the presence of all, with
severe countenance at last charged him with many things that by no means
became a religious person: but the disciple of Christ, confiding in the
testimony of a good conscience, and in the judgment of him that sees all,
keeping always a good composition, and modesty with him, answered not a word.
Whereupon the King apprehended the sanctity of this man, was with reason so
singularly honored by his son Emericus, and laying all dissimulation aside,
he discovered most clearly to the Monks, the intent wherefore he came thither,
and the experience he would needs make of Maurus. Nor did he extol him only
for the present, with extraordinary praise, but further elected him a little
after, to the Bishopric of Cinq-Eglises, and obtaynedthe full confirmation
thereof from his Holiness.

A singular act of Chastity in Emericus, preserving his virginal parity in the
state of Matrimony. Chap. 9.
IN this mean while, Emericus went daily increasing, both in years and
virtues, and felt a generous desire to burn in his breast of doing some
notable service to the divine Majesty. With ^his devotion, entering on a time,
with one page only, into the Church of S. George; he puts himself on his knees
to meditate, and to find out with himself, what Present to offer, that might
be most grateful and acceptable to the eyes of his Creator: and behold on a
sudden, the whole place to be replenished with an immense light, and a voice
heard which said: Virginity is a fair and beautiful thing; this is that which
I seek entirely of thee, as well in mind, as body; This then, do thou offer to
God, and see thou persevere there in with full purpose. These words arriving in
the ears of the Page withal* did so penetrate the mind of Emericus, and so
wrought with him, as that being enflamed with the desire of obeying, and
distrustful withal of his own forces, he prayed in this manner.

My Lord God, to whose eyes every thing is open, and naked, and who, as thou
know, through thy just judgment how to take away the life from great men,
and are very dreadful to the Kings of the earth; so to their frailty, who
presume not of themselves can tell how to afford opportune succor; Grant I
beseech thee, thy most holy will, may completely be performed in me, and with
the dew of thy mercy* extinguish in my (...) concupiscence Fortify the weakness
of thy poor Servant through thy benignity, that he may never swearue from the
right way: Guard him from all the allurements of sensuality, and cause that he
never commit any thing, whence he may seem to fall from thy grace.

The Colloquy ended, Emericus felt himself to be fully replenished with
extraordinary consolation, and wonderfully encouraged withal, yet to eschew
vain glory, would never reueal the favor to any, but commanded his servant
under grievous pains, as long as he lived, to keep it secret. When
cooperating afterward, with the divine mercy, he never left at times to
macerate the flesh, with prayer fastings, and vigils: and that with reason too,
because God, (who is not pleased with virtues not come to the Chisel, and
proved by the Hammer) disposed, that by means of his Father, he should be
tempted to marry with a young Lady of rare qualityes, and of Princely blood,
though by Authors unnamed. To which importunity, after Emericus had resisted a
pretty while at last, not to contristate his Parents, he yields, secure the
while, that the divine Goodness for the observance of his promise, would not
fail him of some succor or other, as indeed after he found it so.

For that as soon, as he had with solemn ceremonies, publicly accepted the
Spouse, in pritrat being assisted from heaven, as well with reasons, as with
prayers, he easily induced her, to co^serue with him, under the cloak of
Matrimony, the flower of virginity, preferring it (wisely) before all respect
of issue, and all the greatnesses, and Signoryes of the world. Whereof in
progress of time S. Stephen was aware; but yet setting the greater glory of
God before his eyes, by all means he absteyned from with drawing Emericus from
his holy purpose. Amidst so great variety of human accidents, and among so many
prosperityes of glorious victories and joyful successes, had S. Stephen no
want not withstanding of his probation and scourges. For of so numerous an
offspring, which he had, while one dyed after another, in their childhood,
there was only Emericus left him, with whose safety alone, to him it seemed
were counterpoysed all other losses whatsoever; when he also, in the flower of
his age, was snatched away, so accomplished with merits, to be an aduocat in
Heaven, for those nations, which in earth by lawful inheritance belonged to him.

S. Stephen nevertheless at so grievous a blow felt incredible* sorrow;
especially so redoubled a little after, by the death of his wife, not finding
the while, any one of his stock, to whom securel^ he might leave the
government: and the whole kingdom standing in danger to return to their old
vomit, and customs as before, when through want of a good successor, the good
exercises began, should be quite given over. Emericus his exequies were
celebrated in AlbaRegalis, some 30 days after his happy passage, with so
evident miracles, and so full persuasion of his eternal felicity, as in a
moment all the clouds of sadness and mourning were vanished quite, when his
wife, now Widow, gave faithful testimony of her husbands virginity, and the
Rage to confirm the same, discovered what had happened in S. Georges Church.

How S. Stephen dies, and is buried with pomp in the Church of our Lady which
himself had built, where he works many miracles. With the translation of his
holy Body afterward. Chap. 10.
SAint Stephen perseuering still in his wonted yielding of due thanks unto
God, and conforming himself with the divine will in all things, came shortly
after to fall into a grievous palsy, where with being held more then 30.
months in his bed, he was finally seized with a strong fever, which brought
him to the end of human miseryes. And now at last, peceyuing himself to decay,
causing the Prelates and Barons which were in Court, to be called unto him, he
dealt with them about a future Election, having always an eye on the divine
service, and increase of his holy faith, and exhorted them with fatherly
affect^, to est^ it above all things, and for the same to be ready to spend
their blood, when oceasion should require. Moreover, he recommended to them the
observance of the divine precepts, and of the Popes ordinations, the
maintenance of Justice, concord, and of peace, not only among themselves, but
like wise with-strangers* In sum, to show themselves Christians to every one,
and faithful no less in heart, and deeds, then profession, and title.

In this manner in substance, S. Stephen spoke to the principal of the
Kingdom, with the great resentement, and sorrow of as many as heard him; when
lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, not without tears, but with voice
interrupted, he spoke in this manner; O glorious Queen of Heaven, O noble
restorer of the world, into thy hands do I recommend, together with my soul,
the Churches, the Clergy, the Primates, and the people of Hungary. Heerupon,
having received, in the presence of all, after the Sacrament of Penance, the
celestial Via^ique and Extreme unction, he quietly rendered his spirit* upon
the very Feastof the Assumption, as he had always desired, a happy day, and
with reason ever celebrated by him from a child with singular joy, being then
the year of our Lord, one thousand thirty and eight, or thirty four, as some
will have it, being the 69. of his Stephens life, and 41. of his Crown.

His body with magnificall pomp* and most frequent concourse of all the
States, was carried likewise to Alba regalis, there ^o be deposed in the Temple
of the most blessed Virgin, by him built, as we have said above: but being not
yet consecrated, it seemed good to the Bishops, that ceremony should first
precede the funerals, which being ended, he was there placed with psalms and
canticles, and other solemnityes, in a vault of white marble; where a long time
the divine Goodness continually glorified his servant, giving health to the lame
and diseased; and consolation, and ^cour to the miserable and afflicted. There
were heard also in the same place, often times by night, angelical songs, with
a most fragrant odor diffused on every side. The precious members lay there in
a Sepulcher, some 45. years at which time Ladislaus the 7^ raygning, there
came order from R^, that diligent search, and enquiry should be made of all the
relics of such, at from the beginning had been the instruments of God, in the
preaching of the Word, and conversion of Hungary; and for the renewing of the
memory of such labors, and so great merits, that a very Honorable, and Noble
translation, should be made of their bodies.

In veriue of this Order, by the universal Diet, was a Fast intimated of three
days, with prayers and alms; after which Ladisslaus, with much veneration,
being accompanied by the Court and people, came first to the Monument of S.
Stephen: but with all the engines, and strength that might be, was it not
possible to be opened and discovered; until such time, as by the advice of a
Virgin, whose name was Carite (who being immured besides the Church of our
Savior, was held in great opinion of sanctity) he was resolved to deliver
Solomon his brother, imprisoned by him for grievous strifes and disgusts
between them. Heerupon now the Fast being redoubled, that immovable stone,
was so easily removed as it had been of wool, of straw. The Coffin then of
lead being taken from thence, and carried in procession, and the Vespers sung,
it was reverently deposed upon a most glorious Altar, in the midst of the
Church; and all that day, and the night following, there continued very evident
miracles.

In the morning, which was the 20. of August, the Mass being celebrated, and
prayer ended; the King, with the principal of the Clergy, and Nobility,
approaching to the coffin, keeping the multitude off, for fear of some theft,
with devotion they opened the same, and now the flesh being dissolved, the
bones appeared to lie within a certain liquour, like balm, which even
sauoured of an odor of Paradise, being much consumed with time. Ladislaus
beheld it attentively, and with great curiosity seeking for the ring of S.
Stephen, caused for that purpose, the said oil to be laded forth by hands of
the worth yest Prelates, into silver vessels: but by how much the coffin was
emptyed by others, it was again filled up of if self, and all their diligence
succeeded in vain: being then amazed thereat, they powered it in again, and
yet the quantity increased not a whit either more or less. When the borres
withal, being put thereinto, they were thence translated, into a most
sumptuous, and rich Chapel.

An Angel appears to Mercuriu^ a Monk, and delivers him a hand with the Ring
of S. Stephen. With a Miracle happening at the shrine of Emericus. Chap. 11.
OF the number of those, to whom, in the ministry of the Priests, was denied
access to the sacred relics, was a Monk whose name was Mercury, deputed to
the service and custody of that Church. This man, taking it very heavily to
heart, that he could not be suffered at pleasure, to be hold and kiss that
great treasure, retired himself a part; and there in the dead time of the
night, sat mourning and lamenting, when besides all hope, there appeared to him
a young man, of a heavenly countenance, who reaching him a piece of fine
holland, enfolded and wrapped up together: Take here (said he) O Mercury, the
same which thou have so much desired, and when thou have kept it in deposito
for a day, do thou carry it to the King. After these words, the Angel vanished
away: and Mercury full of unspeakable sweetness, unfolding the cloth, found there
the hand and Ring, so much sought for of the King, and when it seemed to him,
to be now high time, he went and made a present thereof to the King Ladislaus,
who received it most joyfully, and in a sumptuous Reliquary, caused it to be
laid apart in another Oratory. And it was but just, that so beneficious a
right hand, with particular care, without all injury should be kept and
reverenced, in a place by it self, which so often had been so profusedly
stretched forth, to the benign succor, and liberal relief of the poor.

This particular, from a heap of relations, we have thought good to select
forth, about the life, customs, and greatnesses of S. Stephen, the first King
of Hungary. With which, since we have accide^tally like wise fallen upon those
of the blessed Emericus; it may not happily be amiss, to conclude the whole
narration, with an admirable effect, whereof they both, though not equally,
might seem to participate.

In the time of the same King Ladislaus before mentioned by us, a certain
High-dutchma^, one Conrad by name, a man of a most wicked life, and plunged in
all manner of debauchnes, being at last compunct, and contrite for all; went
his ways to Rome, and there making a general Confession of his whole life,
had for his penance, to wear on his bare flesh, a breast plate of steel, tied
on with five chains of iron, with a sheet of paper written therein, wherein
his more enormous crimes were contained, signed with the seal of his Holiness,
and in this habit to go visit the holy places of Christendom, until such
time, as through divine power the bands should be undone, and the writing be
wholly cancelled. This man obeyed with great promptnes, and after he had been
at Jerusalem, and other famous Monuments of Saints, he came at last unto
Alba-regal^, and there putting himself in prayer, at the shrine of the holy
King Stephen, he determined not to arise from thence, until he had perfectly
obtained the grace. And now he had perseuered from one, to nine a clock at
night, when sleep through wearynes oppressed him, and immediately the glorious
King appeared unto him, saying: Get up friend, and go thy ways to the Chapel
hard by, of my son Emericus, who through especial privilege of incorrupt
virginity, shall obtain thee undoubtedly pardon of thy so great crimes, he
being one of the number of those, who have never defiled their garments, but
accompany the Lamb wheresoever he goes, and who stand singing before the
Throne of God, that new song.

Which said he vanishes; and the Penitent without delay, passing to the
Monument of Blessed Emericus, had no sooner begun to frame new prayers, but
that in a moment, his hard knots fell loose of themselves, and the seal broke
open, and discovered the paper to be blank. At the noise of the cheynes falling
off, the Keepers of the Church, and others, at that time entering to do their
devotions, came running to him, and some of them understanding particularly by
relation, and the rest with their own eyes what had happened, never ceased to
magnify God, the giver of all good, and merueilous in his Saints. To whom be
all honor, power, and benediction for all eternity.

Amen.
S. EDWARD KING.
THE ARGUMENT.
AN Orphan left, and in minority,
Heau'en was my Guardian; this did me protect;
To this I did assign my custody;
My raging ^es heerby suppress't and checked
Yielding to (...), did grant me liberty
To serve my dear Aduancer, and reflect
On this false world, which promising content
Does only yield us matter to repent.
As those that in the Eternal Essence see
What ere falls out, what ever was before:
Veyl'd under bread, Dear Lord, I viewd in thee
The machinations of the Prince The D^.
that bore
A Raven bathed in Martial Gules, to be
Dissolved: I stretched mine Empire past the shore
That Albion bounds: my force did Ireland tame
That thought my standards fatal where they came.
Treasures so much I slighted, that I viewd,
Unmoved thereat, my treasures borne away.
The ^ately Fane at Now Westminster
Thorney raised, has showed
My end, Heavens glory: Still it does display
A mind with true Magnificence end^'de.
Heerby I gaind what never shall decay:
And with a Ring espoused me to the sky,
Where my Raygne done, I raygne Eternally.
THE LIFE OF S. EDWARD KING OF ENGLAND.
Written by Alred Abbot of Ridall, of the Order of Cisterce.
S. Edward is chosen King in his Mothers womb. Ethelrede the Father dying,
Edmund succeeds. Canutus rages. Emma flies with her two younger Sons into
Normandy: with the great towardlines of S. Edward.
IT pleased G^, the Blessed Edward, through especial p^ogatiue, should be
chosen King before his a^pearing to the world: for that at the instance of his
Father Ethelred King of England, a Parliament being called, as well for other
public affairs, as to declare, and swear to a new Prince, howbeyt already
there were two sons of his of strong constitution, Edmond, and Alfred: yet
the Nobility and Clergy, being but little satisfied with either of them, with a
wondrous inclination, concurred to yield homage unto an uncertain issue, as
yet enclosed in the Mothers womb, which being born (...) little after, was
called by the name of Edward. True it is, that E^red dying in those days, and
most cruel tempests threatening the Island on every side, with consent of the
Barons, not to leave things altogether without a head; the said Edmond, took
the rule upon him. Nor was it long, but that a terrible inundation of the
Barbarous Danes, came rushing into England, under the Tyrant Canutus. Who
beginning to put all things to fire and sword, the Queen Mother, whose name
was Emma, a Norman by nation, was conuayed for greater security, with her
younger sons, into her Fathers Country.

Here the child Edward, began betymes to give forth very evident signs of the
mature piety he was like to atteyne in time. I^ reguard, that having in scorn
all childish sports, he attended still, among other tokens of a Christian mind,
to visit now this, now that holy Convent, and to linck straight amityes with
the most famous Servants of God. In the mean time, in England the ^ury of the
Enemy grew day by day more cruel, then other: nor was now to be seen at last,
or heard any other then slaughters, rapins, bitter plaints, and terrible
outcrys. The Temples burned, the sacred habitations ruined, the Guardians, and
Pastors o^ souls, for fear of the worst punishments, hid themselves in the
most craggy, and desert places.

Among which, was Britwald Bishop of Winchester, a man of great prayer, and of
a notable spirit. Who praying one day, with many tears, for the health of the
Kingdom, and pouring forth his afflicted heart with sighs and laments before
the divine presence, after much wearynes of mind, and body, fell finally
asleep. Where behold the Prince of the Apostles appeared to him, from an
eminent place, with S. Edward before him, a youth very gracious in countenance,
and adorned with a scepter, diadem, and royal man^le, who after he had with
solemn unction, consecrated him with his own hands, gave him many good
documents withal, full of verity and life; and in particular exhorted him, to
keep virginity, revealing to him besisides, for how many years he should hold
the dominion.

Now Britwald being sorely astonished at such a vision, at soon as he returned
again to himself, took heart, and beseeched S. (...) to vouchsafe to manifest
to him some things of the estate of that miserable Country, and of the end of
the troubles, which afflicted the same. To which demand, the Apostle answered,
with a seren countenance* Kingdoms, O Bishop, are of God, he is the Lord, and
Master of all; he at his pleasure alters, and changes governments, and for the
sins of nations, does often exalt the Hypocrit. The divine Majesty, is
grievously offended with thy people, and therefore they are fallen into the
hands of their most capital adversaries: but yet nevertheless God shall not
be unmindful of his wonted mercy, nor stretch forth his just vengeance, for
ever upon them: because many years shall not pass after thy death, but the
present calamityes shall cease, and the wished redemption shall come to this
peoplesince his eternal goodness, has already destined a man, according to his
heart, and wholly at his devotion; who being placed through my help in the royal
Throne, with the infinite consolation of the subjects, shall abate the forces,
and bridle the Danish fury; and who after he has many ways raised, and
advanced the Church, being dear to God, very acceptable to his friends, and
dreadful to his enemies, shall termine his glorious life, with a most holy end.

From this so benign an answer, together with the sight of him there
promised, the Bishop took new courage, and stuck not to enquire of the Oracle
it self, of the posterity, and successors of Edward. To which demand, with
obscure and dubious words, the Apostle replied no more, but that, God was Lord,
and after this, he would provide another, according to his good pleasure.

Edmund with his Children are put to the sword. Alfred is made away. S. Edward
prays, and makes a vow to God and S. Peter; and Canutus with his children
dying, is recalled into England again. Chap. 2.
THe English troubles, continuing still, with civil discord among themselves,
being joined at last with externe wars, came to be so mischeiuous and
pernicious, as that despising all law of faith, all vicinity of blood, all
obligation of friendship, al things were full of fraud, factions, and
iealousies. And even malice proceeded so far, as that the Nobles themselves,
forgetting their oath shamefully renouncing their lawful Kings, and putting
Edmond to the sword, with his children at Nurse, they continually prepared
tragedyes. Canutus with a wicked marriage, possessing the Widow the Wife of
Edmond, left nothing untried, to confirm himself, in the unlawful usurpation
of the Kingdom. Wherein he had so fast a hold, that Alfred for the quieting of
tumults in some manner, too boldly passing over from Normandy into his Country,
was with extreme cruelty, made away, as well by the Danes, as English, and at
the same time, the desolate Queen Emma dyed in her Fathers house.

Then Edward, being deprived of all human succor on earth, and fearing every
hour, his last ruin from others, amidst many troubles, and anguishes,
prostrating himself most humbly before the divine presence, prayed in this
sort. Behold, Lord, how I have now, no more help in me, and my nearest friends
are far of from me: my friends, and neigbours, are all become my adversaries;
I have neither Father, nor Mother in the world; my Brothers and Nephews, are
betrayed and slain; the widow my kinswoman, is become our adversaries wife. So
as I am left without all stay, and they seek moreover, to take away my life.
But I (O Lord) poor wretch, am left to thee, and thou shall succor the
orphan, as heretofore in a marvelous manner, thou have done to King Edwin,
environed on every side. Thou, that made S. Oswald, the ornament of England,
of an exile, to be King, and by means of the sign of the Cross, did
subject to him, all those that hated him; If thou shall be with me, and through
thy protection, remit me into my Fathers kingdoms, thou shall be always my
God, and the blessed Apostle Peter, shall be my especial Protector, whose
most holy relics, I do promise to visit in the City of Rome, with his
direction.

With this Vow, S. Edward felt himself exceedingly, revived, and replenished
with no vain hopes. For that Canutus in few days dyed, and his children also,
of tender age, not long suruiued. By occasion whereof, the English, as a
wakened out of a dead sleep, very suddenly took up arms, and shaking of the
yoke of intruding tyranny, recalled the desired Edward into the land again,
and receiving him with all the honor possible, with one accord, they placed
him in the royal throne. At the coming of S. Edward, all good arts, and
Christian virtues did return from banishment. The vacant Seas were soon
replenished, Churches, and Monasteryes repaired, and the divine service, in
short time brought to its ancient splendor again. Hence through welcome
peace, ensued the tillage of the wast and desert champaynes, and the Iudge^ and
Magistrates being kept in their duty, more through example of the King, then
fear of punishments, attended to administer upright justice, to all sorts of
persons. The iubily, and content of the present felicity, was much augmented by
the fresh memory of the miseryes past; insomuch as not only the reasonable
creatures with praises and thanksgiving, but even the land it self, with
extraordinary fruitfulnes, the air with fair and serene weather, the sea with
still and quiet waves, and smiling countenance, seemed to acknowledge him, and
the Cittyes daily to multiply in laudable customs, riches, and multitude of
inhabitants.

Two notable examples in S. Edward of contempt of Riches. With his vow of
chastity, maintained in the state of Matrimony. Chap. 3.
IT was not long, ere the fame of so great prosperity, extended to the
Provinces beyond the Seas. And from all the Potentates, the Dane excepted (for
they left not their pride) came very honorable Embassages, from time to time,
to congratulate, to make leagues of freindship, and to establish some good
correspondence with S. Edward. And he the while, not puffed up with pride, nor
dissolute with vain triumphs, having always the divine Majesty, before his
eyes, with an even tenor of life, carried himself very meek to his
domestiques, reverent to Priests, gracious to the people, compassionate to the
afflicted, and above all things, a great Almoner, and a strange neglecter of
money; insomuch, as once, among the rest lying on his bed, and his private
Treasurer, Hugoline by name, having unawares, left open a chest of money in that
chamber, a groom of the place, being invited through the commodity of the
purchase and the seeming sleep of the Prince, approaching boldly, took away
from thence a good quantity thereof, and put it up in his pocket; and being glad
of so happy a success, returned again a second time and so a third; When as
the King, who had feigned till then, perceiving Hugoline to be coming, brake
silence, and with friendly voice, said to the wretch Get thee gone, for the
Treasurer comes; who if he chance to catch thee once, will not leave thee a
fa^thing of all thou have. At this voice, the fellow fled as soon, and scarcely
had got his feet forth of one door, but Hugoline entered by the other, and
finding so great a sum of treasure to be wanting, he was even ready at first
to faint for grief, then entering into a rage with himself began to rent the
air with cries and sighs: When S. Edward, arising from his bed, and still
dissembling the matter, quietly demanded the occasion of so great a heauynes,
and having heard it: Hold thy peace man (said he) perhaps he who has taken it
away had more need thereof, then we: Much good may it do him, the rest I hope
will serve for us. With such quietness, he passed over that act. Whence may be
gathered, how well subdued he had his passions, and how far he was, from all
rapine of others goods, that was so pro^pt to yield his own.

To which purpose likewise, we may not let this pass; there having been in
his Fathers time, a most grievous taxation, laid on the people, in respect of
an army to be leuyed against the Danes, and yet the same exaction still
continuing (as it happens) though the war were ended; S. Edward as a good
Father, and Pastor of his people, with princely liberality, discharged them
thereof, for ever: whereto, besides the greatness of his mind, he was likewise
moved by seeing plainly, upon a heap of the same money, an ugly Devil to
sit, and sport himself. In such like acts as these of religion, equity and
bounty, with the edification of all the world would S. Edward spend the time
afforded him for the purchase of the Eternity. And yet among these same
honorable thoughts, he forgot not a whit, the virginal title, so seriously
recommeded to him by S. Peter the Apostle: which thing indeed, proved to be so
much more violently assaulted by his green years, hot complexion, easy
access unto delights, as through the fubtilityes of the enemy, and store of
servants, most prompt to him at every beck. Which assaults notwithstanding,
though grievous and fastidious, yet most commonly being open and manifest, S.
Edward did manfully resist, through divine grace, and went continually away
with glorious triumphs. The battayles which perpetually day and night he
suffered, from the Communalty, and states of the land, were cloaked with
honesty, and colored with the public good, and consequently more
treacherous, and terrible to him; who showing infinite care of the universal
peace, and security, which greatly depended on the future succession of the
King, never left urging opportunely, and importunely, in time and out of
season, with reasons, and examples, with prayers and coniurations, and those
mingled now and then with some manner of threats, that he, forsooth, having
pity on his country, and of the dangers, that hung over it through his single
life, would be pleased to differ no longer to provide for progeny, to wit, some
fruitful and honorable ma^e.

Such were the requests, and supplications of the people, and Barons. Among
which, with appearance of right intention, and holy zeal the Earl Godwin
showed himself most earnest, being a person, very potent, politic, and
ambitious, and who by the opinion of all, had a hand with the tyrant Canutus,
in the impious murder of Alfred; and now with thoughts, wholly pointing to his
private greatness, plotted to mary his daughter Edith with Edward, and that to
the notable increase of his estate, to see her Queen. This Lady, was not any
thing like to the Father, as one that feared God, being a friend of abstinence,
very prompt to read and work, far from prattling, and all feminin disports;
in sum, a rose sprung from thorns, ordained by God for a faithful Companion
of S. Edward in all virtues. This young Virgin, by public decree, was
commended and tendered to the good Edward, with the common importunityes and
prayers perseuering still; so much more lively, as the necessities of the
Kingdom, and qualityes of the Spouse, made a repulse to the more inexcusable.
All this now, the King knew very well, but on the one side being resolved, not
to manifest; or break his solid purpose of virginal chastity; and on the
other, very hardly able to resist any longer, the petitions and most earnest
importunities of his subjects; being put into such streights, and fallen into
an agony, he could find no better remedy, then even the same by him so often
tried, of voluntary pennances, and fervent prayers. So as after many fastings,
and other corporal afflictions, which doubtless do serve very much, to render
the divine Majesty propitious to a man, being prostrate on the earth, full of
humble affect, and firm faith, he spoke to his Creator and Lord, in this
manner following: O good Jesus, by thee the three Children have been delivered
from the Chaldean flames of old. Through thee Joseph leaving his cloak behind,
had saved this honor: and the constant Susanna got the victory of the lewd old
Men: and the holy Judith through thy help could not be tempted by Holofernes.
Behold me here, thy servant, and as I have been heertofore, favored and
beloved of thee, in diverse accidents: So succor me now also, O Lord, in this
necessity, and grant, that in some manner, of imitation of Mary thy Mother,
and Joseph her faithful Guardian, such espousalls may be had between Edith,
and Me, that my Chastity may suffer no wrong, or empeschement whatsoever. So
Edward prayed, and moreover added thereunto the efficacious intercession of the
Queen of Angels herself: by whose intercession and means, so great desire
of purity, was infused into the Spouses mind, as that being brought with
solemn pomp and royal preparations to her husband, she was by him, without
the mediation of any other testimony at all, in the divine sight, very easily
brought to a perpetual purpose of entire Virginity; in such sort as being both
united with the holy band, contenting themselves with the Sacrament of
Matrimony, they always kept themselves pure and far from any work of wedlock.

S. Edward being myndfull of his vow of Pilgrimage, consults with the Peer^s of
his Kingdom thereof: But after debate resolves, and is dispensed therewith by
the Pope. Chap. 4.
THis difficulty, now by divine help, being so passed over, there remained yet
another, of some moment; which was the fulfilling of his vow (as we have said)
heertofore, in his greater troubles, to visit personally in Rome, the Memory of
the Apostles. The pious King, kept faithful record still of this so great an
obligation, and the care he had of performing the same, did now continually
burn in his breast. Whereupon, as soon as matters seemed to affoard
opportunity, he immediately began to make provision of magnificent and
sumptuous gifts, for to offer up at the holy Aultars of Rome; and besides went
putting of things in order for the voyage. To this effect, calling the chief
of the Kingdom into counsel, he discovered this thought of his unto them;
and reducing to all their memoryes, the unhappy state, and extreme calamityes
of their country, which had brought him to recommend himself to the divine
Clemency, and to make a vow of pilgrimage to Rome, to obtain more easily the
Protection of the Prince of the Apostles, he demonstrated with many reasons,
how abominable, and impious it was, to forget ones duty, and to become
ungrateful to him, who had delivered the whole nation from the hand of most
cruel enemies: wherefore, every one sincerely should propound, what best
occurred to him, about the accommodating of things, in such sort as through his
absence, might neither the traffic by sea, nor co^merce by land, nor Towns,
Castles, or Cities, nor finally the private, or public affairs come to
suffer any hurt: and lastly bids them be of good cheer, affirming, he was most
secure that the Great God, would both assiste him, in so long a journey, and
conserve his subjects in the peace and abundance, which of his benignity he had
granted to them of late.

To this sense did S. Edward speak, and scarcely had he finished, but all
those Counselors, and heads of the Provinces, began to complain with a loud
voice at such a resolution, as not being fit the land should so be abandoned of
its guide, and the subjects exposed to the slaughters, and outrages of the
Enemies, who were ready at al occasions, that should be offered them, to
return again into the Island in arms: His vow was laudable, but yet
cou^terpoysed with too grievous and manifest perils. In this sort contended
they a good while, and after many answers, and replies to and fro, he finally
took resolution, to remit all to his Holiness, being at that time Pope Leo, the
Ninth of that name; who being fully informed by express men, and letters at
large, wrote back to the King, in this form.

Leo Bishop, the Servant of the Servants of God, to his dearly beloved Son
Edward, King of the English, Health, and Apostolical benediction. Knowing thy
good desires, worthy of praise, and most acceptable to God, we do yield due
thanks for the same, to him through whose means Kings and Princes do rule and
govern, and execute justice: but forasmuch, as God in every place, is near to
those that call upon his name, in truth and equity, and the holy Apostles are
united with their head, with one, and the self same spirit; and that he
equally attends to pious prayers: And that besides being evident, the Kingdom
of England would come to be in great dangers, if thou should leave the same,
that with the bridle of thy power restreynest the seditious motions of the
people: We by the authority committed to us from God, and his holy Apostles, do
absolve thee from the band of that vow, for which thou fear to offend the
divine Majesty; and likewise, in virtue of that power, which was granted to
us* by our Lord, in the person of the blessed Peter, when he said: Quaecumque
solueris super terram, erunt soluta and in caelis, we do first absolve ^ee, as
well from this band, as from all other negligences and defaults whatsoever,
incurred in thy whole life: then, in virtue of holy Obedience, and by title of
penance, we do command thee, thou distribute the money, assigned to this
Pilgrimage to the poor; and to erect besides, a Monastery of Religious, unto
the honor of the Prince of the Apostles: yet leaving still to thy discretion,
either to tear it from the first foundations, or to repair or augme^t some
other in ill plight, and ruined already through injury of times or other
accidents: and furthermore, that thou endow the same, with rents sufficient, to
maynteine a good number of the Servants of God; to the end, that while they
there attend to praise the divine Majesty, the glory may redound to the Saints,
and pardon and indulgence to thee. Besides, we do will and declare, whatsoever
so conferred and applied, either by thee, or any others, to be firm and
stable, and to be always the habitation of the Monks, and not to be subject to
any secular person whosoever, except the King. Moreover we confime, with most
ample authority, what privileges may seem good to thee, to be granted, so as
truly they may be to the honor of God. And for conclusion, we do curse him
with eternal maledictio^, whosoever shall once seem to have the boldness to
violate, or break the same.

This Brief of the Pope, though otherwise true and authentical enough, was
notwithstanding by the divine will, confirmed with an admirable event, as
follows.

S. Peter appears to an Hermit, and bids him in his name to advise S. Edward,
not to doubt of the Popes Brief. The joy of the King heereat: and what
followed thereupon. Chap. 5.
THere lived in those countries a holy Hermit, who having been now, for many
years voluntarily shut up, in a deep Cave, with desire of Contemplation, came
at last, to receive the crown of Justice. To this man, on a night S. Peter
appeared, and said to him: K. Edward, through anxiety which he feels, for a
certain vow that he made, in the banishment from his Country, and for the
care, which he has for the quiet of the Kingdom, and necessityes of his
Subjects, has taken resolution, to seek the pleasure of the Pope of Rome: Let
him know then, that of mine authority, he is dispensed of the same obligation,
with condition to found a Monastery to my honor and therefore he shall make no
doubt of the Apostolical Brief, but shall endeavor to dispose himself without
delay, to perform what he commands him to do for that end. Because the whole
order proceeds from me, being his ancient Protector, and perpetual Advocate.
And to the end, he may see the better to resolve upon the execution thereof; let
him know, that in the west side of London, are yet to be seen the ruins of a
most noble Temple, and Convent of the Monks of S. Benet, which heertofore has
been favored with my presence, illustrated with miracles, and consecrated
moreover with my proper hands. This place is called Thorney; which for the
sins of the Inhabitants there, now for many years, being given over into the
hands of barbarous people, of very opulent, and famous, is now become most
poor and despicable. This would I have the King take in hand to renew, adorn,
and endow with sacred pictures, stately buildings, and rich possessions, that
well may they say thereof: Here truly is the house of God, and the Gate of
heaven. Here will I set up a ladder, by which the Angels may ascend, to carry
up the supplications of Mortals; and I will not fail according to the
disposition of each one, to open him the gates of heaven. But do thou, for the
present, put down in writing, what here thou have heard, and understood of
me, and without delay send the scroule to the King, that so he may rest both
the more secure of the dispensation, and more prompt to obedience, and stable
in my devotion. Which said, the Apostle vanished, and the Hermits relation,
came into the hands of the King, even just at the hour, when the Apostolic
Brief was delivered and read.

Of which concurrence so together, it cannot easily be expressed, how glad S.
Edward was thereat, and how greatly astonished were all the standers by. From
hence, he did wholly apply himself to the execution of the precept: and the
first thing he did, was to distribute to the poor, that whole sum of money,
which was prepared for the voyage of Rome; and then after, having taken very
diligent information of the place of Thorney, he came to understand, how in the
time of Ethelbert, who reigned in the Country of Kent, and was converted to the
Faith, by means of the blessed Augustine, being sent into those parts by
Gregory the great to preach the Gospel, his Nephew Sebert who ruled the
Eastern part of England, at that time, was likewise baptized by the same
Servant of Christ, and in sign of his true piety, built a Church in honor of
S. Paul, within the walls of his principal City by name London, and gave good
rents to Mellitus, for that purpose, newly created Bishop. Then after, without
the walls, to the Westward, he built, and richly endowed another, with a
sumptuous Monastery, in honor of the Prince of the Apostles.

Now being to make the Dedication of the Temple, the night before, the same
Apostle S. Peter, appeared to a Fisherman of the River of Thames which passes
along that Monastery, upon the banks thereof on the other side, in the habit of
a Pilgrim, who promising the Fisherman a good reward, made him to waft him
over, and passing out of the bark, in sight of the Fisherman, went directly
into the Church, and behold on a sudden, a splendor so bright and glorious, as
banishing all darkness, made of an obscure night, a goodly day. There was then
present with the Apostle, a multitude of the Blessed, who by turns went in and
out, and melody was heard from Heaven, while odours of unspeakable sweetness,
were spread up and down.

The Consecration being finished, the Great Fisher of Men returned again to
the Fisher of Fish, and finding him amazed and astonished at that vnquoth
divine light, entering again into his boat with him, said to him: Have thou
not something to eat? and he replying. The hire you promised, so contented me
at first, and then those heavenly rays, did so quite bereave me of my senses,
as I had no thought at all of taking any fish. Go to then, said S. Peter, cast
thy net into the water. And so he did without resistance, when in a moment, he
took a huge multitude of fishes, and all of one sort, save one of an
unmeasurable Greatness; which being drawn to the shore, the Apostle said: Thou
shall make a present to the Bishop Mellitus of this here, which exceeds so
much the other in worth, and bigness. The rest, do thou keep to thy self, for
thy hyre: and know that as long as thou live, thou shall also have store of
them, and likewise thy Successors for a long time after; so that you all take
heed, not to fish upon Sundays. I am Peter that speaks so unto thee, and who
in company of other Citizens of Heaven, have dedicated this Church, as Titular
to me, and with this ceremony have been pleased to supply the Episcopal rite
therein. Do thou tell then Melli^, what thou have seen and heard, and for his
more security hereof do thou show him, the signs which are left in the walls.
Whence he shall not need to reiterate the same any more, but there only to
celebrate a Solemn Mass, and preaching to the people, give them plainly to
understand, that I shall often visit that place, and there be favorable to the
vows and prayers of the faithful, to open them the gates of Heaven, and to
every one here beneath, who shall lead a sober, pious, and just life.

At the end of these words, the Saint was seen no more. When the morning being
come, and the Bishop now in going in procession to dedicate the Church; the
Fisherman went to meet him, with that great fish, and declared to him
faithfully, what was recommended to him. Mellitus stood wonderfully in suspense
heerat, and opening the Church, finds the flore to be all marked with the Greek,
and Latin Alphabet, and the walls in twelve several places to be anointed with
holy oil, and as many ends of wax tapers, set upon twelve Crosses, and all
these things, as fresh as they seemed to have been but now finished. At which
sight, the good Bishop, with all the multitude, begins to bless, and thank
the divine Goodness, without end. Nor failed the prophecy of its effect
likewise, in the promise made to the Fisherman, forasmuch as he, and all his
posterity had ever after a lucky fishing; and in sign of gratitude for it,
they were volu^tarily wont to give the Monastery the tithes thereof: till at
last, one of them, who would needs craftily have subtracted the wonted tribute,
came to be deprived of the benefit, until such time, as being humbly
confessed, and penitent for it, he had made restitution thereof, and promised
not to fall any more, into that fault.

S. Edward sends to Pope Nicolas to confirm the Grants of his Predessour,
which was accorded. He cures a Cripple, and the Kings evil, with diverse other
Cures besides.
SAint Edward having had certain notice, of such a tradition by diverse ways,
without more ado, was enflamed to the restoration, and reedification of the
ancient Thorney: and for the obteining to that end, the confirmation of the
privileges and spiritual graces already affoarded by the Sea Apostolic, he
sent again certain men of purpose to Rome, with an Epistle, to the new Pope,
in this tenor.

To Nicolas, chief Father of the universal Church. I Edward through the grace
of God, King of the English, do present all due subjection, and obedience: Let
us glorify God, who has care of his elect, and who in place of a good
Predecessor, has substituted in his place, a very excellent Successor.
Whereupon we do think it meet, to come to your Holiness, as to a solid rock,
to refine and examine each action of ours, how good soever it may otherwise
seem to be, that between us, in our Lord, may still be received a due
acknowledgement and sweet accord together; by means whereof, it may not be
grievous unto you, to renew and amplify, at our instance, the graunts and
favors, which your said Predeceslour heertofore has affoarded unto us;
especially in dispensing with the vow, by me formerly made, of my coming to
Rome, being changed not without the full remission of my sins, into the
building of a Monastery of Religious, unto the honor of God, and the blessed
Peter his Apostle: as I also, for my part, will notfayle to confirm, and
augment, the good customs of annual contributions, which are made to the said
S. Peter, in these my Provinces: of which Collections, with other appendices, I
do send your Holiness a present, to vouchsafe to pray for me, and for the peace
and tranquillity of my Kingdom, and to ordain that continual and solemn
memory be had of all this Nation, before the Altar, where the sacred Bodies of
the two most glorious Princes of the Earth be kept.

The Pope, very easily assented to his suites, so just; he confirmed the
dispensation, ratifyed the privileges, exempted those Monks from the
jurisdiction of the Ordinary, and recommended to the King, not only the
protection of the said place, but even likewise the defense, and good direction
of the Churches of the Island. So that all things were done in name of the Roman
Bishop, and with the asse^bly and counsel of the Abbots, and Bishops. In this
manner, an end was put to the busynes of the Pilgrimage: and the most devout
King, went so perseuering in holy works, as it pleased the divine Goodness, to
make him continually more great, and more illustrious then ever, not only with
fame, and worldly honors, but even also, with the gift of Curing, and
Prophecy, and of other not ordinary miracles.

He being once at his palace, hard by the Church of S. Peter, there came
thither a certain Irish man, of a miserable form, or figure; for that besides
he was full of ulcers, and that the nerves and sinews of his knees, were so
shrunck up, and so attracted together, as they had even retorted his legs to
his very back, his shancks and shins stuck close to his reins; whence he was
forced, with certain Pattins, in his hands, to go creeping on all four, with
trayling his lyms after him. This man having thus a good while been a burden to
himself, to his own exceeding pain, and trouble, and not finding any human
remedy, recurred devoutly to the divine: and after he had recommended himself,
many times, with great fervor, to the Prince of the Apostles; going lastly
forth of the Church, and approaching near to Hugoline, whom we mentioned
above, being the Kings servant and fauourit, he spoke unto him thus.

And will you not once look upon me? and have you no compassion on me? and do
not any so great miseryes move you a whit? What would thou have me do to thee
(said the other;) when the Irish man replied: It is now six times, that I have
gone, in this manner, as you see me here, to visit the Altar of the Apostles,
in the City of Rome, to obtain health, which yet at last S. Peter has not
denied, but only seemed to differ a while, and put me off, as willing to have
for company in the work, his client K. Edward, for so has he commanded me to
seek him out, and to pray him to bear me on his sacred shoulders, into this
Church at hand, with promise that if the King may once be brought thereunto, I
shall recover perfectly my lymmes.

Hugoline stood a while in doubt, as at a thing that seemed so absurd at first:
yet notwithstanding did the message to his Lord, who immediately gave thanks
to God for the same, and without delay, causing the Cripple to come before him,
took him cheerfully on his back, and began to carry him to the place designed.
Thus hung so poor and noisome a Wretch on the shoulders of so great a Monarke,
who with botchy hands, and loathsome arms, clung fast to that royal breast,
and neck. At this sight, some Courtiers fell a laughing; others with a
scornful and disdaynesull eye, looked on the Irish man, as a Dissembler and
Hypocrite; others finally, who would seem wise, began to tax the simplicity,
and folly of the Princes but he under this straung burden, had not gone many
steps, when sudenly the nerves of the Cripple, began to stretch forth
themselves, the bones to be settled again in their places, the dead flesh to
wax warm, and the legs and feet, now unloosed from the loins, to return
again to their natural place. Whereby a great quantity of corrupt humors,
gushing out from diverse parts, did very fowly defile the embrodered Robes,
wherewith the King was clothed. Then could not the multitude co^teyne
themselves from crying out alowd, Hold, hold, for that the Irishman is made
sound, the King need not to proceed any further so to weary himself, and to
moyle and soil his robes, in that manner: While he on the contrary keeping the
heavenly precept still fixed in his mind, shutting his ears to the Sirens
songs, passed yet further* and entering into the Temple, reposed that sacrifice
before the Altar; and the Wretch moreover having a good sum of money for his
Viatique, returned full of joy, and iubiley to Rome, to give due thanks to God,
and his Saints.

A certain woman, had kernells growing under her throat, or as we call it, the
malady of the Kings Evil, which continually swelling with putrifyed blood,
besides the possessing of the whole, with a deformed aspect, gave also forth an
intolerable ^ench a^ane off; this miserable wretch, after she had tried many
ways, to be rid of this evil, was finally aduertized in sleep, that her
Health remained in the Kings hands, who if he would but once vouchsa^e to
^ouch, and wash the affected place, she should be cured without any more ado.
The sick party, being encouraged with such an Oracle comes to the Palace,
decla^es the dream, implores compassion* And the King, without any l^hing of
the foul corruption, begins with his own fingars, to stroke the tumors;
then having washed them with water, he made the sign of the Cross upon them;
When behold in a moment, the skin being broken, came forth together with
goare blood, a great mul^ude of worms, the ke^els were assuaged, and the
ang^ish went quite away. This is certain likewise of some blind people, who
having their Eyes spurted with the water, wherein the King had washed his
hands, they recovered their sight in the presence of many. But leaving the
meruayles of this fort; let us come to some of the extraordinary revelations
which he had, as follow.

S. Edward beholds, in vision, the King of Denmark drowned, in coming to
invade England. With divine justice showed upon Earl Godwyn, for his perjury.
Chap. 7.
The hatred of the inhabitants of Denmark (as we have said) against the
English continued still. And so much the more increased their rage, as more
happy, and glorious were the successes of this good King. In sum, the Envy
augmented so much, as that after long consults, they determined to use all
endeauours to recover the polsession again, whence they were so shamefully
thrust out. In the mean time, S. Edward being at Mass, on the day of
Pentecost, while the Body of Christ was elevated, showed a smiling countenance,
with the eyes attentive, and fixed more then ordinary. The same, was much noted
by the standers by, and the Sacrifice being ended, his most familiars were so
bold in confidence, as to crave the occasion of such a nouelty: and he with his
native candor, and humanity confessed what passed, saying thus.

The Danes had agreed with their King, to return to their ancient exploits of
arms, and to come and disturb with hostility, that peace and quietness, which
the divine Goodness has vouchsafed to affoard us: and for that they placed the
foundation of the whole enterprise in their own valor, not regarding the
Highest to be the only Master, and Distributer of victoryes; his divine
Majesty has been pleased, to let them see their unmeasurable confidence. Now
had they their army in readynes, and being iouiall, and proud of a prosperous
gale, were at the point of hoysing sail; when the King in leaving his long
Boat, to board the Admiral, slipping with his foot between both the decks,
fell down into the sea, and was drowned without remedy, delivering his
followers at once from a new sin, and us from a new danger. And this
happened just this very morning; and I hope in our Lord my God, and his most
sweet Mother their impious designs shall take no effect in my time: and this
is that which our Savior Christ has clearly showed my this day. Great joy
and iubiley was this news to the hearers; especially when fending some of
purpose, to be fully informed thereof, they found and reported the fact, the
day and hour, to be just the same, which was told by the King.

The Servant of Christ, on a time sitting at table, and the Earl Godwyn his
Father-in-law by him, it happened, that two Sons of the said Earl, yet
children, the one Harold by name and Tosto the other, in playing together, in
the presence of the King grew hot (as it happens) into a kind of quarrel, and
with bitter rancour, their sport was turned to a Duel. Harold being some what
the more robustious and bold, sets upon his Brother, and with both hands
pulling him by the hair of his head, overthrew him to the ground, and would
have stifled him doubtless, had he not been suddenly taken forth of his hands.
Then S. Edward, turning himself to Godwyn asked him if he did see nothing in
the scuffling of these two boys, but a simple ^ray? And he affirming, he did
not. But to me, replied the King in this childish brable of theirs, far
greater things then it, are represented. For that, as soon as both shell
arrive to man's estate, they shall be taken with blind Envy* and wicked
Ambition: as first with traynes, and hidden frauds* they shall seem to sport,
and be in jest, with one another; but the stronger at last shall prevail, and
^hase away the other: and then again attempting to rebel, he shall again be
suppressed by him; and after he has put him to death, it shall not be long ere
himself do likewise come to ^uine. Which to have fallen out effectually,
England itself saw afterward, and truly may testify the same*

And since now we are fallen to speak of Earl Godwin: it is said of him, that
he another time being at table with the King, one of the Squires stu^bling with
his foot upon a rub, was ready to fall on his nose, had not the other foot
which stood fast vpheld him the while. At which sight, the standers by
reflecting, how one foot had helped his fellow; the Earl iested. Even so it is
(said he) when a Brother helps a Brother, and one succors the other, in his
greatest need. Whereupon, replied the King: And so might my Brother likewise
have done for me, had Godwin been so pleased. At these words the Traitor was
afraid, and with a sad cheer said withal: I see Sir, I see very well you
suspect me likewise for the death of your Brother, and give credit to those
that falsely term me a Traitor. But God be the Judge heerof, who knows all
secrets, and so may this morsel in my hand here, do me good, as I was far from
working any plot either against thee, or thy Brother.

K. Edward accepted the condition, and gave benediction to the meat, which as
soon, as it came to the midst of the Earls throat, stuck thereso fast, as he
was never able, withal that he could do, either to swallow it down, or to put
it up again, so as the passages of respiration, being stopped, his very eyes
started forth in fearful manner. Whereupon, as many as were present, were
astonished and clearly acknowledged the heavenly revenge; when the King said to
them: Take away this dog, as they did. This wicked man, among many things,
committed against the divine, and humane laws, was grown at last to be so
bold, and abused so much the goodness of the King, as that to sway and rule
alone, through diverse calumnies, he had banished by little and little, all the
friends and kinsfolks that came from Normandy with the King. Nor was Edward
unaware thereof; but politiquely proceeding, not to put things into
hurly-burly, referred, and reserved all to the Highest, as knowing certaynely,
he would make some demonstration thereof in its time, which he foretold more
then once, not only to others, but even to Godwin himself.

One Easter day, the King sitting likewise at table (where even amidst the
royal Feasts and great assemblies of people, no less then when alone, he was
wont to take many occasions to enter into God) he recollected himself more
strictly then ordinary, and musing upon the celestial goods, with an elevated
mind, acknowledged the unworthiness and baseness of all worldly things: and while
he remained thus in this consideration, his face was seen to be more ^eren then
usually, and his lips to move with a modest smile, and then anon to become
wholly sad and pensive: the same was noted by by such as were present, and the
Table being taken away, Duke Harold, with a Bishop, and an Abbot accompanying
him to his chamber, were so bold, as to demand, what had happened to him: When
S. Edward answered.

The more a man shall seem to subtract himself from transitory, and external
things, shall the true and essential make the more impression in him. Behold
how I amidst the precious wines, and cates most delicate, and amidst the luster
of vessels of gold, and silver, lifting the eyes of my mind, to my Lord God,
have first felt myself to be replenished with spiritual consolation, and then
in unspeakable manner, have been with the mind, raised to the signt of very sad
disaduentures, which for these seven years next, with a sudden mutation,
shall hang over the head of mortals. Because God, shall not fail to vsit the
iniquityes of the Christian people. He shall deliver them into the hands, and
power of the Infidels, the subjects shall rebel against their Lords: and Kings
shall lay traps for Kings, Princes for Princes: and in every Country, the
cruel sword, shall revenge the injuries done to the Redeemer. Which things,
and others like to these, fell out afterward, even just in the manner, as the
King had presaged. And this may suffice us for his Prophecyes.

S. Edward being at Mass beholds our blessed Savior on the Altar. And being
devoted to S. John Evangelist gives a ring to a Pilgrim for his sake, and dies
soon after. Chap. 8.
KING Edward, was wonderfully devout to all the Ecclesiastical Sacraments, and
particularly to the most holy Eucharist: and in this point had, from the divine
Goodness, among others, one notable favor. For being at Mass one day in the
Monastery of S. Peter, before the Altar of the individual Trinity, with one
Leofricus an Earl (of whom it is said, that he lived very holily in the
company of his wife Gothgina, and founded many religious Conuents) the Savior
of the world appeared to him on the Altar it self, and stretching forth his
right hand, gave him his heavenly benedidiction, with the sign of the Cross,
while the King in bowing with his head, was adoring the divine presence. The
said Earl Leofricus was likewise made partaker of the same apparition, who not
knowing what passed in the Kings mind, was approaching to advertise him thereof;
whereof S. Edward being aware: Stand still Leofrick, said he, stand still: what
thou see, I see also: and then Mass being ended, he added: I co^iure thee, O
Earl, for the Majesty of him, we have both seen too day, that while we are in
this life, thou speak not a word of this vision, to the end, that either
through popular applause, we may not fall into pride, or through so rare a
nouelty, occasion may be given of murmuring to those, who believe no more, then
what they can touch or feel with the fingar.

Among these things, S. Edward, being now well stepped in years, and laden with
merits, was certified, that now at last his reward approached, and his
certificate was in this manner. He held (next S. Peter) S. John Evangelist the
beloved Disciple of Jesus, in greatest veneration: insomuch, as he never denied
any honest petition, that ever was made to him, in the name of S. John
Evangelist. When among other times it happened one day his privy Almenour being
absent, that a certain Pilgrim, with the said invocation, most importunely
craved an alms of him, and he not having any thing at hand, pulling off a
precious ring from his fingar, very graciously gave it him. It fell out
afterward, that two English men, went in pilgrimage to the holy Sepulcher, and
having crossed the Seas and now strayed unawares, out of their way, in that
error they were overtaken by the dark night, wherein very sad and afflicted,
they could find neither Guide, nor Counsel, till beyond all hope appeared a
venerable old man, who conducting them into the City of Jerusalem, benignely
received them as ghests into his house, and after a dainety supper, brings them
to their lodgings, with great charity. The morning being come, they both having
given thanks, and ready to take their journey, the good Host said to them.

Know Brethren, you are like to have a good voyage, and shall return safe, and
sound again into your Country: God shall be propitious to you, and I for your
Kings sake, in all this time, will regard you still. I am John the Apostle,
that loves your King very tenderly for the excellency of his chastity. You
shall carry him back this ring, which he gave me some days since, when I
appeared to him in form of a Pilgrim: and acquaint him that the day of his
deposition approches, and six months shall not pass over his head, ere I put
him into the company who follow the Lamb, wheresoever he goes. Which said, the
Apostle vanished, and they happily arriving at home gave faithful account to
the King, of what they had heard, and seen. Not was the prediction vain,
because S. Edward, very soon after fell into his last sickness: wherein
purposing to edify by all manner of ways, as many as conuersed with him, now
feeling himself to decay apace, ordained his death, should be presently
published, though all the kingdom, that his soul, being loosed from prison
might have the suffrages of the faithful, as soon as might be, and with this,
he passed to his most desired Lord, on the 5. of January 1066. having held the
scepter 23. years, 6. months, and 27. days.

He was bewailed, and buried with that feeling and concurse of the people, as
became such a Ruler and Governor. Two translations have been made of that
vessel of the holy Ghost: the one some 36. years after his pappy passage,
which until the other, was the space of 60. years. In both discoueryes, not
only those sacred members, but even also his Princely robe, and habit appeared
very whole, and uncorrupted. The first Translation was made, to afford him a
more honorable funeral. The other followed, at the time of his Canonization,
under Pope Alexander the III. When deposing the venerable Relics, there
succeeded so many miracles anew, as would be too long a matter and far from our
purpose, to make narratio^ of them. Whence we may, with reason hope through the
merits, and intercessions of this great Servant of God, that as so many
particular persons, have obtained the graces which they craved; even so that
most noble Kingdom, all scandals being taken away, and Heresies destroyed, may
one day be reduced, to the union of the faithful, and to the lap of the holy
Catholic Church.

S. ANSELME.
THE ARGUMENT.
SEe in the West Arabia's wonder bred,
With gorgeous luster fair embellished;
Rich in all colors which our eyes behold,
Vying against the Sun his native Gold,
The Phoenix of his age. His Parents left
And of all help and succor quite bereft,
Heaven undertook his charge. He needs not fear
The want of friends, whose friends, whose Hopes are there.
Divided from the world can England be,
The worlds chief Grace having espoused in thee?
Or seem discouraged now, or hartlesse grown,
When such a Saint is denized her own?
No, she may hope, that though some clouds may hide
A while the light, it will at length be spi'de:
And that the offended Sun will glister more,
And spread his rays far brighter then before:
When you, Dear Saints, shall put an helping hand,
That you again may on our Altars stand.
THE LIFE OF S. ANSELME ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY.
Written by Edinerus a Monk of Canterbury, who lived in his time.
What the condition of S. Anselms Parents was. The presage of his future life.
His good inclinations, and first vocation to Religion. Chap. I.
WE being to unfold the Life and manners of S. Anselme Archbishop of
Canterbury, a most noble City of England; will first touch some things of his
Parents. His Father then was one Gondolfus, who being borne in Lombardy of
Italy, and coming to live in the City of Augusta Pratoria, now called Aust,
in the confines of Piemont, took to wife a gentlewoman, whose name was
Ermenberga. These two consorts, for riches and nobility were equal, but in
manners and disposition far unlike. Because the husband, being given to his
pleasures, was held to be no good husband for his family. While the wife on the
contrary, being serious in the government of the house, and a wise
dispenceresse of his goods, gave always forth, a most excellent odor of her
life unto her last, leaving Gondolfus alive; who seeing himself vnloosedfrom
the bands of Matrimony, being now grown of great years, became a Monk, and
dyed in his Monastery.

Of this couple S. Anselme was borne, of whom, as through a certain presage
of his future sanctity, it is reported, in his tender years, having heard his
Mother say, that above in Heaven, was but one God only, who ruled and
maynteyned the whole Universe, he thought with a childish imagination, that the
Heavens were shored up, and sustained by the mountains, and that from the tops
of them, one might reach to the royal palace of that great Monarke: and as he
often had this thought, it happened one night, that he seemed, to mount up by
one of those tops to the foresaid palace, and beholds at the foot thereof,
certain servants of the King reaping of corn with much sloth and negligence:
Whereat being scandalized, he determined to accuse them to the Lord himself.
Whereupon, ascending to the top, and being admitted to the Palace, he found
the King, with the only attendance of one Squire and no more, having sent away
the rest of his family to reap, it being then harvest time. The child then
entering into the hall, and being called by the King, approches near him, and
sits him down at his feet. After which, being pleasantly demanded by him, who
he was, and from whence, and wherefore he came: he answered to all without
difficulty. And immediately heerupon he caused a loaf of most pure bread to be
given him, which S. Anselme eating in the King his sight, felt meruaylous
comfort. Being afterward awakened in the morning, and reducing this vision to
memory, the innocent child held it to be a certain truth, and no fantastical
thing; and verily believed, he had been in Paradise indeed, and had tasted of
the bread of our Lord, and so publicly affirmed to his companio^s.

He went after increasing in years, and virtue so, as for his good behavior,
he was beloved of all. Being sent to School, as he was of an excellent wit, in
a very short time, he profited exceedingly in learning: and for his choosing of
a state of life, he was not yet entered into the 15. year of his age, when he
began to think in what manner he might best observe the divine precepts, and
save his soul: and after a long discourse thereupon with himself, he came at
last to resolve, there was nothing more apt for the purpose, then to become a
Monk, and to consecrate himself forever to the divine Service. With this
determination, he went his ways to a certain Abbot, entreating him to admit
him into Religion. But that Prelate for fear of Gondolfus, durst not receive
him. And yet was not the good youth a whit cool therewith in his purpose: but
rather besought God, he might fall into some grievous malady, to the end the
Abbot by means thereof, being moved to pity, might admit him at last.

The prayers of S. Anselme, were more efficacious with God the^ with men. Being
suddenly sick then of a dangerous infirmity, he besought the Abbot anew, he
would daigne to accomplish his desires, and not suffer him to dye in the world.
But he fearing yet the offense aforesaid, was still very stiff in the negative:
and that not without the divine Will, since the chaste youth was destined to the
help of other nations, and for other enterprises of greater glory of Christ, as
we shall see anon. He recovered then his perfect health, and for that time
withal renewed the good purposes; but afterward what with the heat and
fervor of youth, and the riches and commodityes of home, suffering himself to
be carried away with pleasures, and company keeping; he came wholly, as it were
to loose, not only his Vocation, and spirit he had, but even also the study of
letters, wherein he had been so diligent before. One thing only for awhile,
deteyned him somewhat, from complying too much with his senses therein, the
respect of his dear Mother, whom he loand reverenced much. But after she was
passed from this life, being then merely without any tie at all to hold him
too, that frail bark was carried away into the waves and streams of the
world.

S. Anselme being tired with the bitter usage of his Father. goes into Normandy
to S. Lanfranke, and becomes his Scholar. Chap. 2.
IN his manner went S. Anselme, with the greater part of mortals into manifest
perdition; when the heavenly Father beholding him with the eyes of clemency, to
vnty him from the world, permitted his Father to be so fraught with hatred, and
auersion from him, as that equally the good and bad, or rather more the good
actions of S. Anselme, them the bad, displeased him: nor was there any means
left to pacify him, with all the humility and satisfaction the young man could
yield unto him. Insomuch, as seeing every day, the old man to be more bitter to
him, and intolerable then other; for fear of some great inconvenience, he
determined to leave his Country, Parents, and friends, as well to deliver
himself of so great tribulations and troubles, as to apply himself anew, more
seriously to learning. Putting himself then in order, and laying his fardell on
an Ass, he went toward Burgundy, with only a certain Clerk his familiar
friend in his company: and passing over Montsenese, being not much accustomed
to the labors of the body, he felt himself, so weary of the way, and of
climbing up the hill, and so afflicted withal, as not having other sustenance,
he began to eat the very snow, instead of food. Whereat the Clerk being moved
to compassion, did presently look into his sachell to see if there were
somewhat there to eat: when besides all expectation, he found therein a white
and sauoury loase of bread, which not in a dream now as before, but really in
effect gave to S. Anselme life, so as he arrived in few days to the place
designed, very safe and sound, where partly in Burgundy it self, and partly
also in France, for about the space of three years, he attended to his studyes.

There lived in those days in the Monastery of Benedictins at Bec, in the
country of Normandy, one Lanfranke an Italian by nation, of the City of Pauia,
a man so famous for knowledge and goodness, as many youths from diverse parts of
the world, repaired to him that were desirous of sound and perfect doctrine.
Now S. Anselme being moved with the noise and rumor of such a one; became so
enflamed with desire of knowing Lanfranke by sight, and to converse with him,
as he doubted not a whit, to go himself in have into that province. And was in
truth nothing deceived of his expectation, finding in that Father, so rare
gifts of wisdom, as he took it for no small happynes to have him for
Master, and to be admitted into particular familiarity with him.

With this occasion the fervent lover of liberal arts, without sparing either
day or night employed himself with singular industry, to enrich his breast
with sundry knowledges of high and extraordinary things, in giving ear to the
doctor, in turning of books, in gathering notes, in framing Epitomes, in
rehearsing of things heard, and expounding others. In which occupations, while
he suffers much pains and many incommodityes (as it happens) now of cold, and
now of heat, now of hunger, and then of sleep; it came again into his mind,
that if he were a Monk, as heertofore he had desire to be, he should not
suffer more troubles and pains, nor do more penance then now he did, while in
a religious state besides, he should not loose the merit of so great labors;
whereas in the life he then led, it was more uncertain what fruit at last, he
were like to gather thence. Wherefore in ruminating this, new purposes began to
awake in his mind of serving God, and wholly renouncing secular designs.

Truly, it is well known that, that fire was as yet very feeble, and the
flames ascended but impure, and full of smoke: whereupon, consulting with
himself of the Monastery, he was to retire unto, he said within himself: If I
enter into that of Cluny, it is somewhat too strayte, and I shall not be able
to endure it: If in that of Bec, I shall not there be esteemed awhit, since the
eminency of Lanfranke will doubtless obscure my name, and qualityes: Insomuch,
as not only I shall be able to help but few, but shall come also in a certain
manner to loose the time and pains, I have taken in studyes. It were
convenient therefore, I should seek a place, where I might both help others,
and give forth some worthy demonstration of my self. In these considerations,
S. Anselme was remaining for some days: but then afterward making his
reflection thereupon, through divine grace he was soon aware how they spang
from an evil spirit, and from a heart but ill mortifyed, and too much affected
to the world. So, as reprehending himself for it: And does this forsooth
(says he) seem Monachisme unto thee, so to wish to be preferred before
others, and to be more honored and reputed then others? No truly: go to then,
lay down thy pride and become a Monk in a Convent, where, as reason would,
for the love of God, thou be the last, and the vilest, and most despised of
all. And where may this be trow you, but surely in the Convent of Bec? Since
there is one to be found, who for his high wisdom and reputation purchased,
is so sufficient for all, as there shall be no need of me at all. Here then
shall be my rest, here my repose, here God alone shall be my scope, here his
love shall be my thought, here the blessed and continual memory of him,
shallbe my happy entertaynement, and pleasant satiety.

Gondolfus Father of S. Anselme dies, and leaves him his heir. He consults
with S. Lanfranke, and the Archbishop of Roan what course of life to take, and
afterward is made Prior of Bec in Normandy. Chap. 3.
A Midst these deliberations S. Anselme was advertised, that by the last will
and testament of Gondolfus his Father, he was become the heir and Successor
of all his substance. This news puts his wits on the rack, not so, as to put
himself from the will of serving his divine Majesty, but only made him to
doubt, whether it were not, to the greater glory of God, to remain in the
world, and in the works of Charity himself to dispense his goods to the
poor. It would sometimes likewise come to his mind, that to be unknown, and
to give himself wholly to contemplation, it were expedient to hide himself,
and to live in the desert. In this perplexity, it seemed good to him, not to
make any firm resolution therein, without the sound and mature counsel of
some understanding and faithful person, remembering the Scripture which says:
Omnia fac cum consilio, and post factum non poenitebis. Wherefore he went to S.
Lanfranke and simply declared unto him what passed in his mind, he craved to be
settled and established by him, in what were best to be done to the greater
service of God. S. Lanfrancke was not willing to be judge in the matter, nor
himself to pass the sentence alone, but exhorted S. Anselme, to remit the
whole, unto the Venerable Maurilius, Archbishop of Roan, under whose obedience,
at that time, the Benedictines of those countries governed.

S. Anselme replied not a word heerunto, and being guided by Lanfrancke they
both went their ways immediately toward the Archbishop: And so great was the
devotion and credit, which the good youth gave to his Master, as that passing
through a great wood, betwixt Bec and the said City of Roan, if Lanfrancke
would but have said the word, that he would doubtless have obeyed him therein.
Being come to the Prelate Maurilius, they both together proposed the occasion
of their journey unto him, and the difficulty which S. Anselme felt, in
choosing a state of life. Whereto without delay, the Archbishop answered, that
surely the Monastical Profession was the better, and most secure of all. To
this answer, gave S. Anselme very humbly his consent, and layng all care
aside, having dispe^sed his patrimony, as best seemed unto him; he became Monk
in the same Monastery where S. Lanfrank was Prior; whose Abbot was called
Herlwin, a person of good years, and of much esteem, as well for his rare
virtues, as also for having built and founded that Monastery at his own cost,
and charges.

S. Anselme being entered into this Academy of Christian Philosophy, and
heavenly exercises, on the 27. year of his age, endeauours with great judgment
and attention to imitate (as we also read of S. Antony) all the qualityes,
which he discovered to be more noble and perfect in every one; through
observation whereof, and with divine assistance, walking apace from virtue to
virtue, he became within the term of three years, a most clear mirror of
Religion. So as S. Lanfranke being assumpted to the government of Cadom, S.
Anselme was immediately substituted to him in the Priory of Bec: which dignity
hindered him not awhit, from his wonted meditations, but rather continually
recollecting himself, so much the more, he raised himself to the
understanding of most high mysteries, and solued such Theological questions,
as till that time had never been treated before: wherein he was not so much
assisted with intense speculation, as with purity of heart, and right intention
which he had to expound the purity of divine scripture, to the common benefit
of all, and to defend the verityes of the Catholic faith against the malignant.

But among other knots that straytned him most, and held him in suspense, one
was, In what manner the Prophets had seen at once both things past, and to
come, as they had been present with them; and in what manner, with so much
firmnes and resolution, they have been able to preach and write them. In which
passage while one night he was plunged before the hour of Mattins: behold from
his bed with his eyes toward the dormitory, and temple he clearly sees
through the walls themselves, the Sacristans and the other Officers, about the
Altar and Quire, to prepare the books, to light the candles, and lastly one
of them to take the rope, and to ring the bell, and at the pulse, all the
Monks to rise from their beds, to go to the Office. At which revelation,
merueyling not a little, he came to comprehend, how easy a thing it was to God,
to show the Prophets in spirit the things most remote and distant from them,
since to him it was affoarded so to behold them with the eyes of the body,
there being so much distance of place, and so many impediments and obstacles
between. In this manner came S. Anselme to be cleared of the doubt, which
tormented him so much.

But that which more imports, there was affoarded him from heaven, a discretion
of spirits, so judicious and subtle withal, as he easily diued, and
penetrated into the customs and inclinations of each sort of persons; and
arrived sometimes so far, as to know the most hidden secrets of hearts, and to
discover moreover with extraordinary light, the very origens, and seeds, and
proceedings of all virtues and vices; and finally to demonstrate with most
clear precepts and examples, in what manner to purchase the one, and eschew
the other. To this so great liberality of God, corresponded he with all due
thankefullnes and promptnes to serve him, and with the exact custody of
himself from all that, which might any ways make him unworthy and incapable
of so high favors. In fasting he had now got such an habit, that how long so
ever he differred his repasts, he neither felt hunger in expecting, nor took
any delight in the meat he eat: And yet did he feed as other men do, as
knowing he could not otherwise sustain himself, but did it sparingly, and so
without sensuality, as he not only abhorred al daintyes and delicacyes, and
gusts of the palate, but seemed (as we said) as if in him, the sense of tasting
had quite been lost and extinct.

As for sleep, his holy occupations, and continual labors gave him but a very
small time, answering and assisting every one, that made their recourse to him
for counsel and direction. In which things the divine man would be spending,
not only the hours of the day, but even those of the night also: and by night
besides, he would attend, partly to amend, and correct books, which were
dangerously marred, and corrupted; partly in meditating the life of his
Redeemer, and contemplating the eternal Beatitude, through desire whereof, he
would shed whole fluds of tears, as likewise he would do for his own defects,
and through compassion of the sins of his neighbor, together with the
miseryes of this life, and the eternal loss of souls; insomuch as many
nights he would often pass over without any sleep at all: and if perhaps he
but chanced to shut his eyes, it would be but even a little before the hour of
mattins, when how affectuous he would be in prayers, and united with the divine
goodness, the prayers which he made at the instance of his friends and deuotes,
set down in writing, declare sufficiently.

S. Anselme was enuyed much for his promotion to the the Priory, especially by
one Osborne a Monk, who was afterward reconciled to him; and dying appears
S. Anselme, and revealed his estate unto him. Chap. 4.
AMong all the virtues, and praises, which are recounted of the holy man, to me
none seem more worthy of consolation, and imitation then the dexterity, and
charity which he used in the government and instruction of his subjects. To
which purpose, we are to understand thus much, that as soon as he ascended to
the Priorship, he wanted no few enuyers and persecutours; to whom it seemed an
intolerable thing, and very unworthy, to be subjected so, to the obedience of
one, that might well be called a Nouice. Against the perverseness, and malice of
these, S. Anselme opposed himself with all offices of benignity, that might
be, and particularly unto one, very young of years. by name Osborne. This man
being endowed with a rare wit, and of great hability, employing his talents
ill, and abhorring the interior discipline and service; had conceived an
auersion and hateful rancour against the holy Pastor, and stuck not to exercise
the same, both openly and closely when occasion served. Which malignity of his,
though S. Anselme for himself, not much regarded: yet was he sorry so noble a
Subject, of whom otherwise so much fruit might well be expected, should,
through diabolical operation, be so lewdly seduced, and as it were, utterly
lost.

Now then to reduce him into the righ way, first he sought by all means
possible, to gain his good will, and to win him to be confident. For which end
he began to make exceeding much of him, to dissemble with his errors, to
grant him whatsoever was possible, without the manifest damage of the Order,
and finally to omit nothing that might any ways seem to tame, and relent that
so fierce and unbridled wit of his. The youth took complacence at such
deportements of S. Anselme toward him, and by little and little being mollifyed
and vanquished with so much humanity; began to be affected to him, and to take
his fatherly aduises in good part, and even voluntarily to compose himself to
all modesty and gravity. Which the wise Rectour perceiving, he proceeded to
favor him more then ever, to prevent his necessityes, not to suffer him to
want any thing; and withal to praise that emprouement and fruit which he
noted in him, and sweetly to exhort, and pray him withal, continually to pass
from good to better. From hence he went untying him by little and little, from
his accustomed leuityes, and very dexterously revoked again those former
indulgences which heertofore he affoarded him, and by all means endeavored to
reduce him to reason and religious maturity.

When as afterward he saw himself to be fully possessed of him, continually
restreyning him more and more, he failed not to cut of quite that childishnes,
which seemed as yet to remain in him: and if he had noted him to relapse at
any time into errors, he would chastize him, not only with words, but with
pennances also. Which new severity, was supported by Osborne, with admirable
patience, being now assured and most secure of the fatherly bowels of S.
Anselme, and of the amorous affect whence it seemed to proceed. In sum, with
wholesome and fit remedies, that youth, who seemed so incorrigible before, came
now to be amended and reformed in such manner, as look what disquietnes and
scandal he had given before, he now gave as great example, and edification to
all: When as thus cured in his soul, through divine disposition he fell
grievously sick.

Then did the good Pastor, show no less diligence, in helping the exterior
man, then before he had used toward the interior: so as he served him in
person, in supplying him his meat and drink with his own hands, and with
extreme solicitude, providing him of all things necessary, to rid that subject
of his infirmity, of whom now a good while since, he had promised to himself,
great matters for the divine service, and the good of Religion. But this pious
industry of the Servant of Christ, had not the desired end; since it pleased
the divine Majesty, to cut of the thread of Osborns mortal life. Whereat S.
Anselme grieuing with most tender affect (as much as Christian virtue suffered)
in the hour of his passage, deerly entreated him, that if it were possible,
after his death, he would give him some tidings of him. The dying man did
promise as much, and so expired.

The body, according to the use being socked, clothed, and then laid forth on a
beer, was carried into the Church; while the Monks sat singing of the wonted
psalms about the same. S. Anselme in the mean time to make his prayer more
attentive and fervent, retired himself into a place somewhat a part from the
others: here while with tears, and sighs he begs of our Lord, the salvation of
that soul, being oppressed with sorrow and heauynes and his eyes now shut, he
fell into a slumber: and in that repose, beholds in spirit certain venerable
persons, dressed up in white garments, to be entered in the chamber of the
deceased, and there to sit down to judge him. But not knowing, what sentence
they had passed upon him, and expecting with great anxiety to understand the
success of that judgment; behold Osborn appears on a sudden, in face not
unlike to one that returns to himself again, after a trance, or fit of
fainting. Whereat S. Anselme said presently to him: What is the matter son?
How it is with thee now? The other answered: The ancient Serpent has risen up
thrice against me, and thrice has it fallen upon his own head, and the
Bear-heards of God have delivered me: after which words S. Anselme opened his
eyes, and Osborn vanished.

This answer the dead man gave, and S. Anselme himself, afterward
interpreted the same in this manner: That thrice the ancient Serpent arose
against Osborne; because first, he accused him of sins committed after
Baptism, before he had been offered up by his Parents into the Monastery:
secondly for those, which he had committed after his entry into the Monastery,
and before the making of his vows: in the third place, for those whereinto he
had incurred after his vows, even to his death. But thrice again, was the
accuser defeated; because the errors of the world, had been ca^celled in
virtue of the Faith, and oblation of his Parents, when they presented him
devoutly to the divine service: those of the Nouiciate, were remitted him in
the new consecration of himself by means of his vows. The faults which he
had committed after the vows, were pardoned him somewhat near to his passage,
by means of confession and penance: So as the devil, finding all his
quarrels frustrate, being wholly confounded, was quite defeated, since all the
instigations and subtilityes he had used to make that soul to fall into sin,
had redounded to his own more grievous torment, and greater damnation.

As for the Bear-heards of God, they are (said he) good Angels: for that, as
they tame the bears, so do these restrain the malignant spirits, from the
cruelty and impetuosity, wherewith they use to rush on, to the destruction of
souls. After all these things, to show himself a true friend, and father of
his Osborne, no less after his death then before, he said every day a Mass
for him, though the whole year following. And if sometimes, he were hindered
from celebrating at all, he would seek for some other, to supply the same,
promising to do as much for that Priest, when he was requested. Besides which,
he did send letters into diverse parts to procure sufrages and sacrifices for
the same intention, and thereby obtained a great number of them. Whence it
followed, that not only the deceased party felt (as is verily believed) either
opportune refreshment, or accidental joy: but even also the living took
excellent example of so burning and continual charity of S. Anselme; yea even
his very enemies tempered themselves, who before could not look on him with a
good eye; and at last ouercom and touched with the perpetual tenor of such
goodness, took so great an affection to the holy man, as from murmurers and
emulous, they became followers and proclaymers of his rare virtues. Although
indeed to bring things to those terms, a certain strange accident of no small
moment, happened to one of those enemies of the blessed Pastor, that
immediately follows.

A certain ancient Monk, and great Enemy of S. Anselme, at his death, was
tormented with a dreadful vision, which S. Anselme drives away with the sign
of the Cross. And how he gave himself to the trayning up of Youth. Chap. 5.
THere was one very ancient in Religion, who with implacable disdain never
ceased to bite and molest the good Father, and by no means could never endure
him, much less reverence and acknowledge him in the place of Christ. Now then,
through the just judgment of God it happened this miserable wretch fell sick
to death; and one night while all the Monks were in bed, he began to give
forth very dreadful cries, and to seek as it were, to shun the sight of some
horrible figures; became very pale of visage, and full of trembling and great
anxiety, and would withal be turning his head on this side, and that side, to
hide himself. At these noyses, his neighbors being now awakened, came
suddenly in have to ask what he ayled. You behold me (said he) afflicted and
distressed thus within the paws of two most ravenous wolves, which are now
even ready to strangle me, and demand you of me, what I ayle? One of them
that was present hearing this, by name Ricolfus, who was the Secretary of
Convent, without delay went running to S. Anselme, who at that time was
correcting of a book, and presently informed what passed with the sick man.

At which news, the venerable Prior being touched with his accustomed
clemency, bad Ricolfus return back to the sickman: and he in the mean time
recollecting himself a little, ouertooke him in the Infirmary, and lifting up
his hand, made the sign of the Cross upon him, saying: In nomine Patris, and
Filij and Spiritus Sancti. With which sign, the Wretch was suddenly quiet, and
being somewhat cheerful in face, with most in ward affect of the heart, began to
give thanks to the divine Goodness: and added withal, that soueraygne sign he
had seen to come forth of his mouth, as a fiery lance, which being brandished
against those wolves, had so terrified them, as made them suddenly to fly away.

Then S. Anselme, sweetly approaching to him, dealt with him seriously of
matters concerning the salvation of his soul, and brought him to a great
compunction, and true confession of all his offenses committed against God: and
after he had given him the absolution, told him plainly, he should render up
his spirit, about nine of the clock: and so indeed it fellout, to the great
astonishment of all. From hence forward, S. Anselme with a great deal more
ease, began to administer the office: in which, as one that sought to promote
to perfection all those, whom he had under his charge; so with particular
application, he labored especially in the help of youth, and alleged this
reason for it: That even as wax, when it is too hard, or too soft, takes not
very well the impression upon it, but if it be well tempered between the hard
and soft, it most faithfully receyues the print of the Seal; so just, do we
see it to happen in the age of a man.

Take you one who from his infancy to his old age, has been always bred up in
the vanities of the world, and begin to deal with him then of spiritual
conceits, of contemplation, of celestial things, and of such other like
discourses, and you shall find him to be not able to conceive hardly, much
less to put your aduices in practice, and due execution. Nor is it any wonder,
since the wax is hardened, nor has he spent his years in such practices, and
has always had other objects, and other designs. On the contrary side, take
me a child, both tender of years, and of conscience, and who cannot as yet
discern the evil from the good, the very same shall happen with this, as with
the other, the wax is too soft, and liquid for it, it admits no characters, or
images. Betwixt these two then, the youth stands in the midst, as temperatly
composed of stiff and tender. Do thou endeavor, to instruct such a one, and
thou shall imprint in his mind, what thou will. Which thing I noting (said S.
Anselme) do employ my self with the more assiduity and follicitude, in
trayning up of youth, and do labor from their souls to extirpate all the
roots of vices, and to plant the virtues in place of them: that being purged
in this manner and well tempered, they may come to represent more to the life,
the true image of a perfect man. And these were the principal motives of S.
Anselme, for the education of youth.

S. Anselme sueth to the Archbishop of Roan, to be discharged of his Office,
but is denied. Together with a Vision of Ricolfus concerning him. Chap. 6.
IN the mean time, occupations and affairs continually increasing, and sorely
oppressing the Man o^ God; he held himself to be so much disquieted and
distracted therewith from interior exercises of the mind (which happened not
so to him at the beginning) as he went for counsel a new to the aforesaid
Archbishop of Ro^ before whom, he unfolded the occasion of his coming, and
bitterly bewayling his peace and tranquillity lost thereby, be sought him, that
he might be disburdned with all expedition of the charge. Whereto the
Archbishop, being a person of much judgment and sanctity withal, thus
answered: Do not, my dearest son, make instance to forgo the charge, not do
thou seek to subtract thy self from helping others, to attend to thy self
only: for I tell thee, in good sooth, that I have heard heertofore of many, and
seen some also, who having under the color of their proper quietness,
abondoned the pastoral cure, and by that occasion being fallen into (...),
have likely gone from evil to worse. Which to the ed the same may not fall
upon thee likewise (which God forbid) I command thee in virtue of holy
Obedience, to retain to thee still the Prelacy which thou have, nor to suffer
thy self to be induced any ways to depose the same, unless the Abbot do
enjoin thee to it. And if thou shall be called hereafter to any greater
charge, that thou do not refuse by any means to accept thereof: Because I know
very well, thou art not like to stay any long time, in that wherethou art, but
shall shortly be advanced to a higher degree.

To these words said S. Anselme: Then woe to me poor miserable wretch: I am
ready to faint with the present burden, and yet when another more weighty shall
be laid upon me, I may not refuse the same! These sighs of S. Anselme, moved
not the wise Archbishop a whit, but rather with the same severity, he rehearsed
to him again the same precept, which he had given him. In this wise the
Servant of Christ, perceiving himself to be quite excluded from that which he
wished, failed not at last to conform his own to the divine will: and
returning home, with new fervor and new purposes gave wholly himself to
cherish and increase the more solid virtues in his Monks. To which effect,
knowing very well of what importance was the union and communication together
of the subjects, with the Superior; he pursued with all the means, that well
he might, to procure to himself the love of each one, and that particularly
with showing of true compassion and tenderness to the sick, and indisposed; so
as he stuck not to enter often into the Infirmary himself, and there not only
with sweet countenance and gracious words to comfort the afflicted; but even
also (as we said of Osborne) to serve them, and prepare them their diet and
food with his own hands, and with diligence to find out the state of each one,
and that which most would be gust-full, and pleasing to them.

Through which dealing of his, the bitterness and detractions not only ceased,
if there were any yet left, but there followed a thing, which may truly be
called, the very health of religion; to wit, a confidence, and a certain
conjunction of the members with the head, and that so strayt, and so great
withal, as there was not any, who not suddenly to manifest his secrets, and
each passion, and thought which he had in his breast to the good Priour, as a
child would do to his sweetest Mother. With which security, and sweet
familiarity would S. Anselme be curing of the inward wounds, and remedying the
temptations of his Monks, and that with so much more ease, as their
consciences were made more manifest and palpable to him. So as by this means,
S. Anselme came continually to be held in greater grace and reverence with all
men.

And this good conceypt of theirs, increased so much the more, through a
certain marvel, which newly happened to the above named Ricolfus. This man,
while he went one night through the Cloister, observing the hour of rising of
the Monks to Mattins, in passing by good hap before the Chapter-doore, peeped
in with his eyes, and beheld S. Anselme in prayer, environed round as with a
flaming circle of fire. Ricolfus was astonished at the sight, and after he had
a little thought with himself what it should be, he resolved to hye him to the
Fathers celll, when seeing no body there, he returned to the Chapter again,
and found there the Priour as before, but without the said flame, yet most
assured the while, of that which at first he beheld so clearly.

S. Anselme in a case of necessity miraculously procures a fish from the River
near by: And with the spirit of Prophesy foretells an accident to come.
Together with the Books which he wrote.
ON a certain day, S. Anselme being sent unto, by a principal Lord of
Normandy, to come and deal with him about certain affairs, he refused not to
go; and having discoursed with him, till the Evening, he was not invited at all
by the Prince, to lodge there that night, though the Monastery of Bec, were
far from thence. Which the Man of God perceiving, without speaking a word
thereof to any, took his leave, and departed thence, not knowing where to
lodge. In the mean time, meeting with one of the Monks, of his own Order, he
asked him, Whither he went, and were they might harbor and retire themselves
that night? The other answered: Father, we have a house indeed, not far from
hence, but there is no refection to be had for you, and your company, save only
bread and cheese.

Then said S. Anselme, with a cheerful countenance: Doubt you not good
brother; go thy ways then before, and cast a net into the river there, and
thou shall presently find fish enough for us all. So did the Monk without any
doubt a whit, and calling in have, a fisherman to him, bad him to throw in his
net. Now was it indeed neither time, nor place for such a draught, and
therefore the fisherman laughed at such a bidden thing, and took himself to
be mocked at by the Monk. But at last, being thereunto constrained, as it were
though his prayers and persuasions, he resolved to obey; and behold against all
hope, came forth of the water a Trout of an uncouth bigness, with another little
fish also: So as that fish was more then enough for S. Anselme, and his company.

That other accident differed not much from this which happened to him in
another house of a dear friend of his, called Walter Tuel, who being sorry for
want of fish, and with words of courtesy excusing himself, for not having
provision worthy of such a ghest; S. Anselme smiled, and replied: There is now
a Sturgeon brought in unto you, and do you complain for want of delicacies? As
yet Walter verily believed he had but iested with him, and would by no means
give any credit to it, when behold, two of his men came and entered into the
house with a Sturgeo^, the greatest they had seen a long time, being found (as
they said) by the Stepheards upon the banks of the river of Alteia. Whence,
though in a base and material subject, yet may it well be gathered, that S.
Anselme, amongst other gifts of heaven, had likewise the spirit of Prophesy.

About the same time, he composed three very subtle Treatises: one of the
Truth, another of Freewill, the third of the Fall of the Devil. By which
treatises, may well appear, wherein he had truly fixed his mind, though by
such considerations and labors, he never subtracted himself from the care and
consolation of his Monks. He wrote also another book, which he entitled, The
Grammarian, wherein he introduces a Scholar to dispute with him; he also in
that book goes soluing of many Logical difficulties. He annexed thereto a
little Tract, which he called, by the Greek term, Monologion; for that
speaking with himself alone, without meddling with quoting of the holy
Scripture, with mere reasons he proves There is a God, and that by no means
it can be otherwise.

After this, it came into his mind, whether with one short argument only, that
same might not be solidly proved, which is so believed and preached of God, to
wit, that he is Eternal, Incommutable, Omnipotent, Incomprehensible, whole in
every place, just, pious, merciful, true, or rather Truth it self, Goodness,
Justice, and some other attributes, and how all these things are one thing in
him. This same proposition now did affoard himso much to do, as partly it took
away his meat, and sleep; and partly also (for which he felt the greater
grief) held him exceedingly in suspense, and greatly distracted him in his
Psalmody, and in the other divine Offices: and by how much more violence he
used thereunto, so much the more was he troubled with the foresaid question;
until such time as waking one night, it pleased the divine Mercy to illumine
his understanding, and to give him the knowledge of what he desired, with so
much clarity, as he felt therewith a great iubiley of heart, and a wonder full
sweetness and consolation of mind. And supposing he might help others therewith
(as he was far from all envy, or baseness of mind) he went suddenly about to put
the thing in tables of wax (according to the use of those times) and then gave
them in keeping, with great charge, to one of the Monks.

Some days being now passed over, he demanded the same of the party himself,
and suddenly they were sought for in the self same place where they had been
laid, but could not be found. Whereupon good diligence was used to learn out if
any of the house had taken them away, but yet could never come to have the
least inckling of the^. S. Anselme went about then again to make others of the
same matter, and with especial recommendation gave them in charge to another
of his Monks. He hides them in the secretest part of his own bed: and the
next day, beyond all suspicion, finds them all to pieces on the ground, and the
wax, with the characters, scattered here and there. He gathers them up as they
were, and brings them to S. Anselme, who endeauours the best he could to set
the pieces together and fits them at last with much ado, so as they might be
read, and so kept them close united together. And to the end the same might
happen no more, he causes them to be transcribed in parchment: and from thence,
he drew afterward a Volume, though little in bulk, yet great and very
admirable in conceits and speculations, and called it Prosologion, wherein he
discoursed either with God, or with himself. Which little Work, being written
against, by a learned man, S. Anselme seemed to rejoice the^, and to yield
thanks to the Censour, but made notwithstanding his Apology for it, and sent
it back to the said friend, beseeching him, or any other whosoever, that
should once go about to tax the aforsayd doctrine, not to publish the
reprehension without likewise annexing the defense.

A most pious, and Excellent Epistle of S. Anselme, to a certain
Launce-Knight, who was newly entered into the Monastery of Cluny. Chap. 8.
With all these occupations, as well of government, as also of more grauer
studies, the Servant of God neglected not to write also sundry letters of
edification: Of one of which, we will here insert a chapter, about the subject
of mutation of place, to the end yt may appear, how much the same was impugned
by this holy man, when it is not done through Obedience, or for some important
occasion. He wrote then among other things, some aduises to a certain
Launce-knight, who was newly entered into the Convent of Cluny, of the tenor
following.

Thou art now entered, my dearest, into the lists and warfare of Christ, in
which yt behoues thee, not only to resist the open battayles of the Enemy, but
to beware likewise of the subtle traynes, which lie hid under the show of a
goood spirit. Because many times, when the wicked adversary cannot come to
overthrow a Nouice, with objects of manifest sin, he seeks to ruin and
murder him with the poison of false, but probable and apparent reasons: and so
being not able to induce him to the hearted of Religion, and the Institute which
he has made choice of, at least he endeauours to make the conversation, and
dwelling tedious to him where he abides for the present: and though in some
manner, he permit to reteyne yet the Monastical life; notwithstanding he
cease not by a thousand ways, to make the simple and foolish to imagine,
that he knew not what he did, when he took then abit in such a place, or under
such Superiors, or else in such a community, and this to the end, that making
the wretch by these means, ungrateful for the benefit of his Vocation,
through the just judgment of God, he may not only not go forward, but even also
have much ado to hold his vocation, and to conserve himself in his good
purposes. Because the mind being once distracted into melancholy thoughts,
either of changing the residence, or if this cannot be, at least of
reprehending and blaming the foresaid causes of his determination, he has no
power to recollect himself, nor to aspire to that term of virtue, whereto he
ought to extend himself with all his forces. The cause is, for that the
foundation being once ungrateful to him, he knows not how to erect any frame
of building thereon. Whence it followers, that even as a young tree, being often
^ansplanted, or disquieted and shaken with many encounters, can not take any
deep root, nor commodiously suck in the moisture and nourishment of the earth,
to give forth the desired fruit in time: so the unhappy Monk, if he seem to
remove himself, now here now there of his own mere appetite, and not though
any disposition of Superiors, or else even remaining still where he is, permits
himself to fall into tediousnes and disgust; he can never come to be well
grounded in divine love, and consequently being dry and languishing in every
action of religion, he shall finally remain very poor and despoyled of the
fruits of good works: and he seeing himself withal, to proceed from evil
to worse (if so he note the same) shall lay all ways the fault thereof on
others, and by this means abhor every day, more and more, even those with
whom he lives and conuerseth.

For which cause, whosoever will be a good Religious man indeed, yt behoues
him, that look into what Monastery he has been first admitted, and dedicated
to the divine Service (if in that place be no manifest danger to offend the
divine goodness) with all study and attention he endeavor to establish himself
there, and there to found himself in true Charity, and to beware by any means
from judging the manners of the place, whether they be public or private,
profitable or unprofitable, so that openly they stand not against the precepts
of God. But rather, rejoicing for having found where to abide in the service of
Christ, that he put away from himself all manner of suggestion, to remove else
whither; but with the greatest quiet that may be, he seek to attend unto
pious and devout exercises. And if peradventure, yt may seem to him, that he
has reguard to greater matters, and of more evident profit, then such as are
practiced in that Convent there; let him think, that perhaps he is deceived,
in preferring things that are equal, before all others; or else in presuming,
or promising too much of himself: and if he cannot be brought to leave of that
opinion, at least let him believe, he has not deserved what he desires.

And if further he note he were deceived; let him give many thanks to the
divine clemency, in defending and setting himself free from such an error, and
for that he has not suffered him, without gain, or perhaps rather with loss,
in proving another habitation, and some other manner of government, to fall
into the blame of leuity, or lack of wit; or else, by embracing of things too
hard, in a very short time to become wearied, and fall into the former state,
if not a worse. But if he truly desires a thing more perfect indeed, and more
conformable to him, let him make account, that for his sins, he has not
deserved the same; and let him patiently, suffer the divine judgment therein,
which never denies any one any thing, unjustly. And in sum, let him shun the
offenses of the divine Majesty, through murmur or muttering, but take in good
part, and endure all with a sweet and holy peace, least perseuering otherwise,
he come to exasperat the just Judge, and so remain excluded from that which as
yet he has not received, and loose perhapps, what he holds already, or else to
possess it without any profit at all. But howsoever he do feel upon himself,
either the mercy or judgment of God, in any case let him cheerfully give him
thanks, and in all, and through all, acknowledge that infinite benignity of
his. And since he has the grace to retire himself, into the Port (whatsoever)
from the perilous storms and tempests of the world, let him now avoid to open
in the Port it self any entry to the impetuous winds of impatience, and
mutability; that the Soul abiding in the Lee, or harbor of constancy and
meekenes, may remain firm and intentive jointly, and wholly to the solicitude
of fear, and the gust of divine Love; the one of which through caution
conserues the heart, the other with sweetness, even perfects the Mind.

I am not ignorant, how this matter would require more commodity of writing, or
of discourse by word of mouth, to give you to understand with what subtiltyes
in this matter of temptation, the ancient Serpent is wont to make the ignorant
Monk to fall into his s^ on the contrary, with what reasons and aduises, the
wise Religious may dissolve and defeat his malicious persuasions. But for that
I have exceeded the breuity already, which an Epistle requires, and that
whatsoever I have said, or can otherwise say, consistes wholly to conserve this
repose, and tranquillity of the Soul; it shall suffice me for this time, to
have proposed for your good what succinctly I have don already. Nor would I
have you for this to imagine, that I hold you for unquiet or malcontent: but
forasmuch, as Don Orsion obliged me to give you some aduertisements, I know not
how to affoard you a better and more wholesome one, then for a man to stand on
his guard, in this kind of temptation, which I know is secretly wont to enter
into some Nouices, and quite to overthrow them. So as (my friend, and most
beloved Brother) behold how your dearest friend does counsaye, admonish, and
pray you, with the whole bowels of his heart, that with all the forces of your
mind, you attend to the foresaid quiet of the heart, without which, it is
impossible to discern the snare of the treacherous Enemy, nor yet to penetrate
with the eyes of the understanding, the most strait and narrow way of virtue.
To which tranquillity, may no Religious, ever arrive without constancy and
meeknes, which meekenes is the inseparable companion of patience: nor less
shall he ever attain thereto, if he resolve not, to observe and reverence all
the orders, and institutes of his Monastery not repugning to the divine Law,
though he see not the foundation of them, nor the reason why they were
introduced, and prescribed. Farewell, and the blessed God direct and guide you
in all your actions with perseverance; so as, in the habit of justice, you may
one day appear in his sight, and fully be satisfied, when he shall manifest
his glory.

A pretty Dialogue, between S. Anselme, and another Abbot, concerning the
trayning up of youth. Chap. 9.
THe like instructions gave the divine man in writing according to the
occurre^ces that happened. Nor were those same less replenished with heavenly
wisdom, which in diverse occasions, as we have touched above, he delivered by
word of mouth: Whereof likewise for fuller satisfaction of the Reader, we will
not spare to set down some one example. It was the common custom in those
times, for Noblemen, as it were throughout all (...) ^ndome, to put their
children of tender age into the Co^uents or Monks, partly to consecrate them
perpetually unto Religion; and partly also to take them forth again, being
piously trained up, for the benefit of the common wealth. Now it chanced that a
certain Abbot, in great opinion of Sanctity, discoursing with S. Anselme, of
Monastical government, among other things, came to speak of these youths, to
which purpose, he used these words: Tell me I pray, good Father, what we shall
do with them, they are so perverse and incorrigible; we never cease day and
night from beating them, and yet still they grow worse and worse. Whereat S.
Anselme, making a show of some wonder, answered. You never leave beating them:
and when hereafter they come to be elder, what prove they then to be? Even
dolts, said the other, and very beasts. Then S. Anselme: O how well then, do
you bestow the pains to make beasts of men. And what can we do withal,
replied the Abbot? We seek by all means to constreyn them to their profit,
and it boots nothing. Do you form them, or one, replied S. Anselme?

Do but tell me a little Father Abbot: If you set but a plant in your garden,
and bind it up presently on every side, so as it can not extend the branches
any way: if you go after a year to take away the binder from it, how shall you
find it? Certaynely with the boughs crooked, intricate, and inuolued. And who
then should be in fault thereof, but your self, who so immoderatly restrained
the same? Just so succeeds it with your pupils. They are planted by the
oblation of their friends in the Garden of the holy Church to grow up, and to
give forth good fruits to God. But you, with terrors, menaces, and stripes, do
even so strayten them, as that the poor wretches have not a jot of liberty. So
as being indiscreetly wrung and oppressed, they produce and cherish in
themselves, but ill discourses, which in manner of wreathed thorns, so grow
and setle in them, as there is after no remedy to be found, or prop to sustain
and hold them up, and to make them grow out straight again. And for that, they
find no spark of love or pity in you, nor any tenderness or sweetness toward
them, they cannot frame any good co^ceipt of you, but do rather verily persuade
themselves, that all your doings spring from hatred and malignity in you. And
hence very miserably proceeds it, that the more they grow in body, so much the
more increase they in auersion and iealousies, being always inclined and ready
to fall into all sorts of vices; and as in none they find any signs of true
charity, so can they not reguard any one, but with an eye a skew, and quite
awry.

But for the love of God, I would feign have you tell me, what is the cause
you are so strange and harsh unto them? For are they not I pray, men, and of
the same nature that you are? And would you, if you were in their place, think
it well to be dealt with, in this wise? but be it, as you say, that you have no
other intention with you in such your rigours, but only to make them good. Did
you ever in your life, behold a Gold smyth to frame with blows and beatings
only, any goodly figure of some mass of gold or silver? I believe not. What
then? For to shape it with his instruments, now beats he it, and presses it
gently, and then with a discreet relieve, rayses he it up, and frames it as he
list. So, if you will seem to introduce any good form of manners into youth,
it behooues you together with the depressions of penance to use some
indulgences and helps withal of a fatherly tenderness and love. To this point,
the Abbot. What indulgences, (said he) what helps? We continually labor to
constreyne them to virtue. And S. Anselme: It is well: and so even bread, and
other solid food, are good and wholesome to such as are able to digest the same.
But do you try a while to give it to a sucking child, and you shall see it
rather to be choked, then sed therewith. Wherefore I need not tell it you, it
is so clear. But this I do affirm, that as sickly and strong bodies, have
their difference and proportionable food: so the weak and more feeble souls,
require a food which is agreeable to them, in measure and quality. The strong
and able are fed, and delighted with the solid and substantial food, that is,
with Patience in tribulations, with breaking of the appetite, with exhibiting
the left cheek to him that strikes them on the right, praying for ones
enemies, with loving their persecutours, and with other the like. But that
Soul, which is feeble as yet, in the divine service, had need of tender milk,
that is, to be entreated with sweetness, with mercy, with a cheerful
countenance, with patience full of charity, and with such like carriages. If
you would but accommodate your self in this manner with your feeble, and able
ones, with the grace of God, what in you lies, you would gain all. With these
words, the Abbot, being finally convinced and touched withal, began to sigh,
and said: We surely, Father, have erred all this while from the right way, and
to us has the Sun of discretion, as yet not risen. Heervpon being prostrate
on the ground, he confessed he had hitherto done ill; and with craving pardon
for what was passed, promised to amend hereafter.

Another Dialogue between S. Anselme, and a certain Procuratour of a
Monastery. Chap. 10.
Upon a time, there came to the holy man, a Procuratour of the same Order, who
bewailed (as it happens now and then) his hard misfortune; for that being
touched heertofore by heavenly inspiration, he had left the world to serve God,
and now through obedience, was constrained again to leave God, to attend unto
the world. For as much, as the care of conseruing of rents, of following
suites, of reuiewing of accounts, and of other such like secular affairs, did
leave him no tymeat all to recollect the powers and facultyes of his Soul, for
contemplation of celestial things; but put him rather in continual danger of
offending the divine Majesty, in diverse manners. To which complaint, S. Anselme
answered, with the comparison following: The whole life of man, may be well
likened to a water Mill, seated on a swift river. Let there be then many
millers belonging to this mill, some so negligent, as to let the meal fall
into the water; others, to retain part, and part again to let pass away; and
some also, that gather up all, and lay it up, according as it is fit. Of this
number, it is manifest, that he who has reserved nothing, shall find but
little, he that has held and saved all, shall be able to maynteyne himself
more plentifully.

This Mill, as we said, may well be understood this present life: the Meal
represents the actions of men. Because, that even as when the Mill works, it
goes always round, and is ever continually wheeling about in it self; so
likewise, human actions for the most, return unto their stations. As for
example: Men plough, men sow, men reap, men grind, they make bread, they eat.
Behold the Mill has fetched a compass. What then, does it now stand still? No
truly, because it returns again to the foresaid tilling, sowing, reaping,
grinding, making of bread, and nourishing withal. These things are exercised
every year: and like a Mill fetch again the same compass, and turn about.
Let us now take one, that does all his works for terren ends, and who in them
has no regard but to transitory things: this man, truly grinds and works
indeed; but all the meal, which should be the fruit of his labors, through
the course of secular desires, comes to be drowned, and carried quite away. This
man, at the end of his life, when he shall turn back from the Mill to his
house, and that he would feign feed on something, shall find nothing to eat,
because the vehement stream has carried away the meal: Whence, woe to the
wretch, for he is like to fast eternally.

Behold another, who loses not the whole meal altogether; because now he
gives some alms, now he goes devoutly to visit Churches, and the sick, and
now he buries the dead, and so does some other such like works. But yet when
this very person forbeares in nothing to give himself to all sensuality, to be
aue^ged of injuries received, to take complacence in human praises, and that he
cannot rid himself quite of impure and disordinate affects, the wretch
loses, ere he is aware, the greater part of the meal. And what shall become
of him then in the other life, but even to receive rewards, according as he
has behaved himself?

Let us now pass to the third quality of men; and let us ingine it to be
within religious. Suppose, when a Monk who has made the Vow of Obedience, and
what in him lies, desires not to go forth of the Cloister for any temporal
busynes whatsoe^, Such a one then, is enjoined by his Superior to go abroad,
to have care of some possession of the Convent; the good man excuses himself,
and prays he may not be forced thereunto. And yet the Abbot still perseuers,
and vrges his going thither. So as the subject, being not able to resist, does
what he is commanded. Behold he comes to the Mill, and needs must he grind.
There arise complaints here and there, with murmurs and contentions. Here now
the prudent Monk is to look well to his meal, and to receive it warily into
his sack, and not to let it fall into the Curren^ and how this? Let him do
nothing out of vanity: Let him not be drawn to any manner of injustice, for
any gain whatsoever. Let him execute Obedience in such manner, as he stiffly
defend with good reason all the Ecclesiastical goods; but withal not seek to
increase them by unlawful ways. If he walk in this manner, though he be
sometimes enforced not to hear Mass, to break silence, and other such like
obseruances; Yet the virtue of holy Obedience, consummates all these defects,
and with his sa^ both whole and sound, he conserues all his meal, whence after
he shall have plenty enough to feed on for all eternity: because such a one
walks not according to his Self-will, but answearable to that of his
Superiors, by means whereof, as the Apostle says, he comes to escape
damnation.

Being now come to this passage, the Procuratour demanded anew: and what then
should we think of that Religious man, who offers himself voluntarily to such
businesses, or rather practices them, with complements and flatteries? Whereto
S. Anselme said, such question was not to the purpose of Religious men. To
which the other replying, that he always understood it with condition, to
wit, that the Monk so desirous of such occupations, should not after execute
any thing without leave of his Prelate; When S. Anselme answered: This leave
has deceived many such: because that in the matter, which we now treat of,
there are two things wholly opposite, Obedience and Disobedience: between these
two contraryes, this leave stands in the midst. He then, without being
constreyned by Obedience to go forth of the Monastery, will yet nevertheless go
forth, and by this means subtract himself from the ^igour of the rule; though
he do it with the full consent of the Superior, and so seem to justify the
act, by the license obtained; he ^emaines yet liable to the sin of
disordinate and unlawful will and desire. Because that after one has once
left the world in person, he ought not to return to it again, with desire:
but yet while he would not perform it without the permission of his Superior,
the Obedience whereto he tied himself, shall seem ^ndeed to excuse the
exterior fact; but that Will, which he had of ^is own, shall cost him dear,
if he do not penance in time for the same. Which some not reguarding, do suffer
themselves, as I said, oftentimes to be deceived through their appetite, under
the show of this leave, or license.

S. Anselme had a vision in sleep: His fame increased every where: And through
the importunity of the Abbot, was forced to take the whole Charge of the
Monastery upon him. Chap. 11.
IN this manner, went S. Anselme, as well with words, as with the pen, and
that which more imports, with works, inciting all to the contempt of the world,
and to the service of the eternal God. When through his many labors, being
seized with a most grievous infirmity, in excess of mind, he came to have a
Vision, that inflamed him much more to the desire of the eternal beatitude.
For that, there seemed a very swift and swelling torrent to be represented to
him, whereinto descended all the ordure and filth of the World: Which troubled,
stinking, and filthy waters, with a violent force went promiscuously carrying
away all things with them, which they met with on the way, with all sorts of
persons, both men and women, rich and poor. S. Anselme being astonished at so
foul a spectacle, demanded of one the company, Of what those miserable
wretches lived, and whence they quenched their thirst? And being told they
mainteyned themselves with that same water, wherewith they were more
precipitously carried away. And how so, answered he? Is there any amongst them,
that is not ashamed to swallow up such filth? Whereto the other answered. Do
not you seem, Sir, to wonder heerat: This same, which you se here, is the
Torrent of the world, wherein sensual men are so enwrapped, and carried away:
and by and by said: Would thou feign behold, what is a true Monk indeed?
Yea mary would I, answered S. ^selme. When he replied. Then look round about
thee, and see the walls of a Cloister, being all lyned over with the finest
silver, and the grass in the midst thereof, all of Silver indeed, but soft and
delicate, and most pleasant to behold. Which has likewise another condition
with all, that if one rests thereon, it will gently seem to yield under him,
and then rising again, be rising in like manner. This place so delightful to
see to, seemed to please S. Anselme beyond measure: When deliberating with
himself, to choose the same for his own habitation, the Guide began to ask
him again, saying: Hola. Would you see now, what is true Patience^ And S.
Anselme, showing forth as well with words, as gestures, a most ardent desire
thereof, the Vision vanished on a suden, and (...) returned to himself again.
By such apparitions he was filled with new light, and with a new fervor of
spirit.

In this mean time, the name of S. Anselme, ran not only through out all
Normandy, but even likewise through the Countries of France and Flaunders, yea
and passing over the Sea, extended it self throughout all England, so as from
diverse parts many noble and learned men, and Soldiers also had recourse to
the divine man, and dedicated themselves to the service of God under the
custody of so great a Pastor: though he with great prudence took heed of
persuading them, more to this, then to that Convent, contenting himself with
drawing them only in general to a Religious state, least they entering in
without any proper deliberation of theirs to some Monastery, and then finding
themselves afterward, molested with molestations, temptations, and trauayles,
might chance to murmur, and attribute their impatience and scandal to his
persuasions. Whereupon the Convent of Bec, came shortly to be amplifyed, both
in number of subjects, and in plenty of possessions.

And the Abbot Herlwin, being lastly arrived to extreme old age, and now become
decrepit withal, discharged himself of all things (touching the government)
and laid the^ on the shoulders of S. Anselme; expressly ordayning that he
should be well provided of horses, and of all other accoutrements for iourneys,
whenever his business required the same, and all should be kept as proper for
his person. But he being affrighted with the name of propriety, when he
returned from his iourneyes, would give up the same in common again; nor would
he ever endure, that for his own commodity, the others should seem to suffer
in any thing. And that no marvel, since even in the world it self, he was
ever so amiable and courteous to all; as that when he saw his friends to want
any thing, he would willingly supply them of his own, according to his
ability. For even at that time also, the very light of reason, had dictated to
him, that all the riches of the world, were created by the Eternal Father, for
the common vtility of men, and that in the law of nature, they belonged no more
to one man then another. And much more, after he was offered up to God in
Religion, as a perpetual Holocaust, stood he always firm and constant in
voluntary poverty. Not wanted he occasions enough to exercise the same; in
reguard, that besides the aforesaid privileges and particularities, which in
vain the Abbot Herlwin had enforced upon him; there were brought now and then,
no small sums of gold and silver to spend, or keep to himself for his own
commodity and pleasure, which yet the good religious man, would never yield to
accept of, if they, were not presented to the Abbot himself, for the benefit
and use of the whole community. And if the Benefactour himself, as it would
happen now and then, replied, that he had as then no intention to bestow it on
the Abbot, or Convent; he would answer, that he had no need of such things,
and that, in that nature, he would receive nothing at all of any person living.
With these proceedings of his, he did always yield forth a most sweet odor
of himself. Whence he came to be invited unto diverse Abbyes, to make them
spiritual exhortations, and to resolve their doubts, and to afford them his
counsel, as well in public a^ in private affairs: Which the man of Christ
would do, with exceeding edification, and good of Souls.

Abbot Herlwin being dead, Saint Anselme is chosen in his place. He is given
much to Hospitality: And goes into England to visit S. Lanfranke, and King
William.
IN the mean time, Herlwin dyed, and S. Anselme with the common consent of all
the Convent, was elected for Successor. But he knowing the danger of such
manner of dignitye, for many days opposed himself with excuses and reasons as
efficacious as he could, against the said election. After which, perceiving
that he was not able to remove the settled determination of the Monks,
lamenting and sending forth sighs, he cast himself at their feet, beseeching
and coniuring them, through the bowels of the divine mercy, to leave of such a
thought, and not to burden him with such wayght. But they on the contrary,
being prostrate before S. Anselme, besought him to have pity on the Convent,
and to beware, that with such resistance he seemed not more to regard his
proper commodity, the^ the public weal and vtility. This perseverance of the
Monks, together with the memory of that which was expressly commanded him,
by the Archbishop of Roan, overcame him at last: otherwise, there had been no
means possible, to have brought him to accept of the Prelacy.

Being then consecrated, without altering awhit the manner of his customs, and
living; he now proceeded to promote with all diligence his subjects to the end
of their vocation, and with great vigilance provided, that the least wrong in
the world might not be offered to any one, by the Officers and Procuratours, in
the causes of the Monastery. Moreover in receiving, and lodging of Ghests (to
which work of charity, the family of S. Benet has ever applied it self with
particular industry, and praise) S. Anselme was among others most wondefull
liberal, and where ability failed, he supplied the defect with a great
pro^ptnes of the will, and withal serenity and cheeerfulnes of the
countenance: and likewise, sometimes in case of necessity he would be taking
from the refectory it self, the meat which was prepared for the Monks, to
set before strangers; though ordinarily, as he was a most prudent exactour of
observance, so was he very accurate in procuring, that the Convent should
suffer no want: howbeit often times, things arrived to those terms, as there
would seem to be no provision left for the day following. In which cases, the
Dispensiers, the Cellarians, and other the Ministers of the Monastery running
with all anxiety unto the holy Abbot, he would answer them with a grave and
serene countenance, that if they would but have confidence in the divine
Goodness, he would not suffer them to want any necessaryes, nor were they
deceived awhit of his promise.

Because, even in that very instant, or shortly after, you mig^t have seen to
come from England (where many of the possessions of their Convent lay) some
ship well freighted with all manner of provision; or else some extraordinary
alms to arrive from some devout person; or otherwise some wealthy m^n to come,
and enter into Religion amongst them, whereby in time what manner of want
soever, or disorder in this kind, might be easily remedyed. And forasmuch, as
the foresaid possessions in England, for the better manage of good government,
required somtymes the visits and presence of the Abbot himself; S. Anselme was
feign now and then to go ^hither, being thereunto moue^ moreover with desire to
go and visit his dear, and most venerable Father and Master S. Lanfranke, who
for his most excellent virtues, from the Abbot of Cadom, was assu^pted to the
Archbishoprike of Canterbury. Coming then to England, he was received with
much joy and honor, not only in the said City of Canterbury, but in all other
places wheresoever he passed. And he always according to custom, showed
himself most sweet and affable to all, accommodating himself to the genius
and fashions of every one; so much, as he would many times say, that he who in
every thing, wherein God may not seem to be offended, endeauours to consent to
the will of another, comes to merit exceedingly with the divine Goodness: that
as he accordes with others in the present life, so with him in the future, may
God and all created things, seem likewise to accord. But he that dispising the
neighbors contentment, will attend but his own gust only; shall deserve often,
with the just Judge, that even as in this world, he would not seem to conform
himself to the will of any; so in the other, shall no man accommodate himself
to his. Since even it is said by our Savior himself, that every one, shall
receive according to the measure he has proportioned to others.

The blessed S. Anselme now being moved with such like reasons, as we have
said, did shun by all means to be troublesome and grievous to any: howbeyt,
now and then, he was constrained therefore to remit somewhat of the monastical
severity and discipline that he used otherwise, reputing it to redound to the
greater glory and service of God, to condescend rather a little now and then,
with holy equity, to such Souls as he was to help, then by standing too much
upon rigor, to estrange, and alienate them from his speech and conversation.
Whence it followed, through the great affection, that all seemed to bear him,
they came at last with a very good will to receive very wholesome and spiritual
aduertisements from him: Which in truth have never yet been put in print, nor
always given in the same manner, but proportionable to the qualityes and
estate of the hearers.

To the Monks, above all things he would give to understand they should not
seem to neglect the least faults and trangressions of the Institute. And was
wont to confirm the same, with a similitude of a Viuary, or Fish-trough,
because that even as when the holes, or chinks are not kept well stopped within
them, the water by and little goes running forth, and the fish does even perish
the while: So in religious houses, when there is no heed taken of lighter
faults, by little and little, is spirit together with observance lost.

He taught the Clearkes, how they were to maintain the profession which even
by name they made, of having God only for inheritance, portion and lot, and
advised them to stand always upon their guard, least through negligence or
tepidity, instead of possessing God, they come to inherit the Devil. To the
married in like sort, he would give aduertisements, very full of prudence and
sanctity.

And in this doctrine of his, the divine man proceeded not after the manner of
the Masters, and deep Deuines of the world, who believe they cannot seem to
maintain their degree and dignity if they do not still propose very high and
sublime conceits, and not so easy to be apprehended of the vulgar: But S.
Anselme, quite contrary to such, by reducing the highest points to the capacity
of the meaner understandings, and unfolding the obscure and intricate passages,
and declaring them by images and material examples (being a thing very proper
to true and absolute Wisdom indeed) and confirming them moreover with potent
and manifest reasons; would seem efficatiously to engrosse them in the breast
and heart, so as every one heard him with great cheerefullnes, and recurred to
him in their doubts, with the greatest confidence that might be. Nor was there
in England a personage at that time of importance, that held it not a great
misfortune to have had no occasion to hear, honor, and serve such a man. Yea
even King William himself, who had, conquered that Nation by force of arms,
and was commonly held to be fierce and cruel, showed himself to S. Anselme so
human and benign, as they were all astonished at him.

K. William the Conqueror being dead, his Son William Rufus succedes. And
Lanfrancke the Archbishop deceasing, S. Anselme is chosen in his place. Chap.
13.
FRom this time forwards, S. Anselme was much conversant in England, and
according to the occurrences that happened, he made frequent iourneys thither.
And among other times that he went into those parts, one was, after the death
of the said King William, to whom his Son succeeded of the same name, being a
person very ill inclined, and who from a King became a Tyrant: and among other
iniquityes of his, against all Justice, he doubted not to pollute his impions
hands, with the oppression of the Clergy and Religious, and with the usurpation
of the goods of the Church. Whereupon it seemed good to the Earl of Chester,
and to other principal Lords of the kingdom, to give him a Christian
admonishment by the means of one of so great authority, as S. Anselme was; and
with that occasion to comfort themselves with his presence and discourses, whom
they wished to be the Physician, and Governor of their souls.

S. Anselme then, being so earnestly invited and entreated by this Man, and
many others, with the greatest instance that might be; passed over again unto
Canterbury, where a little before was deceased S. Lanfrank the Archbishop, and
where the Clergy and people, were in great care and desire, to supply the
vacancy of that Seat, with the election of some worthy and sufficient Prelate.
So as now at the appearing of S. Anselme, began to arise a general whisper in
the whole City, that a new Archbishop was come already, and how they ought
not to think of any other then of him. Which the humble Servant of Christ
perceiving, immediately departed from thence, nor could he be induced by the
prayers or entreaties of any, so much as to celebrate there on the Feast the^
approaching of the Nativity of the most blessed Virgin. From hence, according to
the necessity of the Churches, and the request of the Peers, he refused not to
go to the Court, where met with much reverence by all the Barons, and the King
himself likewise, with cheerful countenance, came to receive him, even to the
gate of the Palace; and after most dear kisses, and loving embraces, taking
him by the right hand, he conducted him into a room thereby. Where sitting
down, and some words of courtesy passing between them, S. Anselme showed his
desire to have private audience with him: so as the standers by, went
immediately forth, when he without touching awhit the matters appertayning to
his Monastery, for which it was thought, he had principally come to Court, with
Christian liberty, began to discover to the King, the sinister fame, that went
of him; nor stuck he, to specify unto him many particulars, that he might the
more easily come to amend them.

The discourse being ended, he went his ways, to seek out the Earl of
Chester, and was enforced to remain there for some days. In the mean while,
the King fell grievously sick, and fearing death was put in mind by his
followers, as soon as possible, to provide for the principal Church of the
Kingdom, being then without a Pastor, which was that of the aforesaid
Canterbury. And now this counsel seeming good to the King, he nominated the
Abbot Anselm, and no other, for the same administration. The which declaration,
was with admirable applause, received of all. The Abbot only, at the news
thereof, was struck even dead, as it were; but then gathering his forces to
him again, he endeauours by all means possible to resist, but not being able
to prevail, against the deliberate consent of the King, and of the whole
Clergy, and people, he was snatched up, and carried into the Cathedral Church,
and placed in the Throne with much solemnity From thence, he was straight
conducted to Winchester, and lodged in the suburbs of the City there: where
while he remaynes in the company of Gondolfus Bishop of Rochester, and of a
certain principal Monk, by name Baldwin: behold one night was a great fire
enkindled in the neighbour-houses, which with fury went consuming whatsoever it
met with in the way. It now approached to the house very near unto S. Anselmes
June; when some familiar friends of the Hostess or Mistres of the house,
seeing so little remedy against the fire, began to carry away from thence the
household stuff, into some safer place. But the woman, being full of faith,
forbad the same; very confidently affirming, there was no such cause of fear,
while she had the Archbishop S. Anselme in her house. At which so generous
words of hers, Baldwin being moved, entreated the holy Father, not to deny his
succor to the devout Matron: but he, with accustomed modesty and humility,
answered: what should I help her? and wherein I pray! Go you but forth then,
the other replied, and make the sign of the holy Cross against the fire: and
who knows, whether the divine Clemency may not happily extinguish it by that
means? When S. Anselme replied again. What say you, by my means? You know
not what you say. And yet nevertheless, for fear of the imminent danger, he
went forth with the others; and in the sight of those furious flames, was
constrained by the Bishop of Rochester, and Baldwin, to oppose the wholesome
sign of the Cross there to. A strange thing, he had no sooner lifted up his
hand, but (as likewise it is read of S. Martin) that flaming and impetuous
flood of fire, retiring into it self, made a stop in its course: and the
flames being extinguished on a sudden, left the buildings half burnt, so far
as it had gone.

S. Anselme endeauours to put off the charge imposed upon him, but in vain. He
after falls in disgrace with the King and is banished the Court. With a miracle
that happened. Chap. 14.
AFter all these things, S. Anselme did seek very dexterously to put off from
his shoulders, that new burden of the Archbishoprique: and to that end had
differred till then, the acceptance thereof, and his full consent thereunto.
But so great were the motives, and coniurations made of persons of each quality;
together with the scruple of Obedience thereunto added, which was imposed upon
him heertofore by the Archbishop of Roan, as that in fine a consent was
violently extorted from him. And so was the blessed Man, with great joy and
solemnity, consecrated by all the Bishops of England, in the Metropolis of
Canterbury. This consecration of his, was celebrated upon the 4. of December,
on the feast of the glorious S. Barbara: when lo, the Nativity of our Savior
coming shortly after, S. Anselme went his ways to the King, to give him the
accustomed salutation of the good New year: of whom he was first well
entreated; but afterward, partly out of malice, and the mere instability of
the Kings own disposition, and partly by the work and instigation of wicked
Courtiers and flatterers, the state of masters was quite changed: and the Kings
mind began with a sudden mutation to show it self much aliened from the
Archbishop: while to the foresaid occasions, was likewise added another of no
small moment, which was, that K. William hoping for some great present from him
at his first entrance, found himself to be quite deceived of his expectation;
since S. Anselme, was not willing at all to aggrieue his subjects with any
exactions and loanes, to satisfy the disordinate appetites of the King.

So that perceiving him now to be angry with him, he departed from Court, and
retired himself to a certain Village of his called Bregge, to finish, and
dedicate there a Church for that parish, which by the death of S. Lanfranke his
Predecessor was yet imperfect. In which ceremony, succeeded a notable
accident: which was, that a certain Clerk, but ill disposed, coming from
London, under show of assisting at the sacred office, had thrust himsele into
that troop: where casting his eye on the vessel of holy Oil, but ill looked
to as it seemed; he began to lay his sacrilegious hands thereon, and so with
silence went secretly his ways, toward his home again. He was now gone a
pretty way, as he thought, when contrary to his opinion, he found himself
still in the same assembly, and in the self same place from whence he had
fled; whereat wondering not a little, he puts himself on the way again: and
behold with in a while, finds himself still in the Church of Bregge: and so
went turning his back to it again and again, until such time as the people
being aware of those erring and wandering steps of his, cast their eyes on the
Clerk; and at the same instant were the Deacons advised, that the vessel of
Chrisme was not to be found, for which there arising a great cry, upon good
advise, and discreet conjecture, the foresaid Clerk was immediately
apprehended, and the vessel being found about him under his cloak, with
menaces and rating, he was brought to S. Anselme, who being moved with
compassion toward the wretch, with cheerful countenance reprehended him
Fatherly for it, and ordained, he should be let go forthwith without
punishment; and immediately the Man went directly home to his house.

This Dedication being finished, S. Anselme was very suddenly recalled again
to the Court, of purpose, to give his benediction to the King before he crossed
the seas. He went then presently thither: and for that, the wind in those days
was very contrary unto him, he thought it his duty in the mean time, with all
care and diligence, to admonish K. William again, of the great disorders and
many abuses introduced into the kingdom, and to exhort him to relieve the
afflicted Churches, and to help to reform the same. He did it then in the best
manner he could: but the King, being now troubled already, and wholly incapable
of good counsel, not only slighted the man of God, with the Fatherly
correction he gave him: but even also, with great disdain and contempt did
banish him his presence. Whereupon, some wicked and insolent men present, took
new courage, and boldness again to offer wrongs and injuries to Ecclesiastical
persons and their goods, bearing but li^le respect to the dignity and merits of
S. Anselme himself: who being much more seen and expert in the knowledge of
spirits, then in the manage of temporal affairs, partly suffered himself to
be deceived, not being able to persuade himself, that any one for tra^sitory
things, would willingly loose the eternal; and partly also, was enforced to
yield, having (as we said) the King for adversary, and his grievous enemy.

So as now being wholly anxious, he never ceased to bemoane himself for the
quiet and peace of a religious state; nor found he any comfort, but when he
could now and then, retire himself from company, into Cloisters. Nor would he
neither within the Bishoprique, nor yet without, ever live without the company
and assistance of some virtuous and approved Monks, to his exceeding gust, and
to the great edification of as many as knew him. Besides which, he failed not
to steal some time for mere contemplation, and to remedy the troubles of the
Catholic Church, by means of his most learned writings. Among which, is that
work of his, most worthily renowned, which he wrote in the midst of so great
afflictions upon the subject of the Incarnation of the Eternal Word:
wherewith, the error of the Greeks, remained discovered and convinced, being
so audacious, as to deny the Procession of the holy Ghost from the second
person of the Blessed Trinity.

Not only thus in his Cell, and studies, but even likewise at table, when they
had given over reading, as a most excellent Divine, he would solue very
intricate knots, and expound difficult passages of the sacred Scripture. He
likewise feared so much every offense, how light soever; as he often affirmed,
with sincerity, that if he had on the one side, the horror of sin before his
eyes, and the pains of Hell on the other, with the necessity of being drenched
or engulted in this, or that; he would doubtless make choice, rather of the
infernal pains, then of the offense of God; and sooner accept of Hell, as
pure and innocent, then the heavenly mansion being polluted with sin.

What occasions S. Anselme would usually take of spiritual Conceyts. How K.
William returns from beyond Seas: and S. Anselme goes to Rome. Chap. 15.
THe Servant of Christ, was wont with the gift which he had of knowledge, to
gather spiritual and fruitful conceits from the things which daily occurred:
as once certain Servants of his, had a course at a Hare, who after she had
diverse ways, very nimbly tried to escape from them, by secret instinct, came
at last to squat even under S. Anselmes horse, who suddenly thereupon made a
stop, so as the dogs, not daring to set upon her, stood aloof, baying at her,
expecting her starting again. At which sight, the company laughing, and making
much sport, S. Anselme fell a weeping: You laugh my Masters (said he) but this
poor little beast here laughs not at all, or finds any sport. Her enemies
encompasse her round about, and she with the agonies of death, recurres to us
for succor. The same indeed succeeds very often to the reasonable soul of
man, which no sooner yssues from the body, but the hunters (malignant spirits)
pursuing her as long as she lives in flesh, by the diverse turnings, and
crooked paths of vices and iniquityes, even to the article of death, do then
cruelly stand ready to snatch her away, and to cast her headlong to eternal
perdition, laughing and making great sport thereat; whiles the poor wretch
lies deprived and despoyled of all helps. And after these words, S. Anselme
spurd on his horse, and commanded them not to molest the poor creature; when
by and by having escaped the danger, she skippes again into the meadows and
woods from whence she had fled.

Another day, the holy Father seeing a boy in the streets, holding in his hand,
a certain little Bird, fast tied by the feet with a long third, taking much
pleasure to let the third go and come now and then, and in the midst of its
flight to pull it back on a sudden again, and let it fall often to the
ground. Whereat S. Anselme took compassion on the poor creature, and much
desired to see the bird at liberty; when behold on a sudden the third brake,
and the bird flew away, and the boy cried. S. Anselme rejoiced the while, and
calling to his companions: have you (said he) taken heed to the sport of the
little Boy here? Whereto the others answering yea, he then replied: And now
such manner of sport for all the world, the ancient adversary makes every day
with many sinners; he holds them so entangled in his snares, and playing at his
pleasure, precipitates them now into this, and then into that vice. As for
example, some be given to avarice, or else carnallity, or to some other such
like miseries: To these will it happen now and then, that being touched with
penance and compunction, they make reflection upon the evil life which
formerly they have lead, for which they are moved to tears, and for that time
make good purposes to amend themselves. And now it seems verily to them, they
are loose already, and at full liberty: but yet with the third, or line of
evil custom, in the very loose and iumpe, as it were of their flying away,
they are suddenly pulled back again by the Devil, and made to fall as before
into the same sins. And this thing happens very often, nor do they ever come
to get forth of so abominable a servitude, till with some great violence of
theirs, and with the efficacious help of divine grace, the same line comes once
to be broken asunder. With such holy documents as these, the holy man, daily
excited himself, and others, to the custody of the heart, and purchase of
virtues.

But to return from whence we have digressed. King William, after he had
unworthily banished from his presence the venerable man, so that S. Anselme,
seeing now all things to pass continually from ill to worse, without hope of
any present remedy, through the occasion of obieyning his Episcopal Pall,
resolved to go to Rome, and to recurre unto the Pope for help and counsel,
who in those days was Urban the second; for this end he went to demand
license of the King, and after many repulses, affronts, and injuries received
at his hands; did finally obtain it, with condition never to put foot into
England more. Heerupon, with great feeling and tears, taking his leave, first
of the Monks, and then of the Clergy, and people, he went to Dover, and there
embarked himself for France: but in the midst of his course, behold a
contrary wind arose, in such sort as the mariners began to protest, that unless
he would needs be drowned, of necessity they must be feign to turn back
again from whence they came. This news, did much afflict the good Archbishop,
enforcing him to say with sighs: Since then, it pleases the Almighty God of
his just judgments to send me again back to my passed miseries, rather then
to let me go whither I had intended to arrive, let his divine Majesty do with
me what he thinks best, and govern and dispose of every thing, according to
his good pleasure. With these words growing tender, his eyes were all bathed in
tears; when through divine Clemency, the wind suddenly began to come about so
as with a prosperous gale the ship arrived in France at a place called
Whitsand: where they landing, was discovered another wonder, to wit, a leake in
the bark of two foot broad, which through the merits of the holy man, amidst
so great a tempest, and storm, had received no water.

As soon as it was known in Court, that S. Anselme was now on the other side,
King William with impious boldness, caused his possessions and goods to be
seized upon in his name: he cut of all the Acts and decrees by him made in the
same Dioc^sse, and with strange injuries and wrongs stuck not to molest, and
even suck out of the Church, for himself and his hungry flatterers, as much
blood, as he could. In the mean time, the Servant of Christ being arrived at
Lions, there rested himself a while, and from thence passed safe to Rome,
being every where received of al, with much honor and reverence; and
especially of the Pope himself, causing chambers to be provided him in his
own Palace; and admitting him to audience, and kissing of the feet took him
up, and dearly embraced him; and in the presence of all the Prelates, spoke so
much good of him, as the humble man being confounded thereat, had not the heart
to lift up his eyes from the ground, much less to endure such manner of
discourse. Wherefore with good opportunity he declared the state of the English
Churches, and particularly that of Canterbury; when the Pope with gracious
words promised, to take the business to heart, and provide for the same in due
time.

S. Anselme being at Capua, miraculously causes water to spring up in astony
soil. And goes with the Pope unto the Council of Bari, and thence to
another. Chap. 16.
IN the mean time, by reason it was then Summer, it seemed good to the Pope,
that S. Anselme, being a person of so tender complexion as he was, should
retire himself from that air, into a village of the Benedictin Monks, called
Schiana, not far from C^pua. This village, was seated on the top of a high and
pleasant hill, but defective of water: in so much, as they could get none at
all, but at one Well only, which was there by, on the ridge of that hill, and
this also but at certain hours of the day, it remaining afterward dry, in so
much as the Guardian of the place with the inhabitants thereabout did suffer
very much. Now the said Guardian conceived a great hope that though the
sanctity of S. Anselme some remedy would be easily obtained from Heaven for so
great a difficulty. And thereupon he determined to dig a well in his own house,
howbeit the place being craggy and stony of its own nature, was very unapt for
the purpose: but yet before he would put hand to the work, he prayed the Man
of God to affoard his benediction to the enterprise, and to be the first to
open the Earth with his holy hands. Whose request S. Anselme did not resuse,
but for his Hosts consolation went in person to the place designed, and making
his prayer for a happy success, with a pickaxe struck the earth three times,
and then gave place to others, to finish the work. When it was not long, ere
there sprung up a most limpid and excellent water from the stony soil, which
being enclosed within a pit of a small depth, there followed after a perpetual
abou^dance from thence, enough to supply, not only the necessityes of all
those parts thereabout; but even likewise to cure the diseases and infirmities
of many, who had faithfully recourse to that succor: which thing, being once
diuulged, gave no small credit of more then human power to the B. Anselme, and
from that time forwards it was worthily called, The Bishop of Canterburies Well.

Here now remained the Servant of God, a pretty while, recollecting himself,
and greatly attentive to divine contemplation and serious studies, to his most
extraordinary delight; as seeming to him in a certain manner, he was now
returned to his wonted monastical life again: where (among other things) he
finished a Book entitled: Cur Deus homo, which heertofore he had begun in
England. In those days was Capua besieged by Roger Duke of Puglia; who moved
with the fame and neighborhood of S. Anselme, sent to inuit and pray him to
vouchsafe to come unto him. The holy Man went presently, and with his presence,
humility, and charity, so edifyed the Duke, and gained so the minds of the
whole army unto him, that whersoeuer he showed himself, he was blessed and
glorified of every one: in so much as many Saracens, being moved with his good
example, and the good entertainment he gave them, were even ready to be
converted to the holy Faith: and had been so indeed, if through diabolical
suggestion, they had not been hindered, by a Count of Sicily, who at the
instance of Duke Roger, had trained, and conducted them to that Service.

After this, came likewise Pope Urban himself unto the camp, and the siege
being ended, S. Anselme very earnestly besought him, he would please to
discharge him of the dignity, and Pontifical cu^e, and to affoard him the
favor to let him retire again to his ancient quiet and religious liberty: but
all was in vain, while the Pope esteemed him more worthy of a higher degree.
And a little after conducted him with him to the Council of Bari, where S.
Anselme by word of mouth, conformable to the doctrine he had written already,
left the Greekish pride, and perfidiousnes much abased, and confounded, not
without the universal approbation of the Fathers, and most clear confirmation
of the Catholic Faith. From thence, he returned to Rome with the Pope, who
calling another Council, in that City upon the ensuing Feasts of Easter, S.
Anselme was there also, and illustrated not a little, the said assembly with his
presence and authority, where with the consent of all the Prelates, and
particular consolation of S. Anselme, was thundered forth the sentence of
Excommunication, as well against the Laity, that presumed to give the
Inuestitures of Bishoprikes, as against the Ecclesiastiques themselves, and
others, who received them at their hands, or durst consecrate any persons by
such ways, intruded into those dignities. The Council being ended, S. Anselme
having obtained good leave, departed for Lions, with resolution to remain
there with the Archbishop Hugo, his most intimate friend, having now quite lost
all hope of ever returning into England again, whiles K. William lived.

News comes to S. Anselme, how K. William was sl^yne, and King Henry had
succeeded. He returns welcome into England: where after some troubles passed
over, he dies blessedly in his Sea of Canterbury. Chap. 17.
SAint Anselme being arrived now, at Lions, while he attended to his wonted
exercises of virtue, and assisting the Archbishop, and that Diocese; behold
two Monks from England with tidings, that K. William upon the second of August,
being a hunting, was shot through the heart with an arrow, and had presently
given up the ghost. Whereat S. Anselme was very sorry, and most bitterly
lamenting affirmed, he would willingly have given up his own life, to have
delivered his King from so sudden, and dreadful an end. And a little after,
arrived diverse Posts to S. Anselme, with letters from K. Henry his Successor
and the Nobility of England, both Ecclesiastical, and Secular, entreating him
to return back again with all possible diligence, for that the whole
Kingdom expected him, with exceeding desire, and that all public businesses
were differred, and put off until his coming.

Whereupon S. Anselme without delay, took his journey toward Normandy, and
crossing the Seas, the first thing he did, he declared to the new King, in
plain terms, what had lately been determined in the sacred Counsel of Rome in
the matter of inuestitures of Bishops. Whereat K. Henry being greatly troubled
made instance to S. Anselme that for reuocation of such a decree, he would
return again unto the Pope, called Paschalis, being newly elected in place of
Urban the^ deceased: to which request S. Anselme made answer plainly, that it
was not to be sued for, or possibly procured by any means; and yet
notwithstanding K Henry urging him, that at least for his satisfaction he would
lead with him, another Ambassador thither, whom for that purpose he
determined to send to his Holiness, S. Anselme obeyed, and being received by the
Pope, and the whole Court with great honor, his companion the Kings
Ambassador after he had labored in vain for that which his Lord pretended,
returned into England without effect, and S. Anselme remained in France. for
that he heard K. Henry was exceedingly displeased for the ill success of his
affairs in the Court of Rome, and had impioussy seized upon the Archbishoprike
of Canterbury, and despoiled S. Anselme of all his goods.

Howbeit after a while the same K. Henry, being touched with the fear of God,
and true penance, restored S. Anselme into the possession of the said Church,
and very honorably received him again into peace and grace. Which conversion
of his, how grateful it was to the divine M^iesty, did soon appear by a
glorious victory, which he got against his Brother Duke Robert, with other
personages, who had revolted from him; through which victory K. Henry did
remain absolute Lord of Normandy. And in sign of gratitude, caused a
Parliament to be called at London, in which, to the extraordinary consolation of
S. Anselme there present, and of all good men, he renounced the custom of his
Predecessors, concerning the Inuestiture of Churches, leaving the free
disposition thereof to the Pope and his Delegats, showing him self heerin
particularly, to be a true and obedient child of the holy Apostolic Sea.

Now S. Anselme, waxing daily more, and more grieved with old age, and diverse
infirmityes, especially of the stomach, came to such weakness, as that not
being able to celebrate Mass, made himself to he carried every day to the
Church to hear the same, and in short time the malady increased so much, as it
clearly appeared, there was little hope of his life. His benediction then was
required by the Bishop of Rochester, for all that were present, as also for the
King and Queen themselves, with their children, and the whole Kingdom
besides: and he having given it, with much devotion most sweetly bowed down
his head, and one of his familiars, taking the Text of the Gospel, began to
recite the Passion of our Lord, and coming to those words: Vos estis, qui
permansistis mecum in tentationibus meis, and ego dispono vobis, sicut
disposuit mihi Pater meus, regnum, vt edatis and bibatis super mensam meam, in
regno meo; the good Archbishop, began to fetch his breath more thick then
ordinary. Whereupon the standers by, being aware of the approach of his last
hour, after the due rites, and Sacraments applied, taking him in their arms,
they laid him down, according to the manner of those times, upon a Cilice, and
Ashes; where he rendered his blessed soul to the Creator, upon Wednesday in
Holy week, in the morning being the 21. day of April, in the year 1109. or
as others would have it 1080. and the 13. of his Bishopric, and the 76. of
his age.

Being afterward sockt, and reuested with his Pontifical ornaments, he was
decently laid forth in the Church, and buried with most solemn Exequies, and
with the sorrow that behooved, for the loss of such, and so great a Prelate.
Many other, and great miracles, besides those that we have touched, are
recounted of him, the which notwithstanding altogether with me, make him not so
venerable and worthy of eternal praise, as two only Qualities which he had,
among others, in an excellent degree; to wit, his Discretion, and Assability
with all. Most noble virtues without doubt, and such (as we have said) that he
above all other gifts, should be adorned withal, who desires to have open, and
manifest to him, the Souls and consciences of his subjects, and would seek by
due means, to lead them to some good point of Perfection, and Sanctity.

FINIS.
S. OTHO.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE Altar decked with Purple Sal. I^chi upon those ^ords Number. 4. Et togent
alta^e purpura:
did display
The fire that came from heaven which under lay
As in its mansion vnextinguished,
And by it self conseru'd, and nourished.
Those that Christ's flock appointed are to feed,
And govern it, must take attentive heed
The inward man do with their Robes agree,
And like to that like fire do signify;
Ever conseru'd Heavens love, which drawn from thence
Their nobler souls should purge, and quintessence.
This in my Rule I fostered, this my Heart
Did purify and cleanse my better part
From worldly cares, and sensuality,
And fruitful made in acts of Charity.
My self of all the wretched'st I esteemed,
And worldly joys, I like those Meteors deemed
Composed of grosser substance, yet exceed
The stars we think, and greater wonder breed.
Preferment me abased, raised more high
Dejected more, more low in dignity.
THE LIFE OF S. OTHO BISHOP OF BAMBERGE.
Written by Laurence Surius.
Otho being well descended, his Father having left him poor, goes into Poland;
whence being sent Ambassador to the Emperor, is preferred by him to be
Chancellor. Chap. I.
OTHO, who was after Bishop of Bamberge, a Sueuian by nation (whose proper
place, and Surname, is not known) was borne of the Count Bartold, and of the
Countess Sophia his wife; more noble of blood, then rich in substance, and
goods. Who after they had bred with diligent care, and with the help of a good
Master, brought up this son, dyed; and the government of the house, fell
into the hands of another Son, whose name was Frederick, at such time
indeed, as in foreign parts, as it happened, Otho was busyed at his book.
Where he having with good applause attended to the study of humanity, and to
some part of Philosophy, and wanting sufficient means to proceed any further,
by reason of the short allowance, which his Brother and other friends affoarded
him, he resolved, to the end he might not be grievous and burdensome to them,
to pass over into Polony, where was as that time a great scarcity, and want of
learned men. Here then, for the teaching and instructing of youth, and withal
likewise for his greater profit, he set up open School. And with this manner
of life, coming shortly to be well known, not only for a pious and a learned,
but even also for a wise and discreet Man; he purchased to himself, besides an
honest, and competent means to live, much reputation, and favor also with the
principal personnages of those Countries.

There was added also to the learning and integrity of this servant of God, a
majesty in his countenance, and such a garb in his behavior, and so noble a
dexterity in his conversation, as that after he had in diverse occurrences
handled, and negotiated affairs of no small importance, he was by the Duke of
Polony (for as yet, there was no Alteza, or Highness of a King) sent in weighty
affairs unto the Emperor Henry the fourth, his Cousin. Who was likewise so
pleased with the carriage, and prudence of Otho, as that the Embassage being
ended, with the good leave of his Cousin he retained him with him, with some
honorable title, among his Chaplains: and a little after, the dignity of the
great Chancellor being void, he most graciously conferred it upon him. In
which charge, Otho carried himself so faithfully to the Prince, and with so
much courtesy and humanity toward others, as he made a notable increase of
love, and credit with persons of all sorts.

S. Otho is preferred by the Emperor to be Bishop of Bamberge; and after some
difficultyes is by the Citizens joyfully received. Chap. 2.
THERE was in those days introduced among Christians an abuse of much
prejudice to the holy Apostolic Sea, (and I would to God, there were not as
yet some relics thereof, to be seen likewise in these our days) that many
Princes, and especially the Emperor, under the name of inuestitures, bestowed
the Churches at their pleasure; and when a Bishopric was vacant at any time,
the Chapter would send to Caesar, the Pastoral staff and ring, beseeching his
Majesty to vouchsafe to provide them a Successor. Whence it came, that many
personages, the children, and nephews of Barons, and great Lords, under diverse
colors of services done, would follow the Court of Caesar, to be promoted to
some Bishoprike, or other, as it chanced to fall. Now Robert the Bishop of
Bamberge, a noble City of Franconia, being then deceased, and the sacred
Pledges carried unto Court with the wonted supplication, Henry answered, he
would take time, for the space of six months, to think of a new election. In
the mean while in Bamberge, were made continual prayers, and pennances for
that effect.

The term being ended, it was signified them by the Emperor, that now, he had
found a sufficient Pastor for that Church, though for the present he
suppressed his Name, while that good people, continued still more fervent then
ever in redoubling their devotions. And among others, on the Vigill of
Christmas day, was a solemn procession ordained (where none was absent) from
the Cathedral, to the Church of S. Michael, on the Hill, taking that glorious
Archangell for intercessour, with the divine Majesty, to obtain a Prelate, of
the sufficiency and goodness, which they desired. And on the other side they
sent Ambassadors to Henry, to solicit the expedition: and in fumme neglected
not any thing that concerned the happy issue of so important a business. And the
divine Clemency, accustomed to hear the prayers of such as concur on their
parts, and manfully to set hand thereto; was pleased with the piety and
industry of Bamberge, in putting into Caesar's mind, to put the designs in
execution, as soon as might be. Thereupon, sending for the foresaid
Ambassadors to come unto him, he spoke to them, in the manner following.

How dear to us (Ambassadors) your Church is, and ever has been, from hence
you may easily gather, that we have thought it not good to give you a Rectour,
till after a long and mature consult thereupon; and that surely with good
reason: Forasmuch as the said Church, as you know, has been founded by our
Progenitors, and adorned, and furnished of all things that seem to appertain
to the splendor and mantenance of Christian Religion, and (which is more, and
which cannot be affirmed but of few other Seas) the same ornaments, furnitures,
and ancient riches, are kept very safe, and entire, unto this day; so as reason
would, for the custody, and administration of them, should be placed over them,
not an ordinary man, but one who were sage, prudent, and zealous of the honor
of God.

And the Emperor proceeding to manifest more at large, this good disposition
of his, toward the Communalty of Bamberge, some of the Ambassadors, being
wearied already with such long and tedious ambages, could not hold themselves,
but they must needs ingeniously demand of him, where, and who he was, whom
his Majesty had so destined for the government.

Then Henry cheerfully looking about: Behold him, said he, and taking Otho by
the hand, that was (as we said) of a venerable aspect, and decently clad in a
Clericall habit; This, said he, is your Lord, this is your Priest, and Bishop
of Bamberge. There could not happen to the Ambassadors ears, a more strange
and unexpected thing then it. Whence being astonished, and confounded, they
began privily to look one upon another, and to cast there eyes from time to
time on the face of Otho. Whereof some of Caesar's court being aware, who now
for a long time, gad greedily expected to aspire to that seat and Living; with
glaunces, nods and whispering began to stir up the Bambergians to show
themselves not well satisfied with such a nomination, and resolved not to
accept it by any means. So as at last, with a sad countenance and free
liberty, they turning themselves to Caesar, said: We hoped your Majesty, would
have deputed to us, some Prelate, who had been one of the most markable, and
illustrious of the Court. Now for this man, we know not either, who he is, or
whence he came. Then Caesar replied with a severe look. We our selves, through
long co^uersatio^ and infinite proofs have had full, and perfect notice of
this Subject, his faythfullnes, his judgment, and longanimity: his diligence,
in small matters, and sufficiency in great, are not unknown to us. Nor would
we have you to think but the loss of such a Minister must needs redound to
the notable prejudice of our own service. From whence we see, as every one may
perceive, the sincere affection we bear to your Country, so as we in this
election so much premeditated, are not to be altered in our judgment. And
whosoever shall seem to have the boldness to oppose this our decree, shall
infallibly incur our high displeasure.

Otho hitherto had known nothing of any such deliberation made: Whereupon, as
one astonished with a sudden blow, falling prostrate at the Emperors feet,
began to power forth a flood of tears. The Ambassadors ran readily to rear
him up. He then having taken a little breath, refused the charge with might and
main: esteeming, and proclayming himself to be wholly unworthy thereof: and
affirming with all, that so high a degree became rather some other more noble,
ancient, and well deserving of the sacred crown, then him. By occasion
whereof, Caesar, re-entring again into Otho's praises, among other things,
made this public declaration, how this had been the third Bishopric, which
the servant of Christ had refused; how first he had offered him, that same of
Augusta, then that of Halberstad, nor could ever hitherto seem to fasten any
one upon him. From whence, very evidently appeared the modesty, the humility,
and merits of such a persons through divine dispensation reserved (as it should
seem) for the benefit and behoof of the City of Bamberge. And with this, and
many other Elogies, and praises, putting the ring on his fingar, and the
Pastoral staff in his hand, so adorned he gives him to the Ambassadors.

At sight whereof, with a sudaine inclination of minds, was immediately raised
a fauoutable cry, and applause of the whole multitude. The Ambassadors
beholding things to fall out thus, as truly from God, approaching to S. Otho,
their Father, and Lord, saluted him cheerfully, and with Christian virtue,
very reverently adored him; When as Henry said again, Accept him then with a
good will, and use him with that love and veneration, as he deserves: because I
call him to witness who knows all things, that I know not a man in all the
world, to whom more truly, and with greater reason so ample a charge as this
may be conferred, then to him. And for my part, as long as I live, and wield
this Scepter, whosoever shall but touch him, shall touch the very aple of mine
eye. In this manner then, and by such means as these, came S. Otho to be
forced to the Bishopric, but yet full of anxiety and scruples the while, as
well for other very grave respects, as also, for the controversies sprung up,
as we said before, by reason of inuestitures, between the Roman Church, and
Empire. And yet on the other side, considering, that his being now so often
called to such a charge, could not choose but proceed from the divine Will, he
feared least persisting in the negative, he might hap to incur that dreadful
sentence, Noluit benedictionem, and elongabitur ab eo.

Amidst such streights and perplexityes as these, he finally determined with
himself, to recurre as soon as might be, for aid and light to the
Apostolic Sea, and made an express vow never to admit of the Bishoprike,
unless at the instance of his flock the Pope himself should inuest, and
consecrate him with his own hands. With this resolution, he kept the Feast of
the Nativity of our Lord at Ments in company of Caesar, and from thence,
dismissing a part of the Ambassadors, he stayed in Court for urgent reasons
about some forty days space: Which being ended, he took his leave of Henry;
and through his express commandment, accompanied to Bamberge, by the Bishops
of Augusta, and of Herbipolis, and of other principal personages besides, he
made his solemn entry on the day before the Purification of the most blessed
Virgin. The Monks and Clerks, and all the Nobility, went forth to meet him in
orderly procession, with psalms, and hymns, and with rich ornaments and
devout relics. Nor would the people, and meaner sort, suffer themselves to be
vanquished with such offices of obsequiousnes. While every one, leaving their
shopps, and staules, ran striving to kneel before him, and to demand the
benediction of their holy, and so long desired Pastor. In which feast, and
solemnity we may not pass over in silence one thing, that shows very well
that even in the Courtiers life, who will but affoard any time to spiritual
things, may make a notable purchase of religious virtues.

S. Otho remembering his Vow, goes to Rome, where he is consecrated Bishop by
the Pope himself. Chap. 3.
S. Otho, as we have seen, had spent the greater, and better part of his
years, in the service of secular Princes, and lived in the exterior, a common
life, and without any apparent singularity in him: And yet performing,
according to occasions (which want not) intense acts of temperance, and
humility, and of contempt of himself, in short time he became very rich in
those habits, which more gallantly adorn and deck the soul, then do all the
Mitres, and Pontifical robes set forth the body. Whereof, he gave a most clear
example in the aforesaid day of his entrance so in Pontificalibus. Because,
that in coming to approach to Bamberge, as soon as he descouered a far off
the Cathedral Church, being dedicated to S. George, he not only, according to
the custom of that Bishopric, dismounted suddenly from his horse, but also
putting off his hose and shoes publicly in the heart of winter, went bare
foot and bare leg on stones, and ye through the press of people unto the
Church, where the sharpnes of the cold, having (not without danger of his
health) now possessed already, as it were, the vital parts, and a hot Bath
being suddenly applied to him for present remedy, he suddenly called for cold
water, when putting his legs thereinto, with one rigor, he expelled the
other: and then besides the accustomed ceremonies, having devoutly made his
prayers, and with the wholesome signs, with his sacred hand given his pastoral
benediction to the people, being tired and spent, at last retired himself into
his lodging. After which, the first and principal care of S. Otho, was to
render his vow, and to give due account of his actions to the Bishop of
Bishops, and general Superintendent of the whole Church of Christ.

And though he well perceived the danger he incurred therein of offending
Henry, there being nothing, that more touches Princes to the quick, then the
point of Jurisdiction; yet for all that, preferring ever a good conscience, and
a chaste fear of God, before any other respect whatsoever, he first reduced the
Clergy, and people of Bamberge to his opinion; showing them the obligation that
was of acknowledging the supreme power of the Pope of Rome. Then by letters,
having obtained leave of the Pope himself to kiss his seete, he went with an
honorable train of his followers, and familiars, and of the principal of his
Church, to the Court of Rome, the Pope (who was then Paschalis the Second) then
residing at Anagni, a City in Latium. Where S. Otho arriving within the
Octaues of the Ascension, after the kiss of his holy feet, very faithfully
declared to the Pope, the whole order and progress of his promotion, without
co^cealing any thing of moment: and to accompany his words with deeds,
without more a do puts the ring and staff at his feet, and humbly craves
pardon of the offense, succeeding merely by another violence, rather then of
his own inclination, demanding withal penance, and Canonical censure for
the same.

On the other side, the Procuratours of Bamberge, do never cease to beseech the
Pope, he would daigne to confirm, or to say better, renew the election, made
by Henry, and not to deprive their Country of so exemplar, and behoouefull a
guide, Master, and Supporter. To which speeches of theirs, Paschalis giving a
benign answer, commands S. Otho to resume again the deposed pledges: and he
still showing himself backward; The feast of the Holy Ghost (said the Pope)
drawing near, we will remit the controversy to him. And after some discourses,
the Bishop, and the others returned to their lodgings, with the Apostolical
benediction, but yet with a diverse disposition of mind, and quality of
thoughts: The subjects with a firm hope of obtaining as much as they desired
of the Pope, and the Prelate himself with a purpose to relinquish the
Bishopric by all means possible. And being all that night, and the day
following intensly fixed in contemplating the reasons, that were of either part:
finally pondering the malice of the times, the encombrances, troubles, and
molestations, and dangers of the Episcopal state, the disobedience,
contumacy, and insolency of the inferiors, and in sum, all the asperityes,
and difficultyes of such a charge, he determined with a full and firm
resolution, to reduce himself to a private life, and calling his companions
and domestiques to him very plainly unfolded to them his whole deliberation,
and without delay being dispatched of the Pope, and Court, put himself on the
way toward Germany.

But scarcely had he made one days journey, when a Post ouertakes him from his
Holiness, who calls him back. Which thing was an incredible disgust, and extreme
trouble to S. Otho; while he prudently ghessed what was like to ensue thereof.
But being the^ overcome by the precept, and encouraged by the prayers, and
exhortations of his followers, with fear and trembling he returned to the Pope
again, and without being able to resist any longer, on the day of Pentecost,
while the Mass was sung, with great iubiley of the Bambergians, and universal
joy of the whole Court among other demonstrations of charity and esteem, had
likewise the privilege to have carried before Him and his Successors for ever,
the Cross and Pall, eight times a year; Whereas his Predecessors, had them
carried, but four times only. Which favor he accepted with great
thanksgiving, not so much for his own respect, as for the love of his
Espouse, whose exaltation for the divine service, was worthily most dear unto
him. But yet more glorious to S. Otho, and far more fruitful to Mankind,
were the gifts that befell him in the rites of the mystical unction, being
powered upon him from the large and munificent hand of the Holy Ghost, as a
vessel well disposed, and most capable of them. Thorough which, being
fortifyed with new breath, and agility, and more enflamed continually to each
pious and holy work, without suffering himself by any means to be enticed by
those objects, and allurements, which like to Sirens detayne a man far from his
home, and residence; taking his leave again of the Pope, as soon as might be,
he returned back to his beloved flock.

S. Otho built, and founded many Monasteries, both little and great. He was
hospitable, abstinent, and zealous of souls, and imployes himself in the
conversion of Pomerania. Chap. 4.
BEsides the singular wisdom, which in all affairs S. Otho showed, as well
temporal and profane, as spiritual and Ecclesiastical; were the great
testimonies of his singular piety, and magnificence, the fifteen greater
Monasteryes, and the five less, of diverse orders which in sundry places of
that Province were erected, adorned, and founded by him: With condition they
should all remain under the protection, and direct dominion of the Cathedral
of Bamberge. And in the same Cathedral, and those other Churches of the said
City, for ampliation of the divine service; he increased the rents, recovered
the alienated goods, reedifyed the ruyned buildings, and lastly on every side,
made very notable emprouements, being things without doubt so much more
admirable, as he was more sollicitous even at that time also of the interior
progress of souls, and of the necessary provision withal, for mayntenance of
the body. Wherein expressing the figure of perfect Benignity, he spared from
himself whatsoever he could, the better to supply the commodityes of others,
affecting as well parsimony in private, as magnificence in public, and above
all things far off from any show of superfluity, and those sumptuous dishes,
which under color of state and decorum, are commonly afforded the greater and
richer Prelates.

Nor was he therefore in his diet, or in the ordinary expenses of his house any
whit scarce or miserable, but how well furnished soever his tables were, with a
rare and noble habit of temperance he would rise often times from the table
with an appetite; distributing the while to the bashful poor beggars, and to
sick folks, the dainetyest meats which were dressed for him. And to come to
some particulers in this matter: On a fasting day, there being once set before
him a goodly Pickrell and well seasoned, he was not only not pleased with the
dish, but showed himself disgusted and strange thereat. Whereupon the loving
Steward, as taking compassion of his Masters extreme abstinence, began
modestly to ex hort, and pray him to refresh himself a little therewtih, and to
en joy that blessing, which the common Lord had destined for him^ But the
blessed Bishop, with eyes not allured and vanquished wit^ that present food,
and ears shut to the prayers and enticement made him, said to him: What have
thou laid out upon this fish here? and the other answered, some two crowns.
God forbid (replied S. Otho) that my belly should me so dear: Go too then, and
go thy ways presently, and carry it to my Jesus (meaning by that word some
needy, sick, and diseased person) as for me, that am thanks be to God, so sound
and able, this loaf of bread, shall suffice. Such were his delicacyes amidst
so much riches. Through which, and other most excellent qualityes of this man
of God^, and principally, for the great zeal, which he had of his Neighbors
good, his fame being dilated through all parts, a noble occasion was offered
him of dilating of the Gospel.

The Duke Boleslaus ruled the Poland nation at that time, a personage of much
valor, and singular piety. This man, having with the aid of the Bohemians,
and Hungars, subdued Pomerania, that lay drowned in Paganism; was much
enflamed, through heavenly sparks, to the conversion of that people: but as the
same, in those times, besides the servitude of the Idols, by nature also was
very barbarous and fierce, the good Duke, could not find any laborers to
cultiuate that land, so wild and savage as it was: and yet not ceasing for all
that, to think of the salvation of those, whom the divine Majesty had
committed to his government, at last the person of the Bishop of Bamberge,
came into his consideration, now living (as we have said) very laudably in
Polony, with whom he was so well acquainted, either by sight or hear say, as
(among other gifts) he knew, he had the skill of the Pomeranian tongue: and
promising himself with good reason, all help from the charity of S. Otho, he
besought him by letters and messages, he would be pleased to permit him some
little absence from his flock, now a long time so increased and instructed in
sound Religion; to affoard some part of himself unto a people drowned in
Idolatry, and miserably tyrannized by the powers of darkness.

The prayers and persuasions of Boleslaus, were not in vain: Like a generous
Falcon that discouers its prey, so was S. Otho immediately inflamed to the
spiritual purchase of that Province; and yet distrustful of his proper
forces, he recommended earnestly the whole business to the divine Goodness,
through which, though he well perceived the vocation to be approved; yet
nevertheless to proceed with the more stable and well governed designs, he
would not seem to undertake the enterprise, though otherwise holy, without
first having the consent and dispatch of the Pope of Rome. By whom being
encouraged to so noble a Conquest, and provided of necessary facultyes for the
purpose, he puts himself on the way; from thence passing through Bohemia into
Polony, with three Priests only for his helpful assistance, he arrived in
Pomerania; being honorably met, in the Confines thereof, by Christiernus
Prince of those Countries, who at the instance of Boleslaus, against the will
of his Wife, and Subjects, had been now already baptized.

The great labors, and difficulties of S. Otho, in converting the People of
Pomerania: with baptizing the Wife of Christiernus, and Wenceslaus his Son.
Chap. 5.
IT is no easy matter here to number, much less to unfold the labors,
travails, and toils of S. Otho, while with infinite patience and sweetness, he
seeks first to purchase to himself the good will of the people of Pomerania,
and then likewise to let them see the darkness wherein they lay as buried,
through ancient error; now awaking them with the help of the light of nature
it self, to the knowledge of the Creator; and now proposing the Articles of
the Catholic faith unto them, and with apt comparisons, and examples,
shadowing and figuring the ineffable misteryes of the most holy Trinity. And on
the one side, showing the conueniency and necessity of the Incarnation, and
Passion of the Son of God; and on the other, the necessity of obeying the
Precepts, and of imitating his actions, and in doing penance. To which effect,
the divine Catechist, adding, and proving with lively reasons the eternal
rewards and punishments proposed for the merits of each one, he endeavored
with all his power to root out the fabulous opinions through diabolical
illusion, and long course of time so rooted in their minds, and withal to
pull them from their impious worship, wicked ceremonies, and sacrilegious
feasts of the Idols; the which, how much more accompanied with carnality,
pa^ymes, and riotousnes they were; so much stronger an arm was needful for
so hard a separation, and so bitter a divorce.

But above all, was this wise proclaymer of the Gospel made more vigilant,
with the care he had of the perpetual edification of his Neighbors, and with
the governing not only of himself, but also of his companions and familiars;
so as neither in their facts, words, and carriages, might appear any thing
that might seem to destroy with scandal, what he endeavored to edify with
doctrine: and with these, and such like means, S. Otho did proceed with the
enterprise so far, as within few days, came above seven thousand persons to
the sacred Baptism: whereunto, for a co^plete joy was added not long after,
the wife also of Christiernus himself; and moreover the Prince VVenceslaus,
who was so given, and addicted to worldly pleasures, as it was necessary, not
without exceeding trouble, to go by little and little a weeding away some four
and twenty concubines from him, and to leave him contented with one lawful, and
only Consort. For conservation of which purchases, the servant of God having
erected Temples in those Provinces, and ordained, as much as the scarcity of
subjects would permit, Pastors and Priests; he passed from thence more inward
into the Country, where he dealt with inhabitants so inhuman, as would not
endure by any means to be diswaded from their ancient customs; but instead of
complying with the zeal of the Messenger of Christ, did exercise their native
fiercenes against him, with scorns ^niuryes, with throwing of dirt upon him,
and rudely smiting him withal: until being vanquished at last through his
unheard of ^eekenes and wholesome aduices, most humbly craving pardon at his
hands for so great pertinacity and boldness, they accepted likewise of the sweet
yoke of Christ.

Among which occupations and pains of his, S. Otho not forgetting a whit his
first and dearest vineyard: and fearing least through ^is too long absence from
it, the same might hap to suffer some do^age, settling affairs in those
countries the best he could, he made a progress, as short as possibly he might
unto Bamberge: where ^he fame of his so glorious actions, having already
arrived, he was ^eceiued as a Prelate truly Apostolical, and that though full
sore against his will, with more exquisite honors, and greater vene^tion then
ever: and having with his presence, and oportune ex^ortations comforted that
people there, and promoted, or amended rather, according as need required, the
public discipline; he returned very soon again to the tender plants of
Pomerania. And here encouraging such, as were running before, provoking the
flow, and confirming, and rearing up the wavering, he attended more at ease,
with due means, to establish the happy culture of those lands. And having now
reduced matters to good terms, and being finally rich with merits, and full
of benedictions, he returned again to his proper dio^sse. Where while he
attends by all manner of ways to represent in himself the form of a
faithful vicar, and servant of Christ, there occurred to him an accident
worthy of fear, and wonder, as shall appear in the next Chapter.

After a notable accident happened, S. Otho dismayed, desires to be discharged
of the Office, and to be received into a Monastery: but he is denied. Chap. 6.
IN a Church of a certain village, called Buchback, which S. Otho visited, he
found that under the Altar, within a little chest of lead, were laid very many
and most precious relics, sealed up. Which he not holding to be in so worthy
a place, as became them, determined to translate them, some other where with
more veneration, and decency to be kept by Religious persons. There being then
fasts, and devout prayers made for that intention, he returned thither, with an
honorable troop of Clercks about him, and appointed some of them to break
the seal, and to take forth the chest: but none of them daring, through their
innated piety and reverence they bare unto it, to lay hands thereupon, he
himself full of fervor, courageously takes hold of the mallet, and hardly had
given it two or three blows, when from the chest it self, there flowed forth
a manifest stream of blood. The standers by being amazed at the spectacle,
began suddenly to fall down to the ground, and with tears to beg mercy of
God, and succor of the Saints. The Bishop himself giving over the enterprise,
being full of confusion and fear for the matter, retires to Bamberge, where,
either for chastisement of his too much confidence, or else, for matter of new
crowns, being seized on by a grievous infirmity, and desirous to be assisted
in spirit (since for the body he cared not much) he caused Father VVolfran
Abbot of S. Michaels, to be ^nt for, to come unto him, a person of rare
qualityes: and while this so great and faithful friend of his sat familiarly
by him, and with the hopes of heaven, and other sweet discourses, sought to
^itigate his dolours; S. Otho one day having found some little ^uce with his
malady, with an humble countenance, turning himself to him.

Father, said he, you must understand, how I now for so ma^y years having
been suddenly raised to Prelacy, and from the ^oyse and vanity of the Court,
being yet full of spots and dust, without passing the purgative way, having
purchased the ensigns of perfection, which is, as much as to become a Doctor
before one goes to School. And I, though enforced in a manner unto it by him,
who had reason to command me; do stand yet in some doubt, whether then, I made
due resistance or no to such a charge: and do verily believe, that besides
those ancient remorses of conscience, these new scourges of the eternal
justice, have thus light upon me. And now since the common Lord, with equal
benig^ty, seems to punish me so, and give me space to look back into my
former offenses: I am resolved to differ no longer the delibeta^on I have often
made with my self, to discharge me of the Pastoral office, so much above my
feeble and weak forces, and in a private life to reduce me to Monastical
discipline. And since among all the congregations which I know, I find none
more con^rmable to my designs and behoofes, then yours of S. Michael; I do
therefore most earnestly beseech you, Father, to vouchsafe to accept me in the
name of our Savior Christ into your family, and ^o present unto him this small
sacrifice of my self, and being cloa^ed though vnworrhy with your habit, to
admit me into your Convent; and ruling me in all, and in every thing, as the
other subjects, to conduct me with divine assistance to the glorious victory of
my passions, and to a full mortification of my proper will. You know well
enough the bands of straight friendship and amity, which are between us, and I
do very well remember the charity you have ever showed me in all occurrences.
But now assure your self, that in affoarding me this benefit which here I
request at your hands, you shall far exceed all the services, and courtesies
which you have hitherto vouchsafed me.

Such words spoke the Bishop, with voice and gestures well able to demonstrate
they came not from any sudden fit of passion, but from a resolute and stable
purpose: and the Abbot being astonished at so new a demand, not to constristate
the sick man, for that time would by no means deny him, but rather with a
cheerful countenance, commending the good desire he had, made show to accept
of his prompt Obedience, reserving the execution of the rest, to his better
health. In the mean while, the feruorous Nouice, finding himself to be
somewhat better recovered, and not seeing the hour of fullfilling his vow to
come, having disposed as secretly as he could, the things belonging to him,
without delay requires the habit of Religion; and makes new instance to be sent
into the Monastery so conualescent and weak at he was. But the discreet
Superior on the one side being edifyed at so great humility of his; and on the
other, in much suspense for the importance and quality of the business, calling
after prayer some grave and experienced men to consult, he proposed the Bishops
request; and all having well examined the matter, did answer it to be without
doubt, to the service of God, that a man of so eminent virtue, and behoouefull
to so great a multitude, should go forwards rather to shine on the
Candlestick of the Church, as a burning and resplendant light, then by
aspiring to a private life to hide himself under a bushel, within Cloisters,
though otherwise holy, and laudable in it self.

With this answer, the Abbot being assured, and confirmed in his former
judgment, goes his ways to S. Otho: who like unto a weight that approached
nearer to its center, longed so much the more for subjection, poverty, and
solitude, as the confidence was greater, which he had conceived already of
obtaining his intent; and approaching to him with due reverence, demanded of
him, if he held still his purpose to maintain the Obedience with deeds, which
he had promised him with words: and he cheerfully answearing, that for the
love of him, who to the eternal Father had observed it to death, he was
readily disposed to keep it, without exception. Then (replied the Abbot) on
behalf of the same Lord, do I command thee to persevere to the end under the
charge of the administration thou have in hand, and courageously to go forward
in the way begun to the glory of God, behoof of the holy Church, consolation
to the faithful, the support of Widows, Pupills, and Orphans, and to
continue thy life in good works, and in sum, to do what thou do, and to
execute the office thou art in, to gain at the Prince of Pastors hands the
eternal life, and reward a hundred fould. Because, that if we would but weigh
things indeed with equal balances, what Monk lives at this day under the
Sun, of so much abstinence, and of so great perfection, whose merits and
poverty, may seem to stand in comparison, with the care and solicitude, thou
have of so many souls, and with the sweet dispensation of so great riches? So
as thou may quiet thy self, with the authority of him, whom thou have taken
as guide and consellour in this behalf. And let the divine honor and public
vtility be preferred before thine own particular gusts and contentments.

With such reasons, S. Otho being lastly convinced, as an enemy of self-love,
and far from all pertinacy, without more replies, did bow down his head; and
putting a fresh the most bitter chalice of government to his mouth, with new
breath, and with redoubled purposes he began to give himself wholly to the
spiritual and temporal help of his Neighbors.

S. Otho was exceedingly given to hospitality. He dyed blessedly: And his body
being buried in the Church of S. Michael, was translated afterward. Chap. 7.
FOrasmuch, as among Episcopal parts and conditions (as has been said) S.
Otho knew well, that Hospitality was one of the chiefest, he endeavored to
send before him as much corn, victuals, clothes, and monyes, as he could
possibly procure, by the hands of the poor, but now especially, feeling
himself to be so laden with years, and near to the term of his life. So
as like to an Olive tree, even stooping, as it were with abundance of ^es, he
gave himself freely to each state and condition of mortals. You might have
seen there, whole squadrons of Pilgrims, very decently received into the
chambers and lodgings of S. (...). To the desolate Widows, forlorn Orphans,
and the needy and necessitous Clerks, and Monks, stood his granary open day,
and night, his Purse, and Wardrobe never shut; but like a wise merchant, in the
short mart of this transitory time, he attended to barter and exchange terrene
for heavenly, frail for eternal and incorruptible ware. In sum, besides the
secret alms of each day there was not in all those parts, a Church, Convent,
Hospital, or pious place of any sort, which he visited not, restored, and
royally provided of what was necessary, for the Majesty of pure Religion, and
continuation of Christian verity. And it was an admirable thing to see, how so
much given away, and so much empting, he continually should find no bottom, as
if the great Lord, and his careful Steward, should seem to strive together,
the one to supply, and the other to distribute with a large hand, all manner of
goods, gold, and silver, and what not?

Amidst such actions as these, truly worthy of the lawful Successor of the
Apostles, the blessed Man being now arrived to the end of his days, maturely
composed the affairs of his Diocese, and having made a pure and devout
confession, and after the holy Oil, receiving with great feeling the holy
Eucharist; being environed round with a company of Clerks, and Religious, most
sweet and dear unto him, who in that last passage came all to recommend him to
their common Creator, he peaceably yielded up his soul, well fraught and
replenished with good works, and full of honors, and heavenly graces.

As for the mourning and great concourse of people wherewith his Exequies were
celebrated, it importes not much to treat thereof; while every one may
sufficiently gather how great a desire of his presence, might so loving a
Father, and so vigilant a Rectour, seem to leave behind him. He was praised
then with a solemn Sermon by the Venerable Embrichonus Bishop of Herbipolis,
and carried unto his Sepulcher into the Temple of S. Michael (while Barons,
Counts, and Marquesses succeeded by turns to conueigh the hearse) upon the
first day of July, in the year of our Lord 1139. and of the administration of
his Episcopal charge, the 37. The translation was made afterward under Pope
Clement the III. on 89. year the last of September, on which day is celebrated
his memory, as eternally consecrated unto immortality; even by the learned
penns of the noblest wits. Among which, John Trithemius affirms, that (besides
what we have spoken of above) this S. Otho, was no less in his death, then
life most illustrious, and famous for many and most evident miracles.

FINIS.
S. BERNARD.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE eye, that is unblemished, and free
From colors, their defects can better see.
Souls not forsaken, better can descry
The Worlds deceits, and note her Vanity,
He that the world abandons, this does gain,
Things dark to others are made clear and plain
To his unstained soul. I well could sound
Her deep impostures by experience found,
And them display to others, whom I taught
To slight her, and to ends more noble brought:
I triumphed ore her and her Prince, and lead
Thousands most happy to be vanquished:
Gayning hereby eternal liberty,
And by their thraldom freed from slavery.
If thou the world wilt conquer, her contemn,
And this contempt shall gain a Diadem.
THE LIFE OF S. BERNARD ABBOT OF CLAREVALL.
Written by three of his Monks.
Of the Family and Parents of S. Bernard: with a notable vision his Mother had
before his birth, which gave great hope of his future Sanctity. Chap. I.
IN the parts of Burgundy, is a place which is called Fontaine, obscure
heertofore and unknown, but deservedly famous and renowned, after it had so
affoarded to the world, that mirour of virtue and light of Sanctity, which now
to the glory of God, we begin to describe. In that very place, was an
honorable Knight, called Tesselinus, who according to the Evangelical
precepts, being contented with his pay, and far from all insolency and
rapine whatsoever, so applied himself to Military discipline, as he forgot not
the profession of Christ. This man had a wife, both chaste and fruitful, by
name Aletta de Monte Barro, who amidst the familiar and transitory cares of the
world, keeping her mind still fixed on eternal goods, did increase so much in
devotion, that as many children as she brought forth into the world, (which
were in number some six Sons, and one Daughter) taking them all one by one in
her arms, she suddenly offered them to Jesus; and from that time forwards, as
things made sacred, in a certain manner, would she nurse each one at her own
breasts, instilling into them, together with the milk, the fear of God, and
Christian piety. And after they came to be weaned, would she feed them with
gross, and more common meats, and keep them wholly from all pampering, and
childish sports, as if she had of purpose trained them to a monastical life.
Nor was the project of the virtuous Mother any whit in vain, since finally all
of them, one by one (as we shall see in the progress of the whole narration)
thorough solemn vows of Religion, came thence to be the Servants of Christ.
Of these, was S. Bernard borne in the third place, whose glorious merits (as
they report) even just in a manner as of S. Dominicke, were through divine
ordination foretold, and prefigured ere he was borne into the World.

For as the Mother was resting one night in her bed, it seemed to her in sleep,
she had a little white Dog in her womb, which made a great barking; whereat
the poor wretch being exceedingly sad and disconsolate, demanded of a
venerable Monk the true signification thereof. Who suddenly conceauing with
the spirit of Prophesy, answered her: Fear not, Madame, all is well, there is
an excellent Dog, to proceed from you, which both with his barking shall
faithfully guard the flock of Christ, and with his medicinal tongue, shall
heal the diverse infirmities of many and many a soul. Aletta being glad at
such an Oracle, gave infinite thanks therefore unto the Creator; and from
that time afterward applied her mind with particular diligence to bring up
that child. So as at last being delivered of him, she was not content, as she
had done with the rest, to offer him to God only with private and domestique
ceremonies, but in imitation of the blessed Anna the Mother of Samuel, carrying
him in her arms into the Temple, with a singular affect of Charity, did
dedicate him to the divine service. After this, she diligently attended to the
nursing and trayning him up, and as soon as he seemed to be capable of
discipline, sent him presently to the Church of Castiglio, unto approved
Masters there to learn, as well good literature, as manners.

The child, as he was elected by the divine Providence, and framed for high and
great enterprises, so was he likewise of a rare wit, and of an excellent
inclination withal. Whence it came, that as well in his studyes in short time,
he left all his companions behind him; as also in solid virtues, he began to
give forth those buds, which in progress of time shot up to such a height of
perfection, as they did. There was seen to be discovered in him, even in those
very tender years of his, a meruaylous maturity in all things: As for
examples sake, to recommend himself often to God, without omitting the while,
the exercises of the School; very seldom to go abroad; to keep silence, and
modesty at home; to show himself benign and loving to all: and if any money
chanced to come into his hands, he would presently give it freely in voluntary
alms: but above all, he obeyed his Elders with great reverence. With such
behavior as this, the Child became most grateful in the sight of God, and
Men. And even in that very time, he also gave forth a very notable sign of his
Predestination. Because, that being fallen sick on a time in his bed, through
a grievous pain of the head, there came a Witch unto him, who promised him to
cure him of the headache. But he was so far off from admitting of any such
cure at her hands, as that not without the astonishment of all there present,
he began at the first sight of her, to cry out upon her with all his might
and main, and with a holy disdain very suddenly drove her away thence. In
this manner, the chaste Disciple of Christ conserved purity, and increased in
learning, when through divine revelation, the Catholic Faith was both
established in his breast, and also an extraordinary flame of Charity,
enkindled therein, as shall appear more clearly hereafter.

S. Bernard as yet a youth, had an admirable vision in sleep: He shows a
notable example of Chastity. And his Mother dying, he after some difficultyes
resolves to follow the divine counsayles. Chap. 2.
ON the night of the Nativity, while S. Bernard was in the Church with others
attending the divine Office, falling suddenly into a slumber, he had the
unspeakable grace, to behold the manner by which the Savior and Spouse of
human generation, went forth heretofore from the intemerate chamber of the
Virgin Mary, with a firm persuasion, that he even just at that hour, was
truly and really borne. From which sight, it cannot be expressed, what iubiley,
and spiritual sweetenes S. Bernard took. And hence it was, that as he had the
holy Church, and all the articles proposed by it, in the highest veneration
that might be; so, as long as he lived afterward, he had a particular joy in
this solemnity, and peculiar feeling of this sacred mystery: and (as partly may
be gathered in his Homelies) he did always seem to discourse thereof with
admirable gust, and a blessed fluency of conceits and words thereupo^. Through
this favor, being exceedingly confirmed, he passed over the first part of his
age, without any rub at all, or great contradiction. But coming afterward in
the beginning of his youth, there wanted no probations, so much more grievous,
as they were full of allurements and flatteryes.

Though S. Bernard of himself, were of a tender complexion: yet was he of a
good stature withal, and of lyneame^ts very well in show, and lively withal;
so as more then once he had happened to be importunely courted, and molested by
lascivious women, but still in vain. Because that most noble and precious
jewel of Chastity, was ever kept by the holy Youth, with so much iealousy, as
that he having one day, for a very little space, unwarily set his eyes on a
woman's face; as soon as he perceived the danger, falling into rage with
himself for it, in the depth of winter, immediately he stripped himself, and
entered up to the neck into a Poole hard by, of most cruel cold water: where
with much maceration he remained so long, till he had fully extinguished in
himself all sinister intentiues of mind, and body.

In this mean while, Aletta the mother, after she had sweetly lived many
years with her husband without iarres, and had had many Children by him, well
and religiously brought up, leaving them all alive, came to the end of her
days; which through the just retribution of God, was answerable to the life
she had led. For that having lived (as much as the band of Wedlock, and care
of the house, would suffer) in continual abstinences, prayers, and vigills,
she fell grievously sick, and being now through the malady brought into
extremes, having received the Sacraments, with much devotion, while the
standers by were reciting the Psalter about her, she went still a long with
them, with a weak voice; and when she could do no more rherewith, at least,
she would follow on, with the gestures of her Countenance, and with the motion
of her pale lips, until such time, as being now abandoned of all natural
heat, when rehearsing the Litanyes, they came to those words, Per crucem and
passionem tuam, lifting up her hand, and making the sign of the Cross, she
happily expired. A Matrone surely most noble, truly pious, and worthy to be
imitated of all those who in conjugal state, having the body in power of the
husband, with the soul do seek to serve and please Christ only.

S. Bernard being thus deprived of such a guide, began now on all sides to be
continually more cruelly assaulted, then ever. The flower of his age proposed
to him sensual delights, exhorting him mainely, not to leave things certain,
for perilous, and the present for those to come: and that hereafter when he
would do penance, he should want no time in his elder age, exaggerating
withal the divine clemency, which knows very well our human frailty; and
putting him in mind moreover of the merits of Christ's passion, whreupon very
safely he might build himself. On the other side, his friends, and companions,
who being affrighted with the difficultyes of virtue, had entered into the
spacious way, invited him no less thereunto, with diverse persuasions and
examples. Nor was the world behind, to offer him riches, possessions, and
palaces. Besides which, the very qualityes themselves, wherewith he was
endowed, of wit, of learning, and of a grateful presence suggested to him,
sundry hopes of honors, dignityes, and withal an immortal name. And all these
fantasyes as so much fuel on the fire, the ancient adversary always
enkindled in him, and that so much the liuelyer as he was of a quicker
discourse, and of a sharper apprehension. Who perceiving himself so environed
on all sides with such subtle nets, precipices, and snares, and justly fearing
the treasure, which he bare about him as shut up in his breast, very suddenly
determined to secure the same, and that by no other means, then by the
counsayls of the eternal Wisdom.

S. Bernard after many difficultyes resolves upon Religion, and draws as
Uncle, and two younger Brothers to the same course. Chap. 3.
THere remained now to S. Bernard only, to find out how, and in what manner he
might put his good purpose in effect. Whereof while he went discoursing with
himself, the religion of the Cistercians came into his mind, being founded
heretofore by the venerable Abbot Robert, under the rule of S. Benet, with
addition of some constitutions, and confirmed by the Pope, in the year of our
Lord 1098. This Congregation now, as is wont to happen in beginnings, was at
that time but of small renown, and had but one only Monastery, within a
certain remote wood: whereunto very few had entered, through the straitness
of the Enclosure, and asperity of life. But the fervent young man, and friend
of the lowlynes and poverty of Christ, judged it straight very apt for his
designs, which were to suffer, and to be hidden, and far off from all
occasions of vain glory. In such thoughts was S. Bernard much perplexed, and
in great suspense, and gave besides, diverse other signs of inclination to
retire himself, while his more domestique and nearest friends (which in such
occasions are wont to be the greatest enemies,) endeavor to dissuade him from
it, and thereby gave him very shrewd encounters. They alleged to him the
delicatenes of his complexion, that could not frame to the austerity and
labors of cloisters; they proposed to him many other ways of serving God,
and of helping souls, without going so to submit himself to a perpetual
servitude; and stuck not to put scruples into his head, with burying such and
such talents in a desert, which to the glory of God, and light of human kind
were committed to him: and how much better were it, that following the course
begun of learning, and of higher sciences in a quiet life, he should become a
famous Doctor, and honor to his parents, a glory to his Country, and a
succor to the world?

With these, and other such like reasons his dearest friends went about to
recall him from his purpose. Of all which (as the Saint manifested afterward)
there was none made so great impression with him, as the desire and commodity
to prosecute his studyes. This only respect did give him a shrewd blow, and had
even almost quite overcome him. Whence they may take fair warning, who have
had a vocation of God, and learn with what caution and custody they are to
keep it, and not to communicate the same, but to some person who is very
spiritual and chosen of a thousand; following herein that wary Merchant of
the Gospel, who having discovered a treasure in a field, hides the same, and
sells whatseuer he possesses to purchase that field: which advertisement not
so fully observed by S. Bernard, had well nigh deprived him of so great a
felicity.

But besides the divine Clemency, and his good nature, he was helped not a
little also by the memory of his blessed Mother, who had always with so many
aduises and motives incited him to perfection, and not to fall into tepidity,
to the service of God, and not to vanity of the world, to the verity and
humility of Christ, and not to the pride and swelling of secular wisdom.

With these thoughts and wholesome aduises sustained he the battle, yet so, as
the good youth went still wavering with himself, until one day taking his
journey to visit his Brothers, encamped with the Duke of Burgundy at the siege
of Grancium, he felt himself so afflicted and tormented with the foresaid
assaults of the spirit and sense, as that finding no rest, he retired himself
into a Church by the streets side, and there with a shower of tears, and with
deep sighs unfolding his afflicted heart in the fight of him that created it,
he perseuered so long in praying, and imploring help, and light from heaven, as
that finally all doubt and perplexity being taken away, he felt himself
fortifyed in the course of perfect virtue, as being now without fear of ever
seuering any more, he resolved with himself to reduce thereunto as many as he
could. Nor was his enterprise in vain awhit, while the Highest most powerfully
cooperated withal.

The first assault he gave (being arrived to the Camp) was to his Brothers,
and an Uncle of his by the Mothers side, by name Vi^ricus, a famous soldier,
and very wealthy in worldly substance, and Lord of a Castle which is called
Iuiglio. This man meeting with S. Bernard, and being convinced with the spirit
that spoke in him, lead the way to his Nephews. For that immediately after him,
Bartholomew was taken, being not able to resist the inflamed exhortations of
the Saint; and in the mean while Andrew showed himself to be somewhat
difficult, but in that very instant, the Mother appeared to him (and S. Bernard
sees her also) who with a cheerful countenance, seemed to rejoice at those
happy beginninges. At which aspect Andrew yielded himself, crying out: I see
our Mother; and so he promised to S. Bernard to do what he would. These two
were his younger Brothers.

S. Bernard through his powerful Eloquence, inuites and allures the rest of
his Brothers to follow his example: with other notable Persons. Chap. 4.
AFter these, the valiant Chaptaine, not doubted also to assail his eldest
Brother, by name Guido, though the matter were difficult, not only for his
being now in good years, and encombred with great affairs in the world, but
even likewise, being now married a good while ago, with a Gentlewo^man of a
noble house, and having had some children by her. Nevertheless S. Bernard
stuck not to set his hand, and though Guido at the beginning seemed to oppose,
notwithstanding afterward entering better into himself, and wisely considering
herein, how the affair of his eternal salvation was handled, in being as it
were wholly impossible to be happy in this and in the other life; he determined
also on that very day to prefer the hope of future goods, before the present
commodities. And how much more he was encouraged the next morning, when as
entering with S. Bernard and others into the Church, he heard those words of S.
Paul recited: Fidelis est Deus, quia qui coepit in vobis opus bonum, ipse
perficiet vsque in diem Jesus Christi, I remit unto the pious Reading: for it
seems no other, but that Guido's joy could be very great, in respect he heard
this promise, in the very time of his wavering in purpose, as it were, to come
from Heaven. Likewise S. Bernard and the rest, could not but receive exceeding
comfort hereby.

There was only one doubt yet left, whether Guido's wife would give her
consent, or no. And yet howsoever, if she denied it, he determined with a
generous and pious mind to disperse what riches he had to the poor, and
laboring with his hands to live in the state of penance, and to maintain
himself and family with his own labors. But S. Bernard delivered him from
that anxiety, affirming for certain, that the Wife very soon would either
yield consent, or end her life. And indeed the same succeeded, for that she
showing her self somewhat difficult in that business, was seized on with so
grievous and bitter an infirmity, as that acknowledging the hand of God upon
her, she resisted no longer, and permitting liberty to her husband, allowing
good means for her Daughters maintenance, became likewise her self a Nun,
to the exceeding great consolation of Guido her Father; and in that religious
course she perseuered even to her dying day, not without the wonder of all.
Guido in this manner being quit of all temporal cares, had leisure to attend
very fully to the spirit.

It was not so easy a matter to incline Gerard to this, the second Brother.
This man, besides that he was a brave Soldier, was also very wise according to
the world, and likewise benign and beloved of all. This sudden mutation of his
Brothers pleased him not awhit, he interpreted the same to a certain mobility
and leuity of mind; and in sum after he had disputed a good while, he
peremptorily denied to consent ever to alter his profession. When S. Bernard
wholly full of fire and zeal, putting forth the fingar to his side: I see well
(says he) that tribulation only is to give you understanding. The day shall
come, and that ere long, that a lance entering through this side of yours,
shall set open the door of your obstinate heart unto the wholesome counsel,
which now you will not accept from me. And so it fell out; for a little while
after being encompassed by his enemies, he took a blow with a lance in the
same side, and being taken prisonner, and dragd through the streets, began as
one besides himself to cry out, I am a Monk: I am a Cistercian Monk: and
said nor amiss, for that he had no sooner his liberty again, but he went to
submit himself to the sweet yoke of Christ, with the great joy of S. Bernard,
and the rest, who most ardently thirsted after his salvation.

The Benjamin remained, who was the youngest of all, by name Ninardus. This
same did the others think good to leave in the world for a stay of the house,
and for the more consolation of their old Father: but he neither would be
excluded of the heavenly benediction, because that Guido meeting him one day in
the market place together with some other boys: Go too Ninardus (said he unto
him) all our goods are like to fall upon thee. To which words the child
answered not with a childish judgment: Belike then heaven is for you, and the
earth for me: there is no equality in that partition. And so after some days
he also dedicated himself to the service of Christ. In the mean time, it
pleased S. Bernard to go up, and down the neighbour-places for new conquests.
Going forth then in the name of our Lord, he began to preach in diverse places,
of the instability of human things, of the vanity of honors, of the shortness
of pleasures, of the miseries of this life, and of the rewards and punishments
of the other: and this with such an eloquence, and grace, and efficacy withal,
as like a devouring flame, he transformed into himself what ere he met
withal. And finally the matter passed so far, as the Mothers hid their
children, and Wives their husbands, and friends diuerted friends from
listening to the reasons and discourses of the feruorous youth, least happily
against their will they might be rapt away with that impe^ torrent of
celestial Eloquence. But for all that they could not hinder him so, but he
returned to his country with a precious booty of choice men. Among whom also
was Hugo de Marcone, a person very notable for nobility and riches, who after
he had made in Religion very excellent success, was assumpted to the
Bishoprike of Auxerre.

S. Bernard, and his devout Companions retired themselves into the Monastery of
Cisterce, with the Exemplar life which all lead, but chiefly S. Bernard. Chap.
5.
THis troop of new soldiers of Christ, assembled themselves in Castighone,
where though in secular habit, yet lived they all in the same house in common
with so much peace and concord, that as it is reported of the Primitive Church,
of all that multitude there was but one heart and soul only. And through the
great veneration wherein they were with the people, there was hardly found any
one, that durst approach to look into their actions: and if perhaps any entered
into their lodgings, in beholding the Fraternall union, and order, and
distribution of time, and Offices, the spiritual conferences, the singing of
Canonical Hours, and other devout exercises; they acknowledged the divine
assistance to be there without doubt, and either they remained there also with
the same intent, or at least departed thence compunct and full of good desires,
calling that Congregation Thrice happy, and fortunate.

In this manner while the domestical affairs of some of them were in
handling, they remained in the said place some six mo^ths at least. But
perceauing afterward a manifest danger in a longer abode there, especially for
that in fine, two being miserably seduced by the Devil, were fallen back; it
seemed good to S. Bernard and the others, to stay there no longer: so as all
impediments being removed or cut off, calling on the divine assistance they
repaired to the Monastery of Cisterce some fifteen years after the said house
began. The number of these new disciples of Christ were about thirty, a very
seasonable supply no doubt to that Congregation, which now already through the
foresaid occasions was even almost brought to nothing.

Whereupon, the Abbot Stephen who governed at that time, being Roberts
successor, and those few which as yet were remaining with him, received
incredible comfort, with a firm hope of a long posterity, according to a
certain revelation had a little before by one of those first Monks; to whom
being anxious about failing of the Order, at the end of his life, was
represented an innumerable multitude of persons, who at the fountain near
unto the Church were all washing their own garments. By this means (through
divine grace) was Cisterce restored. And to this good work was added another,
to set up at Villeo a place hard by, a Convent for the wives of as many of
those Nouices as concurring piously to the promotion of the divine service, had
been content to acquit their husbands of the coniugal band, and by
consequence to offer up themselves also in Holocausts to the Creator of all,
to whose divine Majesty, how grateful that sacrifice was, may well be
comprehended by the notable increase, which the said Convent of Nuns made in a
short time, as well of number of subjects, as of means to live.

But to return to the Saint, as soon as he saw himself in the school of
Christ, the first thing was to plant in his heart an immovable perseverance, in
speaking within himself, at what time either case invited him, or labors
deterred him: Bernard, Bernard, to what end did thou enter in? And for
repressing of unprofitable appetites for the soul, because he knew well, how
much the custody of senses auayled, he was so wary and diligent in the heed
thereof, and especially of his eyes, as that after a whole year of his
Nouitiate, when he went from thence, he knew not as then, whether the seelings
of the chamber were painted, or of fret-worke. And though he had entered so
often into the Church, where there were indeed many windows at the upper end,
he never thought there had been more then one. Besides, he kept himself at all
times from all leuityes and sports, and from all those things which are wont to
slacken the soul. Much laughing, a thing so proper unto man, was seldom in
him; and when it was, it was without excess, and forced as it were, using it
sometimes, nor to seem froward in things wherein commonly others hardly could
forbear. He was moreover exceeding sober and vigilant; refection was a torment
to him; at his rising from table, he would always make examen upon what he
had eaten, and if he had found he had passed the bounds in any thing, he would
not let the fault be unpunished. He had sleep in horror, as a resemblance of
death, and that repose which, enforced through extreme necessity, he was wont
to take, was superficial only, and so small, as to any but him, would have
given no refreshment at all. Whence if he saw any of the Religious to sleep
indecently, or snoring, he could hardly endure it, saying, such an one slept
like a secular.

But such excess of watchings and fastings could not chose, but bring also
exceeding hurt and detriment to his health, since in progress of time, his
stomach together with the diminution of natural heat, came very much to be
deprived of the retentiue faculty: and the tongue and palate, the body being of
so noble a temperature, thereby came so to loose the taste, as that among other
things, through imprudence of him that served, for some days he lived of
sheeps-suet, instead of butter, drinking some times very oil instead of water,
his eyes not looking upon it. And these unctuous meats, he would hardly endure
to be set before him, even in time of conualescency: for ordinartly hefed for
most part on nothing else then bread, dipped in hot water, or some broth made
of pulse, or else a little milk: and if perhaps sometimes he were feign to
taste any wine, the cup would return from his mouth again, as if it had not
been touched at all.

The continuation of the rare Virtues of S. Bernard: with an example or two, of
the deep attention of his mind to heavenly things. Chap. 6.
FRom this mortification of the flesh, though otherwise but little rebellious or
disobedient to the spirit, and by such manner of recollecting of the interior
powers, came that blessed soul of S. Bernard in short time to square it self,
and to be purifyed in such manner, as like to a polished and lucid glass, it
received right well, the rays of eternal Wisdom, and he not only purchased
a most excellent habit of meditation and prayer, but even mounted also anon to
a very high degree of contemplation, by means whereof being abstracted from
exterior operations, and liquifyed with ineffable sweetness, in a deep silence,
he would unite himself, with most chaste embraces of the highest good. Besides,
in the very mechanical occupations themselves, through a certain privilege,
he had the grace, together with the whole outward man, to attend to the work
in hand, and with interior to deal and discourse with God, satisfying the
conscience with the one, and with the other feeding the will. For indeed S.
Bernard was none of those, who under pretext of contemplation, eschew travail,
or else for private gust, forgo the public good: so as hardly with greiuous
and most irksome maladies could he be drawn from the Quire, where with gravity
and wonderful modesty he would persevere in praising and blessing God. In the
labors of the hand likewise he abhorred all liberty, or any manner of
exemption at all: as if he even but then entered into the Monastery.

Going once with the Monks to reaping of corn, and not knowing well how to
use his sikle, he was bid to sit down, and rest himself; whereat he being
sad, prayed with such fervor to God, that he might not be unprofitable, as
that changing on a sudden his manner, he began to reap so readily and
dexterously, as if all his life he had never practiced any thing else. True it
is, that in the exercises which required much strength of lymmes, as in
carrying of burdens, in digging and deluing the ground, and other such like
works, when through his delicate complexion he was ready to sincke under the
same, he would get himself to some services less difficult, but yet more
abject and vile; so recompencing in that manner the pains and travail of the
one, with the baseness of the other, and showing himself always as might be
equal or rather inferior to his companions. And these rules he did keep in
things which were imposed by the Superiors, either to him in particular, or
to the Convent in general. But when the ministry was not common, and the
obedience exacted no corporal application, then S. Bernard being abstracted
from visible thing he would be so absorpt in the attention of the mind, as in
him all operation, and all sensitive memory, as it were seemed quite to be
extinct. To which purpose are recounted two notable examples.

The one, that he having as it were, all day trauayled along the Lake of
Losana, and his companions at night discoursing thereof, he demanded of them
very seriously, what Lake was that they talked of?

The other example was, that he being to visit the Monks of Chertosa, there
was brought him in have by a stranger or secular a steed well appointed, and
hansomly furnished, whereon the holy man being mounted, and come to the
Charter House, was hardly welcome, and entreated with much reverence by the
servants of God: who remained all exceedingly edifyed with their ghest; faue
only with the furniture of his horse, while to them it seemed, such quaintnes
therein, gave no good odor of poverty: so as the Prior himself could not
hold, but must needs break a jest thereupon to one of S Bernards companions,
who with religious zeal soon told it to the Father: and he turning himself
on the one side to the Priour, and on the other to the horse; made show with
great sincerity also himself to wonder at such trappings, ingenuously
confessing, he never had perceived the same. At which words, the good Priour
in a manner remained confounded, for having himself at first sight noted a
thing, which the other well mortifyed in the sense of the eyes, and attentive
to the interior, could not once discern in so great a journey, and space of
time.

Besides which, the divine man, not only in commodious and easy things, but
even likewise in public mortifications was far off from all manner of
noueltyes: in so much as having for some years very secretly worn a cilice,
being an austerity not commanded by the institute, and the same by accident
being discovered, he laid it suddenly aside, not to seem singular to men, or
eminent among others. And this was also the occasion, that howbeit poverty was
ever grateful to him; yet shu^ned he as much to be wholly careless of the
exterior habit, and to seem uncleanly, which in a manner is wont to turn
away men's eyes from one.

The very same may be said of the Saints learning and grauer studyes. He was
wont in the fields and woods, treating with himself and God only, to receive
frequent lights from heaven: and in prayer and meditation to penetrate the
highest Misteryes of Divinity. Whence to his more confident and dearest
freindes, with a religious jest he affirmed sometimes, he never had other
Masters, then Beeches and Oaks. Nevertheless, that the world might not
think he had been taught miraculously, he failed not to read, and read over
again whole books at times, and in the very reading was accustomed with
particular delight and profit of spirit, to stick upon the text and words of
the sacred Scripture, with leisure ruminating upon them, and therewith deducing
rare and strange conceits, and therewith afterward helping himself with
that copy, elegancy, and dexterity, as his divine treatises and discourses
show. And notwithstanding with much humility also, he would consider the
studyes and interpretations of the Fathers and Catholic doctors, not
comparing ever his opinion with theirs, but (...) the Monks her brethren, and
especially the Abbot, whose most excellent virtues so rung in the ears of men.
Putting herself then in order, with a greattrayne of servants and ostentatio^
of apparel and jewels, all gorgeous and glorious she went to Clareuallis: but
had a far different welcome from that she expected. For that S. Bernard
understanding the gallantry, and pomp, wherewith she came, being all enframed
with zeal, said; this snare of the devil, this ruin of souls, shall not come
in my sight. Andrew being one of the younger brothers, and then at the gate of
the Monastery, seeing his sister so brave and gorgeously attired, with a severe
look and bitter voice, stuckeno^ to call her among other things, A painted
sepulcher, the others, through the example of S. Bernard remained retired, and
hid from such aspectacle. Whereupon the poor wretch compunct, and wholly
confounded, and melted in tears, answered, sighing deeply from her heart.

Though I be a sinner, yet Christ, he dyed for such; and because I acknowledge
my self to be miserable, I do therefore approach unto the good for help and
counsel: if my brother despise my flesh, let not the servant of God y^
abhor my soul. Let him come then, and command me, for I am ready to execute
whatsoever he shall appoint me.

The Saint laying hold of such a promise, failed not to come forth unto her.
And since it was not in his power to part her from her husband, at least he
advised her of the danger she was in, by following so her senses, and exhorted
her, that abandoning those vanities; while time yet served, she should attend
to do pennanc^: and in sum, she should set continually before hereyes, for
glass and pattern, the life and manners of Aletta their Mother, since she had
lived with her some while, and that she must needs remember her very well.

The words of the servant of God were of no light moment: they enkindled in
that breast as in a solid and substantial matter, so tenacious and burning a
fire of Charity, as returning home, not without the astonishement of as many as
knew her, she changed her manners on a sudden, and the whole care of the body
she turned to the dressing of the mind: she likewise her self attending to
watchinges, prayers, fasts, and alms, and that not for a few days only (as
commonly is wont) but with such constancy and longanimity, as that her husband
himself now holding her in veneration, and not daring to hinder the course of
so great virtues, at the end of two years, give her leave to retire, and
consecrate her self in the Monastery of Villeo whereof we have made some
mention above. Where the happy woman living to the last, with exceeding
edification, showed her self to be not unworthy, either of the blessed stock
she came of, nor of the happy branches that encompassed her round about.

The strange vocations of diverse persons, of several conditions and state, to
Religion, by the means of S. Bernard. Chap. 8.
IN the mean time, the Cistercian family, according to the visions, made a
notable increase, and multiplied in such manner, as in the space of few years,
there was plenty of them through diverse Kingdoms and Provinces. And now at
this time the resolution of such as took the habit grew not (as sometimes it
happens) through temporal necessities, or humane dessignes, but sprung (for the
most part) from supernall and generous motives, partly fortold, and partly also
obtained through the prayers of the Saint, as may clearly appear by some, for
example sake, which we will here put down.

At the fame of the man of God, came a troop of gallants to visit him, being
all very dissolute young men. Now, Quinquagesima was a time, when the Catholic
Church, all sad, for the bitter fall of our first Parents, exhortes mankind to
wholesome penance, and when even the faithful themselves (O lamentable case)
partly alluted with sensuality, and partly quite transported with the torrent
of evil custom, attend more then ever to wantonness, feastinges, and banquets.

These Nobles, being violently set upon the same custom, and wholly enflamed
with youthful heat, while they remained in Clareuallis, went seeking a fit
place somewhat near to the Church for their marshal sports and turneaments.
The thing was much displeasing to the Abbot, wherefore with instance he prayed
them for the present at least to desist from such exercises, and to make him a
gift of those few days of Carneual. The unbridled youths stopped their ears
unto so reasonable a request, remaining stiff in their foolish purpose; then
replied the Saint: I trust in our Lord, he will grant what you deny me. After
this, calling for a cup of Wine, he first blessed it, and then invited the
Gentlemen to pledge him, and taste of it (which he called the wine of souls.)
They all drunk cheerfully thereof, some few only excepted, who took the
inuitation in ill part, for fear some hidden power, and enchantment, as it
were, might be in that wine, that might aliene their minds from more grateful
and pleasant things. Nor was the suspicion altogether in vain: for scarcely
had they taken their leave of the Abbot, and were gone out of the Monastery,
when being touched and pricked with new inspirations, they began to discourse
together of the continual perils and foolish glory of the world. With which
discourse they were so enflammed, as immediately without more ado, they all
agreed to return to the cloister, and humbly demanding admittance into
Religion, they continued there courageously, enduring many labors with much
fortitude and patience: a change surely worthy of much admiration, but yet no
less marvelous are these that follow.

The Saint being once to make a peace of much importance, in going to Mentz a
principal city of Germany, the Archbishop of that Metropolis, understanding
of the approach of so great a man, sent a principal Clerk called Mascolin to
meet him with honor, and to receive him worthily on the way. This man arriving
to the presence of the Saint, and having reverently declared to him how he came
from his Lord the Archbishop to wait upon him, S. Bernard stopped, and fixing
his eyes a while on the Clerk, said to him, he was sent by another Lord to
serve him. The German was troubled at the answer, and not penetrating awhit
what he meant thereby, affirmed again, that he came being sent by the
Metropolitan himself; the servant of God on the contrary, replied: You deceive
your self, the Lord that sent you indeed, is yet greater then he, to wit,
Christ himself. Then finally the good man understanding what he aimed at: Your
Paternity thinks perhapes (replied he) that I intend to be a Monk? God forbid
the same as yet never came into my thought. Notwithstanding the Saint forbear
not to rehearse again, that by all means that must fall out which God has
disposed of him, and not what the Clerk himself has thought, or not thought
of. What more? He had not finished his journey, but he resolved with himself
to leave the world, and a little after in company of many other honorable and
learned men, gained by the Saint in that journey, he came to exchange his habit
in the Monastery of Clareuallis.

A more notable success yet was that other of Henry brother of the King of
France. This man being come to deal with the glorious Abbot, about certain
temporal affairs, the treaty being ended, desired the Monks might be
assembled to salute them all together, and to recommend himself (as he did)
unto their prayers. With this occasion, that wise Pastor entered into some
spiritual disourses with the Prince, and in the progress of conversation
together among other things, he said to him: I hope Sir, you shall not dye in
the state you are now in at this present; but that very soon you shall know by
experience, how efficacious the intercession is which you have requested of
these poor servants of God. Nor was it long ere the prophesy was verifyed. On
that very day through divine inspiration, Henry did determine to follow by the
straight way the stepps of Christ, and without delay he put his purpose in
effect: his family and the Nobles that accompanied him thither, lamented him no
less, then if that Royal youth had layne dead before them, and extended on a
hearse.

But among others on Andrew Parigino could by no means brook it, being
greatly affected to Henry. He was even mad with anger, and seemed to let fall
from his mouth curses, banninges, and all whatsoever grief and rage could
suggest unto him; when Henry on the other side (that yet loved him well)
began earnestly to entreat the Saint, he would seek above all others to
convert this man. To which S. Bernard answered: Let us let him alone for the
present, for the poor man is now full of bitterness. Nor do you take any
thought thereat; I can assure you he is yours. With these words Henry being
enflamed with new hope, and greater desire began to instance anew the blessed
Father to delay no longer to give him the assault. Then S. Bernard replied with
a severe countenance: What ayle you? Have I not told you already, he his yours?
The standers by hearing the discourse between them, and Andrew himself among
the rest, who being obstinate in his ma^ners, and far from changing his
habit, and doing penance, bowing down his head (as he confessed afterward)
said within himself to the Abbot: Now I see thee very well to be a false
Prophet, I know for certain thou have said one thing, and the contrary will
fall out: Go to, go to, let me come to the Court once, and on my credit, the
King shall understand of all, and I will make thy lies appear to the world.

While this wretch makes these accounts alone with himself, they being in
suspense, expected what would be the issue of the matter. When seeing him the
day after to depart from thence without any thing done, the faith and credit in
some began to stagger, and the former conceit which they had of the servant of
God: but our Lord permitted not the temptation to continue long; for that
Andrew being now on his way, though his conscience began to sting him a little,
yet for a while went he on cursing the Abbot, and Monastery, where he left his
Master, and wishing the whole Clareuallis might sink, with as many as were in
it. But these brauado's and stiffnes of his lasted that day only; for being
arrived to his lodging at night, he was so inwardly gauled with such stinges,
as that being not able to resist any longer, without attending so much as till
day, he leapt from his bed, and speedily returned back to Clareuallis again,
where deposing the old man, with his wonted manners and fiercenes, he put on
the new, to the great consolation and wonder of all.

Certain noble Gentlemen yielded up themselves to S. Bernard: whereof one
having a temptation afterward, was happily by him quit thereof. Chap. 9
IN those days certain Flemings sped very well, who besides they were of a
Noble blood, and well learned, had likewise a great desire to attend to
perfection, but could not well determine what school was fittest for their
purpose; and in this suspense of mind stood wavering, until S. Bernard about
some public affairs happened to go into those parts of Flanders. And as
his Name was now famous already, at the appearing of such a man, sprung a
notable light in the minds of those disconsolate lovers of wisdom, so as
without more delay they made choice of the Abbot of Clareuallis for Master and
Superior, supposing he was destined thither by the divine Providence for their
salvation; selling and dispatching then each one their business, and laying aside
the vain designs, and deceiptfull hopes of the world, they went joyful with
S. Bernard toward Burgundy, who then likewise had finished his affairs. In
which journey there happened an accident not fit to be let pass.

It is an ordinary thing, likely in all beginners in the divine service, and
not yet experienced enough in desolation or substraction of grace, and
spiritual vicissitudes, when that gust of sensible devotion comes once to
fail them, and that pleasant light which puts them hastily on, to loose on a
sudden all courage quite, and to fall into pusillanimity of spirit, and sadness
of heart. The occasion thereof do Wisemen say to be this: the Rational substance
cannot endure to be straightened, and some delight either heavenly or terren must
be. Now the souls, as being raised above themselves, with some taste of
supernall pleasures, do easily renounce the visible objects: so when through
divine dispensation, that joy is taken away from them, finding themselves
deprived of this also, and not accustomed to expect with patience the returns
of the new Sun, it seems to them they are neither in heaven nor earth, and
are as buried in a perpetual night; so as like babes having lost the breasts
they languish and sigh, and become tedious, and irksome chiefly to themselves.

The same happened on they way to one of that company called Gaufrid. This man
being suddenly grown arid, and full of interior darkness, began to bethink
himself of his friends, parents, and goods, which he had left behind, and
thereby was assailed with so strong a temptation, as being not able to
dissemble it in his countenance, one of his more confident and intimate friends
was aware thereof, and dexterously approaching to him, with sweet and benign
speech in secret, said to him: What is the matter, Gaufrid? How happens this I
pray you? go to, tell me, for it seems to me you go pensive and sad, more
then ordinary? Then Gaufrid answered with a deep sigh: Alas brother, I shall
never be merry more in all my life. The other being with that word moved to
pity went suddenly, with fraternall zeal, to acquaint their common Father
what passed, who understanding the danger, began to pray for him in a Church
thereby, and Gaufrid in the mean while being overcome with sadness, reposed his
head on a stone, and there fell a sleep: but long it was not ere both arose,
the one from prayer with the grace obtained, and the other from his sleep with
a face so cheerful and serene, as his friend much admiring at so sudayne and
great a change, could not hold, but freindly upbraid him with what he had
answered him a little before. Then Gaufrid said: if I told thee before, I
should never be merry again, I now affirm (...) thee, I shall never be sad
more. And this same Gaufrid afterward, in the Nouiceship being desirous of the
eternal salvation of his own Father, recommended him to the Saint with much
affect and confidence. And he said; doubt not, son, but thy Father shall be a
good Religious man, and I my self after his death shall bury him with these
arms: and so it fell out, that old man being entered into Religion, and grown
very perfect in virtues, fell greiuously sick, at such time as S. Bernard was
far from Clareuallis, in which infirmity of his he grew daily more sick then
other, lying in extremity for some five months continually together, until
the Abbot returning, with his assistance he sweetly rendered up his spirit in
his arms, and with his own hands buried his body with his wonted Charity,
and performing of due exequies.

Another time, being gone to Chalon in Champayne to deal with the Bishop of
that City, he thence lead with him at his return a good number of excellent
subjects: and such manner of purchase^ with the help of the divine hand he made
happily from time to time. Besides which, there wanted not daily many, that
being allured by his Name, and glutted with the deceipts of the world, came
voluntary of their own accord to submit themselves to the obedience of so
great a guide. Whence no wonder is it, that from the garrison of Clareuallis,
should be sent after (as we have said) so fit supplies, as there did, to so
many parts of Europe.

S. Bernard deuinely admonished, changes his stricter hand upon his Nouices, to
a milder way, with the good fruit that came thereof. Chap. 10.
IT remaynes now to see, what manner the divine man took in guiding and
governing the Souls, recommended and committed to his care by the Prince of
Pastors. It is then to be understood, that in the first years of his Prelacy,
in measuring others fervor by his own, he was something more rigid and
severe, then good and moderate government would seem to bear. For that in
receiving of Nouices into the Convent, he was wont to bid them (among other
things) by way of Enigma, to leave the body without, and to enter only with the
spirit. Through which saying of his, some of the simpler of them, remained so
astonished, and terrified therewith, as they were after not able to understand
the sense and meaning of those words, though the Saint himself explayned the
same. In the confessions which he heard of his Monks, with a bitter countenance
he abhorred any manner of defect; esteeming every light fault in Religious, as
a mortal sin. In his Sermons, or as we say Homilyes rather, in the
speculatiue, he often soared so high, as the hearers understanding, would loose
the sight of him: and instead of being fed and refreshed, would come to be dry
and arid. And for the moral, he required so curious and exact perfection of
all, as the poor disciples, besides hope of gayning it, came to loose the
desire and will of procuring it.

With these and other such proceedinges, the greater part of the Monks,
especially of the younger of them were soon oppressed with a certain sadness
and timidity withal, which both took away devotion, and hindered their profit
in solid virtues. Among which inconveniences was yet this good besides, that
the Monks through the great opinion they had of their common Father, would lay
the whole fault thereof, partly on their own tepidity, and partly also on
their poor wit, and small capacity, without ever once complaining of the
Abbot, or opposing any thing which he said, or diminishing awhit the reverence
they bare him. It pleased God this humility of the subjects should get the vper
hand upon the Superior: because, that he being lastly overcome and compunct in
a manner at so much submission and modesty of theirs, began to assume to
himself the occasion of loss, and to say within himself. O Bernard, how much
better were it for thee to attend to the amendment of thine own
imperfections, then so to disquiet with too much severity and importune
discourses the souls more timorous of God, and more religious then thee? Now,
are not these servants of Christ, better able to walk with their simplicity,
then with thy indiscretion? And to learn much better the spiritual doctrine,
in one only meditation, in dealing with the Highest Wisdom, then by all the
preachinges and exhortations thou art able to make them? Learn then at last,
that the Abbot Stephen has laid a pack-sadle on an Oxes back, and that this
governing of others is not thy talent.

With these thoughts, the man of God began to enter into so great a bitterness
and hatred of his actions, as he determined to retire himself more then ever,
and to abstain from all pastoral functions, what possibly he might, until
such time as had some clear sign of the divine will: nor was his expectation
awhit in vain, because it was not long, but there appeared to him by night a
little child, clothed all with eternal light, expressly commanding him, he
should desist to propose unto him, what his heart seemed to dictate to him,
since it was not he that spoke to them, but the Holy Ghost discoursing by his
mouth. And together with an inestimable gift, besides, of a sweet and
discreet maturity, whence he might learn to compassionate the weak, to temper
himself to the capacity of the rude, and to condescend to each what he might
well do with the safety of Monastical discipline.

Hereupon the rigourous Abbot, in this point being changed as it were into
another man, began with extraordinary tenderness, and solicitude to prevent the
necessityes of each one, and not only of the souls, but even also of the
bodies, providing as much as possibly he might, that every one being free, and
delivered from temporal troubles and molestations, might attend with the whole
mind to the purchase of virtues, and to the divine service. Howsoever yet to
himself only, and his own person, the man of God, not altered awhit his
former customs, for that indeed in him (as is signified already) the appetite
was naturally much subject to reason, and had no need through force of
chastisements and scourges to reduce it to servitude. Whence came the flesh to
be a great deal more weakened in him, and afflicted with sundry infirmities* in
so much as the Physicians were astonished, how the Holy Abbot amidst so many
dolours, could attend to occupations of any sort; and resembled him just to a
Lamb being put to the plough: and he himself also at the latter end of his
age, was finally aware thereof and accused himself for excess of maceration
of the body, and for destroying his complexion with austerityes, enfeebling the
organ of the Holy Ghost, and consequently for hindering on his part the greater
glory of the divine goodness.

But for these new proceedings of his which we spoke of, it cannot be
expressed, to what edification and public commodity they redounded. Because
(which are the effects of known love) there sprung very suddenly a noble
strife and contention, between the fatherly indulgence of the Master, and
generous fervor of the disciples, being all (for the most part) well
descended; so as by how much he showed himself to them to be a less strict
exactour, so became they ordinarily more rigid censurers of themselves,
extending themselves to the perfect observance of vows and rule, not leaving a
defect unpunished, and holding the allurements and enticements of sensuality
far off from them. And the matter proceeded so far indeed, as not without
some manifest peril of life, they went about in diverse kinds to take away all
taste and relish of meat and drink, as seeming to them a thing unlawful, that
he who has laid up his treasures and delights in heaven, should take any gust
or pleasure in terrene things. And they were so rooted in such an opinion, as
hardly with sundry examples and reasons, and with the authorityes of the sacred
Scriptures themselves, could they be brought to understand, that each creature
was good, being used in time and place, and with due moderation. Note this
finally, they left that pernicious error, but yet they wanted not matter of
mortification. First the divine offices were celebrated with greatest
attention, and that for a good space of the day, and night. Moreover the
Monastery as yet not having any manner of rents, their holy poverty was here
so much the more easy and familiar unto them, as it was more straightly embraced
and cherished of each one. Heerreto was added the straitnes and incommodity of
the dwelling, which while they sought to remedy, their continual labor of the
hands at certain hours appointed, affoarded them no leisure for sloth and
idleness.

The sage and prudent government of S. Bernard, in guiding his Monks: with
his enflamed Charity to his Neighbor. Chap. 11.
AMong all the labors and travails of these blessed men, as there were many
things of excellent example: yet was there none of greater edification to the
beholders, then the continual recollection and silence of so many servants of
God; so as, within the same habitation was jointly to be seen a noise of a
multitude, and a silence of a solitude, and that surely not without cause. For
that as a man which is solitary, if he be inwardly unruly and distracted, makes
of his heart a very Inn or Marketplace; so a number of persons well
disciplined and composed, through means of good order and custody of the
senses, represents in the thickest concourse of people a very desert or
hermitage. This continual discipline and custody of the monks, was to them an
exceeding help for the union with God. Whereto also they approached so much the
nearer, as they had always more lively and admirable examples of all
Christian virtue before their eyes, in the person and actions of the holy
Abbot. In whom was seen so burning a Charity, as he never pretended or wished
ought, then the honor of God, and salvation of souls; procuring ever the one
and other, with the form and manmer of his life, with heavenly conversation,
with prayers, with the labors of writing, and of interpreting the divine
Scriptures, and finally as occasion served, with private and public
discourses.

For eloquence, it was a thing in the blessed man more Angelical then human,
with so much sagacity would he discern the peccant humors of men; with so
much dexterity accommodated himself to their wits, docility, and manners. He
would deal with the country people, as if he had continually been bred up in a
village: with the Nobles he kept all the points of good breeding: with the
Idiots he would use comparisons and conceits of material and palpable things:
with the learned and Sophisters he knew well in his time, to stand upon
subtilityes and acumens: and in sum had a great store and copious variety of
bayts and hooks proportionate to the gust, forces, and nature of each one. To
this so excellent prudence of his in practice, and so happy and rare a faculty
of speaking, was adjoined another gift and privilege, indeed not afforded to
many, to prove when need required his doctrine, with frequent, and great, and
those evident Miracles. Whereof, besides what already has been touched (not to
go forth here from our purpose) we shall discourse with our wonted breuity in
its place.

But with the ardent Charity of the Saint, we spoke of, he gave us likewise a
most clear demonstration, in the sorrow and compassion he felt for the
peruersenes, and fault of his Neighbors, especially of such as he had under
his government: which in so great diversity of nations and temperatures, may
not seem very strange that some disorder now and then should fall out; and
that so much the rather, as the Religious state supposes men not already to
be perfect, but studious, and (so we may even say) scholars of perfection, in
as much as each discipline and art (as the Philospher said) is in erring
learned. In such occurrences then, the good Prelate, though touched in the
soul with the sharpest stings: yet nevertheless with familiar countenance and
paternall gravity withal; would not hold in secret from rebuking the
delinquent; who coming hereby to acknowledge the fault, and to show forth true
penance, the man of God contented with the humble satisfaction, would comfort
him, and proceed no further. And when the guilty showed himself stiff, and
gave a harsh answer, he would suddenly cease to strive or contend with him,
not to put in some sort his pastoral authority in danger. But leaving to the
disciple new space to acknowledge his error, with occasion he would return
again afterward to the same office of loving correction; or else when
necessity required, he would betake himself to the counsel of the Scripture,
which advises, the foolish man not to be corrected with words. And when this
last remedy at any time proved unprofitable, it cannot be expressed what
affliction and corrasiue the blessed Soul, would take thereat.

And if any perhaps should wish him not to grieve so much at it, since he had
fully satisfied his duty in the sight of God, and that he could by no means
do any more with one that through obstiuacy would needs perish; the amorous
Rectour would answer sighing, how these nor infinite reasons could quiet him,
in beholding him as dead before his eyes whom he loved so much: and you would
have me (says he) to feel no grief at so ill success, as if in this
reprehension and rebuke, I had for scope only the saving of mine own soul,
and not rather the salvation also of that of my beloved? And what Mother is
there, that howbeit on her part she have used all care and diligence in her
child's infirmity, if she see it dead, who can choose but lament and bewail the
same, considering the while the pains she has taken for it in vain?

Such then were the bowels of this true follower of Christ, whence it would
happen likewise, that if he had denied any thing at the first to any indiscreet
and importunate suitor, he could by no means deny him the second time.
Forasmuch as even by natural instinct, his heart would not serve him to behold
any one contristate and afflicted, so as he never despised or made light
reckoning of the trouble and perturbation of any one tempted: and how beit in
its time he could show, that he sought rather the pleasure of God, then that of
men, and preferred truth and justice before any other respect whatsoever; yet
did he all with such regard, and so much circumspection, as even to such as
seemed offended with him there wanted not matter to remain well satisfied.
Whence sometimes it happened, that such as these would become afterward more
devout, and affected to the man of God, then ever.

Diverse examples of the meekenes and patience of S. Bernard: and how (...)
Monastery of Clareuallis flourished by him founded. Chap. 12.
IT may not seem strange, that so much piety to Rational creatures should
seem to lodge in that sacred breast, since he wanted not tenderness and
affection also to the very Beasts themselves. It fell out sometimes he should
meet on the way with Hares hoatly pursued by the hounds even at the heels; or
else some Foul flying from the hawke, which the blesled Man beholding, would
straight deliver them from the present danger with the sign of the Cross,
signifying to the hunters (as indeed it happened) that they pursued them in
vain. From this so burning a furnace of Charity, with reason proceeded that
refined gold of his solid Patience, which he truly made manifest in the
continual tribulations, scourges, and infirmities, wherein he was proved by
our Lord, from the beginning of his blessed conversion unto his last breath; in
so much as his life was esteemed by such as familiarly conuersed with him, to
be a lingering death, except only in occurrences of some great vniuer^ benefit.
For in such necessity through divine dispensation he would seem to have gotten
new forces, and extraordinary vigout. And even with men also (though perhaps
not so often) he had sufficient occasions to show himself armed with
invincible sufferance and constancy.

He would speak as well through experience, as speculation, very learnedly of
this most excellent virtue, and was wont to distinguish the subject thereof
into three manner of offenses, to wit, of honor, of goods, and of the person:
according to this division, let us see briefly how he behaved himself in
effect.

The great servant of God had written on a time, to a Bishop being a principal
Consailour in the Court, entreating hi^ to give certain aduices and
admonishmentes in a thing (...) some matters that went not well. Whereat the
Bishop being ^gely offended, wrote back a letter again to the most devout S.
Bernard, dealing with him at the very beginning as with an impious and wicked
blasphemer. To which so sharp and bi^ ^proach, answered the servant of Chr^
with these words: I cannot believe now, I have the spirit of blasphemy in me,
nor was (...) ever any intention of mine to speak ill of others, and
especially of my sovereign Prince. And this Answer of his, he afterward
acco^panyed also with actions so loving, and with so much observance toward
him, who had so wronged him, as he gained him at last, and made him his
greatest friend.

After the enterprise of Sozia, which under the conduct of Jews King of
France, through wicked perfidiousnes of the Grecian Emperor, had taken but ill
success, there were some that traduced the fame of S. Bernard, as who had
been the principal author of that expedition. Whereunto being not able to
give a particular account to every one of his motives, and of what had passed
in the voyage, at least he prayed often for them all, being a great deal more
sorrowful for their sin, then for his proper infamy: and being not able to
suppress such murmurs rejoiced at least, that those poisonous shafts of the
slanderous ignorant, were aimed all at himself (who did little respect them,)
and much rejoiced that the divine Majesty and Providence, was come to be
entire, and untouched by those impious people.

There were once 600. marks of silver intercepted by the way from the servants
of the man of God, being magnificently assigned by the Abbot of Farco, to the
behoof and benefit of the Order. To which news the Saint replied with a
cheerful countenance: Blessed be God who has delivered us from such a
burden: and he truly who has taken away the money, in some sort deserves to
be excused, since such a sum might well give a shrewd temptation. The same
tenor he kept of a serene mind, without contention, or strife at all, when
there were taken from him, partly through deceit, and partly by force about
some ten Monasteries, or places at least very apt to erect foundations for them.

A certain Regular of another Monastery being tem^ted, and not sound in his
vocation; having read some spiritual tr^ses of S. Bernard, went his ways to
Clareuallis to make instance unto him, to receive him among his: to whom the
blessed Man sweetly answering, wished him to return, not seeming good to him
for just respects to yield to his request. Why have you then (replied the
wretch) Father, so extolled Perfection in your writings, if you will not
succor and help him, who desires the same? And being urged by the infernal
spirit, added: Now then if I had those books in my hands, I would surely rent
them in a thousand pieces. To this, the Man of God answered: I do verily
think, said he, that in none of them thou shall find, Thou may not be
perfect in thy cloister: the amendment of manners, change not of places (if I
well remember) I have proposed, and commended in my books. Then went that
frantique man quite out of his wits, and lifting up suddenly his most
sacrilegious hand, he gave so huge a cuffe on the ear to the holy Abbot, that
his cheek was presently swollen: whereat with reason the standers by being
incensed began to rise up to handle the Wretch as he deserved; but soon the
Servant of God prevented the same, exclayming and coniuring them by the name of
Christ, not to touch him, but warily to lead him away, procuring by all means
possible, he should take no harm. And thus the wretch all pale, and trembling
escaped thence without the least punishment. Moreover this defendour of the
Truth, and promoter of the divine service, wanted not his emulous, and
persecutours, though he, through the eminence of his qualityes, and glory of
his words and deeds, had very much overcome their envy.

With such a pest of men, the Iouer of Christ used this manner of proceeding:
first according to the precept of the Gospel, he would make fervent prayer
for them; after that with might and main he sought to extingnish that
malignant passion with all manner of submission, and good offices; in rendering
benefits for iniuryes, honor and reverence, for contempt and affronts, as he
who had their salvation as dear as his own, and felt particular torment, at
the scandal of those, to whom he had given no occasion at all: and the malice
of others did excruciate him more, then his conscience seemed to satisfy him,
it seeming a matter too difficult for him to cure a malady, whose origin he
could not discover: and whenever he was able to come to the knowledge thereof,
he took no greater pleasure then to root it out, although he were thereby to
have his hands all mangled and bloody.

The most holy Abbot was arrived to such a point of the love of God, and of his
Neighbor, through the continual meditation of the life and passion of Christ,
being truly become the form and example of the flock, which he had in charge,
as that now with great reason was the good odor of Clareuallis spread, and
dilated through out all Christendom; and in all parts (as we said above) with
cost and diligence were the grafts of this happy plant both craved, and
procured; nor were there only Monasteryes of S. Bernard founded here and
there, but even whole Conuents likewise of other families, came voluntarily to
submit themselves unto his obedience, and to conform themselves with all study
to the rites and profession of the Cisterce, yea even he himself whose
principal care was (as we said) to remain hidden and unknown in that corner,
and valley, was yet very suddenly more highly placed by the divine hand, in the
light, and sight of men, and obliged to dispense to the benefit of the world,
the treasures and graces which he heaped up together in his Cell. Whence
Schismatikes were reconciled to the Roman Church, Heretics publicly
convinced, and Catholics promoted, and established in peace.

A Schism in the Church ariuing about the election of a Pope, was happily
ended through the wisdom of S. Bernard. Chap. 13.
THe first achiuement the Saint happened to make for the good of all
christendom, took occasion from the Schism of Pierlonio the Roman, who after
the death of Honorius, with evil practices, making himself a false Pope, and
taking the name of Anaclete, opposed himself to the true and canonically
elected Pope Innocent; in which so scandalous a division, both the one and the
other endeavoring as well with messages as letters to draw whole Kingdoms and
Christian nations to their obedience, the world was put into a great confusion
and perplexity, being as yet not able to discern which of these two fornamed
Popes they were to acknowledge and adore for lawful Successor of S. Peter,
and vicar general of Christ. Upon this then so important an article were
assembled in diverse parties of Europe national Synods, and particulerly in
France was called the Council in the Land of Tampes, where to be able with the
more light and more favorable assistance of the holy Ghost to decide so great
a difficulty, it seemed good to the King himself, and the more principal
Bishops, that above all, the Abbot of Clareuallis should be called thereto, so
great was the conceit had even at that time of the wisdom and spirit that
spoke by him.

Being invited then on behalf of the King, and exhorted withal by the other
Abbots of his Order (to whom he was ever most obedient) he went his ways
thither, wholly full of fear and trembling, considering the weight and danger,
and the other qualityes of the business. And yet he felt notwithstanding great
comfort in a vision which he had on his way by night, wherein was represented
to him a very great assembly of Ecclesiastical persons, who with sweet harmony
praised and glorified God: from whence he conceived firm hope, that soon
after would follow the desired union and concord of the Christian people. When
he came then to the place designed, and that the Council was opened, the
Faste^ and devout Processions according to Apostolical custom being
celebrated, in the same first Sessi^on, with judgment and consent resolution
was made, that the whole controversy should be remitted to S. Bernard, the
servant of God, and nothing should be done therein but what he determined.
Which charge truly as intolerable, the man of God refused with great modesty,
but won at last through the prayers and authority of that holy multitude, he
accepted the same, and buckles himself to the enterprise, so much mote stout
and confident in God, as he was more dif^ident and weak in himself. So as
inuoking the aid of Heaven, and making a most exact inquisition and examine,
first of the manner and order of Election, then also of the qualities and
merits of the Electours, as of both the elected Popes themselves, he securely
nominated and declared Innocent for the chief and true Pastor; to which
proposition was not one in the whole Council which opposed awhit, but suddenly
singing a joyful Hymn with the accustomed prayers and thankesgiuings, they all
with one accord subscribed to the said declaration.

In the mean time Innocent, being not able to resist the power and fury of the
adursaryes, going forth of Rome, and received with due honor and reverence of
all Tuscany, he came into France; and the glorious Abbot with the same greatness
of courage pa^ed over into England, where King Henry through the persuasion of
some Prelates, declared and showed himself very backward and hard to accept of
Innocent. But the venerable Abbot after many reasons alleged in vain, at
last full of zeal and fortitude said to him. What fears your highness? doubt
you to commit sin with affording obedience to Innocent? Go to then, do but
think as you ought to do, to render account to God for your other sins, and
do you leave this to me, and I will take it upon my charge. With such an offer
made, that mighty King without more ado, was satisfied, and was so assured
thereof, as he determined to go forth of his kindome to go meet, and humbly
receive Innocent, who through Prouence and Burgundy being come to Chartres,
Henry came thither to kiss his feet, who with great common iubiley and give
him the Apostolical benediction.

While many matters touching the divine service, and the holy Church, were
there handled and defined in the said place: behold the Popes Nuntio's to
arrive thither from Germany with letters from those Lords, and those Countries,
full of affectious prayers, that his Holiness would daigne so much as to comfort
those Northern parts with his presence, since now all, through the example of
France and England, acknowledged him for supreme guide, and head of the Church
militant. But the Pope so soon could not affoard himself to those nations,
being with so much devotion continually entertained and desired by the Cittyes
of France, through which having made his progress a while, he intimated a
Council in Rhems, where likewise having ordained many things to the honor of
God, he after with many solemn ceremonies at the instance of King Lodouik the
Father, crowned and anointed Lodouike the son, in the place of Philip his
elder brother deceased.

In these and other actions, the Pope would never suffer the glorious Abbot of
Clareuallis to depart from his side, yea diverse supplications of moment were
presented unto him, and he would afterward propose them in the consistory,
where S. Bernard was forced to be present, and to sit with Cardinals
themselves, undertaking the protection of the opppressed, and showing
continually favor to what was honest and just: after which the Council brake
up, and the Pope going to meet with the Emperor Lotharius at Liege, was
entertained with much solemnity and great veneration. But all that joy was
changed very soon into sadness and bitterness: because while it seemed to
Lotharius he had a rare opportunity without trouble and difficulty to strayten
the Pope, and draw him to his designs; he began to make suite to recover
again the inuestitures of Bishopriques taken away heretofore from the hands
of Henry his Predecessor.

Innocent with his whole Court being strooken with so harsh a proposition and
so unexpected, grew pale thereat, and stood as a man wholly void of counsel,
as seeming to him he met in Liege with a greater check, then formerly in Rome
it self: when the venerable Abbot with freedom of mind and meruaylous liberty
counterposed himself as a solid wall to the demand and pretension of the
Emperor, and so well dissuaded and discoursed, as he soon drew him from that
covetous and ambitious thought. An exployt, surely, of a poor Monk truly
glorious, and hitherto unheard or; howbeyt perhapps for so happy a success,
may some praise also be given unto those times, wherein commonly the Signors
and Potentates of Christendom applied themselves of their own accord, or
easily at least were brought to exalt and propagate the splendor and authority
of the Apostolic Sea; whereas at this day (O unworthy spectacle) it seems as
all were striving to abate the same, to weaken, and even to extinguish it
quite. But here let us silence all odious and unprofitable complaints.

Troubles arising in the Church through the faction of the Antipope, were by S.
Bernard pacifyed, in favor of the true Pope: with the miserable end of a
chief Party of the Schism. Chap. 14.
INnocent being thus freed by means of S. Bernard from the anxiety he was in,
and having taken moreover a firm purpose and a inviolable promise of Lotharius
to come with his army to Rome, as soon as possibly he might, to quiet the
tumults there, and to place him in the pontifical Throne, took his leave of
the Church of France, and joyfully went toward Italy, making his journey
through Burgundy, and by the way was pleased to visit, and take Clareuallis for
his Inn, where receiving much consolation of the voluntary poverty and
abstinence, and religious conversation ofthe Monks, he prosecuted his journey,
and arriving at Rome, found Lotharius there ready with his army, by whom being
brought through force into the palace of S. John Lateran (being the ordinary
residence in those days of the Popes of Rome) yet for all that, had he not the
desired contentment to behold things pacifyed and quiet. Because the Antipope
being obdurate in malice, and continually accompanied with armed men, kept
himself in hold, and always well fortifyed in Towers, and more eminent
places of the City: from whence with sudden incursions and stratagems without
ever entering into open battle, or once seeking to come to a parley with
Lotharius, he never left infesting both day and night the friends and defenders
of the Pope.

Whereupon the Emperor being now grown weary of the excess, charge, and
small fruit, returned into Almany again: and Innocent fynding no better
remedy for so great mischeifes, went out of Rome the second time, and
assembling together another solemn Council in the City of Pisa, among other
things publicly declared Pierlonio excommunicate: of which censure, the
miserable man was never absolved. Here also S. Bernard, through obedience
assisted the chief Bishop, and was not only a helper and partaker of the whole
affairs and counsels therein, but may be said more an arbiter and vmpier in
the busynes. Which affairs being once dispatched, it seemed good to the Pope
to send him to Millan, where the poison of the Antipope having got in, the
whole people were found to be in a most inextricable trouble and discord among
themselves. Nor was here likewise the arrival of the man of God in vain. He
soon reunited the whole City again, and reduced it to the devotion of the
true Pope. From hence passing over the Alps, he returned to Clareuallis, and
being received by the Monks there with infinite iubiley, at their instance
transferred he the Monastery into a more ample situation; whereof the fame being
spread through out, there immediately concurred so great alms from Princes and
Prelates, and from other devout persons, as in very short space, the building
adorned withal commodityes was brought to perfection to the great increase of
the divine service.

At the same time the Country of Gascony, and especially the Church of
Bourdeaux was fallen as it were into some afflictions and calamityes, from
whence the city of Milan had been delivered but a little before. Of th^e
mischiefs Gerard Bishop of Angolesme was the principal occasion who with
ambitious promises having gotten of the Antipope the, Legacy of Gascony, had
drawn to their wicked designs not only a good part of the Clergy, but even
many also of the Nobles, yea the Prince himself and Lord of those Countries,
called Count William, through whose forces, and other ill practices of his
own, he had brought things into those terms, as that against all those that
would not consent and subscribe to the election of Anaclete, they openly
proceeded with banishments, confiscation of goods, and with other inventions,
and examples of fierce and barbarous cruelty.

One of the chief of those that were persecuted, was William Bishop of
Poytiers, a man well qualifyed and exceeding constant in defense of the
Catholic Religion. This man with many iniuryes was expelled from his Church,
and a Schismatic and wicked one put into his place. The same happened in the
Diocese of Limoges, where instead of a Catholic Prelate, was placed one
Abbot Ranulfus, who through divine judgment, paid full soon the punishment of
his impious boldness, since in a plain and even way being fallen from his
horse, he pitched his head so shrewdly on a stone, (which lay in the way) that
dashing out his brains, he dyed suddenly.

S. Bernard having excommunicated Duke William, he submits himself: with the
just judgment of God, showed on the schismatic Bishop of Angolesme. Chap.
15.
AS soon as Gaufrid Bishop of Chartres had notice of so great disorders and
inconveniences, to whom the Legacy, and even spiritual government of Gascony
was committed by Innocent, he was heartily sorry for it, and layng other busynes
aside, determined to succor those Churches as soon as he could, which were in
extreme danger; and for that he knew well how noble an instrument of the
divine providence the Abbot of Clareuallis was for such effect, he entreated
him very earnestly to accompany and assist him in such an enterprise, And the
man of God made no resistance thereunto. But only required, they might pass by
the way of Nantes, where Ermengarda the Countess had founded a Convent of his
Monks, and it was necessary for him to pass that way, to give order (as he
would quickly do) to the affairs belonging to the said Monastery. Gaufrid and
S. Bernard then put themselves on the way with an honorable train of
Prelates, and other Catholics: and the matters being dispatched which were to
be done in the City of Nantes, they entered into the co^fines of Gascony, where
Gerard already with consent of the Count William, had intruded himself into
the administration of Bourdeaux, and possessed the two Churches at once, of
Bourdeaux, and Angolesme.

Now the Count understanding of the coming of the Bishop of Chartres, and of
the Blessed Bernard, as also of other Bishops and Religious with him, to treat
with him in the affairs of Ecclesiastical matters, he thought it not fit for
many respects to refuse that parley. They were all then assembled together by
agreement in a place which was named Pertinaco, whereby the Servants of God had
fit opportunity to express their minds to the full, and it was proposed (among
other things) how unseemly it was, that all France being now at the devotion
of Pope Innocent, Gascony should only divide her self from the common
communion and accord, and cause so great, and so miserable a separation and
defection in the people of God: how he could not but know, that the Church of
Christ is but one only, and whatsoever out of it, as found out of the Ark of Noah, must of necessity sincke and perish. They likewise reduced to his memory
the dreadful event of Dathan and Abiron, who for no other cause, then for
making disunion, were swallowed up alive in the earth. To this they added other
examples of manifest vengeance and wrath of God against seditious persons and
Schismatiques. Count William being moved with these exhortations and menaces,
partly became flexible thereunto, offering himself to accept Innocent for
lawful Pope; and partly showed himself obstinate and hard, being not willing
by any means to restore the Catholic Bishops again so violently deposed, and
sent into banishment, and that not so much through occasion of the public
cause, as for some particular grudges which he had against them.

This article was disputed a good while in two assemblyes, and the second time
S. Bernard perceauing, that nothing could be concluded by way of words, he
straight recurred to more efficacious and potent means, as in such occasions
he was wont to do. Wherefore breaking off the discourse, he goes directly to the
Altar, and prepares himself for Mass. Those only entered in, who were not
forbid to assist at that dreadful sacrifice, while the Count with others being
severed from the Catholic communion, stood without at the gate. When he Priest
of God, having finished the whole consecration, and given the Pax to the
people, not now as a man, but as one of the spirits of the heavenly squadron,
holding the most holy Sacrament over the Paten with flaming countenance and
burning eyes, not with a supplant visage, but with a power more then humane,
going forth of the Temple, with a terrible voice, thus thundered to the Count:
Have we not entreated you, and you despised us? Besides, have not this
multitude of Gods servants coniured thee, and yet have thou made no account
thereof? Behold the Virgins son is come into thy sight, being the head and
Lord of the Church which thou do persecute. Behold thy Judge into whose
hands that soul of thine is sure to fall. And now will thou seem to contemn
him like wise? Will thou also affront his his person, as thou have his
Servants?

At such a sight, and such words withal, the standers by being astonished and
much amazed, began to invoke the divine succors: but the Count himself
perceauing the Priest to come toward him with the most sacred body of Christ
in his hand, being full of sudden horror and trembling, fell flat to the
ground, and presently raised up by his Guard, fell down again, with quiuering
nerves, without speaking a word, or lifting up the eyes: but only with deep
sighs, by the mouth and beard he put forth both foame and spittle, as he had
been in a Epilepsy. Then the Servant of Christ approaching unto him, and
touching him with his foot, commanded him to stand up, and hear the divine
Sentence, in the tenor following: Let the Bishop of Poytiers come hither into
this place, whom thou have banished from his Sea: Go thy ways to him, and
with the holy kiss having given the peace, do thou thy self restore him
again into his Church, and satisfying our Lord God, give honor to the good
Prelate for the injuries and affro^ts thou have done him. Moreover in thy whole
dominion do thou then regather and recall again into a true union all those
who are now in discord and division: Submit thy self to Pope Innocent, and as
the other are obedient to him, so do thou also affoard due obedience to his
Holiness, elected by the divine Majesty.

The Count hearing this, and being convinced and confounded, as well through
the work of the holy Ghost, as with the presence of the sacred mysteries, he
neither could, nor durst answer a word, but seeing the Bishop of Poytiers
present, went speedily to salute him, and receive him with embraces and signs
of love and peace, and without delay conducted him, and restored him to his
Episcopal seat again, with the same hand wherewith he had deposed him, and
thrust him out. After this the holy Abbot oftentimes looked more sweetly and
more familiarly on the Count, aduising him to beware henceforth of so impious
and temerarious actions, and never more to provoke the anger of God. Nor were
the admonitions cast into the wind, since that Prince not only abstayned for
ever after from troubling the Ecclesiastical union and tranquillity, but even
rather in process of time, arrived to the terms of most excellent virtue and
Christian charity, as the things that are written of him do sufficiently
declare.

In this manner were matters in Gascony well pacifyed, save only the Bishop of
Angolesme continued still fixed in malice. Who yet soon after, through the
just judgment of God was found dead one morning in his bed, with a terrible
swelling, without confession, and the last rites. And though for that time,
through the help of his dearest friends he was buried in the Church, yet after
notwithstanding by order of the Bishop of Chartres, were his execrable bones
taken out of the sepulcher, and cast forth to the fowls of the air, and the
ravenous beasts. Nor ceased here the punishment, for as much as even his
Nephews also with the whole race and kindred of the said deceased, being
afterward banished out their country, went wandering into diverse parts,
infamous and miserable.

S. Bernard is sent for to Rome again by the Pope, to pacify the troubles
there, with his joyful reception of all the Faithful. Chap. 16.
IN the mean time S. Bernard having brought so noble an enterprise to a wished
end, with the exceeding consolation of his Monks, returned to Clareuallis.
Where while he was so far removed from worldly contemplation of divine
things, and for the help also of others, being seriously occupied in
expounding of the Canticles of Solomon; behold new Letters, and Couriers from
the Pope, who after the Council of Pisa being returned to Rome, was yet
busying himself to allay the tumults, and to reduce that Church the Mother of
all Churches, to some tolerable state at least: but finding every hour new
obstacles, as well from Pierlonio himself within the city, as without from
Roger King of Sicily, who for private designs of his, did secretly favor the
Antipope and Schism, he resolved to call the Abbot of Clareuallis once more
for help and counsel, having known already by so many proofs of what avail
in such difficultyes was the valor, and prudence, and sanctity of the man of
God.

He sends him Messingers then with Apostolical breifs, and in the same matter,
many Cardinals likewise wrote unto him, he would be pleased once more to come
to the City of Rome. Whereupon S. Bernard though loath to leave his study and
Cell, yet preferring prompt obedience before any just respect whatsoever,
prepares himself for the journey, and causing his Monks to be assembled
together from diverse parts, after he had a good while sent forth deep sighs
and sobs from his breast, at last took his leave of them in this manner: You
see, Brethren, into how great disorders, and tribulations the Church of God is
now brought. And to say truly, the followers of Pierlonio are now, as it were
throughout, by the divine grace pulled away from that feygned Head, and so
pestiferous a sect. And even in Rome also a great part of the Clergy and
Nobility in their hearts do follow Innocent, though otherwise through fear of
some more potent, and of the common people withal corrupted by the Antipope,
they dare not openly show forth what they have more secretly laid up in their
breasts. So as the West being now subdued, we may say, there remains but one
Nation only to be vanquished and overcome: if you make but prayer with
spiritual Iubily, Jericho shall even fall to the ground, and you but lifting
up your hands with Moses, Amalech be put to flight. Joshua victorious in the
battle, to have full space of a complete victory very bloody, commands the
Sun to stay its course, and is obeyed. And you likewise seeing us, in the
heat of the battle, cease you not to affoard us your aid and succor with
fervent prayers: and in the mean time, be you firm in the way begun, and holy
purposes made; and howbeit in your selves, you be not conscious of any great
crime, yet beware you esteem not your selves in your own judgment to be
innocent and just, since to justify, and judge the conscience, appertains to
God only: yea, by how much a man is more forward in perfection, so much the
less presumes he of the strait and rigourous account of the divine justice. On
the other side make you no reckoning of humane judgments, either of your
selves or others, but so keep you under the fear of God, that neither you, in
judging by him, come to dash upon some rock of pride or vanity. You are to
attend to an exact and continual search into your selves, and of your selves;
which doing, yet shall you always repute your selves to be unprofitable
servants, as our Lord commands. It behoues me to go, whither the chief Pastor
appoints me; and since all this travail is undertaken by me, purely for the
service and glory of the divine goodness, I shall not fail to beseech the same
with much confidence, to take you into his custody and protection.

After these words, being accompanied with abundance of tears and devout
desires of that pious congregation, he puts himself on the way toward Rome,
and being received, wheresoever he passed as a man from heaven, with his
arrival he brought extraordinary joy and comfort to the Pope, with all
Catholics. And without delay endeavoring with diligence to find out, whence
so long obstinacy of the contrary faction proceeded, he soon came to
understand, how the Clergy though stung in conscience, yet through fear of
loosing the benefices obtained of the Antipope durst not forsake him: besides
which, the respect they had of a vain constancy and foolish reputation, filled
their mynds with a cloud of obscurity; but for the popular sort, being likewise
deceived partly through covetousness, and partly with a false religion, held it
a great scorn, and iniquity to break the oath of fidelity once given to
Pierlonio.

S. Bernard endeavored in vain to withdraw the king of Sicily, from the part
of the Antipope; through whose death peace was restored to the Church again.
Chap. 17.
FRom these errors S. Bernard did endeavor, and not without fruit, to
deliver that blind people, when the Ambassadors of Roger King of Sicily
arrived at Rome, who with a dissembling zeal of the common good, made show of
being desirous to inform himself fully of the truth, and to become arbiter of
so great and pertinacious discords, though in secret (as we said) he were held
to be a fautour, of the perverse faction, and therefore craftily required
Anaclet, to send him Peter of Pisa, a most wise and eloquent man on his
behalf, and made instance to Innocent for the Abbot of Clareuallis, that these
two as advocates being to argue and plead in his presence, might give him true
notice of all, hoping by this means the lowlynes and simplicity of one poor
Monk might be ouerborne and oppressed, through the eloquence and cunning of that
famous Doctor.

The said King was very potent, and was at that time with a puissant army in
the kingdom of Naples, so as the Ambassadors had no great difficulty to
obtain at Rome what they would. But through divine disposition the matter had
a far different event from that which the King thought of. Because that Peter
and S. Bernard being arrived at his Court, after they had discoursed apart with
him, and the principal Officers, there was finally deputed a certain day to
both the Procuratours together for public audience. Now what success was to
follow of this duel, a certain battle fought between the said King, and
the Duke Ranulphus, who was a Prince, and a very virtuous Catholic, gave no
small demonstration at that time. S. Bernard, with Charity had endeavored to
hinder the said conflict, and to make peace between the two Christian armies;
and to Roger had manifestly threatened and foretold, that if he fought he should
loose the battle. But he finding himself to have much odds, and advantage
over Ranulphus in number and forces, with haughtynes and pride contemning the
aduises and protestations of the man of God, would needs by all means
encounter and set upon him, near unto the City of Salerno: where, with the
astonishment of all, there suddenly entering a fear into the camp, he was
vanquished by the Dukes army, routed, and put to flight. And yet
notwithstanding having reassembled together the unhappy remainder, and with new
succors made up a Royal army again; he presents himself in Council and
Tribunal on the day assigned for the dispute, having first in private, with
great promises and large offers set the Pisan Doctor on fire to purchase
himself honor, in sustayning the cause of Pope Anaclete, and in that assembly
of noble and learned men to stop the mouth of the French Abbot.

Peter then full of vain hopes, and of high thoughts, appeared in the Court,
where with much eloquence, and great memory and art, depainting forth first the
fact, with handsome colors, then alleging and interpreting in his manner
the decrees and Canons, he endeavored to prove how the election of Anaclete had
been most sincere and legitimate. On the contrary the holy man having heard the
Orator with much patience, began his discourse with great humility and
modesty, and by little and little grew into so great vehemence and liberty of
heavenly spirit, and with such pregnancy of reasons, and weight of Scriptures,
and variety of examples, and comparisons, so defeated the foundations, and
discovered the falsehoods of the adversary, as not only almost all the auditory
then remained persuaded, but even the Advocate Anaclete himself of being
convinced with the truth, and returned to himself, repented he had ever
undertaken the protection of the wicked and false Pope; and being afterward
further assisted with the private exhortations of the servant of Christ, failed
not to reconcile himself to Innocent.

But Roger, how beit he could now pretend no ignorance, yet being overwhelmed
with diverse passions, could never be brought to the said demonstrations and
acts, which in a matter of so great importance ought publicly to be done.
Whence S. Bernard being satisfied with his own conscience, and remitting the
rest to the divine Justice, returned back to Rome, and renewed again the
interrupted labor of reducing the souls to the obedience of the Pope, and
union of the Church, which till that time had been either seduced through
opinion, or enchayned by malice. For so great a hurt and notorious a scandal,
S. Bernard was exceedingly afflicted: but it pleased the divine goodness soon
to deliver him from that grief through the death of Pierlonio: who being
seized with a pestilent malady, though he had three days space, to acknowledge
his offenses, yet obdurate and impenitent, he passed to render account to the
eternal Judge of his misdeed.

Being dead, his followers did presently substitute, and set up an other
Antipope, who yet being conscious of his own weakness, and the dangers which
hung over his head; went by night to seek out S. Bernard, who having lovingly
reprehended him, and made him to lay down the ornaments usurped, led him with
his own hands to the feet of Innocent, from whom benignly receiving
absolution, he was admitted into grace. And from thence began the Pope to give
dispatches without disturbance, to attend to reformation, and to take away the
abuses introduced in time of the discord. For so joyful success next unto
God, they all gave the glory and honor to the Abbot of Clareuallis, and not
without reason, since trauayling in the enterprise, into diverse parts of the
world, for more then seven years together, finally in the City of Rome with
the divine help most happily concluded the same.

But the true disciple of Christ being not able to endure the human praises,
applauses, and the extraordinary veneration wherein he was held of the whole
Court and City, within the term of five days and no more, having got leave
of the Pope with all importunity, he suddenly went his ways toward
Clareuallis. And for as much as his Holiness required some of his Monks to
inhabit near to Rome, he made choice of them, and sent them at that time
under the care of one Bernard of Pisa a good Religious man, and a person much
honored in the world, who not long after, Innocent being dead and his
successors Celestin and Lucius, was with much approbation made Pope, by a new
name, called Eugenius, and to him S. Bernard wrote those most learned books Of
Consideration. In this manner then did S. Bernard carry himself in repayring
the torn coat of our Lord, and reuniting to their head the members of the
Church, with most wicked example so severed and disioyned. And no less
vigilance and solicitude showed he in oppressing and rooting out heresies,
which discovered themselves in his time as shall presently appear.

S. Bernard refutes and confounds Abaylard, a famous Heretic: with other
heresies arising at that time. Chap. 18.
THere flourished in those days, with great fame of much knowledge, one Peter
Abaylard, a person of an exceeding sharp wit, but proud and haughty withal.
This man (as it happens often with the proud) being deceived by the Father of
lying; began to disperse writings, full of new doctrine, and of pestiferous
opinions: whereof S. Bernard having notice, through his accustomed goodness and
benignity, performed the office toward him of fraternall charity; endeavoring
that without prejudice and infamy of the writer, those blasphemies might be
amended. And truly Peter himself for the present, through the words and
Charity of the Saint showed himself to be so changed and compunct, as he
promised to remit al to his censure and correction. But a little after, being
vanquished through the blind love and vain persuasion of himself, he not only
brake his word, but even also taking his advantage of the time, he went to the
Bishop of Sans, in whose Church was presently a great Council assembled, and
before him very insolently complained of the Abbot of Clareuallis, as of a
slaunderer, and detractour, and made instance, the Council being opened he
might be cyted to yield account of the objections and calumnies given out
against his books, showing himself to be prompt and ready to defend in
public whatsoever was contained therein. Nor did the Bishop refuse him: the
time being come, he cites the Man of God to the Synod to justify the said
oppositio^s. There came likewise thither Peter full of pride, founding himself
in sillogismes, and his dialectical art: but well it appears how vain human
means are against the divine power. Because, the designed day being come for
discussion of those articles, S. Bernard in the presence of all those venerable
Prelates and Doctors, produced the volumes of Abaylard, and with very strong
reasons and clear testimonies of Scripture and holy Fathers, went manifesting
and refuting one by one, all the propositions, which digressed from faith, and
the Apostolic traditions. And such was the spirit, which in that Session also
spoke in the mouth of S. Bernard, as that Abaylard loosing in a moment his
memory and discourse, full of shame and confusion with the wonder of all was
strooken dumb. There was given him space notwithstanding, and election, either
to deny those writings, or humbly to amend himself, or else to answer (if he
coud) to the objections made. But he very hard to repent himself, to gain (as
they say) more time, resolved with himself to appeal to the Sea of Rome,
howbeit, that sacred Congregation stuck not to reprove the doctrine, though
forbore the person: and a little after came the sentence of the Pope, which
declaring Abaylard to be a manifest heretic, condemned him to silence, and his
works to the fire.

This disorder being thus remedyed, after some years again there appeared
another, through the fault of William Perretta Bishop of Poytiers, a man much
versed in the divine Scriptures, but temerarious and arrogant, in so much as he
had the boldness to meddle with the mystery of the most holy Trinity, with many
capriches and subtlityes never heard of before, and that with so much the
greater common peril, as he was more pregnant and dexterous, to cover the
senses with artificious and obscure words; in such sort, as the poison had
much spread it self before any could easily perceive it. To these snares S.
Bernard did most valorously oppose himself in the Council of Rhemes
celebrated by Pope Eugenius, wherein disputing continually for two days
together against those impious dogma's, what with quoating and comparing
places one with another dispersed and disioyned here and there, with
determining of equivocations, distinguishing ambiguityes, inserting of
conseque^ces, and deducing of corolaryes; he drove out of darkness and caves,
that whole antiquity, and exposed it so to the light, as there remained no more
any place for doubt.

And because notwithstanding all this diligence, some favorers of William
hindered that the process could not he finished against him; S. Bernard with
his great authority, caused a congregation to be assembled of purpose, where
with the consent and subscription of the Fathers of ten Provinces, and of very
many Bishops and Abbots, he framed, and added a new symbol, as opposite to the
noueltyes of William, and with such means very easily wrought that these
perverse opinions should be utterly prohibited, though no chastisement
otherwise were inflicted on the Author, since he was in the mind to enter into
that dispute with this condition and protestation, that in case his sayings
were not excepted and approved by the sacred Council, he would be ready
without pertinacity at all, to revoke them quite, and so being demanded if he
gave his consent to the said condemnation, answered: Yea, and in full session
retracting and detesting the etrours, he obtained mercy.

No less horrible and pernicious, about the same years, was the impiety of a
certain Precursour of Martin Luther, called Henry, a most vile Apostata also,
and even possessed wholly with the like spirit of blasphemy; so as he doubted
not to open his sacrilegious mouth against heaven, to discover himself to be
the enemy of Christ, to assail, and to his power to destroy the Sacraments
and Ordinations, and the ancient rites of the ecclesiastical Hierarchy. And as
he had a good tongue, and knew well how to handle the people, and entice men to
licencious liberty, he made such progress in some parts of Gascony, as now at
last here and there were Pastors to be seen without flocks, people without
Priests, Priests without due veneration, and finally Christians without Christ
himself. To children there was none to open the gate of holy Baptism; the
offeringes and suffrages of the dead were come into derision; the invocation of
Saints, Excommunications, Pilgrimages, the building of Churches, the keeping
of Fasts, the consecration of Oil, and summarily all the institutes and
traditions of the Apostolic discipline were had in great despite and
abominatio^.

At such unhappy news, a Legate being sent from Rome to those parts, in
passing by Clareuallis, lead S. Bernard along with him, who being received by
those people, with incredibie devotion, he began to fructify among them,
abiding particulerly in the city of Toulouse: and even in those very places,
where the Minister of the Devil had made his most abode, and done most hurt,
there S. Bernard being assisted by the right hand of God, with Sermons, and
preachinges, and with evident miracles besides, in a very few days made a
notable purchase, in catechizing the rude, confirming the doubtful, reducing
the erring, resisting and repressing the authour^ and instruments of the
malignity: in so much as in very deed they durst not appear before him, much
less oppose and stand against him. Henry himself at the arrival of the
Legate, fled presently away, and after he had hid himself here and there for
a good while, was at last apprehended and bound, and so delivered into the
hands of the Bishop of Toulouse.

Thus was remedy put to the infernal pest, which otherwise had spread and
dilated it self through all those Provinces.

S. Bernard settles peace and concord among Princes and states, and
particularly between the City of Mets, and the neighbor Countries. Chap. 19.
FRom such pains and travails, suffered by the Labourer of Christ, in curing
and recovering of Heretics, may every one imagine how much care and study he
employed in preserving and helping Catholics. So as, it would be over long and
tedious to recount how many great Princes, and other persons of each state and
quality, he instructed with great patience in Christian virtues, and from the
vanities of the world converted to the love of heavenly things. How many
Churches at variance and discord with their Pastors, how many Chapters and
Colleges not without most grievous scandal disunited from their head and in
themselves, with his sweetness and authority has he reduced to peace and amity?
To how many afflicted and distressed souls has he given counsel, succor,
and comfort? How many fires already kindled of open war between mighty
Lords, and neighbor-people with like zeal and prudence has he extinguished?

To which purpose, we are by no means to pass over in silence, the accord
which he concluded with so great travail between the inhabitants of Mets in
Lorayn, and some Neighbour-Princes thereabouts, by whom that noble City being
provoked with some iniuryes, sent forth to revenge the same a great number of
Citizens in arms, but with ill success, because they being taken on the
sudden through the exceeding disadvantage of the place between the straits of
Montefred and Mosella a famous river, and assailed by the enemy, though
inferior in number, and put to flight, were about two thousand of them lost,
partly by sword, partly in the waters, partly also by their own confusion
smoothered and crushed to death in the press. Whence the Princes on the other
side being rich with the spoils, and proud of the victory, returned home with
triumph. Nor yet lost the city a whit of courage, while they seemed to be
vanquished more through inequality of the place, then by the valor and skill
of the adversaries.

They prepared then anew on all sides, and doubtless there hung a cruel
mortality, and a miserable wast over all those countries. When the Metropolitan
Archbishop of Treuers, for the fatherly care and solicitude he had of his
people, after he had tried many means in vain, he recurred for the last
refuge to S. Bernard the great servant of Christ; and being come to Clareuallis
in person, prostrating himself very humbly at the feet not only of him, but
of all the Monks also, besought and coniured him withal to vouchsafe to apply
some remedy to so great mischeifs and evils, since for such an office of piety
in the world besides, was no other person found to be sufficient.

S. Bernard at that time approached near to the end of his days and being
ouercharged as well with old age, as infirmityes, kept his bed; yet
notwithstanding most benignly promised his help, and (as we have said above, is
wont to happen in like cases) his forces being suddenly recovered for this
affayre, he went his ways in company of the Archbishop. When they arrived,
they found the two opposite armies, who attending on the banck side of the
river, were expecting an occasion to come to a fresh battle.

From so great a hazard, and so much hurt, sought S. Bernard with prayers and
exhortations to deliver the Christian armies, but words auayling little, with
the efficacious force of stupendous miracles, he filled those fierce and
obdurate hearts with such religion and horror, as being finally mollifyed like
wax, were all the controuersyes by common consent remitted to the arbitrament
of the man of God. Whereupon he having brought the Procuratour of each part
under public safe conduct, to a Parley in an island of the River, having now
well understood the beginning of the strifes between them, prescribed them
conditions and articles of peace; the which without rigor were accepted, and
in sign of accord, the Procuratours gave each other their hands, with loving
embraces, and those dark clouds, and dreadful lightnings of war, were soon
turned into a goodly calm of tranquillity and concord.

And since we have already often made mention of Miracles of the Saint, and
sometimes also according to occurrences declared some of them; you must
understand, this matter affoards an infinite store of narrations: forasmuch as
among other Authors the venerable Gaufrid Monk of Clareuallis, who was
companion and Secretary of S. Bernard, affirms for certain and notorious,
that in a village of Constance, called Dominge, in one and the self same day,
with the only imposition of hands, in presence of a multiude of spectatours, he
gave sight to eleven blind, healed ten maimed, and eyghteene cripples: and in
Colonia Agrippina in three days he reared twelve cripples, cured two lame,
gave speech to three dumb, and hearing unto ten deaf men. So as certain
pious men having begun to note down all such wonders of his, being after
oppressed with the multitude of them, and not being able with the pen, to set
down the store of effects in that kind, very soon gave over the enterprise.
Nevertheless there remaynes yet a faithful and distinct memory of so many of
them, as to go about to set them here down one by one, would be a thing too
prolix and far off from our scope. We therefore making choice (according to out
custom) of the more notable and of greater edification, shall reduce them to
five heads; that is, to the grace of Cures; to power upon devils; to visions
or apparitions; to the spirit of Prophesy; and to efficacy of prayer: which,
though indeed it may be said, to run through all the other species,
notwithstanding for that it wants not proprietyes also of its own, we have
thought good to put it down by it self a part; yea and taking beginning from
thence, we shall tell what happened to S. Bernard, concerning one of his Monks
less mortifyed, and less perfect then the rest.

The Judgment of God, showed upon one, approaching to receive the Sacrament at
S. Bernards hands, without due preparation: with diverse other Miracles besides.
Chap. 20.
THere was a Monk, that for a secret fault being suspended from the
participation of the divine misteryes, and beholding all the others to
communicate on a very solemn Feast; the wretch for fear of shame and infamy,
boldly also approaches to the hands of the holy Pastor. Who not willing to
expel him thence, the occasion being (as it was said) secret and unknown,
turning himself to God from the bottom of his heart, he besought him to put
remedy for such and so great a presumption, and heerewith ministered to him also
the Bread of Angels, as to the rest. But behold the host being received into
his mouth, he could by no means let it down, though he striued never so much
to swallow it. Whereupon being wholly anxious and trembling, he kept it enclosed
within his palate, until such time, as the Communion being past, with an humble
sign he drew the man of God apart, and being prostrate at his feet with many
tears declared to him what he suffered, and opening his mouth showed him the
hoastir self. When the good Father reprehending him for it, as it behooved,
went about to reconcile him again, and the Penitent suddenly having received
absolution without any difficulty swallowed the hauenly food.

Another entering a fresh into Clareuallis, to do penance there of his life
very dissolutly led in the world; found himself to be (...) and exceeding in
devout, while his companions with many tears, were cleansing themselves of
their passed crimes. Being moved with this example to enter into himself, and
trying in vain to imitate them, he recurred with most inward affect of heart to
the holy Abbot: who yiedling to so honest and pious a demand, obtained him
from heaven such abundance of tears, as from that hour the good disciple was
never seen to be with dry eyes, and cheeks not dewed with tears. The like
power though in a bas^ subject showed the servant of Christ with his prayers,
once especially among other times, when he returned from the City of Chalon.
There was then a cruel winter and most bitter cold, so as all most all those
of his company being shrewdly pinched with the weather, and busyed in defending
themselves from the air (as it happens in that case) making much have,
heedlesly left him behind with two only in his company, one of which by chance
alighting, his horse brake away from him in the open fields (as the Camel once
escaped from S. Antony in the deserts) without commodity of catching him again
in have, when the venerable Abbot turning to him that was lest with him, said
let us pray. And kneeling on the ground scarcely had they finished a Pater
Noster, when behold the unruly beast, with all gentleness returning back, stood
quietly at the feet of S. Bernard, and thus he who had lost him recovered him
again. A great expedition surely in regayning him so, but this other which
follows was nothing inferior.

S. Bernard in the Court of the young King Jews, negotiated a peace of moment,
and secretly had the Queen his opposite therein though otherwise openly she
showed her self to be devoted to him. This Lady was held to be barren, having
now lived many years with her husband without issue, for which she with the
whole Court, was exceedingly afflicted. Now she one day with the holy Abbot
lamenting her self for such a disaster, with this opportunity he fayld not to
advise her, that if she would be comforted in her desire, she should cease to
hinder the peace in treaty: which she did, and soon after the accord very
happily succeeded. Then Jews through suggestion of his wife, put S. Bernard in
mind of the promise made, and he faithfully acknowledged it; recommending the
matter so fervently to God, as the Queen at the years end was brought to bed,
with the extraordinary joy as well private as public. That effect also was
held very memorable, which now we shall tell.

S. Bernard being ready to depart the second time from Rome, procured with the
Popes consent, some Relikes of Saints to carry with him; and visiting Churches
for that end, he was offered by the Grecian Monks the entire head of S.
Caesarius Martyr. But he of innated modesty, having respect as not willing to
deprive those Religious of so noble a treasure, was content to accept as a
favor one tooth only. The Monks then endeavor to pull it forth, and being not
able with their hands, they brake two knives about it, without profitting a
whit: it is fit (said S. Bernard) we pray to the glorious Martyr, he would
vouchsafe to do us this favor: he prayed unto him, and after reverently
approaching to the sacred skull, without any difficulty he took out one, with
two of his fingars, which before could not be stirred with the force of
instruments. I will finish this part with the first of all the miracles which
S. Bernard wrought.

The venerable Abbot, returned from a certain Monastery called Three
fountaynes, which was in truth the first which he founded, and behold a
Messenger in have, comes running on the way very anxious, acquainting him how
in a Castle at hand, by name Firmita, a kinsman of his called Guisbert, lay in
extreme danger of death, having lost his speech before he was able to be
confessed. This same was a noble and rich man, and withal a great usurper of
others goods, and of a very ill conscience. Whence through the just judgment of
God, he was ready to depart this life without the viatique. At which tidings S.
Bernard as soon as he had commodity of a Church did celebrate the Mass, and
prayed for him, and at the same hour (as was known afterward in reckoning the
times) G^bert returning into himself, brake silence, and began with tear^ to
bewail his sins: but scarcely had S. Bernard finished the Mass, but he fell
dumb again, and presently thereupon arrived S. Bernard with Gerard his
brother, and Galdricus their uncle: and much instance being made to the Abbot
by the friends and kindred that he would be pleased to pray for the sick man;
lifting up his mind to God, and touched by the holy Ghost, he answered with all
libety: you know how much evil this man has done, and how much he holds of
other men's goods; let him, and his children make restitution, and renounce the
wicked customs introduced, and satisfy the wrongs he has done to the poor,
and so doing, he shall dye like a Christian.

The standers by were all astonished at these words, and at so firm a
promise, not knowing yet the mighty power which God communicated to S. Bernard;
and the brother and uncle were more affrighted then the rest, for fear least
being deceived by some illusion or craft of the enemy, he proceeded too far
to undertake so much. But immediately the success showed the contrary: for
that due restitution being made by the Gentleman and his sons; that tongue so
tied before began suddenly to be unloosed, and G^bert being confessed with much
contrition, not ceasing ever to ki^ the Abbots hands, devoutly received the
most holy Eucharist, and adjoining thereunto the holy Oil, with all the other
ceremonies that belong to that time, the night following, with great
edification of all, and all with much hope of eternal salvation, he dyed.

In testimony of the Catholic faith, S. Bernard cures all the sick and
infirm, with holy bread: and miraculously heales one afflicted with the
Palsy. Chap. 21.
LEt us now come to his Cures: of which so great a number, w^ will take two
examples only, which to every right iudgme^ may suffice for a thousand. When
the man of God went his waye^ into the parts of Toulouse, to oppose (as we
said) against the impious endeauours of Henry the Apostata, it chanced that he
preach^ in a certain place called Sarlat: the sermon being ended, those good
people came and brought him bread to bless, which he lifting up his hand, and
making the sign of the Cross in the name of God blessing it, said: By this
shall you see, my Children, how true are the things which we instruct you in,
and how false those which our adversaries seek to let you understand; to wit,
if your sick with tasting of this bread shall be all cured or no. At his word
remained the Bishop of Chartres there present in some suspense, and with good
zeal fearing the proposition might be too universal, modifyed the same with
adding to the hearers: you must understand,] they shall be cured in tasting
thereof with a good faith; When the holy Father confiding and secure of the
divine power replied bouldly: My Lord, I speak not in that manner, nor do not
add any such condition thereunto, but I say in truth, and as the words sound,
That as many sick as taste thereof, shallbe all freed of their infirmityes, to
the end at least that hence all men, may come to acknowledge us to be the
undoubted, and true Ambassador of the eternal God. According to the word the
effect followed, as many as did eat of that bread, were all cured without
exception: whereof the same flew on a sudden through all the province, and so
great was the concourse of people desirous to see and adore the servant of
Christ, as that in his return from Sarlat to Toulouse, to shun the press,
and to have passage, it behooved him to turn out of the way with all secrecy.

At the very same time, and in the self same Countries, there lay in the
College of the Clarks of S. Saturninus, one sick of the palsy that was
incurable, called also by the name of Bernard, so pined therewith and worn
away as he seemed daily even ready to give up the Ghost. The Abbot of
Clareuallis, was besought now by the Superior and by the others of that place,
that he would daigne to go and see that miserable wretch: The Man of God did
so, he went in have, and benignely comforted the sick man, and having given
him the wonted benediction, he went forth of the Cell with particular desire,
that the divine Clemency in confirmation of the Catholic doctrine, and
confusion of the obstinate, would affoard some not^ble demonstration, in this
man's extreme and evident peril Our Lord accepted the good will of his servant.
He had hardly departed thence, when he saw himself overtaken by the Clarke;
Who feeling his nerves on a sudden restored to him, and his joints confirmed,
slipping out of his bed, followed the Abbot apace, until ouertaking him, at
last he casts himself at his feet, kissing the^ with much devotion, and with
affectuous thanksgiving. Whereupon by chance, one of his Colleagues meeting
with him, who had left him the other day near death, and with one foot in the
grave, he was filled with so great horror, as he was ready to fly from him, as
it were from a Ghost; nor to stay until he were certifyed, and secured by
diverse of the truth.

The same had happened doubtless to many others besides; but the fame of the
admirable success being sudenly spread, took away all suspicion quite; and
the people with the Bishop and Apostolical Legate, came striving to behold and
enjoy so new a spectacle; and after went altogether into the Church, to give
due praises to Almighty God, through whose power he atcheiued al these things;
the Clarke himself going before all, singing with full voice together with
the rest: Who being afterward no less sollicitous for his spiritual health,
then glad of his corporal, not only very willingly accompanied the Saint to
Clareuallis, but likewise submitting himself to his Obedience, took there the
habit of Cisterce, and giving good demonstration of prudence, and of Religion;
was sent back again by the glorious Father into his Country, with title of
Abbot of the Monastery called Valdacque. This fact like wise was very famous,
and stopped the mouths of all the Heretics there abouts.

S. Bernard dispossesseth two women very grievously infected with evil
spiritts, in the City of Milan. Chap. 22.
LEt us now pass to the power and command which the Saint had over wicked
spirits; and in this so ample a subject, we will set down like wise two only
examples thereof, which shall serve for sufficient conjecture, and consideration
of the rest, b^ing able otherwise to say truly, that no person obsessed, or
possessed through secret pacts, by those malignant and unclean Substances,
appeared ever before S. Bernard for help, that was not quit and delivered from
the infernal tyranny. And though on every side, and at all times, there were
occasions to use the exorcismes of the Church, notwithstanding during the
schism of Pierlonio, it seems the adversary of humane kind, had through
divine judgment obtained particular license in the city of Milan, to seduce
(as we said above) the followers and ministers of the Antipope.

Here then besides many other signs, wrought through divine power by means
of this fervent Labourer: one morning as he was celebrating Mass in the Church
of S. Ambrose, with an exceeding great concourse of people, there was presented
to him by her parents a little Girl of tender age, in whom the Devil most
tyrannically reigned, and he was prayed with great instance to take pity of
that unhappy Wretch, and deliver her from so cruel torments, which appeared by
the shreekes and cries she gave, and in her countenance and in all the parts
of her body, with the exceeding horror of the standers by. The tender heart of
the good Priest was moved with these prayers, and such a spectacle: who sitting
near to the Altar, while the Quire was singing, called for the Patten whereon
he was to make the Offertory, and with his fingar distilling some drops of
water thereon, he gave it to the possessed person to drink, and immediately the
Devil not able to suffer that sacred Antidote, and that blessed effusion, by
means of a foul and nauseous vomit, very hastily departed, and the Girl with
infinite applause and admiration of the people was restored to her Parents safe
and secure.

After this, upon another day, in the self same place and hour, was a
gentlewoman of mature age brought thither by many with main strength, in whose
breast now for many years Satan had remained, and so disfigured and deformed
her, as that being deprived of hearing, sight, and speech, in putting forth the
tongue, like an Elephants truncke seemed rather a Monster then a woman; besides
which, the face all soyled and ugly to see, with a stinking breath withal,
showed well the quality of the Ghest that kept possession. Being brought then
into the presence of the Saint, he knew at first sight, through divine
permission, that enemy was of an evil and cruel race, and so inueterate and
settled in her, as he would not easily be got forth of so grateful, and so
ancient a dominion. Then the servant of Christ, turning to the people which
were there in great number, bad them all to pray very attentively, and
commanded the Clerks to hold the Woman there as firm and immovable as they
could: but she with devilish force resisting and kicking withal, with her
foot came to strike the Priest himself, who not regarding the same, entered
into the consecration in such manner, as look how many signs of the Cross he
made upon the host, so many in turning himself he made upon the possessed
person, with the incredible rage, and dolor of that fiend, as by the gnashing
of teeth, and sundry, and those strange, gestures and roaringes and struglinges
she made, most manifestly appeared.

After which the Pater noster being said, the Priest began again to give a
more shrewd assault to the adversary, with likewise holding the Paten, with the
body it self of our Lord over the Matrons head, and sayng: Behold here, O
wicked spirit, thy judge; behold the supreme power, now resist, if thou can;
behold him, who being to suffer for our salvation, affirmed that then the
Prince of this world was to be banished hence; here is that sacred body, which
being taken from the body of a holy Virgin, extended on the Cross, put into a
Sepulcher, and risen from death, ascended triumphant into heaven. So then in
the power of this Majesty, O malignant spirit, I do command thee to leave this
his servant, and not dare to molest her more. That said, and the host
(according to the use) being divided into three parts, he gave the Pax to the
Monster: which peace and health diffused by him, through all the congregation
with particular influence did even penetrate into the soul and body of the
possessed, because the unjust and pertinacious possessour went forth immediately
from her, declaring thereby of what efficacy and value the Sacrament of the
Altar is, especially being handled with the purity and faith it deserves. And
it may be well believed with good reason, that this Devil with whom so much
tampering was used, was one of the chiefest of the Hellish squadrons, since
others of a lower rank not only used to fly away very fearfully from the
coniurations used, and presence of the servant of Christ; but even also from
his Stole, though he himself had by^ distant far off, as from an object
intolerable to him, and a most grievous punishment. Such, and so great was the
sanctity of S. Bernard.

S. Bernard with prayers delivers a soul from pains: with other notable
Visions besides, that happened to him. Chap. 23.
IT follows now that we touch something of the Visions, i^ which, either he
appeared to others, or others appeared to him. And be that the first, which
himself afterward was wont to tell unto others. A certain Monk of a good
intention but of harsh conversation, and less compassionate to his neighbors
then he oughe to have been, in the Monastery of Clareuallis came to the end of
his days, and a little after appeared to the holy Abbot with sad countenance
and a miserable habit, signifying that matters went not very well with him.
Being asked the particular, he added with dolourous accents, that he was given
up into the power of huge, and cruel Elfes; he had scarcely said so much, when
being pushed with a fury, and chased away from the face of the servant of God,
he suddenly vanished. Then the Saint with a sigh and compassion as behooved,
said, calling after him with a loud voice: I command thee in the name of the
Highest, to return to me again within few days, to tell me how thou farest.
From hence applying himself to help that soul with prayers and sacrifices, he
never gave over until such time as the dead himself appearing once more
according to the precept given him, did comfort him with the happy news of his
delivery.

S. Bernard found himself on a certain time in a strange manner to be grieved
and oppressed with an excess of cold humors, so as a gush of fleame
continually running from him, soon brought that body, nigh worn and spent
already, to a manifest point of death. His children and other Deuotes do
gather about him, as it were to prepare the exequyes, and he being in excess
of mind, seems to himself to be brought unto the Tribunal of Christ, where
the ancient adversary was likewise present most outragiously accusing him. The
accusation ended, and space given to the servant of Christ to plead and defend
himself, not showing the while any sign of perturbation at all, thus
answered: I do confess I am not worthy of eternal glory, nor of the heavenly
kingdom; but my Lord who possesses the same by a double title, that is, by
paternall inheritance, and painful purchase, contenting himself with the one
of the two titles, of the other makes a liberal gift to me, and in virtue of
this devotion, I do with reason aspire thereunto. At which answer the enemy
was confounded, that form of judgment and tribunal vanished, and the man of
God without any more returned to himself again.

Another time he beheld himself at the Sea side, expecting a ship to pass
over, the ship came and approached to him: but being to leap therinto, it
suddenly gave back; so did it thrice together, and at last leaving him on the
shore, it went away without returning any more: so as S. Bernard easily
gathered, that the hour of his passage was not yet come, notwithstanding his
dolours continued so much more sharp and irksome, as he had less hope to be
hastily rid thereof. Now it happened in the evening, that all the other Monks
going according to custom to the lesson which was made of the collations of
the ancient Fathers, the two only assistants of the Abbot remained there, and
he being continually more afflicted and tormented with the malady, bad one of
them to go into the Church to pray for him. There were three Altars in the said
Church, one of the Blessed Virgin, and at the sides thereof two others, to wit,
of S. Laurence, and of S. Benet; making prayer then at all three, even at the
instant the glorious Mother of God accompanied with those two Saints, with such
a suauity and serenity, as may rather be imagined then described, entered into
^e sick man's Cell, so manifestly, as he, with full and perfect knowledge could
easily distinguish each person. Thence she approaching to him, and touching
softy all the places of the pains, immediately all malignant qualityes
vanished, that rhew matique spring in the same moment being quite dyed up,
whence grew the dolours.

Diverse examples where S. Bernard in his life time appeared to many, remaining
in places far remote. Chap. 24.
THe foresaid apparitions were made by others unto S. Bernard: now follow some
of him to others, of which number one was to brother Robert of the order of
Cisterce. This man at such time as the venerable Abbot remained in the City of
Rome, fell deadly sick at Clareuallis. In that state appeared to him a young
man like to the infirmarian, commanding him to go along with him, and so
doing he was straight conducted to the top of a high mountain where Christ was
encompassed round with Angels, who said to his guide: look well to that man
there; and withal he put a message into the sickmans heart to deliver the
Convent of Clareuallis. The morning being come, he sits upright in his bed,
whom every one held to be quite dead, and calling for Don Gaudfrid as then
Priour, that was afterward Bishop of Langres, among other things said
clearly to him: Our Lord commands you to erect great buildings to contain
the multitude of people, which he is to send you, and for the same end give
order that our Brothers who have care of the possessions and tenements be
mindful of modesty, and endeavor to give good example to seculars, for woe be
to him, through whose default any one should come to fall. From hence twenty
days being passed, the sick man still remaining quite forsaken of the
Physicians, S. Bernard appeared to him in his cell in spirit, paternally
visiting him, sung there the mattyns with a good number of brothers, and passed
all that night with him: and the morning being come, Robert without any more
ado, arose up sound, and faithfully recounted the manner how he escaped so
great a danger. A notable event surely; but this other is no less worthy of
memory.

The servant of God lay sick in Clareuallis, more worn and decayed with
labors and infirmityes, then years; how beyt he ceased not to attend to the
government of his Monks, and to feed them with the word of God, and to rise
likewise every day to celebrate Mass, which he never omitted but of mere
necessity, reviving his afflicted members with the fervor of spirit. In this
while it so happened, that he was feign to send some person of quality into
some more remote parts of Germany about matters of importance. For which
enterprise a German Monk was elected, by name Henry, whom with many other
subjects the same holy Father some six years before in his return from
Constance, had induced to the divine service. This man entering into so long a
voyage, especially in the midst of winter, as one with reason indeed feared
many disasters, and above all he doubted, least the venerable Abbot might come
to dye in the mean time, and he remain defrauded and deprived of his last
benediction. But the holy Father blessing him for the present and saying: Go
thy ways in Gods name, for thou shall return safe, and shall further find me
as thou desire: and so sent him away full of comfort.

Being arrived in the territory of Strasburge, as he was passing over a river
all frozen with Ice, his beast stumbled, and he without remedy fell quite over
head and ears in the water. What could the poor wretch do here being
plundged beneath in the waters, above covered with Ice, and both back and sides
being dashed with the current? He had surely no comfort but merely the promise
of the holy Father, by whom indeed he was not deceived. Because in that agony
he saw him before him, and was so full of consolation withal, that now he selt
not the violence of the river, nor any difficulty of breathing, nor finally
fear, nor any manner of disease at all. Hereupon forsaking the beast he was
on, through divine power, he found himself to be pushed softly against the
stream without any force of his to the same breach, which with his fall he had
made, where taking hold with his hands on the edge of the Ice he escaped; he
returned very safe and sound to Clareuallis, and for a full accomplishment of
joy and contentment, had the wished favor to see his most dear and desired
Master again, to whom he showed himself very grateful and obsequious, not
only as long as he lived, but even also after the death of S. Bernard in
frequenting his sepulcher, and there most devoutly making his prayers.

Surely a large matter of discourse for him that would compare this with other
such like meruayles. But let us, leaving this artificiousnes to Orators,
content our selves with the naked and simple truth. Besides what has been
said, it is also reported for a thing most certain, that the vigilant Prelate
in the government of his order through diverse Monasteryes very far asunder
and remote from him, gave many commissions and precepts of things, which
through human means he could no ways come to understand, in so much as though
absent in person, notwithstanding (as it is read likewise of S. Benet, and
other servants of God) with the spirit he seemed to be present at the actions
and proceedings of his Monks. The which revelations albeit Deuines ascribe to
the gift of Prophecy; yet we restrayning the sense of this word, and applying
it only unto presage and prediction of future things, shall demonstrate, that
to S. Bernard also (among other titles) this same so precious a gift was not
wanting.

Some examples of the admirable gift of Prophecy, and discretion of spirit in
S. Bernard. Chap. 25.
THat troop of choice young men, which, as at the beginning we mentioned, S.
Bernard in the city of Chalon purchased to our Lord, were almost all of them
in worldly wisdom the disciples of one Stephen of Vitreo, a person very
famous in those days and Country thereabouts. Now being come to Clareuallis,
while they were yet kept by the man of God in an Inn, as it were in their
first probation, and instructed by little and little in the rules of the divine
service, comes in Stephen of Vitreo, beyond all expectation, and demands to be
likewise received into monastical discipline. It is the manner of those who
have newly left and forsaken the secular hopes and affairs, to feel
incredible iubiley of heart, when they behold some others to do the like;
whether it be, through that new zeal which the beginning of spirit
subministred to them; or else for that they take delight to have their election
approved by the judgment and example of many: so as at the unlooked for
appearing of no ordinary subject, but even of their own so famous a Master,
it cannot be told what great contentment those good Brothers took, and what
joy they made both private and public. But the mind and judgment of the wise
Abbot in this point was so far otherwise. Who by divine advise knowing
suddenly the quality of his vocation, first sighing held his peace, then in the
presence of all, he said: This man is sent hither by the evil spirit, he comes
without a companion, and without a companion he shall go his ways again. At
this speech of his, they were astonished and amazed, who even now could not
contain themselves for joy: nevertheless not to scandalize those tender
plants S. Bernard was content to admit Stephen upon trial, especially making
large promises to observe very punctually the rule, and to execute with all
promptnes whatsoever should be ordained him. But it was not long ere being
overcome with the tediousnes of silence and of solitude, being affrighted with
the rigor of the observance, and weary of the exercises, and mental labors,
he was seen to be drawn forth of the Oratory by a vile Black-more, as
heretofore was that Monk of Cassin. From hence after some six months were
passed, repenting himself of the good begun, he endeauours to attempt, and to
stir up others, according to the manner of Religious men ill grounded and
mutable, who being resolved to leave the banners of Christ, and to return to
the leekes of Egypt, think to cover their shame with the multitude of
companions, and to diminish the infamy by communicating the fault: but neither
he, nor he that set him a work could effect the same. Because all those
souls, through the preservative infused into them by the faithful and prudent
Steward, still remained where they were, firm and immovable, and according to
the protestation of the holy Pastor, that unhappy Stephen de Vitreo did but
travail in vain. He entered alone, and alone went forth again. Nor was the
prophesy which follows much unlike.

Three young men having taken the habit together in Clareuallis one of them
through instigation of the devil, within a little while after returned to his
vomit again. Whereupon the Fathers being so much more anxious for the health
of the other two, in their presence treated of this matter with the holy Abbot.
Then he looking in the face of both those Nouices, answered plainly: This man
shall never have temptations of moment. That other shall have many, but shall
finally prevail. The one then with a prosperous gale went always forward in
religion. The other being encompassed with tribulations, and assailed with
perilous assaults, after he had wauered more then once, and turned his back as
it were, yet being sustained by divine grace, and through the memory of the
Saints promises, victorious at last was crowned with perseverance. Of these
kind of Oracles this same that follows was so much more famous, as it was
published upon a greater occasion, and in a place more notable, and with
persons more illustrious.

Jews the old King France, being greiuously offended with some Bishops of that
kindome, suffered himself to be led so far into p^sion, as to expel them by
force from their Churches and Cittyes. Whereupon S. Bernard, wrote many letters
to him to appease him, whose coppyes are yet kept to this day. It chanced the
while, the servant of Christ being present, that many of those Bishops, to
mollify the Kings mind prostrate with all humility on the ground, and embracing
his feet, were not all able to move him to pity. The man of God touched with
this spectacle, and full of a holy zeal stuck not the day following to give a
free and stout reprehension to the King himself, for having in that manner
despised the submission, and prayers of the Priests of Christ, and clearly
made protestation of that which was revealed to him, that night. This thy
obstinacy shall cost thee the death of Philip thy eldest son, and sworn
Prince. I have seen thee, in company of thy younger son fall prostrate at the
feet of those Bishops, whom but yesterday thou made so small account of:
Collecting thence, that soon thou shall loose Philip, and for substitution of
this other, thou shall sue to the Prelates, whom now thou use so hardly,
Which was not long ere it came to pass. Philip dyed, and the Father being
humbled, wrought by all means with the Ecclesiastical state, that Jews the
second borne might be accepted for Successor, and be anointed with accustomed
ceremonies. And so much may suffice of matters said or done by this admirable
man above all force or term of nature: of which subject notwithstanding,
though perhapps by us too sparingly and scantly handled, yet it is much harder
for us to find an end, then how to begin.

The great Humility of S. Bernard in avoiding worldly praises and hhnours, and
the pious shift he used to acquit himself thereof. Chap. 26.
OF all that which we have hitherto written, or left untouched, two things do
most astonish me. The one how S. Bernard amidst so great variety of universal
businesses mainetayned himself always as Lord and Master of himself,
without neglecting ever the custody of his heart, and continual examine of his
actions; and always walking therein so vigilant and provident, as if even then
from the shade of the Nouiciate he had past forth into the dust, and sun of
Christian warfarre. The other wonder is, how among so many favors from heaven,
and applauses of men, he never abandoned the confines and center of holy
Humility; and this seems to me to be the principal cause why continually from
the divine hand were showred upon him so excellent gifts, and so rare and
incomparable graces: because that even as there is nothing which of its part,
more dryes up the fountains of the divine benignity, then Pride and Arrogance,
in whose company Ingratitude goes hand in hand: so is there not a nearer and
more apt disposition, to become capable of that souueraigne liberality, then
Modesty, and to think humbly of ones self. With which as we see also in human
things, a devout will, and a solicitous care of thanksgiving go commonly
united. The great servant of God would discourse highly, as well of this as of
other heroical virtues, and among other celestial sentences he was wont to
utter, he would say: The true humble man desires not to be held for humble, but
vile and abject, and that surely with reason, since to the magnanimity of the
Gentiles corresponds, though in a more eminent degree, the humility of
Christians, whose property is to hide and conceal their own praises as much
as may be: though humility outwardly be obscure and neglected, yet inwardly
being quaint and well decked, it shines so after, as all, either first or last,
in fixing their eyes thereon, do admire it without end. But how S. Bernard
despised from the heart to be prized and reverenced of the world, may be
manifestly known by that which I shall tell.

Perceauing before hand, how they went about to make him a Bishop, he very
dexterously procured that the other Abbo^ of his Order, unto whom (as has
been said above) he had made profession to owe obedience, should obtain an
Apostolical Bre^e, wherein it should be commanded them, that if it happened,
the Man of God were requested of their Congregation for any Prelacy forth
thereof, they might deny it by all means, and not seem at the petition of
others to despoyle themselves of such a guide, and so great a Pastor. And this
preserua^iue of his, was very efficacious, because that S. Bernard indeed with
full confent of all the Citize^ and Clergy was first chosen Bishop of Langres,
then of Chalo^, anon of Rhemes, and of most noble Cittyes in France and
Flanders. Moreover also in Italy he was required for Archbishop of Milan, and
of (...): and from all these Co^munityes and Republiques had come Ambassadors
for the same effect. With whom to diminish the opinion of sanctity, which is
wont to grow of such refusalls; the servant of Christ would answer no more,
but that he was not of his own power, but subject wholly to the Cistercian
Abbots; they might go unto them, and he would do what they should determine.
So as remitting all to those Fathers, they without respect through common
accord gave always a precise and peremtory repulse.

The great Honors affoarded S. Bernard by all sorts of people: with the (...)
blessed end he made. Chap. 27.
THus had S. Bernard fully his intent to put off the marks and Ensigns of
Honors, but yet could not with this so escape and free himself from the glory
of them, which like the shadow (according to the ancient Proverb) follows men
flying, and men following it, flies. Because notwithstanding all the repugnance
he could make, and felt therein, he was always in such credit and reputation,
as it may securely be affirmed, that the majesty of one poor and simple Abbot
seemed to parallel with the crest and altitude of any degree, title, and
dignity whatsoever. And peradventure when the ancient and modern historyes be
all turned over, there shall not be found any, who yet living in mortal flesh
was so much reverenced in presence, and renowned so in absence: forasmuch as
not only private persons, or some Communityes, but even Kings. Princes, and
Popes also would recurre to him in their greatest difficultyes, to him put
their strifes and controuersyes of most importance to compromise: and finally
from him expected nothing, but succor, justice, and truth. Not only from
neighbor Provinces, but even from the furthest parts of Europe, as from the
utmost confines of Spain, Ireland, Denmark, Sueueland received he Letters
full of reverence, and loving presents also, in sign of memory and devotion.

Wheresoever he went, he was reverenced of all, as sent from Paradise, and with
great faith the infirm, and afflicted with any calamity soever, were presented
to him for succor. Bread and water by him blessed, were kept as certain
Antidotes against all evils, and with great industry were sought for from the
furthest parts. The shreds of his garments, or whatsoever he had worn, were
held for wholesome, and venerable Relics. It cannot be expressed what concourse
and multitudes of people there were, wheresoever he was, or went any way. He
could not appear in Rome, but the people and Court would be about him. In
Milan and in other places of Lombardy, he was constrained for the great press
to shut up himself in his Inn, and to be seen by the people at grates and
windows to give them his benediction. In passing over the Alps, when he went,
or returned from Rome, whole troops and familyes of shepherds and swaynes,
would descend from those rocks and ^ops of mountains to meet him, crying out
aloud a far off, and ^imbing up the clifts, and showing themselves on the
highest places ^here to have his benediction, and from thence retire them
again unto their Cotages, making great joy and vaunts for being worthy ^o
behold that angelical face, and for their good to have the Saints ^ight hand
extended so upon them.

In the City of Spire, the Man of God having wrought some ^otable wonders,
there came so great a multitude of people about him, as Conrade himself King
of the Romans, was forced to lay off ^is robe, to carry him with his own arms
out of the Church for ^eare he might be oppressed and smothered in the crowd.
And when he passed into Mets for the pacification we mentioned above, he was
one day among others environed by such number of people, as it was needful for
his followers to embarque him with great dexterity in the river of Mosella, and
there in resemblance of the Savior of the world, he ceased not to exhort and
assist the people. And this was the last of the public actions of S. Bernard.

For that peace, being made in that Province, and the minds of men reconciled
among themselves, returning to Clareuallis he felt himself to grow sick of a
mortal infirmity, wherein yet every day he approached to the end of this life,
with so much sweetenes of spirit, as if now already sailing in the port, by
little and little, he were taking down the tacklings, and striking sail. And
because the Monks with tears and prayers besought the divine Majesty, not to
take away their loving Master from them he tenderly complained with them, for
prolonging by that means his exile, and depriving him of the desired sight of
his Redeemer and Lord: finally he became so feeble of his stomach, through
failing of the natural heat, as that blessed soul being not able longer to
uphold and govern the worn and decayed members, flew directly to tho^ mansions
of heaven, whereon he had ever his eye fixed, on the 20. day of August, in the
year of our Lord 1153. leaving by his means founded more then 160.
Monasteryes of the family of Cisterce, among which, in the Convent only of
Clareuallis lived 770. servants Christ. He was deposed some two days after his
departure, with a little case on his breast, wherein the Relics of S. Thadeus
the Apostle were contained, being sent him that very year from ^rusalem, the
man of God so ordayning it, with hope and intention to be united with the
Apostle in the day of the Resurrection.

The mourning and concourse of people at so dolorous a new^ the preparation of
the Exequies which followed; the intercessios made at his shrine, were a matter
more easy for the pious and p^dent Reader to imagine, then for us to describe.
The holy Father (as his most sweet writings demonstrate) had a perpetual and
most singular devotion toward the most blessed Virgin, the Mother of God. In
so much, as with reason it is believed, how from that inexhaustible treasure of
celestial riches, he drew the talents and graces, which made him so grave and
composed in his person* so acceptable to the divine Majesty, so helpful, so
wise, and admirable to the world.

FINIS.
S. HVGH.
THE ARGUMENT.
Physicians say, Diseases faster grow
Whose moving causes our complexions feed:
Whom most we trust, most dangerous is the Foe,
Spite is more fell, atty^d in freindships weed;
And sooner it procures our overthrow,
Then that which does from open foes proceed.
For arms, or laws, or friends prevent the one,
The other God himself must shield, or none.
More dangerous are allurements which we love,
And with our perils do like serpents warm:
Worldly delights, neglecting those above,
Because most present, most our souls do harm.
This I discovering plainly, ever strove
To free my self, and others from the charm
Of that Enchauntresse, whose endearments bring
Eternal grief, pains ever torturing.
THE LIFE OF S. HVGH BISHOP OF LINCOLN.
The Parentage and Minority of S. Hugh: with his Vocation, and entrance into
the Charter House at Grenoble. Chap. I.
THe blessed Hugh, whose life and manners we take in hand, was nobly borne in
the parts of Burgundy. His Father was a valiant Captain, fearing God, and
living well contented with his Pay. There was not far off from a Castle of
his, a Monastery of Canon-Regulars, to whom he was much devoted. Here as
soon as he was deprived of his Wife, he placed his son, who was about some
eight years old, that from his tender years, under spiritual standarts, he
might accustom himself unto Christian warfarre. S. Hugh was very willingly
received by those good Fathers, and put over to a venerable old man, who was to
instruct him in learning, and religious discipline. This man with a reverent
gravity, first premonished him to beware of licencious and light sports, and to
endeavor to anticipate the benefit of time, with maturity of manners, and
sometimes would say unto him: Hugh, I train thee up for Christ, these sportes
become thee not. And his admonitio^s were not in vain: the holy Ghost found
such disposition in him of wit and purity, as he was soon replenished with
wisdom, and understanding, whence in short time, he came to be very grateful
to God, and most dear to men. In the mean while, the Knight his Father
touched with heavenly inspiration, leaving the world, retired himself into the
same Monastery, and there attended to the service of God unto his lives end.

But S. Hugh, as soon as he arrived to the nineteenth year of his age, at the
instance of the whole Convent, having taken all the holy Orders, except
Priesthood, was applied by Superiors to the help of a certain Parish, in
which office he bare himself in such sort, as every one framed a high conceit
of his sanctity and prudence: but our Lord willing to lead him to a life of
stricter observance, and of greater merit, disposed that his Priour, going for
devotion as he was wont, to visit the Charter House of Grenoble, took S. Hugh
in his company, who making his prayer, and now entered in the Cloister, in
beholding partly the solitude and silence, partly also the semblance and
manners of the Monks, felt immediately such an ardent desire of passing unto
the same Rule to enkingle in his breast, as not being able by any means to
conceal, or endure the flame, he began presently to make secret practices, and
to entreat the Fathers one by one to vouchsafe to admit him into their
Institute.

His Priour was aware hereof, and calling him aside with dolourous sighs and
tears in his eyes: O my beloved Son (said he) I see well now, and perceive
too well, I have brought thee hither to my great mishap, and the irreparable
loss of my whole flock. And as soon as they returned home again, he
discovered all to the Chanons, and especially to the Father of S. Hugh,
entreating him with great feeling, to put some remedy to so great a cross.
This being once understood, they run presently to the young man, and more
fully informed themselves of the nouelty from his own mouth, and finally
pressed him so hard, as they made him to promise with an Oath, that he would
not forsake them. To which purpose, by how much S. Hugh condescended against
his will, so much more troublesome and sharp pricks of conscience, and
scuples felt he in himself: on the one side, the touches of a more high
vocation ceased not to molest him, and with reason feared he to constrist are
the holy Ghost, in resisting so: on the other, he was opposed against by
fraternall charity, and the promise he had made with an oath. S. Hugh being
assaulted a good while with this contrariety of spirits, after many prayers and
considerations, was satisfied at last, that he was not tied to the observance
of his word and promise, which hindered him from the greater service of God,
and his own perfection. With this resolution being now returned very quiet
again to the Charter House, he did so efficaciously a new express his
desires, as those Religious men admiring so constant a teruour of his, without
more delay admitted him.

S. Hugh is made Priest; then Procuratour of the house of Grenoble; and lastly
sent for into England by the King there. Chap. 2.
THe soldier of Christ, being now entered into a new war, begins to feel
new battles, all which notwithstanding through divine succor to him, were a
subject to him of glorious triumphs. Especially he was molested day and night
by the concupiscible part, nevertheless to conserve his Virginity, he ceased
not to macerate his flesh with abstinences, vigils, scourges, and other
mortifications; yet sometimes refreshed with consolations again, and with
heavenly sweetness, with which means, and with humble and continual prayer, at
last the fiery shafts of the enemy were quite extinguished. A midst these
labors, the time of Priesthood approaching, a venerable, old man (whom S.
Hugh according to the custom of the Order, through charity and submission
devoutly served) demanded of him, if he were willing to be a Priest or no!
Whereunto he having sincerely answered, that for his part there was nothing in
the world he desired more; to whom the old man replying with a severe
countenance. And how dare thou aspire to a degree whereto none, how holy
soever, but through constrain is worthily advanced? At this reprehension S.
Hugh being terrifyed falling flat on the ground, with tears in his eyes,
suddenly craved pardon; at which humility of his, the Master being tender, and
touched with the spirit of prophecy said: Rise up my son, rise up, do not
trouble thy self, I know very well with what effect, and with what intention
thou vtteredst such words: and I tell thee moreover, and affirm it to thee
without all doubt, that ere long, thou shall be a Priest, and within a certain
time after shall thou be a Bishop also. At which presage of his, the good
disciple full of blushing, and confusion held his peace, and a little after
being promoted to the dignity of the Altar, prepared himself with most exact
diligence to the sacrifice, and with the same continuing to celebrate, not only
slackened not, but augmented his spiritual exercises, and his accustomed
mortifications, whence he took such a weakness of stomach, as ever after
afflicted him sorely; for the obligation of the rule, and the public
assemblies of the Quire, the Chapter, and the like, was he ever the first,
endeavoring in all things, yea even in the least, to edify as many, as
conuersed with him.

In this manner, having passed in his private Cell, and priestly ministry
about ten years, the principal Procuratourship of the house, being a charge
amongst those Religious of no light importance, was by Superiors imposed upon
him, and which to S. Hugh laid open a new field to exercise his excellent
Virtues in. Because he understanding very well, how from his care and
vigilance, depended the Religious quiet, and contemplative life of the others,
abandoning quite for the love of Christ his own consolations, attended with
extraordinary care, unto all the parts of Economy, and of a perfect Steward,
making provisions in good times, preventing the necessityes of every one, and
especially of the sick; surueying, and reuiewing the accounts of the
Officialls and Factours, improuing continually the possessions, defending and
conseruing the rights and rents, and all in such manner, and with that
maturity, as well gave the world to understand, how far he was from all
particular interest.

For these so rare qualityes, in short time his fame was spread even to the
remotest Countries,; and Henry the second King of England, who in those days,
was upon founding a Monastery of Carthusians at VVhitam, and through the ill
condition of that neighborhood, could not bring the matter to any good pass:
after he had with small fruit applied two Priours of the Order upon the
enterprise; being finally moved with the constant relation of the worth, and
sanctity of S. Hugh, not failed to send in post, to that end, very honorable
personages to the aforesaid Charterhouse of Grenoble (and among them Reginald
Bishop of Bath) to require him for this office. To which purpose, those Fathers
being assembled together, there followed an earnest dispute among them, while
to some it seemed not just or reasonable, for any ones sake whosoever to
deprive their own house of so firm a propp, and others judging on the
contrary, and with lively reasons demonstrating, how it became not Christian
charity, and the Evangelical profession, to have the eye fixed upon the
commodityes only of one family, and to keep that virtue enclosed in so little a
space, which might be extended for the benefit and salvation of foraine
nations, with the great augmentation of the divine glory.

Among such contentions had for a while, to and fro, of no light moment, that
Part prevailed at last which would the public and universal, should be
preferred before the private; and that they ought not, with so harsh a repulse
provoke the displeasure of so great a King. In this manner S. Hugh, being
otherwise an enemy to Prelacy, and who protested himself to be wholly
insufficient for such a charge, was by Superiors constrained to take it upon
him: and not without much tears, departing from his dear Cloister in company
of the said Ambassadors, he arrived sale and sound at the coasts of England.
From thence without going to the Court, trauayling by the nearest way to
VVhittam, the first thing he endeavored to do, was with a cheerful
countenance, and with fit exhortations to comfort those few afflicted Monks
whom he found there: and being afterward sent for by letters unto the Kings
prefence, through divine favor he had such grace in the eyes of that Majesty,
as that after diverse discourses thereof, he brought away both for the present
and future necessities, a very large provision of all things; and besides
could tell how to use such dexterity with that people, and so to purchase their
love and good opinion, as that from harsh, contumacious, and froward, in short
time they became very gentle, obedient and tractable: whereby very easily both
the Church became more enriched through divine offices, and the house to be the
better accommodated for the sustentation of the Monks, and for the splendor
and ornament of the place the fabricque to be finished; while S. Hugh labored
thereat with his own hands, and carrying, for example and public
edification, stones and mortar on his shoulders: in so much, as many seculars
being invited, partly by his sweet and sanctified manners, and partly also
through a gust of a retired life, and of the commodity of the buildings there,
abandoning the cares of the world, and renouncing the proper liberty, came
thither to consecrate themselves unto God, and by vow to oblige themselves unto
monastical discipline.

The King with his whole army at Sea, is delivered, by commending himself to
the prayers of S. Hugh. Chap. 3.
THe king of England, took no small comfort at these proceedings, he rejoiced
much, in that he was not deceived awhit in his judgment in the election of such
a one. And (as he was a wise and prudent King) having very often familiar and
long discourses with the Priour, the more he diued into him, the greater
esteem made he, not only of his prudence, but of his piety and perfection
also, holding it a great happynes, to have such a man in his Kingdom, and
placing a good part of his hopes in his devout intercessions and suffrages: as
among other times, he clearly showed, when as returning with a great Army,
from the enterprise of France, he was suddenly assailed with so cruel a
tempest, as the fury of the winds illuding all the art of the Mariners; they
all betook themselves, as many as were with him, according to custom, to
vows and prayers; and the King notwithstanding perceauing the waves to grow
more rough, brake forth at last into these words: O if my good Hugh of the
Charter-howse, were now aware of this, and would make fervent prayer for us, as
he was wont, the divine mercy would not be so slow to our succor. And a little
after, with other sighs he gave not over, but added: O blessed God, whom the
Priour of VVhittam truly serves, vouchsafe through the merits and intercession
of thy faithful servant, with the eye of pity, to reguard our distress, and
afflictions. And behold the invocation was scarcely finished, but a calm
began, in such sort, as the whole company, with as many as sailed with them,
yiedling thanks without end to the divine Clemency, very happily arrived at the
wished port.

The news whereof on a sudden flew into all parts, and the name of S. Hugh,
grew to be in so great veneration, as Henry had not in his whole kingdom
besides, a man he esteemed more, nor in whom he reposed more confidence: and
the number of those Religious went multiplying every day more and more; in the
manage and instruction of whom, S. Hugh showed very well, how excellent a gift
he had in government. Because, that pursuing his ancient thoughts, the first
thing he endeavored effectually, was that men might know clearly, that nothing
was more deer unto him, then the quiet and consolation of every one. To works
(as need was) he adjoined words, and efficacious and discreet aduises. But
above all things he pressed them, through the example of his own manners;
being so habituated in treating with God, as his familiars also in his sleep,
should hear him unawares to pray, and say his Psalter. He was besides, as much
as public occasions permitted him, much given to sacred reading, and was wont
to say, how the divines Scriptures to all Religious, and especial to such as
lead a more solitary life, are delights in peace, arms in war, food in
time of famine, and a medecin in infirmity: so as, when according to the
custom of the Order, he eat alone, he had always, on a little table, the
scripture open before him, or some holy Doctor: though otherwise, he was so
diligent in the custody of his senses, as when he happened on holy days to
take his refection with the rest, he would never hold his eyes from the table
cloth, his ears from the pulpit, and his mind from God. This holy man was
exceeding careful, that, for his sake or any of his, no person should receive
any agreiuance and scandal.

And to this purpose, we may not conceal, how the King having taken from a
certain rich Monastery, and well furnished with books, the new and old
Testament, written by those Regulars, with great labor and diligence, and
bestowed it on the Fathers of VVhittam, as yet not well provided of such
necessaryes: as soon as S. Hugh had knowledge thereof, from one of the
aforesaid Monastery, he answered with a sad cheer: thus stands the matter
then. The King would have deprived your Church of your labors and trauayles,
so fruitful, to accommodate and enrich us by such means. We cry you mercy
with all our hearts for the loss you have sustained for our sake, though in
truth til now we were never made acquainted therewith. Take ye then the Book
again, and if your Fathers will not receive it, I will without more ado;
restore it my self, to the party that caused it to be brought hither. And
further, if they be willing to accept the same, I will cause the matter to be
kept secret by all means. This modesty of his pleased them exceedingly, and as
they remained much edifyed thereat, so they came to contract a great friendship
with the Family of VVhittam.

S. Hugh is made Bishop of Lincoln, and how stoutly he de^eanes himself in his
Pastor all charge. Chap. 4.
NOw approached the time, destined by the divine providence, for the exaltation
of his faithful and wise feruant. The Sea of the City of Lincoln had now
been vacant for some eighteen years, and those of the Chapter being moved at
the loss which the flock suffered so without a Pastor, laying finally aside
the strifes and contentions risen amongst them, resolved with the approbation
of the Metropolitan of Canterbury, to go a sufficient number of them to the
Court of the King, under whose protection, and superintendency, the election
being celebrated with wonted ceremonies, they agreed upon the person of the
Priour of VVhittam: whereat Henry, being extraordinarily joyful, sent the
news thereof presently to S. Hugh, as he thought most joyful tydinges. There
also arrived together, the letters and messages of the Archbishop himself, who
congratulating with him for such a dignity, did lively exhort him not to resist
so honorable a judgment of the Canons, and so manifest a sign of the divine
will. His friends likewise generally encouraged him to it, with reasons and
importunityes.

But S. Hugh, now experienced in the chaste government of souls, weighed all
things with a more just balance, and who knew very well, how great temerity it
was, in a stormy sea to take voluntarily in charge with so much hazard a bark
repleate with the blood of Christ, with might and main endeavored to withdraw
himself from the enterprise: alleging besides his own insufficiency, the
election to be likewise inualid, as well for being prosecuted forth of the
Diocese, and practiced with the favor and authority of the King and
Archbishop, as for that the voice of the Priour of the great Charterhouse was
not concurring thereto, without whose approbation, he could by no means accept
such a charge.

These and many other things of like tenor, the man of God replied: hoping the
Electours either moved through equity, or disdaining the repulse, would easily
turn the designs to the other part. But through divine dispensation he
remained much deceived of his conceit. Because the same humility wherewith he
thought himself unworthy of such a manage, and the earnest instance which he
made, that it might be transferred upon some other, inflamed the Chanons to
extol and advance so great submission, and so great virtue; so as to take away
from S. Hugh all excuses and occasions, being a new assembled together in the
same City and Cathedral Church of Lincoln, with like consent they ratifyed
the decree as at first, and besides sending for that purpose unto the great
Charter House of persons of quality, they brought back in ample form, not
leave only, but so express command, as for S. Hugh there was no evasion.

With this dispach went all the favorers of that creation very glad and
triumphant to the Monastery, and taking the sad and sorrowful Priour from his
Cell, they lead him with great joy to the Cathedral Church. In which act
appeared very well how great a friend he was of poverty both of body and mind,
because being not able to hinder so noble a concourse, which came to accompany
him, reteyning at least in himself, the desired lowlynes, he would never
permit some few co^modityes of his, for his own use, should be carried by any:
but rather putting them behind him on the cropper of his horse would needs
convey them himself publicly to the Bishops lodgings, and by no means
before consecration; he would admit either title of Prelacy, Pontifical robes,
or attendance of servants.

Finally being afterward anointed, and placed with solemn rites, in the
Pontifical Throne, he felt himself as a choice and disposed vessel, to be
replemshed with so great a plenty of celestial gifts, and particularly of the
spirit of fortitude, as from that time he made a purpose to spare no labors,
to shun no perils, nor yield to entreaty or threats, where the divine glory,
or good of the Church might take place: and for this very respect, he liked not
those rich Presents, with the fresh gratulations sent unto him from the king;
and so it was necessary for him to make such a resolution. Because there passed
not many days, but that the King Raungers of the forest (so they call in those
countries, the overseers of the forests and of the chaces of the kings) relying
on their favor in Court, and on the custom now usurped a good while, upon
light occasion laid hands upon a Clerk, and condemned him in a good sum of
money. Whereof S. Hugh being fully informed, with reason (said he) these people
are called Foresters, as it were standing forth of the kingdom of God.
Heerupon calling to a Consult, certain excellent Doctors, and such as feared
God (whereof, from the time he was first assumpted to the Chair, he had made
provision with good care) and by the common opinion of all, having given due
premonishments already to the delinquents, he courageously proceeded to
excommunicate the head of that company.

K. Henry took this act of the Bishop very bitterly; but yet to satisfy
himself better of his disposition, dissembling the matter for the present, he
requested of him by messengers and letters in post, a Prebendary then vacant in
the Diocese of Lincoln, in favor of a certain Courtier; while some friends
of S. Hugh labored it much, that he might take occasion thereby to mittigate
the anger of the King, and to return into grace with him: but the soldier of
Christ, having read the petition, said: These vacant places are not to be
conferred upon Courtiers, but to Ecclesiastikes rather. The Kings Majesty wants
not means to reward his servants: nor is it just, to deprive such of their
rents, who serve the king of heaven, to bestow them on those, who wait upon
the Princes of the earth. With this answer he dispacht away the messengers of
K. Henry, and being entreated at least graciously to absolve the Raunger, he
could not be brought thereunto.

Unto such, and so open contradictions of the Bishop, the King being accustomed
to be obeyed as a beck, brake his patience at last, and sending for him, after
the vpbreading him with so many graces and favors don him, he co^playned
bitterly for so hard a measure from him. And the venerable Bishop, being not
troubled any thing thereat, with a grave and sweet countenance withal,
demonstrated to him, how in the whole affayre he had regard, next to the
service of God, principally to his eternal salvation: which incurred manifest
danger, when through his occasion, either the oppressors of the Church
remained unpunished, or sacred benefices were rashly bestowed. And briefly S.
Hugh could so wisely justify that fact, as the King being a man otherwise
discreet, and a friend of justice, remained satisfied, and restored the blessed
man into his ancient freindship again. After this the Raunger showing himself
sorrowful and penitent for his ill deportments; S. Hugh gave him, not without
the public chasticement of the verge appointed by the Canons, the desired
absolution, and further assisted him in spirit: in so much as of a troublesome
adversary, he had him ever after a friend much devoted to him, and in
busynesses occurring a most faithful sollicitour. With the same courage of
mind S. Hugh endeavored, to extirpate many inueterated abuses from that
administration; among which was that very markable which we shall speak of in
the next Chapter.

S. Hugh reformes certain abuses: K. Henry dies the while, and K. Richard
succeeds, which some passages besides. Chap. 5.
THe Clergy was wont every year, to present the King with a precious Mantle,
at the charge of the people; and the care of going here and there, to make the
collection, the Clergy had taken upon them, reteyning afterward, and dividing
among them as it were for their pains, those moneys which amounted over and
above: and that to the extreme disgrace of their Order, and most greiuous
scandal of the people. The new Pastor, could by no means endure this custom
amongst them: and having efficaciously made the Priests, to acknowledge the
shame, and impiety thereof, he likewise obtained from K. Henry authentic
Patents, wherein he renounced such a gift, and each right, which upon any
appearance he might pretend thereunto. The Magistrates and Ecclesiastical
Judges, in criminal causes touching that Court, were wont to condemn the
delinquents for the most part, in money: whence it followed the rich not caring
much for such penaltyes, perseuered most impudently in their sins. S. Hugh
therefore opposed himself maynly against this inconvenience, by changing the
loss of money into corporal afflictions, or into public notes of infamy, or
else when the case required it, also into excommunications; the which thunder as
we shall presently see, came never from the hands of the Saint without
admirable effects.

K. Henry in the mean while, after diverse travails of mind and body,
departed this life, with much hope and many signs of predestination. There
succeeded him Richard his son: who by how much he showed himself less
propitious and freindly to S. Hugh, so much greater and more ample a field he
gave him of exercise, and of glory. This King imitating his Ancestors, passed
over to the war in France, and in process of time, as it happens, the
Paymaisters of the Camp being out of money, he resolved to send back the
Archbishop of Canterbury whom he had then with him, into England; that by the
favor and help of the Clergy, he might seek to get from his subjects the
greatest quantity of money he could possibly procure. The Archbishop obeyed, and
calling an assembly in a fit place, he found none that openly durst oppose, but
the Bishop of Lincoln: who detesting the impious contentions between
Christian Princes (especially at such times, when the wars of Egypt, and
enterprise of the Holy Land, waxed hoate) demonstrated with solidgrounds, how
unlawful it was, without very just and urgent necessity, to squize the
substance of the poor afflicted subjects.

To this voice of his, consented, though but timerously, another Bishop only,
whose name is not expressed. For all the rest, they striued to please the King.
Who being certifyed by the Archbishop of what happened in the said
Congregation, was so troubled thereat, and enflamed with rage, as that suddenly
he gave order to a principal Officer, as he loved his life, with a sufficient
preparation without delay, he should utterly ruin and destroy both those
obstinate and rebellious Bishops. The Co^missary was not slack in obeying. But
the matter succeeded not so happily with one, as with the other. Because the
timorous Bishop, at the first noise of the Court, abandoned his Church, and the
sacred goods without resistance were all confiscated. But the blessed Bishop,
upon the approach of that profane and ravenous troop, calling on the divine
assistance, prepares for Excommunication, and caused all the Parishes to ring
their bells, with such confidence, and with such a presence of undaunted
courage, as the Courtiers who held him a Saint and favorer of God, being
terrifyed and confounded, returned back without doing any thing. And some few
days after being passed over, the other Pastor at the intercession of his
friends, was recalled from banishment, and the King by this time being returned
from France, he went very suppliantly to meet with him, and with tears to ask
him pardon, and with humble promises not to contradict any more. But the
disposition of S. Hugh was quite otherwise, as shall appear in the next
Chapter.

How S. Hugh admonished King Richard of his abuses: and what effect the
admonishment took. Chap. 6.
S. Hugh putting his confidence in justice and reason, remained still
immovable in his residence, the Court being especially at that time far off:
but afterward bethinking himself of the precipitous nature of the Prince,
and the ill offices he had done already, and which a new were like to be done
by him, and how at last, the fury would come to fall upon his poor people;
laying aside all fear, and all respect of death or affronts, he determined to
go in person to the Kings presence, and to pacify him by those means which
were convenient to the divine glory, and quality of the times. With the aid of
prayer then, putting himself on the way, he was no sooner come to his
iourneyes end, but some of his principal friends, and zealous of the honor
of God, came to meet him, entreating him most earnestly, and coniuring him
withal, that by no means he would appear before the King, nor give him
occasion to renew in him, the slaughters, and cruelties heretofore happening,
with so much infamy of the Kingdom in the person of the glorious Martyr S.
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.

These and other things to this purpose, with much affect represented those
virtuous men, wherewith while S. Hugh was nothing moved, one that loved him
more tenderly then the rest, never left entreating him, he would be pleased at
least, to stay until such time, as he might preoccupy the mind of K. Richard,
with fit offices, and so dispose him with prayers and reasons, as he might not
look awry upon him. To such an offer, the Bishop answered, full of undaunted
courage and fraternall charity: Would you then, to save my self, I put thee
and all thy family in hazard? And what greater gust could my enemies have, then
to take occasion to calumniate thee as partial to me, and enemy of the Crown?
That said, without more ado, he passed into the Kings lodgings, and finding
him by chance hearing of Mass, in his Chapel, he approached to him with a
cheerful countenance, and demanded of him (according to the use of that
Country) the holy kiss of union and love. And the King disdainefully
answering: No, thou deseruest it not; yea but I do, answered S. Hugh, and that
especially after so long a journey: and withal taking him pleasantly by the
Robe, endeauours to hang on him with so great ingenuity, as K. Richard changing
his bitterness to a sweet countenance, was won at last, and kissed him.

At such a sight, the Prelates and Barons standing by, remained astonished. And
so the Mass went on: and in the mean time the servant of Christ, without
putting himself into the company, or taking up a fear among the Bishops, most
humbly betook himself to a meaner place. The King noted the act, and arguing
from thence, how S. Hugh was as little in his own eyes, as magnanimous and
great in common causes, began to hold him in so great veneration, as that even
at that time, the Deacon coming according to custom, to present him the Pax,
he commanded in sign of reverence, it should be given first to the Lord of
Lincoln.

The Mass being ended, S. Hugh resolving to give K. Richard a fraternall
admonishment, for the more decency, and liberty, he sweetly took him behind
the Altar, and there being both set down together, with a grateful aspect
began to examine him, saying: how is it with your conscience? Now you are of
our parish, and we are to render a straight account of you before the dreadful
Judge. My conscience (answered the King) reprehends me of nothing, save only,
that I cannot bear any good will to such as stand but ill affected to my
Kingdom. Then S. Hugh with a great vehemence said: what is this thou say?
And is it not true, that thou go every day without fear imposing new
greiuances upon thy people, oppressing the poor, afflicting the innocent? And
moreover the public fame runs, that thou keep no faith, nor the Sacrtment
of Matrimony. And think thou these to be matters of no moment? At this voice
of the Bishop, or rather of the Holy Ghost which spoke in him, the King being
terrifyed, was feign to hold his peace. Whereupon with like fortitude, S. Hugh
reproved him of diverse faults, which the King endeavored partly with excuses to
purge himself, and partly craved pardon, with purpose of amending his life.

S. Hugh having given this ^dmonition in secret, gave after account in pub^
(...) rust motives that moved him to take, in matter of new tributes, the
protection of the multitude committed to him, and spoke in such manner, as not
only the rest of the auditory, but even Richard himself remained satisfied,
holding it for a great happynes, that the tax went no further. S. Hugh taking
afterward, a courteous leave, returned back undaunted to his flock: and
Richard turning himself to his followers, said, that if all the Bishops were
like to this man, no power could prevail any ways upon them: to which opinion
they all agreed with one consent, because S. Hugh through his frequent
victoryes so got, was by a surname called, The mallet of the King. And if for
the service of God, he showed himself so courageous and bold, it may easily be
gathered, how immovable he remained in like encounters with other persons of
meaner rank, and with the ordinary sort, as appears in the next Chapter.

How stoutly S. Hugh carried himself to all sorts, to the greater honor of
God. Chap. 7.
IT chanced to S. Hugh more then once, in sundry places, to be barehead, among
spears and naked swords, reprehending the armed themselves, like a Lion, of
their impious and wicked endeavors, they remaining amazed and astonished the
while at so great a freedom. Upon a time he met on the way with a company of
Sergeants and catchpoles leading a malefactor to death: and being moved with
the prayers of the unhappy wretch, who in that necessity most earnestly
recommended himself unto him, he gave order presently to the Ministers to
unloose him, alleging that where the Bishop was present with the faithful
people, there was the Church, and that the living stones deserved no less
privilege and exemption then the dead. The enterprise was not in vain, though
otherwise perhaps more worthy of applause, then imitation and practice. The
officers being moved at the majesty of the Prelate, making some protestations
only for fear of the King, left the guilty wholly free, and infinitely obliged
to him, who beyond all hope had given him his life.

Of this so great a heart, and courageous constancy of S. Hugh, if one seek
into the causes, besides the unction of the holy Ghost, there may many be
brought. And among these the natural generosity of the man, inflamed also from
time to time with the instigations of his old Father by us named above, and the
two natural brothers of his, brave Soldiers, and valiant Champions of the
Catholic Church. These men would come sometimes to visit him at Lincoln, and
by letters as occasion served, would exhort him always to stand firm in his
purpose, and not to yield awhit, either to the headlong multitude, or furious
Tyrants. And gave him moreover to understand, they had rather see him dead,
then for any terror to commit any thing unworthy the Episcopal degree, and
honor of his family. Besides which, S. Hugh helped himself much, with his
frequent reading the lives of the glorious Martyrs, and Confessors of Christ,
especially of such as for defense of the divine worship, and of the sacred
Constitutions, have promptly exposed themselves to all punishments. And then
from his daily sacrifices the while what comfort he felt, is a thing not easily
to told: in which mystery he was so diligent, as he preferred it before all
other things whatsoever; and was so grounded in that verity, as it seemed in
some manner he had some clear evidence thereof, as appeared in a case which
follows, in a village of those parts.

Where a certain Priest, of very dissolute manners, having no fear at all to
celebrate that divine Sacrament, and to handle with his impure hands the
dreadful King of Majesty, as he came to the breaking of the consecrated Host,
saw manifestly the most holy blood to proceed, and fall from thence: at which
sight being affrighted and contrite, he took dexterously the precious liquour
in the Chalice, and changing his manners, gave himself to sharp penance in so
much as every one was astonished. By this occasion the miracle came to be
diuulged, and the Priest himself to give God the glory, gave public account
thereof, in showing also the blood it self to every one that was desirous to
be better satisfied in the matter. It happened, that the Bishop of Lincoln,
for certain affairs of his, was to pass that way, and with that occasion it
pleased him to understand and confer some spiritual things with the Priest,
the fame of whose strange mutation and singular austerity of life, ran every
where: falling then into diverse discourses with him, among the rest the good
man gave account and information to the Bishop of the beginning of his
conversion, entreating him withal he would be pleased to contemplate with his
eyes that venerable relic it self; which S. Hugh not only refused to do,
alleging the certainty thereof had need of no such probation, but even
reprehended such of his family, accepting the inuitation, of little faith, and
too much curiosity. And it is a thing well known, that in recompense as it
were of so great a stedfastnes, the Savior himself, in the sight of some
Religious men appeared many times in the Host inform of a most beautiful
child unto S. Hugh himself, while he celebrated the Mass.

Besides this, the Blessed Man took great spiritual forces, from the lively
and more then human conceits of the holy Psalter: wherein what gust he
received, and how obseruant he was of the times and determinate hours of the
divine Office, may in part be gathered at least, by that which we shall speak
in the next Chapter.

The good success S. Hugh had, through his devotion to the Canonical H^res:
and how dreadful his Ecclesiastical Censures were. Chap. 8.
While S. Hugh, was trauayling on the way, upon public affairs, with some
Prelates and other Ecclesiastical persons; he chanced to arrive unlooked for,
at a certain place much infested with men distracted of their wits. His
companions being advertised of the danger, full of dread, consulted with
themselves what to do, and resolved at last, to pass those ways by dark,
and with all the secrecy that might be. With this resolution remaining in the
June, about midnight they rise, and their horses being made ready in have, they
go to the Bishop of Lincolnes chamber, who was now even ready to say his
Mattyns, and with much instance, they solicit him, to provide for his safety
by the opportunity of the darkness. And he answered, What should I go hence
without saying of my Mattins? Then they replied, there would be time enough for
that afterward, since the present necessity affoarded no delay, and they had
need to go away suddenly, if they would not be taken by those Beadlams.

Then S. Hugh with his Breuiary in hand, Stay they that will stay, and fear
that list to fear, said he, for my part I am determined not to go forth, till
first I have paid this duty. And so performed it, saying his Office with ease
and attention: And after that, with his family, getting commodiously on
horseback, he met with no misaduenture at all: whereas those wary and cautious
people in taxing him for superstitious and improuident, so preferring human
respects before the divine glory fell (as it often falls out) into the same net
they so carefully shunned.

To all these so efficacious and potent helps, he added another surely of an
excellent virtue. He retired himself at least once a year, to the Cloister of
his beloved VVhittam, and there under the common Rule, without any other
difference, but only the sacred ring on his fingar, he attended all the vacant
time he had, as from a high tower, to suruay the vanities of human things, the
shortness of life, and immense greatness of eternal Beatitude. And casting his
eyes withal upon the infinite difficulties of spiritual government, and the
horrible precipice whereon all Prelacyes stand; and as at the beginning he had
avoided with all his power the Episcopal dignity, so many times afterward he
sent letters and agents to his Holiness, beseeching him with much importunity to
be disburdened of the administration, and restored to his Order, from whence he
was taken against his will.

But since his supplications were not only not heard, but even the Sollicitours
themselves came back sometimes very shrewdly checked from the Vicar of Christ,
and rather other cares for the universal good imposed upon him; S. Hugh being
enforced to obey, prepared himself for new labors, and new battles,
nourishing still with the foresaid means in his breast, a burning desire of
satisfying the highest in all things. Whereby in difficult enterprises, were
equally matched in him a security of mind, and such a confidence, as that
amidst the greatest difficultyes of all, yea even the dangers of death it
self, neither lost he the peace of his soul, nor the convenient repose of his
body. So as being one night for some grave accidents transported in
imagination, into diverse thoughts, which tormented him without fruit, after
he had thus roued with his fantasy a pretty while, at last was aware thereof,
and smiting his breast with a deep sigh, be began to reprehend himself
sharply, for not suddenly remitting all anxieties unto the divine Providence,
but being troubled and grieved for things so happening, as if the direction of
them had depended on his own knowledge and care: and scarcely was the day
come, but calling for a Confessor, he declared that sin with much
contrition, and surely not without reason, especially the hand of the Highest
so concurring with him, by wonderful effects, as well in other actions as
particularly in Censures: Whereof some events which happened in this matter,
will purchase a firm belief. Certain rebellious and conturnacious fellows
being by him given over unto the power of the Devil, vanished immediately, nor
were ever seen more.

A Soldier, who at the instigation of his wife, unjustly usurped the goods of
another, and being often reprehended for it by the holy Bishop, with diverse
pretexts and falsehoods still covered the same: this man being excommunicated by
him one day, was on the next night following strangled by the infernal enemy:
and yet for all that, another pursuing the same unjust suite, being gone to bed
well fed and merry, continuing sleep with death, paid the fee of his iniquity.

A Deacon for having calumniated others of high treason against his Majesty,
being worthily condemned by the Bishop, by diverse colors and policyes used,
obtained the absolution thereof from the Metropolitan himself, which S. Hugh
knowing to be vain, and surreptitious, stuck not to renew the Censure; and to
the end it might appear which of the two, was the true sentence, it pleased
God, that the Deacon within few days after, most miserably ended his days. A
certain young woman, who in presence, and against the reprehension of the
Bishop ceased not to spit in her husbands face, being stifled by a Devil, very
sudenly expired.

A virtuous Clerk, through the faction of the more potent, being quite
deprived of his right which he had in a Church, after he had without any profit
at all, gone to suite a good while both at home in his Country, and at Rome
abroad, and consumed his substance therein, took finally resolution to recurre
to the Bishop of Lincoln: who being well informed of the cause, and moved to
pity upon the trauayles of the suppliant, resolved through divine instinct, no
doubt, to thunder against all those wicked and sacrilegious men, although they
were not of his own jurisdiction. An admirable thing. The bolt was no sooner
shot, but some of the impious company, having lost their senses became furious;
others ended their life unprovided; others lost their eyes with excessive
torments, and finally, the Heavenly vengeance ceased not, until such time as
the Client of S. Hugh, was restored to his Benefice again. This also, was of
much consideration which I shall presently tell you.

Seven of the Kings Court, having by stealth taken out a thief from the holy
Churchyard whither for fear of justice he had fled to save himself, without
the Bishops consent, hung him up. The servant of God resented the matter as was
fit, and with his wonted arms chastized them straight. And they from others
example likewise fearing the worst, very sorrowful and compunct, cast
themselves at his feet all craving pardon of him, one excepted; and having
obtained the same, upon condition, that among other satisfactions, being half
naked (it being then winter) they should carry on the shoulders the man that
was hanged for a good distance unto the said Churchyard, whence so
temerariously they had taken him forth, and there bury him with their own
hands. So did the six penitent, not without public scorn and a great deal of
trouble the while, and had no other hurt, that ensued thereon. When lo, the
seventh proud and pertinacious wretch, after seven years, came also (...)
last, to prostrate himself in the sight of the Bishop, declaring to him a
strange story of the hurts and domages befallen him in this while, as well in
his honor, as in his goods and person besides, and heartily craved absolution
at his hands, for mitigation at least, if not an end of so great miseryes. The
conversion and supplication was not in vain. when S. Hugh not to add
affliction to affliction, absolved him with a light penance, and restored him
again to the Communion of the faithful.

The sweet manner of behavior which S. Hugh carried toward all: With his
Charity, and Prudence in the manage of things. Chap. 9.
IN these and such like affairs touching the honor of God, and
Ecclesiastical immunityes, S. Hugh would show so much rigor and severity, as
may seem perhaps to be attributed, to a certain asperity or harshnes of mind,
and rusticity of manners, if otherwise he had not always used much humanity,
and still retained the wonted bowels of Mercy. At Table, and Feasts, he showed
himself very soberly pleasant and merry, and would exhort his friends to the
same cheerefulnes, with giving thanks to the giver of all good. As for
^nquets, sports, and music, if he could not avoid them sometimes, he would
make use of them, either to refresh himself, for new trauayls, or for a taste
of celestial delights. Not only, in the public preaching of the Word, but
even also in familiar conversation, would he loose no occasion, most sweetly to
allure men unto solid virtues, and through their amendment, very manifestly
appeared the profit thereof. His conceits were efficacious and lively, and
fitly accommodated to each condition and quality of persons. Of which kind, may
serve as a certain pattern, that with diverse demonstrations he would give
Religious to understand the necessity they have, of fighting continually with
themselves, and ascending always to the top of perfection. Unto seculars, and
especially to such as traffike, above all things would he inculcate faith and
truth in all things, without which of necessity all human commerce must utterly
perish. The women, he was wont to incite to divine Love, in putting them in
mind particularly of the singular privilege, and the inestimable favor done
to that sex, by the sovereign Majesty, in vouchsafing to take flesh and
become the son of a woman: and whereas man had never the honor to be called
the Father of God, a woman yet has had the grace, and pre-eminence to be named
the Mother of God.

In this manner, he stirred up always mortals from sloth and tepidity, and
was most vigilant in encountering with the first origines of discords, and
maintayning peace, as well in private as in public; having among other gifts
so great a judgment and light touching the point of equity, as that not only
near at hand, but also from remote countries, and even from Rome it self (as
we insinuated above) there came controuersyes delegated to him, of no light
importance. He was wonderfully beloved and reverenced by his Chanons, though
for their sakes he would not swerve from righteousness; and with his prudence,
and sweetness he knew how to manage them so, as he never pretended any thing
from the Chapter, which he obtained not at last; he had likewise very admirable
success in the highest affairs of the Kingdom, and among other his actions,
was remarkable that peace, which he concluded between King Philip of France,
and John King of England, being the immediate successor of his brother
Richard, who in punishment of the troubles brought unto Ecclefiasticall
persons, within a few years of his Crown, was miserably slain in battle.

And to the purpose of this pacification of his, it seems not good to pass
over in silence, how S. Hugh returning from Normandy, with the accord
established, happened by the way to lodge in a Monastery of his Carthusians,
called Arneria: and some of those Fathers familiarly craving he would make some
particular relation of the said expedition, and quality of the articles; Saint
Hugh mortifying such a will in them, said: These secular businesses may well be
declared by Bishops indeed, but should not be curiously enquired into by Monks.
So tenacious was he at all times of Monastical discipline and of cha^t
silence. This also was a matter of much edification, in this great Prelate that
having lost (as we have said) through excessive abstinence all appetite, was
vexed with most bitter gripes of the cholike, yet failed he not for all that,
to employ himself when need was, with a most exact diligence, in consecrating,
or rehallowing of Churches, and administering the Sacraments, especially of
Confirmation and of Order, observing ever the Catholic rites in all things, and
beginning sometimes before day, perseuering therein some hours of the night
following without any refection at all. He spared not to bestow a good part of
his time, in informing himself of the behauiours of the people and Clergy, of
the necessiryes of the poor to relieve them, in and visiting and lovingly
comforting the sick.

But though he showed himself most pittyfull and beneficial to all, yet felt
he a singular tenderness of affect toward the infected with leaprosy: he would
go into their Hospitalls in person, and after that in common he had given
benign consolations and fatherly aduises to that wretched people, he would
approach to each one in particular, and humbly inclining himself unto them, he
abhorred not to kiss their loathsome ulcers, and lastly refreshed them with
convenient alms. The Chancellor of Lincoln, called William one day was
present at such a spectacle, who being first astonished at so great humility,
and afterward doubting some vain glory in the Bishop, began to tempt him,
with saying: S. Martin with a kiss only cured the leaprous, but you, me
thinks, do not so. Towhich jest of his, S. Hugh made answer: S. Martins kiss
eured the leaprous in flesh, but the kiss of the leaprous even cures my soul.
He was wont also, most ordinarily to wash secretly the feet of thirteen poor
folks, and to serve them at table. And finally his works of piety were so
notable and famous, as he was universally called the Father of Mercyes; and
even sucking Babes, as it were, through naurall instinct would stretch forth
their little arms to call, and embrace him.

How S. Hugh addicts himself to bury the dead: with a strange prognosticate of
his own death. Chap. 10.
What marvel is it, that S. Hugh should show such clemency and compassion to
the living, who used such Charity and solicitude toward the dead, and that
not only to their souls, but even likewise to their corpse; he no sooner
understood that there lay here or there any body unburied, but setting, as a
new Tobyas, all other businesses aside, he would go thither in have, and with
due exequyes, according to the condition of each one he would commit them to the
earth. And he was so given to this holy occupation, as that being sometimes
invited by the King himself unto dynner, he would let him expect some whole
hours together, until his work were finished: and while the messengers came
in one after another, to solicit him, with saying, the King yet differred his
dynner for his sake, and remained still fasting, S. Hugh freely would answer:
Why does he expect me? For better it were an earthly King should eat without
me, then for me to consent that the commandment of the King of Heaven should
be contemned. My food is to fulfill the will of the eternal Father.

It happened one day, that he buried a most stinking and corrupt corpse of a
drunken and dissolute sinner, to which none durst approach without stopping the
nose; and yet S. Hugh went about to handle him without any auersion at all,
until he had laid him and covered him with earth: the standers by being amazed
thereat demanded of him, whether he felt not any noysomnes or loathing from the
corrupt corpse, and he answering, that he felt no offensiuenes thereat, and how
they were deceived with their own imagination; being full with new wonder,
they ceased not to glotify the divine Goodness in his Servant.

News being brought him one day, of the death of a bitter persecutour of his,
he suddenly puts himself in order to go unto that house of mourning, and to
be present at the hearse: and being told for certain, there were traynes laid
for him on the way, and therefore by no means he should go thither: I deserve
well, indeed, answered he, to have fetters at my feet, and bolts on my legs,
if I should once but neglect such a visit. And so causing the rest of his
train, to stay behind, he went thither but with two only familiars of his, and
there arrived without any stop or hinderance at all, and procuring a decent
funeral for him that hated him so much, and placing the body in a vault, be
returned home again replete with joy and merits.

How acceptable these and the like exercises of S. Hugh, were in the sight of
God, was even manifested also in this present life, with the precious gifts of
healing infirmityes, and expelling the wicked spirits, and quenching flames. In
the mean while, from his indispositions, from his travails, and years, S.
Hugh continually feeling himself to decay, attended with more fervor the^
ever, to prepare himself for that passage, whereto in this short and
uncertain course of mortality, all the cares and studyes of men, should be
most intent and fixed. A notable presage of the end of this Saint approaching,
were the actions of a certain Swan of an extraordinary greatness, which on the
self same day whereon S. Hugh being created Bishop entered into Lincoln, was
now likewise come from parts far remote unto a certain Castle, whither the
Bishop afterward resorted sometimes for honest recreation: and when he arrived
at any time, that white bird would immediately fly to receive him: and where to
others it showed it self very shye, and coy; to the Bishop only it would be
most domestike, and give forth infinite shows of welcome; it would take meat
from his hand; it would thrust, as in a poole, the head and neck, within those
large and ample sleeves of his, and not contented therewith, leaving the fresh
waters, and its accustomed haunts, would stand all night a watching, and
keeping centinell at his chamber door. Moreover it had taken up a custom, as
often as the Bishop was to retire thither, to be very iocund, to cry out, and
flap with the wings, in so much as the keepers of the castle, as they had been
aduertized by some harbinger, would be accited thereby to prepare the chambers,
and to put all things in order against his coming. Now the last time that S.
Hugh came thither, the amourous Swan leaving its accustomed dauances, would so
hide it self, with the head drooping, and with other signs of sadness, and
frowardly sequestring it self from his sight, which it was never to behold
more; as the servants were feign to take it, and bring it in by force. And thus
much of this new prognosticate.

The death and funerals of the Venerable Bishop, not without some miracles
accompanying the same. Chap. 11.
IN those days was assembled at Lincoln, a most famous national Council:
and S. Hugh being then in the City of London, upon urgent occasion, with
purpose to hye himself as soon as possibly he could to the said Assembly,
being there overtaken by a suden and vehement fever, was forced to keep his
bed; and yet in despite of the disease, re-enforcing his prayers unto God, and
to the most blessed Virgin, and devout colloquyes with his Angel Guardian, and
with the Citizens of Heaven; he ceased not withal to afford grateful
audience, with wholesome admonitions to as many as came to visit him. Being
admonished to make his will: It greiues me (said he) for this custom of
making wills, introduced into the clergy. I never had, nor have at this present
any thing, that is not wholly of my Church: and yet that the Fiscall may not lay
hand thereon, let all be distributed to the poor, as soon as may be,
whatsoever may seem to others I possess. Hereupon the Feast of S. Matthew
being come, wherein he remembered he was consecrated Bishop; he caused the
celestial Viatique, and the Sacrament of Extreme unction also to be ministered
to him, as thinking very probably, that immediately he was to depart: but it
pleased our Lord to differ the same, until the 17. day of the next month,
in which space he ceased not from deuotious for himself, and exhortations for
others; and moreover with the spirit of Prophecy, very clearly foretold, the
great disasters, which soon after, were to happen to that Kingdom, and
particulerly to the Clergy.

The foresaid term being afterward arrived, the holy Bishop being interiourly
certifyed of his departure, caused besides his Chaplyns some Monks and Priests
to be called to assist him, and seeing them all to weep bitterly, he sought
with interrupted speeches, but grave and affectuous withal to comfort them,
and laying his right hand upon each one, he recommended them to the divine
custody. And now his feeble voice began quite to fail, when he willed, that
the flore being swept, a cross of hallowed ashes should be formed thereon, and
that a service should be said in manner of a Quier, whereat being present with
great attention, as soon as he came to that verse of the 90. Psalm: Clamabit
ad me and ego exaudiui cum, cum ipso sum in tribulatione, causing himself to
be lifted from his bed, he stretehed his withered and frozen members (being
mindful of the Passion of Christ) upon the said Cross, and presently
beginning the Canticle of Simeon very happily expired, in the year of our Lord
1200. of his age 60. and of his Episcopal charge the 15.

In this manner it pleased the Prince of Pastors, to put an end to the
travails of his most faithful Coadiutour, of whose passage into heaven some
persons worthy of credit have had undoubted revelation. The body being spiced
with Balm and other odours, was in pontifical habit exposed in a Coffin ready
to be carried, according to the order left by him, unto his Church: but through
the infinite concourse of people, which pressed in, to touch or at least to
behold more near that sacred Treasure; there succeeding by turns very
Honorable personnages to carry the corpse, the way became to be so taken up,
and stopped the while, as it was there feign to stay for no less then six days.
In approaching to Lincoln, the two Kings John of England, and William of
Scotland, who then were present, came forth to meet them with a most noble
train, and both being desirous to submit their shoulders to the venerable
Beer, the Scottish King among others (who loved him dearly) powered forth a
flood of tears. After that, in the Cathedral were the solemn exequies
celebrated, with the pomp that became both the dignity of the deceased, and
the quality of the standers by, among which two crowned heads, three
Archbishops, fourteen Bishops, more then a hundred Abbots, very many Earls
and Barons, drew the eyes of the people upon them; the divine Providence so
disposing, that the promptnes and perseverance of S. Hugh in taking so great
care to bury the bodies of others, was thus recompensed with so magnificent and
glorious a Sepulture. To this were added for greater splendor, new and famous
miracles, which to recount throughout, were a thing too long: it may suffice
for example only to add here also, that within few days at his monument, were
cured six Palsy men, three blind received their sight, and two dumb men
recovered their speech. Moreover the deposition, customs, and heroical
prowess of the Saint, were afterward not only celebrated with a lively voice,
by that age, but by many Writers also registered with a faithful pen, to the
glory of God, the memory of him, and the noble example, and incitement to
posterity.

FINIS.
S. ANTONY OF PADVA.
THE ARGUMENT.
RIch LVSITANIA, yields thee vital air,
And first of others shines with such a gemme
Thy countries Father; thou do her prepare,
Thou do dispose her unto Heaun's diadem
By doctrine and example; they declare
How grateful was such charity to them.
Thou Solons doctrine well do overthrow,
Showing the Country to her brood may owe.
Padua adopts thee hers, whose spacious Fanes
Could not contain thy happy audience:
The larger fields, and open spreading plains,
Did seem prepared for such a confluence:
Thy heavenly doctrine sweetly entertaines
The hearers, charmed with golden eloquence.
A second Orpheus, whose commanding Lyre
Even senseless things do follow, and admire.
THE LIFE OF S. ANTONY OF PADVA. Taken forth of Laurence Surius.
Of the family and youthful age of S. Antony: and how he became be of the
family of the Chanons-Regular. Chap. 1.
THE marvelous Mysteries of the divine providence, are discovered as it were,
through the whole pilgrimage of S. Antony, commonly called of Padua; and so
much more worthy to be renowned by the world, as through the sollicitous
cooperation of this most noble Confessor, they are seen to be accompanied
with the clear examples of an Apostolical spirit. and of each Christian
virtue. The blessed man was borne in the famous Metropolis of Portugal, which
is called Lisbon, K. Alphonsus reigning in those parts the second of that
name, in the year of our Lord 1195. His Father was called Martin Boglion, his
Mother Mary Tauera, both of ancient and very honorable families, dwelling
right over against the great Church dedicated to the Mother of God, wherein the
Relics of the glorious Martyr S. Vincent are kept with much veneration. From
so noble a couple, in the flower of their youth sprung forth this blessed Bud,
and in Baptism was named Hernando.

In the first rudiments of learning and Christian manners, he was with
diligence instructed by the Priests of the said great Church; so as an exact
education being added to an excellent inclination, under the protection of the
most Blessed Virgin Mary, and that most invincible Martyr, he came very soon
to bring forth most evident signs of his future greatness: because, as it is
likewise reported of some others elected of God in their childish age, being
far off from childish thoughts, he took pleasure in imitation of his
Parents, to frequent holy places, and to distribute alms to the poor, as he
was able, that saying of Job well suiting with him: Ab infantia mea, creuit
mecum miseratio. With these passages of his childish innocence, being come to
the dangerous and ticklish point of youth in choice of an estate of life, he
felt himself not a little to be allured by sensuality, with enticements of
flatteryes: but preserved doubtless by the divine Mercy, very generously
withdrew his foot, resolved to follow by the sharp way, the guide of reason,
and splendor of honesty.

And to secure himself the better, with perseverance, with a voluntary
holocaust he dedicated himself to our Savior Jesus Christ, in the Monastery
of S. Vincent of the Chanons-Regular: which Monastery howbeit situate forth of
Lisbone, yet was it not so far, but many, as it happens some for love, some
for curiosity, came to visit the new soldier of Christ: whence he perceauing
himself to be disturbed in his devout exercises, obtained with much difficulty
to be removed from thence, some three days journey, into the Monastery of the
Holy Cross of Conimbria, where yet to this day that Order flourishes, to the
great benefit and ornament of that City. Here the feruorous disciple of
Christ, besides the learning and diligent observing the holy Ceremonies, so
employed himself in the grauer studyes, as he always reserved the better part
of his time and travail for spirit: nor suffered he (as often it falls out with
they unadvised) the vehemence of speculation should come to oppress or
diminish devotion, but with a sage temper, helping himself with the sacred
Scriptures, partly for finding out of deep senses, partly to inflame himself
with divine love, and making no less often acts of the Will, then of the
Understanding, he arrived within a little while, to so high a degree of
perfection, as he had no greater thirst, then to spend his blood for the
Catholic faith. And in this so laudable a desire of his, he became much more
confirmed, through the occasion we shall presently declare.

The occasion that moved S. Antony to endeavor to change his Rule, and what it
was. Chap. 2.
THe venerable Family of Friars, which through Christian humility do call
themselves Minours, was by the Eternal Pastor newly founded, to the help and
reduction of wandering souls. The head of these was the most blessed Francis
of Assisium, who with the approbation of the Sea Apostolic, and with the
example and profit of his holy manners and speeches, trauayling into diverse
Countries, and especially into the utmost confines of Spain, had with
admirable increase spread his name, and ministry, by the many residences of
his children. And by this way had sought with all industry to provide for the
extreme necessityes of the afflicted Christianity. After this being not able to
suffer the other so great a part of the world to be seduced by the fabulous
lies of the Mahumetan perfidiousnes, he very freely determining to bring, to
his power, some light and succor to those miserable nations; and when he
should be able to profit no more, with a glorious end at least, to lay down
his life, in confirmation of the Gospel.

Into which enterprise having put himself more then once, but through diverse
impediments, being not able ever to prosecute any thing; at last, assembling
together, two squadrons of choice workmen, with one of Eleven, he himself
passed from Ancona into Egypt, where under Damiata, the Christian army was
encamped against the Saracens: the other of Six, he sent under Friar Vitalis an
Italian, into the land of Granata, and of Andaluzia, being tiranically handled
by Miramolinus King of Morocco, a great vpholder of the name and sect of
Mahomet. These two expeditions concerning the little fruit they wrought, with
those blind and obstinate people, had in a manner the same success: but for
the dealing with Apostolical persons they were far different. Because S.
Francis passing boldly from the Christian tents, unto those of the Saracens,
was by the Sultan (though for that time he resolved not to accept the Gospel)
more then once, yet graciously heard, and with diverse courtesyes and favors
much honored and entertained, not without the infinite wonder of the standers
by.

But the troop, which under Vitalis went into the West, by his order continued
their way, and with incredible fortitude preaching the truth of Christ, and
accusing the vanity of the false Prophet, not only in Seuill of Andaluzia, but
even also in the City of Marocco it self, and in Africa, and confirming
their doctrine with works above nature, they were first scorned, pelted, and
overwhelmed by the people, with stones, cudgells, and prisons: and afterward
by Miramolinus himself (to revenge the iniuryes of his Mahomet with his own
hands) very cruelly slain through the strokes of a Semiter, in the presence of
his people. Whose bones now renowned with new and evident miracles, being
diligently gathered by the means of the Infant Don Pedro, the King of
Portugals Brother (who was very acceptable at that time in Marocco to
Miramolinus himself) and decently conuayed to the Church of the holy Cross of
Conimbria, caused in that devout people, diverse motions of Christian piety,
but in the Chanon Don Hernando, through holy emulation increased so the thirst
of Martyrdom, as he could find no rest by day or night; and he was much more
rouzed up, being taken with the triumphall palms of those valorous Champions,
the^ was Themistocles awakened from sleep through the Tropheyes of that other
Athenian there. In fine, the enkindled flames of charity at this spectacle
increased so in him, as Hernando being not able to contain the same, with full
resolution, determined to pass likewise over himself into Mauritania, and
preaching courageously the faith of Christ, to purchase to himself, a precious
death for the glory of Christ, and salvation of Souls.

Now by this time, he was made Priest, and had arrived to the age of 26.
years. He was for his singular virtue and rare talents, so dear to his whole
Congregation, as diffiding wholly to get leave of the Abbot for such an
enterprise, concealing his purpose under the pretext of choosing a more austere
and strict rule, he determined to pass into the new religion of the Friars
Minors, holding for certain, that thence he might more easily compass his
desired enterprise. Wherefore making very fervent prayers thereupon, at last he
found out this way to execute his design which follows in the next Chapter.

S. Antony is admitted into the Convent of the Friars Minors, where he pursues
his intent, but all in vain. Chap. 3.
AMong other Conuents of S. Francis, dispersed through the kingdom of
Portugal, there was a little one under the protection of S. Antony the Great,
without the walls of Conimbria, where those Fathers philosophizing rather with
life and manners, then with questions and disputes, gave themselves to let the
world understand the vanity of things present, and solid hopes of voluntary
poverty. Some two of this Convent, from time to time, were wont to come to the
sumptuous and rich Monastery of the holy Cross, according to their institute,
very humbly to crave Alms: So as Don Hernando, taking them one day aside, with
a lively affect of Charity unfolded unto them, as to two Angels of Paradise,
his holy purpose, and besought them, keeping it secret where need was, to deal
with their Superiors, about his admission into their Order, but yet with
express condition to send him by obedience, as soon as may be unto the land
of the Moors, to work some fruit in the conversion of Gentiles. Even from that
time, was the name of Hernando famous for learning and goodness; so as the
Friars Minors, took it to be no small favor so to enrich themselves with such
a purchase. Wherefore the busynes being concluded on their parts; on the other
Don Hernando began to crave humble license of his Prelates, who made a very
strong resistance for a time; but his prayers were so continual and vehement
as they finally prevailed. So as devoutly taking the habit of S. Francis from
the Minous in their Cloister, he went his ways thence with such displeasure of
the Chanons, as he heard at his going forth, such a bitter taunt in the way of
jest cast forth by one of them, as this: Go your ways now, perhaps you will
be a Saint in that Religion. At which words (said he) with a cheerful
countenance: When that shall be, I believe you will give praise and thanks to
the Redeemer for it.

In this manner passing into a new habitation and institute; the first thing he
did, was to lay aside all secular habits, and quite to forget his fathers
house, and to be also himself the more unknown, and quite forgotten of the
world, from the title of that little Church, or to say better, Oratory of the
Minors, in changing his name, he caused himself to be called Friar Antony.
From thence renewing his supplications to God, and his Superiors, and
preparing himself continually with fit meditations, to each cruelty of
punishments that might be, it was not long ere he was sent into the desired
parts of Marocco; where as in a most certain field of battle, he hoped to
obtain by dying for Christ, a glorious victory.

But soon appeared very evident signs of the inscrutable disposition of our
Lord; who accepting herein the good will of his servant, had preordeyned him
for other labors, and to other merits. Because, that in the very beginning of
his departure, being oppressed with a greiuous malady, he was constreyned for
the most of that winter to keep his bed. Where, though after many profers and
endeavors made in vain, he coniectured, the divine Majesty was no ways
propitious to his purposes; yet by the beginning of the next year, having
scarcely recovered any forces, he valiantly began afresh to make proof of
himself, and to sail toward Afric. But the bark had hardly hoysed sail
and departed from the haven, when behold a contrary storm of the South-west
winds, by force, transported the Mariners to Messina of the Island of Sicily.

This adventure gave S. Anthony much more matter to reflect upon the
interpretation of the divine will, and had yet a more evident sign thereof. As
soon as he landed he understood by the Friars Minors there resident, how of
late a general Chapter was intimated of the Order, at Assistum, and therefore
it apperteyned to him also, as a Priest, not hindered by any lawful cause to
go thither. Through this citation joined with passed accidents, he came to be
satisfied, it was not the divine pleasure he should aspire to preach to the
Mahometans or Gentiles. From which bar of exclusion, the wary Merchant went
about to make a double profit, one of his own confusion, accusing himself of
too much boldness, and presumption in himself; the other of a stable purpose,
to suffer himself hereafter to be wholly guided by the Creator, by means of
his Ministers; without making choice on his own head, of this or that manner
of procuring the divine glory. And withal, since it was not permitted him to
expose himself for the holy faith, unto the fury of the people, to the cruelty
of Tyrants, to the scourges and knives of the mercyles hangmen, he determined
to offer up himself, another way to Christ, in a living host, upon the aul^
of Religious justice, by mortifying the flesh with whips, fastings, prayers,
and vigils, slaying and annihilating the will and understanding, with perfect
obedience, and full contempt of private respect.

How S. Antony goes hiding his talents for humility sake, and is unknown to
men. Chap. 4.
S. Antony going with such designs in his breast unto the Congregation of
Assisium, since by reason of his celebrating of Mass every day, and reciting
the canonical hours, his Priestly dignity could not be hidden, he endeavored
at least with all care to conceal the nobility of his blood, the force of his
wit, and the variety of learning which he had; which so cunningly he did, as
with the whole Chapter, he remained in opinion of an Idiot or simple man, and
not apt, either for subtilityes of speculatiue learning, or manage of
practical matters. Whence it followed, that the assembly being dissolved,
while distribution of subjects (according to the use) was made, and the
Superiors requiring to have some this, some that man, along with them unto
their residences, S. Antony remained alone without being required or requested
of any. Mean while the divine man exceedingly rejoiced, in beholding himself,
in imitation of his great Master and Savior Jesus, without fault of his to be
slighted and neglected of all. Yea rather to make continually more intense acts
of Christian humility, approaching with great humility and submission to the
Minister of the Province of Romania, called Friar Gratianus, he did reverently
beseech him, he would daigne to entreat Father General, he might take him to
him, to instruct him with other Nouices, in the ceremonies and obseruances of
the Order.

Nor was the petition made in vain. For Friar Gratian being moved with the
modesty and solitude of the person, come thither from parts so remote; took
him benignly along with him, unto his own Diocese, and a little after, at his
new instance permitted him to retire himself into the hermitage of Monte
Paulo, with some others. Where S. Anthony being provided of a narrow Cell, in
fasting with bread and water, and perseuering in holy contemplations, and
manfully resisting the temptations of the Devil, prepared himself
unwittingly, unto the admirable exploits and enterprises, which for the benefit
of Christendom, God was pleased to work by his means. Being afterward
called from the deserts to the Conuents, he departed not awhit from his firm
deliberations, to use and cause himself to be dealt with by others, as the
meanest and most ab^ct of all: whence the time which he had spare from the
altar and Quire, he spent cheerfully in sweeping the house, in serving in the
kitchim, and in doing such offices, which ordinarily are held in most scorn,
and are most abhorted of human pride. And in such ministeryes, he continued
hiding, shrouding, and concealing himself from mortal eyes; when it pleased
him at last, who beholds the hidden things, to his eternal glory, and
salvation of many people and nations, to manifest him to the world, with the
occasion following.

How S. Antony is discovered by his talents, to be singular, and is declared
Preacher. Chap. 5.
IT was now the time of Ecclesiastical Ordinations; and therefore Father
Guardian having destined some Friars to the City of Forli, he thought good to
lead them thither in person himself, and would needs have S. Antony also along
with him being Priest already, as we have said; and as reason dictats unto us,
and the Portugal Chronicles themselves do clearly demonstrate, howsoever
more modern Authors being moved by one ambiguous word only of Surius, have
after affirmed, that S. Anthony went thither to be enrolled with the others
into the sacred warfare. With this family then, for the same effect, went some
Dominicans a long like wise: a Religion instituted as it were, by the eternal
Father at the same time of the Franciscans, for the greater help of the
Catholic Church, and for supply, of men for the continual preaching of the
word of God.

These two companyes, though diverse in habit and means, yet in will and end
very conformable, being come to Forli, were lodged both in the same place: and
not for to give over their spiritual exercises, the hour of their conferences
arrived, the Guardian of the Minours made great instance to the Father of the
Preachers, that according to their institute they would be pleased, for the
common consolation to discourse something of matters concerning the divine
service, and for the purchase of virtues. Whereof those virtuous Fathers
excusing themselves, through the shortness of time, and wearynes of the journey;
the Guardian being doubtless touched with some hidden inspiration from Heaven,
contrary to the opinion of all, turned himself to S. Antony, and suddenly
imposed upon him to make them a Homily, and to say something of edification. To
which precept the servant of Christ very modestly opposed a while, but the
Superior and the rest urging him to it, at last not to break with Obedience,
recommending himself to God, he began to discourse, but rudely at the
beginning, and without any show of learning in him; but in the progress of the
discourse, the Holy Ghost without doubt, so guiding his tongue and heart, ere he
was aware, he entered into so great a variety of allegations of the divine
Scripture, into so great sublimenesse of mystical senses, and above al, into so
great an access and ardour of charity (which even cast forth flames from his
countenance and gesture) as all the Auditors remained partly inflamed with
heavenly affects, partly also astonished with wonder, as of a man that knew no
more then his Breuiary, that never handled as it were any books, and from
whose mouth scarcely ever came forth any Latin word.

But he, to whom, as well the memory, as also the creature it self, served as
a Book laid open, and in so long an intermission of study and reading, had yet
never failed from treating familiarly with the benign Giver of Wisdom, gave
forth to understand in that act, how much richer are the treasures of the
mystical and sweet, then the scholasticall and sterile Theology. Besides their
astonishment at this so sudden an eloquence, such indeed as all confessed they
had never heard the like; they had a singular esteem and consideration at his
so rare humility, since whereas others, having scarce got a smatch in learning,
can hardly conteyne the unbridled will from appearing in Pulpits, and hunting
after vain praise and applause of the people: he though very well instructed
already, with infused and purchased learning, and besides endued by nature,
with those parts which are required in a Christian Orator, had ever held his
peace, and was ever more willing to hear then speak, and striued as much to
abase himself, as others do to procure high degrees, and to be notable and
famous in the world.

It was not long ere the Blessed Father S. Francis had news thereof, who took
extraordinary contentment therein, and gave infinite thanks therefore to the
divine Goodness. And howbeit he might without more ado have deputed S. Antony
unto the holy Function of Preaching, as who had been well studied already of
himself; yet by reason of his so long intermission now from his said studyes,
and not to give matter of murmr unto others, he determined to make him renew
and refine his mystical Theology, under the direction of the Abbot of S. Andrew
in Vercells, a man very famous in those days for learning and sanctity, and
who among other signs of profound Science, had lately translated the works of
S. Denis Areopagita, out of Greek into Latin, and illustrated the same also
with his explications and comments. S. Antony then being reco^mended to this
Doctor, with another English Friar called Adam de Marisco, within the space of
a year, they both made such profit in the knowledge of celestial things, and
arrived to such a height and elevation of mind, as it seemed to the said
Master, he had two Angels in his house, and that he had learned of them
rather then they of him. With this so happy success, S. Francis was more
confirmed in his opinion already conceived of S. Anthony, and with great hope,
of much profit to the world, declared him Preacher, and commanded him very
confidently henceforth to apply himself to the ministry of the Word or God.

How S. Antony mollifyed a Tyrant with his sharp reprehension, and brought him
to reason. Chap. 6.
THis excellency of preaching, was not only discovered in the blessed disciple
of Christ; but as true humility is capable of all graces, and mother of all
virtues, he showed himself very soon, how exceeding sufficient he was for
confessions, and apt withal for disputations against Heretics, and for
Scholastical chayres, and for writing of books very profitable for the whole
posterity, and (being a thing very hardly to be coupled with such (...)) he
showed likewise no small skill and dexterity in government. To all which
prerogatives, as by an irrefragable seal and patent, the divine Clemency had
annexed the spirit of Prophecy, with the privilege of frequent and manifest
miracles. Of each one of which gifts according to our purpose, we shall declare
the chief of them with breuity.

And first, for his preaching, we must know, there was so burning a zeal of
the glory of God, and the salvation of men, planted by inch solid and deep
roots in the soul of this lover of Christ, as that being suddenly pushed
forth of his stand, like a generous steed, he began to discurre through
villages, Boroughes, castles, and Cittyes, leaving steps imprinted of holy
customs on all sides, and exciting miserable mortals, from base and terrene
cares, to high and celestial thoughts. And this his zeal of Charity, he
endeavored always to keep lively and flaming, with the breath of prayer,
and with matter of consideration, keeping also it from all humidity of sensual
pleasures or disordinate affections. Whence followed among others, two
inestimable advantages, to wit, a great credit with the auditory, and a
singular energy of discourse: the one of which conditions, more auayles to
persuade with, then all the artificiousnes, and figures of Rethoricall art that
may be: the other how behouefull for a Teacher of truth, and Ambassador of the
King of Heaven, may be easily comprehended of every one.

By this means he came to be free and rid of those bands, which are wont to
inueagle the mind, or restrain and tie the tongue of others. So as neither the
force, nor malignity of the Mighty was able to dismay him, nor flatteryes or
offers of friends to bow him, nor the winds of popular applause to puff him
up. Without all exception of persons, as well in public according to
occasions, as in private, the magnanimous Interpreter and Messenger of Christ,
ceased not to hammer and break the wills grown obdurate in vices, and that
with a presence of a courageous heart, as that many famous Preachers, who came
to hear^him would even tremble; and some amazed at the lightning and flashes he
sent from him, would cover their face; others again, through doubt of some
perilous accident, would retire themselves. Which things to be no whit
exaggerated, nor feigned may sufficiently be seen by that, which happened to
him, with that famous Tyrant Ezelinus, of the City of Padua, and of a great
part of Marea Treuisana.

This man under a rational figure, having the heart of a Bear, and Tigre,
seemed to thirst for nothing more then human blood. Persidiousnes and impiety
both, were in him as converted into nature: robberyes, rapines, destructions
through fire and sword, were even sports and recreations to him, and (as to the
Captayns of mischiefs it happens) he was always waited on by Soldiers and
Sergeants, neither in avarice, nor cruelty, nor lust much inferior to him. Now
this bloody wretch, only to terrifye the people, without cause, made many noble
Citizens, to be slain in Verona. Saint Antony took such sorrow, and
indignation thereat, at that going boldly into the presence of that monster,
and those Sergeants of his, began with a loud voice to cry out against him,
saying: When will thou cea^e, thou fierce Tyrant, and ravenous Dog, (...) so
the blood of innocent Christians? When will thou termine or m^gate ever this
so great inhumanity? Know then, there hangs a dreadful punishment of the
divine Justice upon thee which shall not leave unpunished the homicides, the
robberyes, the extorsions, and wicked slaughters thou committest.

These things the Servant of God vpbrayded him with to his face, first in
general, and then after in particular, descending into circumstances, with so
much vehemence of spirit, with so much sparckling of the eyes, and fervor
withal, and with so much weight and liberty of speech, as that most ravenous
Wolf became now of a sudden a most meek Lamb, and in the presence of as many
as were there, pulling off his girdle with his own hands, and putting it
about his neck, cast himself at his feet, very humbly craving pardon, both of
God and him, and offering himself most ready to perform whatsoever penance
the Venerable Father should impose upon him. Whereupon the Blessed Antony being
somewhat pacifyed, and the penitent confirmed with sweet admonitions in his
good purposes, not only without any hurt at all, but rather with a great deal
of reputation and honor, and grace withal, came from him: the people remaining
the while much admiring, and amazed beyond measure, how Ezelinus at the first
sound of such rebukes and reprehensions, had not caused him to be hewed in
pieces, and cast forth to the beasts with a look only. To take away the
wonder, he yet wholly confounded, and even pale for fear, said: Let it not
seem strange to you my Masters, what here I have done, because while that
same Religious man spoke in that manner, I manifestly saw most lively rays of
divine splendor to come from his face, which so dazeled me, and filled me with
such fear, that even doubtless me thought, I should even have been swallowed
into hell. These words indeed Ezelinus spoke, and such feelings he showed for
the present: but as the promises proceeded from servile fear, and not for the
love of virtue, after a short remorse, returned the Barbarous wretch to his
former custom, accusing himself for having yielded so basely, to the boldness
and menaces of a presumptuous Friar, and perhaps also a dissembler and
hypocrite. Yet nevertheless, remained that more then human countenance so
engraven in his memory, and that Majesty, wherewith he was terrifyed, as to him
it seemed very hard to believe, that without some heavenly concourse, and the
hidden merits of so courageous a reprehender, so strange and unusual a thing
should befall him.

After the Tyrant had been thus perplexed in mind a pretty while, wavering in
himself, he resolved at last to clear himself in that point of the goodness
and sincerity of the Friar, with the touchstone as follows. Taking then forth
of his treasury a rich Jewel, he gave it to some Ruffians, of his, to carry it
to S. Antony on his behalf, with fair and amorous speeches, but with express
order, that if he accepted the same, as a false and covetous man, they should
suddenly hew him to pieces: and if he should refuse it, they should with all
respect abstain, as from a person truly holy and acceptable to God; nor for
whatsoever he should say unto them, they should take any revenge upon him, but
without any reply at all return back again. With such commission those
Russians being come to S. Antony, and entreating him with the greatest courtesy
they could, to accept of that small charity, which Ezelinus sent him, and to
remember him only in his devout prayers; by so lively experience they presently
knew what he was, since with a severe look and show of anger, he thus answered
to the message: God forbid, I receive in sign of liberality the very blood of
the poor of Christ: for which shall Ezelinus, ere he be aware thereof, make an
exact account to the divine justice: and get you hence also without delay,
least through your iniquityes either the house ouerwhelme us with a sudden
ruin, or the earth come to swallow us up with a horrible rupture.

Whereat those miserable wretches, with bowing down the head, went silently
and fearfully away to give account to their wicked master of the whole
success; who being cleared in this manner of the suspicions falsely conceived
by him, touching the servant of God, from that time forwards held him in the
esteem he ought, and gave order to his soldiers, they should let him say of
him what he listed himself: and though the Tyrant, through his inueterate
custom in sinning, was never converted from his lewd ways, yet certain it
is, that the memory of S. Antony served him often times for a bridle, and
through fear and reverence of so great a man, he forbear afterward to commit
many outrages, which he had otherwise effected without respect. These then and
the like assaults, the courageous Champion of Christ, would not fail to make
at any time when need required. Though indeed no merueyl it be, that for the
defense of the truth, he should not fear the face of any man how angry soever,
who with so much desire heretofore had sought to drink of the chalice of the
passion.

The excellent gifts, and talents of S. Antony, especially necessary to so
notable a preacher, as he was. Chap. 7.
LEt no man think by the former Chapter, that S. Antony showed himself to be
so rigorous and terrible to all. He wanted not judgment to discern the
difference of his Auditors, nor skill and practice to deal with the rich,
with the poor, with the noble and ignoble, according to the capacity, and
nature, and state of each one. And how beyt the principal foundation of his
preaching was placed, as we have said, in frequent prayer, and continual
abnegation of himself; nevertheless he took light and nourishment of sound
and sincere knowledge from the ancient Doctors, sacred Counsels, and divine
Scriptures, wherein he was so versed and dexterous, as it is affirmed for
certain, that when by any misfortune, they might hap to be lost, he alone from
the Cabinet of his memory, was sufficient to recover them again, as
heretofore Esdras had done, and to put them faithfully in writing.

Whereof among other persons of authority, Gregory the Ninth his Holiness, gave
truly a most clear and grave testimony; for that S. Antony being come to the
Court of Rome (for this likewise was a notable exployt of his) to oppose the
designs and endeavor of Friar Elias, and of others, who sought to wrest the
Rule, and enlarge the Religious discipline, he not only labored efficaciously
in this matter, but preached also to the Court, and people of Rome, in diverse
places and times, with so great abundance of true and profund conceits, with
such subtilityes, and art in discovering the origens and causes of vices, and
in appling apt remedies to each one, and with such sharp and sound
interpretations of the Psalms and the Prophets, and of all historyes and
Oracles, and divine precepts as the Pope himself being astonished, besides
infinite other praises afforded him, with a Pontifical spirit daigned to call
him, The Arc of the Testament. There were added to these so rare gifts of a
Christian Orator, a dignity of aspect, a grace in his gestures, a sweetenes
and cleernes of voice, and all in so eminent a degree, as he seemed to be an
organ for honest delectation, and for a wholesome moving of souls, framed by
the hand of God himself. And that which more increased the wonder, was so
great a variety, quaintnes, and propriety in the Italian tongue, in a man
trained up in Provinces so remote, and come into Italy being of years so
mature, and so late brought forth to the light of the world, and to the
eminency of Pulpits.

Whence it is not very easy to explicate the concourse of people of all
conditions, that assembled together at the sound of that celestial harmony and
divine Trumpet: in shutting up their shopps, leaving their traffikes in the
market places, and the noyses of the Palace, and taking up places before day
at the sacred audience, with such have and strife withal, as many times the
servant of God was constreyned to abandon the Churches and Cittyes, and go
forth into the spacious playnes, and there from the higher bancks to break the
bread of the divine word unto the hungry multitude. And he howbeyt corpulent by
nature, and much subject to sweating, and diverse infirmityes, left not for all
that, to expose himself with great promptnes, and without sparing any labor,
or trouble where the greatest need was, and hope of a more certain and copious
harvest.

Now who were able to set down what fruit followed, to the glory of our Lord
and salvation of men? Who could number the rancours and enmityes deposed, the
restitutions made, the Concubines forsaken, the processions, disciplines,
fasts, the pious works both common and particular instituted for behoof of
body and soul? Many contemning the vanity of the world, though rich and potent
otherwise, either dedicated themselves to the divine service in Religion, or
the better to assure their conscience, very freely subjected their whole
substance and their life it self, unto the dispose of the faithful servant of
Christ; the good and faithful through his discourses would depart from him
very full of consolation of new courage and purpose afresh. The sinners chasing
away darkness and sleep, astonished at the divine providence, acknowledging
their perilous estate, and the greiuousnes of their sins, as wounted Hearts to
the fountain, so ran they to the tribunal of Confessors, with tears and
sighs.

How S. Antony mountes into the Chair of Theology, and was the first of his
Order, that read in those Schools. Chap. 8.
WE may not seem to pass over in silence, how 22. Thieves being accustomed
to rob and murder trauaylours in a certain thick and obscure forest, and then
after unknown in the City, to appear in the habit of Honorable persons,
being lastly moved with the fame, which ran every where of the Angelical
preaching of S. Anthony, resolved to go all at once to hear him. And found
the report of him to be nothing false, but rather remained so mollifyed and
softened, at his fyery speeches, as the sermon being hardly finished, they went
al one after another, to cast themselves at the feet of the Preacher, with most
humble confession, craving absoluion at his hands, and promising amendment. Of
whom being graciously heard, and with fatherly admonitions being encouraged
and instructed, they retired themselves to perform the pennances imposed upon
them.

By which example, may easily be estimated without more ado, how great, and how
unusual effects, that instrument of the divine goodness occasioned in the hearts
of men. So as S. Bonauenture in the second translation of the Saint, which was
some thirty two years after his death, finding that happy tongue, through the
divine will, wholly fresh and red, with good reason exclaymed: O tongue, which
have ever blessed God, and taught others to bless him likewise, it appears
now manifestly of what merit thou wast before our Lord: and so kissing it
devoutly he placed it in a decent Reliquary, for that purpose. But returning to
the matter of the spiritual purchase, and most burning zeal of S. Antony. It
is surely a merueilous thing, how the man of God, notwithstanding the
occupation of the pulpit, and other trauayls of no light importance, employed
himself very willingly in hearing confessions, and with so much prudence, and
longanimity applied himself to look into, and to cure the wounds of souls,
as sometimes from morning, to late in the eueuing, he had no time to restore
his weary and afflicted body either with meat, or repose at all.

The Heretics moreover and the Heresiarks being manifestly convinced by the
wisdom and spirit that spoke in him, were constreyned openly either with base
silence to confess their perfidiousnes, or with wholesome compunction to
accept the truth. Though indeed he combated against such a plague, ^ot only
from aloft with long and continued speeches, but even also in meetings and
assemblyes in schools, with syllogismes and distinctions, and with other arts
which Logic teaches. Which perticularly is seen in the Cities of Arimini,
Millan, and Toulouse. From which things grew also another effect of no small
consideration, as well for the common benefit of all Christendom, as for the
especial increase and reputation of the Friars Minors.

The said Religion, as we mentioned, was lately founded by the most Blessed
Father S. Francis, in profession and spirit, rather of Christian poverty and
humility, then of erudition or learning. Which though they were not despised,
or in contempt with him, yet was he very circumspect and cautious in admitting
them into his Institute, being desirous that his Friars should preach rather
with example and good works, then with precepts, and words: nor lightly would
he give them leave to study, as fearing not without good reason, least through
weakness of humane nature, much reading might extinguish devotion, and the wind
of curiosity destroy the building of Charity. From this caution of the holy
Father, and simplicity which commonly appeared in his children, sprang up an
universal opinion in the world, that the Friars were certainly but silly, and
good men only; but ignorant merely and little apt for discovering the deceipts
of the ancient adversary, and judging the quality of sins, or distinguishing
between leaprosy and leaprosy, and by consequence unable to cooperate with the
divine providence in the conducting of souls.

Now some Fathers being desirous to cancel this note, as zealous of the fame
of their Order, and of the glory of Christ, made great instance unto the
Blessed Antony, he would take the pains to read and explicate the more grauer
sciences, and set up in the Religion of the Minors a School also, whence as
from a noble and perpetual Seminary, might issue from time to time sufficient
workmen for the Vinyard of our Lord. To which so honest requests, howbeit
otherwise he would willingly have condescended, yet having some notice of the
mind of his common Father and Superior, he could never be brought to accept
the enterprise, until such time, as he had express faculty and commission
from him, with a letter of the tenor following: To his most dear Brother
Antony, Friar Francis sends greeting. I am content that you read Divinity to
the Friars, but in such sort, that (according to the advice of the Rule)
neither in you or them, the spirit of holy Prayer may be extinguished.

Hereby, all excuse being taken away, S. Antony did at last begin to satisfy
the continual desires of the Friars, and he was the first, who in that,
venerable Family ever held the Chair; beginning in Mompelier in France, and
prosecuting afterward in Bologna, and then in Padua. To which City, whether
it were for the clemency of the air, or for the humanity and disposition of
the inhabitants, he bare very special affection: and with this his new labor
of interpreting the divine mysteries, he came both to illustrate the Order of
Minours, and to affoard the militant Church a fit supply of the choicest
fouldiours. Amidst these so noble and fruitful cares of his, the Servant of
Christ, could not also avoid that same of governing others, in diverse degrees,
and places of France, and Italy, where he was (according to the institute of
the Order) both Guardian and Minister. In which dignityes, howbeit he showed
affability, and such judgment, as he was both reverenced and beloved of his
subjects: yet to the end he might more readily attend to spiritual works, and
for the greater common good, it seemed well to Pope Gregory the IX. through
singular privilege, to discharge him of all superintendency of Conuents, or of
Provinces, which do necessarily bring with them diverse distractions and
thoughts of temporal matters. And besides the office of confessing, conuersing
with the Neighbors, and preaching, the same Pope would have him to put his
sermons into writing, that the profit might not only derive to the present and
living, but even also to the absent, and posterity. Whereupon retyring himself
a new into the City of Padua, being a place for diverse occasions very apt for all exercise of learning, he went forward in putting those books to writing,
which are now read in print, and which to the studious of christian eloquence,
serve as a copious and rich storehouse for any subject whatsoever.

A certain Prophesy of S. Antony fullfilled, of one Philip a Martyr of Christ.
Chap. 9.
HItherto we have spoken of the actions of the Saint, which are imitable of each
religious person. It remaynes now to touch some thing of the more admirable.
And to begin with prophecy, whereof two no less certain then famous
predictions, sufficienly declare, how much this so precious a gemme shined in
the blessed S. Antony. There being a woman at Assisium now ready to be brought
to bed, she devoutly recommended her self to his intercession, who for
charityes sake had been to visit her. To which request, through the hidden
instinct of God, he manifestly answered forthwith, she should be of good
cheer, that she should have a happy labor, and have a son, and that which
more imported, he was destine by divine providence, first, to be a glass of
virtue in the Religion of S. Francis, and then also with effusion of his blood,
and greattorments, for Christ should purchase a palm of a glorious martyrdom.
There was nothing of all this that infallibly fell not out. The happy Babe was
borne without hurt of it self or mother, and in the sacred Baptism, took the
name of Philip. And passing his first years in Angelical purity, of his own
election became a Friar Minour. Hence fortifying himself in the love and fear
of the eternal God, through a heavenly inspiration, was moved to the
pilgrimage of the holy Land, and arrived at Azotus, even just at the time, when
that City, was by treason taken by the Saracens, and the Christians that were
there, to the number of two thousand, were all publicly condemned to death.

Through which so cruel a sentence, Philip fearing least some being affrighted
might come to abandon the holy faith, requested as a favor at the ministers
hands of the Souldan there (and obtained it without difficulty) to be the last
executed of all. Whence the Mahumetans being brought into some hope, that he
would renounce in the mean time; found themselves at last to be far deceived
of their expectation. Because the cruel spectacle being now begun, Philip
endeavored with all fervor and fortitude of mind to comfort all the
Christians, to suffer freely, speaking aloud, he had a revelation of our Lord,
that he was to enter that day into the kingdom of Heaven, with more then a
thousand Martyrs; through which so high a promise these faithful people being
exceedingly comforted, did voluntarily, yea even cheerfully present their bare
necks, to the sword of the bloody Executioner.

Which thing the Souldan noting (who beyond measure abhorred the name of
Christ) entered into such a fury, as he suddenly commanded, that with all the
sorts of most exquisite torments that might be, should his temerity and
boldness be punished, that durst so dissuade from the worship of the Great
Mahomet. Whereupon a troop of hangmen, assailing Philip without more ado, and
in the sight of the whole company of Christians, went first to cut of his
fingars joint by joint, in which so sharp and prolix a torment, he never
ceasing to exhort and inflame the Christians, in such wise as neither being
enforced with menaces, nor won with flatteryes, they all cried out, with one
accord, they would follow by all means the stepes, and counsails of the
courageous Philip. The Souldan continually more enraged, caused him to be
fleaed alive to the navel, and afterward that blessed tongue to be cut out,
whereof being deprived and torn in all parts, he ceased not for all that with
signs and gestures, and much more with example to inflame those sacred
victimes, until such time as he was beheaded with them, and that altogether
ascended to the eternal Country, leaving even to their enemies behind, an
evident sign of their felicity, since the bodies being kept a good while, in
the same place unburied and uncovered did not only not give forth the least ill
savor, but rather yielded a most sweet odor. And in this sort came that to
effect which had now for so many years before, without all doubt, or ambiguity
at all, already been prophesyed by S. Antony.

Another example of S. Antonyes prophesyes, which happened in another Martyr.
Chap. 10.
NO less memorable then the former, was a certain revelation, which S. Antony
manifested clearly being Guardian at that time in the confines of Aquitan, in
a City, which being in a more high place, the Frenchmen called Le Pay, and the
vulgar Italian Val Poggio, and was aunciently by the Latins called Anicium. In
this City among other Inhabitants, was a certain Notary, very Catholic in
faith, the worldly in his dealinges, and more practiced in taking of
Suretyships, then discerning of spirits, more aquainted with plying the Judges,
and Aduocats, then frequenting of Churches and Sacraments. And yet S. Antony on
a time, meeting him one the way, with a low duck, and uncovering of the head,
made him an extraordinary reverence and obeisance. Which thing the Notary,
being guilty of his own quality, and not tied through any freindship to the
poor Friar; at first attributed the same to error or simplicity, afterward
perceiving him to persist in the said observance, when he saw him a far of,
endeavored to shun him. But meeting full on a time where he could not avoid
him, and the Friar saluting him again with the accustomed, or rather with
greater sign of honor then ever, he holding the same as an act of scorn and
derision toward him, began with anger, even grinding his teeth, and drawing
out his sword withal, and to cry out, saying: If thou had not been a Friar,
I had now a good while since even thrust this same in thy sides.

But tell me, thou rude, base, and errant Jack: What is the matter thou
scoffs me thus to my face? To whom the servant of Christ answered with all
submission; Brother, trouble not your self, I do reverence you with my heart,
and do honor you withal fidelity that may be: the reason is, for that I
having greatly desired, and begged as a favor of our Lord, to spend my blood
in his holy service, have never been worthy, nor has he been pleased to hear
my suite. But indeed of you, he has revealed to me, that you shall one day dye
a Martyr; Whence I am constrained with a sweet envy, to hold you in the esteem
and regard I do: and do most affectuously entreat you, that when you shall
come to that glorious conflict, you would be mindful of me poor wretched
sinner. At which words the Notary being pacifyed, converting choler into
laughter, went his ways jesting at the matter. Nor long it was, but the effect
did really succeed.

Because the Bishop of that City, preparing himself to go unto the holy
Sepulcher, the Notary being touched with supernall motives, resolved to
accompany him thither, as he did. And being arrived at Palestine possessed by
the Saracens, the Bishop happened to fall into dispute, of matters concerning
the holy Faith. In which conflict those barbarous people showing themselves
very bold and iusolent, against the honor of Christ, and the Bishop being
timorous in defending the same, and in opposing their blasphemies; the Notary
could by no means brook such indignities, but courageously entered into the
quarrel, and without any respect a whit indeauoured to discover and accuse the
vanity, fraud, and ambitions of their wicked Master whom they adored:
whereupon the Mahumetan^ being all enraged took the Notary, and for the space
of three continual days, having satiated their greedy desires, with mangling
and scourging the victorious warrier of Christ, at last they led him to death:
and he remembering very well, what had been told to him by S. Antony, declared
it to the Christians about him, and with infinite consolation, stretching forth
his neck, to the servants of impiety, and washing his stole anew in the blood
of the Lamb, went immaculate to the heavenly banquet. And thus, with the
stupour, and amazement of all, came the Oracle to be verifyed.

Of sundry apparitions of S. Antony, made in his own person, upon several
occasions. Chap. 11.
THe apparitions of God, made to S Antony, and of him to others, are worthy of
eternal memory. Being one day received as a Ghest, by a certain Knight, no
less devout then illustrious, he had a lodging appointed him, far from
noise, where he might the better attend to study, and contemplation. Now, while
the Knight passes in the night by the house, he sees a most bright splendor to
proceed from that chamber, whereat merueiling much, he secretly approches to
the door, and looking through the key hole, beholds upon an open book before
S. Antony, a child of a celestial beauty; who sending forth rays more bright
then the Sun, threw himself tenderly about the neck of the blessed man, and
embraced him without end, and S. Antony likewise him, with ineffable joy and
affection. Amidst these chaste embraces the most sweet Babe showed him how his
Host was standing at the door, and beheld al things remaining in a rapt. S.
Antony not enuyed him so happy a sight, letting him enjoy it at his pleasure,
until such time as the glorious child did vanish away, when lastly he opened
the door, and with a thousand prayers coniured him to keep the matter in
secret until his death. So promised the Knight and observed the same: and as
soon as the Servant of Christ was quit of the bands of his body, he unloosed
the same of silence, and began to proclayme the aforesaid spectacle, and to
affirm it with oaths and tears together, with so much gust as he could never
be satisfied with recounting it. And hence it is, that the images of the Saint,
are seen so depainted with a child in his arms, sitting on a book, for a
difference of others of his Order. In this manner was S. Antony among other
times, as then made worthy of the presence of our Savior.

And he also, as we said more then once, affoarded himself in several places,
unto diverse persons at once, and that always either for the divine service,
or for edification, and the help of neighbors: as particulerly happened to
him in France, while he was preaching first in Mompelier, in the great Church,
after in Limoges in S. Peter's, which they call of the Quadrino. Because S.
Antony being in the pulpit, and remembering suddenly, he had forgot to
substitute one in the Quire of the Convent, who should supply his part, that
belonged to him; suddenly by divine power, not failing neither the people
assembled, nor pulpit, was present with his Friars to sing his Lesson, and
Antiphone.

At other times his Father being falsely accused in Lisbone, for intercepting
the monyes of the Fiscall, and then again for killing a young man, which by
certain wicked men, was of purpose put into his garden with many signs of
blood upon him, S. Antony in the mean while being certifyed by diuiue
revelation of what had happened at both times, from places and Provinces most
remote, was found to be present in the same moment in the City of Lisbone; and
as for the monyes he made the Magistrates to understand, that the Kings
Treasurers, though fully satisfied heertofore, yet maliciously had denied the
receipt thereof, and acquittances given. For the homicide, it pleased him to
demand it publicly of the dead himself, whether his Father (though
sentenced already for it) were guilty of the said wickedness: whereto having
answered no, without the urging of S. Antony to name the malefactors, he
demanded absolution of the servant of God, for a certain excommunication he
had formerly incurred, and intercession for his sins; which having obtained
in the sight of all the multitude, he fell down dead into the sepulcher
again. And thus S. Antony conserved his innocent Father in his goods, honors,
and life.

Moreover, the servant of Christ, was wont to show himself clearly in the
night in sleep, to some inueterated in sensuality, and other vices, who for
fear or shame durst not to lay open their enormious sins to the Priest, and
vpbrayding them their of crimes, and circumstances thereof, now to admonish
them with sweetness, and now to constreyne them with severity and menaces, to
repair to this or that Confessor, as he esteemed most for the purpose, and so
with the Sacrament of penance they had time, to deliver themselves from the
power of the devil: which even the penitents themselves related afterward,
not without the great meruayl of every one. So as neither in this also may the
blessed S. Antony be accounted inferior to S. Nicholas, to S. Ambrose, to S.
Francis, and others, of whom it is read, how they had the same very favors
from the Almighty in diverse occurrences. And since we have newly made mention
of penitents, we may not fold up in silence, how efficacious the words of S.
Antony were concerning that wholesome Sacrament.

Other notable examples, of the efficacy of S. Antonyes preaching, not without
manifest miracles. Chap. 12.
A Certain Citizen of Padua by name Leonard, confessing unto him, among other
iniquityes discovered, being very contrite, that he kicked his Mother on the
belly so hard, as he threw her to the ground. For which the Saint reprehending
him most grievously, in process of discourse said to him: How that foot which
had had the boldness to strike the belly, whence he came forth, deserved to be
cut off. The words were not spoken to a deaf man: the absolution received,
Leonard goes his ways home, and interpreting the sillables as they sounded,
taking a hatchet really in hand, he cut off his foot, and presently being
seized with a mortal sooning, began to cry out aloud; to these cries the
unfortunate Mother full of fear came suddenly in, the Chirurgians are sent
for, the wound is swathed with little hope of remedy or cure, the neighbors
run in, one cries, another weeps, all are astonished.

The woeful woman, scarcely yet recovering breath, goes her ways with her
hair disheueled to the Saint, and with womanish plaints, and bitter sobs,
charges him with the death of her dear son. The Blessed Antony, with the
news thereof remained extremely disconsolate and afflicted, and not content to
have discharged himself with just excuses, he went immediately to the lodging
of that simple man, and there sending up enflamed prayers to God, he took up
the foot cut off, and laying it to the stump of the leg, with the benediction
of God so united the same, as the young man without grief or scarre remained
safe and sound. The fame of so great a miracle dilated it self throughout, and
thanks were rendered to the divine goodness on all sides. These and other such
like shinges befell S. Antony in Confessions.

But turn we now to his Preaching again, we may not let pass, how the
Crusado for the holy Land being proclaimed, under Gregory the IX. and a most
ample Iubiley published for such an intention in Rome, there assembled together
an infinite number of people from all parts of Christendom, as Greeks, French,
Almans, Spaniards, English, and of other nations: by all which, the blessed S.
Antony was heard to preach at once, each one in their proper language, as in the
City of Jerusalem heretofore the Apostles were heard on the solemn day of
Pentecost; that supernatural effect being renewed, with the astonishment of as
many as heard the same.

In Arimini, the City being full of Heretics, S. Antony endeavored chiefly,
and not without much travail to reduce the Heresiarcke Bonuillus, or (as some
would have it) Bonellus to a better mind, who for thirty years continuallly
had persecuted the Church of Christ: and after his amendment, notwithstanding
many others yet remaining most perverse in their obstinacy, and shutting their
ears unto the truth, after that S. Antony with many prayers in vain, had
invited them to a Sermon, there being a great number of them as then forth of
the walls, where the river called Marechia discharges it self into the Sea;
with great confidence in our Lord, he begins to call the Fishes unto the word
of God, since men of reason and redeemed with his precious blood, would by no
means seem to harken to him. And incredible thing had it not been evident: he
had scarce given forth the command, when an innumerable multitude of fishes of
sundry forms and bigness, were seen to appear on the waters of the Sea and
river, which even of their own accord came in by sholes, and with heads
erected accommodating themselves to listen to him; in so much as the lesser put
themselves near to the bancks side, and then the greater and bigger in order,
with so goodly and fair a dispose, as a more pleasing sight could not be seen.

To these squadrons so well ordered, the blessed S. Antony lifting up his voice
began to unfold unto them the benefits vouchsafed them from the Creator, the
gift of swiftnes and colors, and of their beauty in particular; the medicine
subministred from them by Toby; the tribute, and food of our Lord himself: the
mystery of the Resurrection represented in the Prophet Jonas. For which reasons
with many others besides did S. Antony exhort them to yield God thanks. To
which advise of his those Marine troops* since they could not by words, with
sundry motions at least did signify their obedience, stooping with the head,
sporting with iubily and showing a will to honor the messenger of Christ. Nor
would they depart from the place, until they were lice^ced thence, through his
holy benediction. And so in the mean time the concourse of spectatours being
now continually grown greater; the man of God taking then occasion, vpbrayded
those obstinate and perverse men of their malice and impiety, since in
acknowledging the high Creator, admitting so his holy law, they would so
manifestly suffer themselves to be vanquished by beasts; whereupon the
Heretics at last remained confounded, and the Catholics continually more
confirmed, in the holy doctrine and veneration of the Sea Apostolic.

Other miracles which S. Antony wrought in the sight of Heretics, to the
conversion of many, and confusion of others. Chap. 13.
MOst famous was that which happened in the exequyes of a certain public
Usurer, now buried already: at which exequyes, it belonging to the blessed S.
Antony to make the sermon, he took for text that saying of our Savior: Vbi
est the saurus tuus, ibi est and cor tuum. To which purpose with accustomed
liberty he inueighed against the disordinate love of gold and silver, and
weighed the inestimable domages which grow from thence: finally to let them see
with their eyes themselves the truth of that sentence, turning himself to the
nearest parents of the dead: Go your ways (said he) by and by, to the chest of
the miserable wretch, and there within shall you find his very heart it self:
which they did without contradiction, and to the great terror of them, and of
the whole land, in the midst of his monyes they found the said heart, as yet not
wholly cold. We shall now ad another of no terror awhit, but of mere
consolation.

S. Anthony being Custos at Limoges, after he had passed through France still
preaching here and there, chanced to discourse with the inhabitants of
Burges. But the press was so great of such as came to hear him, as that the
Canons of the Church, putting themselves in procession with the whole Auditory,
went forth of the gates of the town, into the open fields: where while the man
of God puts himself to discourse in an eminent place, behold there gathered
together very black clouds in the air, which threatened a terrible ^pest; for
fear whereof the people flying from thence and beginning to shift for
themselue, S. Antony said with a loud voice: Be of good cheer my masters;
stir not a foot, there shall not a drop of water light upon any of you. The
people obeyed: and behold suddenly a mighty storm of hayle and rain to fall
from heaven, which enuironing the Auditory as a wall, did not wet the breadth
of a palm in the whole circuit, but left the people dry and untouched. Whence
followed many praises unto God, and extraordinary credit and reverence to S.
Antony.

And now to speak something likewise of meruails succeeding in his
disputations with Heretics: It is reported for certain, how the divine man
being at Arimini on a time, or as others would have it, in the City of
Toulouse, a malapert minister of Satan* of the Sect of Berengarius, being not
able to maintain himself in a controversy of the most holy Sacrament, against
the reasons alleged by S. Anthony, said finally unto him. Thou confoundest me
with words, as more learned then I; but not because they have more foundation
of truth. But let us come to some more clear experiences in effect; Whence I
may be certifyed indeed, that God is really present in the consecrated host,
and I promise and swear unto you (when it shall succeed) that I will confess
to be vanquished, and believe this article, in the manner as you teach it.

S. Anthony accepts the condition, nor doubts awhit to put the quality of the
trial to his own choice. Let us do it then in this manner replied the
Heretic. This day will I begin to keep my Mule without meat, and after
three days again shall I bring him forth so hungry into the market place,
together with a pecke of oats for the purpose. And at the same time thou
likewise come thither with thy azime or host, and if the beast in presence of
the one and other shall forbear to eat the oats, and turn to bow unto thy
bread, I am content also to adore the same, without more ado. In the name of
God said S. Antony let the matter be published through the City. The third day
being come, both parties repair to the marketplace, with such a thronge of
people as every one may judge. Here S. Anthony sacrifices upon an Altar set
up for the purpose, and before he communicates, converting himself to the
principal Citizens, with lighted torches about him, holding the Host in his
hand replenished with faith, ^es to the brute beast, which now was senting the
oats, and commands him in power of that God there present, that l^uing the
prouande^ now taken out of the sack, and set before him, to come presently to
his Creator, and acknowledge and adore him in the said Host.

The Priest had scarcely ended these words, when the Mule despising the
prouander, with headbowing, humbly approaching to the most holy sacrament
kneeld down to adore it, to the infinite iubiley of the good, and wholesome
conversion of that wretched Sacramentary. In this manner was a very strange
experiment brought to pass, unworthy indeed of so high a mystery; but yet
nothing prejudicial, nor perilous to the life of S. Antony.

How S. Antony escaped the treacheryes of his enemies by secret poison, and of
the opinion he gained with all men. Chap. 14.
SOme others of the same kind with the former, found out another more wicked
proof, and by so much more dangerous, as more hidden; who being not wone with
the former passage, but more exasperated rather with the said miracle,
determined with poison to murder the servant of Christ. Inuiting him therefore
to dinner (whither he refused not to go, being desirous to help any manner of
ways) under color of charity, they present him with poisoned meat; which
fraud being suddenly known in spirit, he reprehended them with love and
gravity for such impiety: but those obstinate and perverse men, instead of
being compunct, and penitent thereat, unto their hidden deceits added a manifest
impudency, and boldly thereupon began to say: How Christ had promised his
faithful Disciples, that neither the poisonous, nor fatal drinks, should
seem to hurt them. Whence if he would but taste thereof, he should soon
doubtless confess that saying of the Gospel to be false. At which words S.
Antony recollecting himself, and on the one side, holding the taking of such
food were a mere tempting of him that had revealed the danger unto him; and
fearing on the other, through the wicked disposition of those Calumniatours to
occasion some discredit to the sacred Scripture, was resolved at last to eat,
and drink the same without exception, if they would promise to return to the
Catholic faith, when as he should receive no hurt thereby. To which condition
they yielding assent, his word was performed, as well without the hurt of his
person, as with the glorious purchase of those minds seduced.

These, and many other things, which for breuity we let pass were wrought by
the Blessed Anthony in the name of Christ, beyond all course and compass of
humane power: which being matched with a singular innocence of manners, and
with a solid, lively and enflamed eloquence, may not seem strange they should
fructifye so much, not only in the hearts of the meaner and poorer sort (which
ordinarily is wont, very willingly to accept the word of God, and without
difficulty to raise the affect from visible things) but even also in the minds
of the rich and potent; who so rarely embrace the seed of the Gospel, and be
so hardly weaned from false delights, and designs, to aspire with pains,
mortifications, and alms to the future felicity. And yet many of this
condition rendered themselves to the battayls of this great Captain, and
committed wholly to his discretion and government (as we said) both their goods
and lives.

Among which, a principal Baron of Padua, being called Tisone Campo San
Pietro, may not seem to be reckoned in the last place. This man after he had
served long in the wars, wherein he had been a chief Commander, retyring
himself to his house, and laying his arms aside, at the entreaty of the
Blessed Antony, with the good example of the whole City, gave himself to
spirit; and conceauing fervor and zeal to help his subjects, obtained of the
Blessed Father to vouchsafe to come into the Land of Campo S. Pietro (from
whose dominion, took the noble family of the Tisons that name) to cultiuate
and instruct the rude people there in Christian Religion, and in the fear of
God. Which S. Antony refused not, especially for that there was in that place a
little Convent of Minours, that was maintained by the alms of Tisone himself.
True it is, that S. Antony being arrived there, to remain more retired, would
not abide continually, neither among the Friars, nor less in the Palace of
his Host, but under a Nut-tree of an unmeasurable greatness, from whose truncke
grew forth six great branches in manner of a crown, causing three little Cells
to be set up, one for himself, and the other for two Friars and companions of
his (in which work Tisone himself with singular piety did labor with his
own hands) whence S. Antony was wont after his exercises of prayer and
contemplation, to preach unto the people; which assembled to that heavenly
food, from the neighbor countries thereabout; but yet descending at the hours
of refection and rest, he remained in the Convent.

Amidst these things the divine man, although by his old Institute he shunned,
and had all worldly glory in much horror; yet through the greatness of his
merits, he was arrived to that venerati^n with the people, that even pieces of
his poor cassock were sec^etly cut off for devout Relics; and when the word
Saint was but named, for excellency sake it was commonly understood of him. And
yet he notwithstanding continued in austetityes, macerations, and vigils, not
that his flesh now tamed and subdued already, had need thereof; but to afford
therein a perpetual example, and edification to seculars. Who ordinarily not
having just weights to balance the integrity of virtues, are wont, and
accustomed to value and prize perfection, by the exterior afflictions and
penances they discover in Religious.

The Death of S. Antony, with the sequels thereof: and his speedy Canonization.
Chap. 15.
With such manner of strictnes of life accompanied (as we have said) with an
extraordinary weak complexion, and many labors, and trauayls withal, came
the servant of Christ to be so feeble, as being surprised in Campo San Pietro
with a grievous infirmity, he soon, and directly told it likewise to one about
him, that he was now arrived to the term of his short days, and hoped ere
long to go, and enjoy those places without term or measure of time. And
withal not to be troublesome in his cure, either to that small Oratory of
Minors, or the lay Families there, though he were with the most affectuous
prayers that might be, coniured by all to abide with them, yet causing himself
to be laid in a Country cart, he went to Padua. And considering that in the
Monastery of Sancta Maria Mayor, within the walls, he should too much be
molested with visits, he diuerted to another place, which is called Arcella, of
Franciscans indeed, but yet somewhat forth of the City.

Here now being oppressed with the malady, with all devotion he received the
wholesome Sacraments, and with hands joined together, and lifted up, not without
extraordinary feeling he recited the seven Penitential psalms, and a devout
hymn to the most Blessed Virgin, whose protection with particular service he
had always sought to rely upon. From thenceforth he begins suddenly to lift
up his eyes, and to fix them on heaven; and being demanded what he looked
upon? I behold, said he, my Lord Jesus Christ and after a short repose, among a
thousand benedictions and pious tears of his dearest friends, he yielded up
his spirit to the Creator, with all the tranquillity and serenity that might
be, in the year of our Lord 1231. and the 13. of the month of June, on a
Friday, he being then but 36. years of age, whereof 15. he had spent in his
Fathers house, two in S. Vincents of Lisbone, 9. at the holy Cross of
Conimbria, and about some 10. in the Order of S. Francis

After the passage, that blessed flesh, which through evil usage, was before
so horrid to see, so rugged, dry, and wrincked to be touched, became in a
moment so white, soft, and plump, as if it had been of a tender and delicat
child. His beloved friend and master the Abbot of Vercells, whom we mentioned
above, at that time, was much afflicted, with a disease of the throat. And even
lo, the same day, when S. Antony dyed, being in his chamber alone at prayer,
he saw him suddenly to appear before him; and after mutual salutation, and
embraces: Behold (said he) my Lord Abbot, having left my Ass at Padua, how I
go in have to my Country. And saying so, with a light touch only, he cured his
throat, and so vanished. But the Abbot steadfastly beleiuing, that S. Antony was
really passed by to Lisbone, going forth of his chamber, began to enquire of
hi^ familiars, where he was; from whom not gathering any thing, at last
returned into himself, and coniectured by that vision the happy departure of
the man of God: whereupon, making new diligence by letters, he found the
encounter of hours and moments to be just the same, as he himself did
afterward testify.

In the mean while the Friars of Arcella, fearing some tumultuous concourse
would be at the body, endeavored to keep the departure of the servant of Christ
very secret, but in vain. Because the very innocent boys, through hidden
instigation of the spirit, began in many troops to go crying through the
countries: The holy Father is dead, the Saint is dead. With which voice the
people being awaked, on a sudden they shut up their shopps, and laying all
other business aside, put themselves in arms, with great effusion of blood,
while one part stood for retayning the sacred treasure in Arcella, and the
other to conueigh him into the City: but after many and perilous bickeringes
between them, by the humble prayers of the Friars, and the authority of the
Magistrates it was obtained, that as himself being near to death had
requested, he should be carried to the Church of Sancta Maria Mayor, and so he
was accompanied thither by the Bishop, the Clergy, and by persons of quality in
good order, with such abundance of lights, as the whole City seemed to be on
fire.

Here the high Mass being sung by the Bishop, began continually new and
stupendous miracles to manifest themselves in diverse infirmityes of souls and
bodies. To which fame, with incredible fervor, continued a long time, whole
troops of Pilgrims to resort thither, not only of those confines, but of Italy
also, and as it were of all Europe, with such a number of large gifts, and
precious offeringes, as they were feign to appoint chamberlaines and keepers
for the custody of them, of the chiefest, and most honorable persons of Padua.
With the help whereof, and with that moreover which the City it self adjoined
thereto, changing the title of the Temple (which was first of Juno, and after
of the Blessed Virgin Mary) in honor and invocation of the Saint, was built in
the same place, one of the magnificent and sumptuous Churches of Christendom.
Lisbone it self being the native Country of the Saint, concurred in a manner
with the devotions of the Paduans, in making by command of the King, of one
part of the House, where he was borne, a fair little Church as we said, and of
the other a Hall, where the Ancients with the Senate, unto this present day,
are wont to assemble to deal about matters of the Common wealth.

But above all, Pope Gregory the IX. himself, who before in Rome had with so
choice an Elogy commended the doctrine of the servant of God, concurred to the
exalting of his glorious memory. So as scarcely had a month passed over from
the death, or to say better, from the nativity of S. Antony, but causing a most
exact inquisition to be made of his life, and miracles, with the high
approbation of all the Cardinals, and Prelates of the holy Church, he canonized
him solemnly, and enrolled him among those spirits, who arrived in the eternal
country, do securely enjoy the beatificall vision of God, there making
intercession for others, who being on the way, are yet doubtful continually of
their progress and term. Through which judgment and approbation of the Sea
Apostolic, was enflamed in all Christendom, a new desire to accumulate
honors upon the sacred depositum, and a lively says in presenting
supplications to that glorious soul: the Paduans yet in this part showing
themselves most remarkable of all; who being constant in their ancient piety,
follow in celebrating every year the day of the deposition of the Saint, with
most exquisite pompes, psalms, panygeriques, and other triumphs, truly
belonging to the immortal merits of the noble Confessor of Christ, and
particular protection he affords that famous City: whence he renouncing in a
manner his proper Country, has been pleased to accept, the perpetual sweet
Surname of Padua.

FINIS.
S. THOMAS OF AQVINE.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe An all^ to the Rose called in Hebrew, Loves ^haddovv. Cant. (...).
Tree that bears the dainty Cyprian flower,
Unless often pruned by skillfull workemans art,
Grows wild and fruitless: Love does loose his power
And vigorous force, unless our Souls do dart,
And force it often, with often acts on high;
Or feeble soon it grows, and soon does dye.
The smiling leaves each other seem to kiss:
Give heaven thy Love; Love shall from thence descend,
Cropped, bruiz'd, distilled more sweet by far it is:
Troubles make ours more grateful in the end,
And oppositions nobly borne away,
Crown our afflictions with a nobler Bay.
Opposed by Friends their force I ouerbore;
My wish at last obtaining to enjoy,
Heavens Love I found in me augmented more,
While more to gain it, I my Love employ:
By painful acts this Passion I dilate,
And keep my soul by weakness in her state.
THE LIFE OF S. THOMAS OF AQVINE.
Written by the Reverend Fathers Preachers.
Of the Parents, and education of S. Thomas: with the signs of his futnre
greatness. Chap. I.
SAINT THOMAS Doctor, for the excellency of his learning, surnamed the
Angelical, was borne in the City of Aquinas, in the year of our Lord, 1224.
His Father was Landolphus Count of the said City of Aquinas: his Mother
Theodora, daughter of the Count of Thean, being both of a noble and illustrious
house. The birth not only of the Saint, but also his Religion was foretold by
a venerable Hermit, who lived in those Countries, called Bonus; who visiting
Theodora near her childbirth, saluted her, saying: Be joyful Lady, for you
shall shortly have a son, who for his singular qualities shall be renowned
through the world, and shall take the habit you see here depainted: It was
even the habit of S. Dominicke, the which, at the foot of the Mother of God, in
a little image, he wore for devotion hanging about his neck. Theodora
answered: Gods will be done. After which, the child being borne into the world,
and called in sacred Baptism by the name of Thomas, soon gave very manifest
signs of the learning and sanctity which in time were to shine in him. Because
on a day while the Nurse was making him a bath, he snatching up of his own
accord a piece of paper from the ground, held it fast in the hand, and the
Nurse going about to take it away, he began to cry, and to be so troubled at
it, as for a last remedy she was feign to wash him, with the same in his hand.

Wherefore the mother being advertised, to clear and satisfy her self the
better of the matter, opened his hand by force, and taking away the paper from
him, they found there written the salutation of the Archangell Gabriel to the
Virgin Mary, and that with so much more wonder of theirs, and of all the
standers by, as they could less conjecture, how such a writing could come into
his hands. The little Child in the mean time, with signs never ceased to
reach after it, and to cry and sob for the same, until to quiet him they were
forced to yield it him again: and he not to have it taken away any more,
putting it in his mouth, on a sudden swallowed it up. This same, as we say, was
held of the wise, and of men of good understanding, for a great and certain
presage of celestial knowledge, and of the rare virtues, which in progress of
time were to ripen in Thomas: it being not likely that a child in the
swath-bands, without divine operation could be so enamoured with the words,
which were the beginning and fountain of all the mysteryes of the new law, and
of Christian piety.

Nor this sign only of future fruits, was seen in that noble bud, but as
often as a book, or ought else but like to a book, was presented to his sight,
with childish endeavor he would reach after it, and take it in his hand,
turning it up and down, and looking on it without end; so as to comfort him,
when need was, and to still him and dry his tears, there was no more
efficacious way, then to put a paper or book into his hands, to play withal.
A midst such hopes, being now arrived to five years old, that he might be the
better conserved in purity and virtuous manners, he was according to the
laudable customs of those times given to the venerable Monks of Monte Cassino,
to be trained up: under whose care were likewise many children of Lords and
Princes besides. Not had the Master any difficulty at all, to direct this
happy plant unto immortal and divine things; since the child of his own
accord, showing himself to be aliened from base thoughts, and from all
curiosity whatsoever, did even tire him with high and profound questions,
whereof one was, to demand often, what God was? Besides that, keeping himself
from company of the less modest and devout, he would voluntarily recollect
himself, with the wiser and more prudent sort, and more addicted to spirit:
yea it is affirmed for certain, that even at that time, he would spend two
hours of the day, in sundry devotions, and yet not fail to be at school, or
to do whatsoever the Master appointed him besides. In breife, outstripping his
years by many degrees, with his judgment he became a pattern of indust^y, of
obedience, and of all goodness.

Whereupon the Ab^ot of Monte Cassino, for fear least Count Landolph and
Theodora, should transfer him from the arts of peace, to those of war, as
they had already done with the other two elder sons of theirs, very
instantly persuaded them, that they would not smother such a wit in the
tumultuous exercises, and occupations of chiualry, and deprive the world, and
the Church of so great a help, as such beginnings without doubt seemed to
promise them. Great was the authority of the Abbot with all men, nor less
efficacious were the reasons alleged by him. Thomas his age (which as yet not
passed ten years) afforded a large field for great designs. The neighbor
City of Naples, being the ancient and gracious receptable (as Strabo
testifyes) of sublimer wits, and (...) the liberal arts, being in love with
so great a Student, seemed as it were, ambitiously to stretch forth the arms,
to inuit and entertayne him.

All these occasions, through divine disposition concurred together, to
mantayne Thomas so studious of speculation and learning: so as being co^ueighed
from the Country to the Metropolis, and from gra^mer to the grauer studyes,
under famous Doctors, he studied the Mathematikes, Logike, and Philosopy, with
such profit as in short time, his name began to resound through the whole
University, extolling with the luster of his Blood, and splendor of his
parents, the singular qualityes and rare ornaments of his person. At which
glory afforded him, was yet the wise and chaste youth not puffed up a whit, but
rather endeavored he with all force, to stand firm in the knowledge and mean
esteem of himself, and amidst what varieties so ever of human accidents, to
hold his intention fixed and centered in God only: and by how much more
knowledge he got of the Creator by the means of creatures, and from Time
learned Eternity, and from transitory things the stable and eternal, so much
greater desire was enkindled in him, to sequester himself from the vulgar, and
with a generous contempt of the world, of purpose to attend to the
contemplation of the first cause, and to cultiuate wholly that part of himself,
which he knew to be more worthy, and more like unto God. Such was the end and
scope of the good youth, but in the election of the mean, he could not yet
resolve, but remained in the same perplexity, until a clear day was added to
the uncertain light of the passed inspirations, through the occasions we shall
presently declare.

How S. Thomas enters into the Family of the Dominicans; and how he bears
himselues therein. Chap. 2.
THe sacred Order of the Friars Preachers, now flourished in those days, that
was founded by the glorious Father S. Dominicke, and there were, even at that
time also, as ever after have been, many men of excellent learning and singular
virtue amongst them. Now S. Thomas having friendship with one of these, namely
with John of S. Julian, began ingenuously to confer with him of his studyes
and labors. Whereupon being often present at his disputes, and discourses, and
of others of the same Family, he came by little and little to affectionate
himself to their Institu^e, while it seemed to him, he could no ways better
employ the talents he had from God, then in the company of men wholly given to
the extirpation of Heresies, and defense, and exaltation of the Catholic
Faith. But perhapps the better to examine his spirit, or not to trust to much
too himself, he differred (as the use is) his resolution yet longer. When John
easily perceiving what the noble youth reuolued in mind, he determined to
spur him on, and with good opportunity said to him one day: It seems to me
Thomas, when I cast mine eyes upon thee, and thy labors, and trauayles, thou
aspirest to no vain, or transitory rewards: but if thou will attain thy
purpose, Know assuredly my Son, that perfect wisdom and true felicity, is
not got amidst the distractions, intrications, and labyrinths of the world. The
recollection of the soul, and the repose and solitude, which are found in
Religious, is the next disposition to apprehend the truth with, and to receive
continually new rays and influences from heaven. This way, as you well know,
have the greatest lights of Christendom held; who sequestring themselves from
busynesses and po^rba^tions, and cares, have attended to Philosophize in good
earnest, nor have reguarded any more the peoples ta^ngs, then the bawling of so
many Curres. Wherefore do thou also with like examples not fail to disentangle
thy self. This habit here now expects thee a good while, and if thou
resoluest but to accept the same, my mind gives me, nor am I a whit deceived,
that by thy means our Lord will work some notable exployt.

Such was the first assault and battery which John gave him, and not in vain.
Since that finding now at first the walls to be shaken with this discourse, he
proceeded on to level them with the earth, and to take all obstacles quite
away: and S. Thomas easily convinced, gave up the hold, saying: Father, I would
not have you think me to be so cold, and so poor a lover of the chiefest
good, as that the peoples talk, or any other respect whatsoever, should put me
off, from following it with all my forces. Your exhortation, has not found me
alienated a whit, from such manner of designs, since now already I have
thought with my self long since, to retire me. And now only to resolve of the
place, I had need of some loving direction, and prudent counsel. To which
office of charity, since it has pleased our Lord to make use of your person,
assure your self I receive your words, as come from the Holy Ghost. Whence I
pray, let there be no delay made: Do you deal with the Superiors, for I will
not depart hence, til the busynes be concluded. John could have wished for no
better news. Soon shall you be satisfied, replied he then; and going in have
to the Priour, without any difficulty, but rather with a great deal of joy of
the whole Convent, he brought the busynes begun, to a very good pass; and
Thomas was put into the habit, with the due ceremonies, being then of
seauenteene years of age.

Now seeing himself, to be thus shut up in the Monastery, and esteeming
himself to be sufficiently fenced against the clamours of his friends, and
City: considering the state he had entered into, he began to frame his life,
according to the obligement of his vocation; holding it a great scorn if after
the leaving of such hopes in the world, he should not so carry himself in
Religion, as every one should not rest satisfied of the course he had
undertaken. Then partly through the internal motives, which he felt in his
breast, partly the exterior examples and aduices of the Fathers with whom he
lived, he went on more encouraged every day, not to forflow any thing, that
might any ways promote him to the top of perfection, which he had proposed to
himself. And howbeyt in each virtue through divine grace, and with the
continual use of prayer, he labored to become excellent, yet with particular
application he endeavored to go forward in holy humility, as well for
acknowledging it to be the Mother of all good, as also in seeing an
extraordinary necessity imposed upon him, to show forth himself more meek and
humble to all, by how much the ornaments and habilityes he had received from
God, were more apt to move envy, and to make him more haughty and proud. And
forasmuch as he well knew, there was no more direct, and speedy way for the
aforesaid virtue, then the perpetual subjection and mortification of the
proper will and judgment, he gave himself to observe obedience above all
things: and even from the first beginning so ordered he, and composed the mind,
as that neither in words nor deeds, would he once digress from the Superiors
dictamens, nor from the orders, and rules of his Religion: and therefore he
attended to read them, as he might every moment without difficulty be putting
them in practice. Besides which, knowing how important sobriety and abstinence
were to restrain passions, and to conserve the understanding clear, and
quick-sighted, he determined to give no place to superfluous nourishment and
sleep; whence, either the flesh might kick through too much pampering, or the
mind be ouercast with fumes and vapors. Finally, he ever abhorred all idleness,
not suffering any hour unfruitfully to pass away, and leaving withal, as
little place as might be to the temptations, and subtilityes of the ancient
Enemy.

Theodora the Mother hears of S. Thomas his entry into Religion; and labour^
to draw him from it, by all means possible. Chap. 3.
IN the mean time Count Landolph dyed, after he had suffered many troubles and
losses, for defense of the Sea Apostolic, by Frederick the Emperor: who being
now with his army in Tuscany, understanding of the death of the Count, sent for
his two eldest sons, the one called Arnold, the other by the name of his
Father, Landolph; and under the show of honorable service in war, kept them
for hostages, that in defending the cause, and part of the Pope, they might not
follow their Fathers steps. The widow Theodor^ being now in these terms in
the City of Aquinas, had news of the election of life, which her son Thomas
had made in Naples; and remembering withal the prophesy of the good Hermit, she
endeavored to satisfy her self, with what the divine providence had ordained:
yea she began to render thanks to God for it, as became a Christian, and
virtuous woman; but was enflamed notwithstanding with such a burning desire, to
behold and embrace her desired son, as without delay she travailed to Naples,
with the mind (as the writers say) to examine the counsails of the young man,
and that if she found them to be reasonable, and well grounded, to encourage
him to persevere in the divine service, rather then to alienate or divert him
any manner of ways.

Nevertheless, the Dominican Fathers, not to expose so new and worthy a
subject to the hazard of his vocation, understanding of the Countess coming,
made have to send him to Rome; from thence to pass unto Paris. When Theodora
had notice thereof, it cannot easily be expressed what anger and disdain she
conceived for it, and laying all other thoughts aside, she posted to Rome; and
not finding her dear pledge there neither, she presently wrytes to her sons
in the Camp, to send forth as soon as may be, to way-lay the Roman passage,
and apprehending their Brother on his way to France in a Friars habit, by any
means to send him to her. This message to those Souldyers (who as yet had
heard nothing of the news of S. Thomas) was both sudden, and ungrateful to
them. They being no less enfla^med with choler then the Mother was, with the
Emperors consent, they went scouring the Country with a good band, until by
divine permission, they found the Pilgrim, through wearines of the journey sat
down with four others, at a clear fountain somewhat near the Bourge of
Aquapendente, and running furiously upon him, first they tried to pull away his
habit, by force; but that not becoming them to do, they took him lastly, and
sent him bound to his Mother: who receiving him with sighs and sobs, caused him
to be carried for the present to Rocca secca (a place that was seated, on the
top of a hill near to Aquinas) to see if hereafter, with more leisure, she
might draw him to her designs.

This boldness of Theodora, and of her elder Sons, with reason displeased the
Pope, when he heard the same from the Fathers of S. Dominicke, and would surely
have proceeded against them with censures and excommunications, if the said
Religious for avoiding scandal, and to show themselves rather to be friends of
peace, had not pacifyed the matter, in leaving all to the divine justice. But
Theodora yet not contented with what she had done, being returned to her
country, beginns afresh to lay a cruel assault against S. Thomas, saying
among other things, that which follows: When thy Father of happy memory, and
I thy unfortunate Mother first sent thee to Monte Cassino, and afterward to
study at Naples, we had verily thought, that the conversation of such, even so
held in esteem for sanctity and learning, as the Fathers of S. Benet were, and
the others of S. Dominicke, would have bred and nourished in thee nothing but
piety and reverence due to a Mother, at least humanity and discretion, to be
showed of right to every one: but now with these deportements of thine, thou
make me doubt that these new Orders instead of meeknes and ciuility do but
teach men to put on the habit of fiercenes and cruelty: yet when I am present
at their preachinges, I do hear them commend both with reasons, and with
authority of sacred Scriptures, the observance, and honor due unto Father and
Mother, and the care which every one ought to have of their domestiques. If
these modern Deuines, to purchase in public an opinion of sanctity, and in
secret to attend to their private interests, do but celebrate Mercy in the
Pulpit, and in their Cell approve inhumane, rigours, and of harsh manners, and
if so it be with them; then surely it is to be thought a goodly sanctity to lie
so in the Pulpit, to deceive the Auditors, and with trim and colorable
speeches of piety to inueagle and entice the unwary youth, to make them
afterward in Cloisters, to become very savage and brutish, arming them, and
setting them on against their own Mothers, sometimes more just and timourous
of God, then even the Preachers themselves.

And likewise if it be true, as I have always understood, that to have respect
to Parents, both by divine Law and natural instinct, be straightly imposed on
every man; what excuse can thou seem to allege, my Son, for not casting
thine eyes hitherto, on so great calamityes, as now have partly happened to me,
and partly also, are likely to arrive anew, and even hang over my head? Tell
me? Where is thy Father, who has left me a Widow, surcharged so with years,
amidst so grievous storms and adversities? Where are thy Brothers, who being
accused for being too favorable, and followers of the Pope, are violently
detayned by Caesar? Yet so great loss, and miseries might in some manner be
suffered by me, if there were but any hope yet left us of better. But these
differences which reign so between the Emperor and the Pope, and the
sinister conceit, wherein we are with the most potent and stronger part; alas,
how I fear it will redound at last, to an utter ruin of our house, and our
whole City. One comfort only remained unto me, in thy person, while thy
wisdom and rare parts seemed to promise me, they would shortly raise thee to
so high an estate and dignity, as thou only mighst suffice to remedy all these
losses and perils. But most unhappy we, that even we applied thee to study and
devotion, while now thou art become an idle spectatour only of the calamityes,
and troubles of thy disconsolate Mother, Brothers, Parents and Friends, and
lastly of the flames and ashes of all the afflicted country. To which I see
well thou art likely to give us some goodly succor surely, with those horrid
garments I see upon thee, and with thy flying so, into the dens of France,
there to rejoice thee, and to laugh at our death and Exequies.

The Answer of S. Thomas to his Lady Mother. Chap. 4.
THese words Theodora accompanied with weeping, and anger withal, but yet not
entering into menaces, hoping that her Son being moved to pity would be able
to make no more resistance against her. But he being resolute and firm as a
tower, did seek indeed to comfort her, but as far as duty would and no
further, and gave her account of his doings in the manner following. If so many
ruins as you say Madame, are like to befall our house, neither you nor I can
tell which way to remedy them, since for the future it rests in the hands, and
will of God. Nor to me appears, we are to expect so much evil from the divine
Goodness: and if in very deed our sins, and those of our Country seem to
merit the same, what better mean can I take, to pacify the Heavenly wrath,
then to dispoyle me of my self, and to offer me up as a full and perfect
Holocaust to his Eternal Majesty? If I should have remained with you in the
world, or now return to it a new, what should I do but increase with my
presence your misfortunes, laments, and woes? And is it possible that our City
should be reduced into so il terms, as that the only safety thereof, should
be ^ounded in a poor youth, of little knowledge and of no experience at all?
And yet when necessity shall require it, I shall be ready to succor it with my
life and blood.

But where are the flames? where the fires you exaggerate so much? For my part
I do see none present, nor do I know whence they are like to come. And if
indeed (as I said) they were to be feared so, for our own sins; it rests not
in my power but in Gods only, to exempt us from them. And when you would rely
on human succors, have you not other Sons, as more ancient in years, so of
much more prudence and worth then I? Are they not continually with the person
of the Emperor? Who, supposing he have some suspicion of our blood, yet will
it be no hard matter, for them with their service and loyalty (which is wont to
soften and relent even Bears and Lions) to pacify him so, that his ill
conceit may turn to a good opinion again, and his hatred be converted into
grace and protection. Nor would I have you say here, Madame, that I am quite
deprived of affection and of common sense, and that from the Servants of God I
have learned to be in human and savage: these are but fables merely. I contemn
not your sighs, I take no pleasure (as you please to say) in your tribulations
and afflictions. God calls me another way, him must I needs obey rather then
men: and you consider not the great danger, the while, you put me into, through
your so obstinately opposing his holy will. And since you term me hard and
savage, for sequestring my self from the snares of the world, what manner of
love shall I call yours? how pious, how benign, how motherly, so to pull me
from the midst of the haven of tranquillity, to expose me to the raging winds
and furious tempests of the world? But in sum, you deceive your self Madame,
if you think with your artificiousnes to draw a soul into baseness and mire,
that having through the grace of God already tasted some fruit of the spirit
and true virtues, has now at last in scorn and loathing what pleasures soever
the sense and flesh can promise. And well may you with violence retain this
body of mine with you, and make it consume in prison: but that ever the mind
should be aliened from Religion, and should lay aside this poor habit, and
courser garments, while I breath you shall never obtain the same.

The persuasions used by S. Thomas his sisters. His answer to them, and what
followed thereof. Chap. 5.
With this so free discourse of S. Thomas, the Mother now satisfied, that by
way of persuasions, or prayers, she should profit but little; so as being much
exasperated thera^, with an angry contenance she betakes her self to
protestations and threats: but finding him continually more constant and
impregnable, very sad and heavy she parts from him, leaving him still shut up
in the Rock with a good guard. A little after to ^ee if the enterprise would
succeed better with others, she command two daughters of hers of sharp wits,
and of excellent speech to go unto him, and to try by all means to bow that
obdurate heart. Nor stayed they a whit (as the human Nature is more prompt to the
execution of evil then good) to make trial with all industry that might be.
Apparelled then very sumptuously, and with the most gorgeous ornaments they
had, they went both of purpose to see him, showing themselves with amourous
looks, and premeditated words, to marvel much, how he could once let such a
folly enter into his head, and by whom he had been so deceived, and induced, as
to forget his greatness so much, and the splendor of his so illustrious and
ancient a Family, of so many and so famous Predecessors of his. He should
consider a little, if the habits and habitation^ of the mean, base, and obscure
people, become persons of so noble blood: if it were sufferable, that a young
man elected by God, for high enterprises and affairs, to govern states, to
rule vassalls, with so much dishonor of him, and his friends and parents,
should go hide and bury himself in cloisters. And therefore by all means, he
should change his mind, and turn the same, to take to himself some noble and
bewtifull Spouse, to live (as men of judgment do) according to decorum, and to
procure by all means, the greatness and glory of the house of Aquinas, for
these were atcheiuements worthy of him.

At which suggestions of theirs S. Thomas fetching a deep sigh: Cease, answered
he, from such vanities, for you are not to deal here with a Reed, to be
shaken with every wind, but with a Religious man and servant of Christ. The
noble blood you so much vaunt of, if not accompanied with solid virtues and
divine grace, is no more then a foolish fantasy? And where the goodness and
friendship of God is found, what need is there of nobility of birth? As for the
exterior habit, I have a great deal more occasion to see you, or rather to
bewail you, to behold you so brave and gallant as you be. And know you no^ how
this quaint workeman-ship of yours, springs but from the devil* and serves for
nothing else, but to put the honesty of body and soul in hazard? And much
better is it, under a poor, and course mantle, to cover a can did and pure
spirit, then with superfluous ornaments of the body to show a mind not so
Christian or modest as it ought? And it appears, Sisters, you regard not so
much the eyes of Christ, as those of men. And this perhapps were a less evil,
if together with humane arts here, were not mingled also the diabolical. You
see not the spots which by this manner, you put upon the soul, and think
belike, you wretches as you are, with your silks, gold, and jewels, to deceive
the ^ight of the most holy Trinity, and of all the heavenly Court. And what
suppose you at last to derive from terrene love, but a perpetual succession of
sorrows and troubles?

Look upon our Mother, in what torments she is now, and how unhappy a life she
confesses she leads. Let her go on, forsooth, gathering the sweet fruits
of the world, and do you follow her likewise if you will, having still before
your eyes the continual punishments she has, and the infinite dolours she
feels. These are the gaynes your worldly industryes procure you. To this
finally, do those dressings of the body point; to those proud thoughts of
vain glory* of vain nobility, of vain honor. I would to God, he would so
open your eyes a little, as that transcending the heavens and stars, they
might penetrate into the inmost bowers of the blessed spirits, where you should
behold, very lively tragedyes of your perdition, and folly, most perfectly
represented. And if in that fortunate number, were some of our Ancestors to
be found, whose ^ame you seem to extol so much, whence think you* would they
receive a more grateful and sweet spectacle, either of me, that labor
withal my forces to imitate them, and who therefore treading under foot all
mortal care, and contemning all human reputation, and g^t with this habit to
be able more freely to follow their stepps; the of you, who forgetting their
examples, do spend the time in chats, and attend to flesh, without any
reckoning of the soul, and do seem to give your selves to nothing else, then
to kindle your selves an everlasting fire?

With this discourse accompanied with truth and spirit, S. Thomas did so
mortify the boldness of his Sisters, as for shame they held their peace. And the
one of them being touched with partic^er feeling, afterward continued a good
life, and holy conversation, until such time as moved by God, imitating her
Brother she made a vow of Religion, and being reclused in a monastery of the
Nuns of S. Benet of Capua, laudably perseuered therein unto her death. But S.
Thomas in the mean time making a virtue of necessity, and a Cell of his
prison, spent the time in prayer and study as he was wont, esteeming it to be
no small happynes to him in those persecutions, to see occasions cut off, of
wandering abroad, here and there, and the distractions, which a more free, and
common life would bring with them.

How S. Thomas is provoked by his Brothers again; then tempted by a woman; and
lastly escapes out of prison. Chap. 6.
S. Thomas continued not long thus quiet and secure, because Frederick the
Emperor, being passed with his army into Puglia; the two Brothers, of whom we
have above made mention, upon that occasion came to Rocca secca, renewing their
ancient purpose, of diuerting S. Thomas, by all means possible, from his way
begun: and since that neither with terrors, nor flatteryes they could prevail
with him, being enflamed with rage, they doubted not furiously to tear off the
sacred weed from his back, and leaving him so half naked in the place, they
departed thence full of wrath and indignation. Then the disciple of Christ,
taking compassion of their youthful error, and praying most earnestly for
those souls, endeavored to piece up again the torn habit, the best he could
with his own hands, and thanking God for the victory obtained, now returned
again to his wonted occupations; when besides all expectation, he was
surprised with a new assault, more fierce then ever; a wanton woman, set on by
the Brothers, and brought in of purpose to tempt him: But he, as one that knew
well the danger of such manner of battayles, snatching suddenly a brand out of
the fire, chased away that monster from his chamber, and shutting fast the
door, at the same instant drew a Cross on the wall with the same stick, before
which having prostrated himself, most humbly besought he our Lord, that if by
chance that hellish fight had left in his imagination any manner of blot
whatsoever, he would vouchsafe of his infinite mercy to take it away quite, and
to grant him besides so much help and favor, as he might be able very
perfectly to preserve his chastity to his death, which in Religion he had
devoutly promised.

The divine ears were not deaf, unto so just and seruent prayers. The
Champion of Christ thereupon being grown very weary, fell into a short sleep:
when two Angels from heaven appeared to him, telling him his prayers were
heard, and for a testimony thereof, they guirded this loins with a belt, so
strongly, as that through pain thereof crying out aloud, it made his keepers to
enter, into him, to whom notwithstanding he would not discover what had
happened, as neither revealed he it afterward to any others, until the
article of his death, when it seemed to him, he was then obliged in conscience
not to bury so clear an act of the divine goodness in perpetual oblivion.
But after that accident, if some great necessity for the glory of God or behoof
of the neighbors required it not, he kept himself wholly from all couersation
with women, as from basiliskes, and serpents.

For two whole years he had now been shut up in that prison; at the end
whereof Theodora, being now grown weary, and partly also being gauled with
touches of her conscience, calling for some of the Fathers Preachers unto her,
she secretly gave order to them to come at a certain hour of the night, unto
the foot of the wall against the chamber of S. Thomas, and that he descending
by a cord from the window, or a false ladder, they might carry him away in the
name of God. The occasion of this secrecy was, as well the fear of offending
her other Sons, if without their consentes he had been openly let go, as the
respect of her own reputation, which seemed to be in danger, if after so many
contentions, and so much ado, her sage practizes should manifestly be
vanquished at last, by the constancy and reasons of a youth only. For this
enterprise John of S. Julian was chosen, whom we mentioned above, being the
deer father and Master of S. Thomas, and who heertofore truly was wont by the
tacit consent of Theodora to visit him in prison. By this man, and other his
companions being led away to Naples, not without the common Iubiley of all,
from thence they sent him to Rome, by order of Superiors, and from Rome in
company of the General of the Dominicans he went to Paris; and from thence
again within few months, being sent to Colen, he began with great
contentment, to hear Albertus Magnus, holding it to be no small happynes to
him to have met with so famous and excellent a Master, and with so clear a
glass of all religious virtues.

S. Thomas is graduated, and made Master of the Chair: and how he caryes
himself therein. Chap. 7.
BY occasion of such a Doctor, S. Thomas gave himself to heap up new
treasures of wisdom, and to attend the better to so noble a purchase. He
imposed on himself in the mean time, a Pithagorean silence, in so much as he
was come into contempt for the same with the rest of his fellows in the
school, and was brought into such a conceit amongst them of a slow and gross
capacity, as by a surname they called him the dumb Ox. But the divine
Prouicence suffered not so rare a light of wit, should be hidden long. It came
into the mind, to some of the more curious, with diverse demands to tempt the
unknown learning of the youth, and to break in some sort that pertinacious
silence of his. There was explicated at that time in Schools the book of S.
Denis Areopagita, de Diuinis nominibus, a very high matter, and full of deep
mysteryes. Upon the lessons S. Thomas then being cunningly examined by more
the^ one he gave such account thereof beyond all expectation, both by his pen,
and by word of mouth, that Albertus would needs oppose, and prove him also;
ordayning in the first disputations, he should be Respondent in very difficult
questions.

This did S. Thomas refuse at first, of his innated modesty. But Albertus
continually making more instance, he thought good, to resist no longer: and
recommending himself first very humbly to our Lord God as he was wont, he
answered after, with such acumen of wit, and with so much dexterity withal, as
that Albertus being full of astonishment exclaymed at last: Thomas, thou
seem to me rather a Moderatour, then a mere Respondent. And thereupon
turning to the Auditory. My Masters (said he) you call him a dumb Ox, but
certainly he shall one day give forth such lowings, as shall be heard
throughout the whole world. With his so clear a testimony made so publicly
of him, it was not possible for him any more, to remain either retired or
silent; but yet he always conserved himself far from any arrogance at all:
whence he came every day to be so much the more admirable to all, and was by
universal consent held no less then a Saint. Thus being in Colen for some
time, he was by the instance of Albertus Magnus, recalled to Paris by the
General of the order, there to take the degree of Bachelour upon him. To which
degree being promoted against his will, they applied him presently to expound
the Master of Sentences; wherein (having kept for this intention very strict
vigils, and fasts, and made his prayer) he came off with it in such manner, as
that the Rectour of the Studyes, determined very soon to make him a Master in
Theology, with all the solemnity that might be.

S. Thomas understanding thereof, and esteeming himself very far unworthy of
that name, began afresh to find excuses, and to allege particulerly his age,
which as yet had not finished the thirtith year, yet for all that he was feign
to obey. And in such extremity of his, recurring (according to custom) to the
arms of prayer, he begins to crave the succor of the Almighty God; until
such time as being once perplexed, among other things, about the Theme he
should take in that public act, a venerable old man appeared to him in sleep,
and said to him: What aylest thou Thomas, that thou weepest, and so afflictest
thy self in this manner? He answered, they enforce me to take the name and
office of Master upon me, whereto I know my self, to be insufficient: and
being among other things at the beginning to make a discourse, I know not what
Theme to take. Then, replied the old man: Be of good cheer my Son: It is the
will of God that thou accept the degree. For Theme thou shall take that verse
of the Psalm, Rigans montes de superioribus suis, and de fructu operum tuorum
satiabitur terra. That said, the old man vanished, and S. Thomas yielded many
thanks to God, for being so benignly comforted by his immense goodness. Being
now made Master, he went forward in explicating the sacred Theology with great
applause, having always an eye to the profit, and capacity of the scholars,
rather then to his own reputation or proper gust. In his manner of
interpreting he had an easy, clear, and distinct method. He fled new
opinions, and the vnusualf manner of phrases and words. In disputes, he kept
himself from moderate contentions, and extranagant acts or clamors, maturely
yiedling to others obstinacyes or pertinacityes, and choosing rather for the
glory of God, and edification of the Neighbor, to appear sometimes less
learned, then little modest. Wheresoever he read, but especially in Paris, and
in Rome, he had alwayer his School very flourishing, both for number and
quality of hearers, Doctors, Bishops, Cardinals: and it is a notable thing,
that with all the credit and authority he had gotten, yet never slacked he his
dilgence, being otherwise one of so great a natural wit, as he had few his
equals, and of so happy a memory withal, that in a manner, as often as he had
but once seen any thing, he would faithfully retain it for ever; and of such
vigor of mind, as that which is recounted of some Ancients for so admirable a
thing, he would yet do more in dictating, in diverse matters, unto three or
four Scribes at once, and yet that rich flood of wisdom would never be
diminished.

Of S. Thomas his Speculations in studyes: with his Rapts, and Ecstasies in
Spirit. Chap. 8.
IT would be too long, and a superfluous thing to make here a Catalogue of his
works so many, and of so great note, wherewith he confirmed the Catholic
faith, and rooted out, and oppressed many heresies, partly increased already, and
partly new grown up: each state and quality of persons he would instruct with
holsom aduises and precepts, and finally illustrated the sacred Thology, and
brought it again to its ancient dignity, reducing and submitting all other
sciences to its Empire, which through the fault of some impious Sophisters
seemed heretofore to dissent and rebel, from it. But as he would touch the
point in every matter, so he seemed to have a special grace, in treating of
the most excellent Sacrament of the Altar, and not only in Prose, but in Latin
time also, according to the customs of those times; in so much as for the
eminent doctrine and piety contained therein, the Catholic Church even to this
day, singes no other Office, or Mass on the day of the great solemnity of
Corpus Christi, then that which he composed, at the instance of Pope Urban the
IV.

And it is most certain, that in Naples, being once much elevated in mind, and
present in person before a Crucisix, our Lord spoke to him in that image: Well
have thou written of me, Thomas; What reward then would thou have? When he
answered: surely nothing, O Lord, but thine own self. Two notable parts
concurred in the glorious Doctor, which are hardly coupled together; as
quicknes in apprehension, and patience in speculation. Forasmuch as he not only
acutely penetrated and distinguished at once, but would also diue into the
deeper inuestigations, as that very often he would come to loose his senses.
When on a time, being in such an abstraction, a cole of fire, lighting on his
leg, and again the flame of the candell, which studying he held in his hand,
even touching his flesh, a pretty while, he stirred not awhit, nor was moved any
more thereat then a mere stone.

That same likewise was memorable, which happened to him, at a Feast with S.
Lewys King of France, at such time as he wrote that noble Sum against the
Gentiles: in which matter he was then so absorpt, as that amidst the Royal
dishes of the King, forgetting himself and the standers by, he suddenly cried
out: The Manichies are convinced; and seeming to him, that he was in his Cell,
called to Friar Reginald his companion, to dictate to him as he was wont. But
after awaked by the Dominican Priour who sat by him and craving pardon with
some confusion, he was comforted and excused by the wise King, at whose beck
one was suddenly called that might faithfully note those new conceits. Nor
les^e memorable was the excess, which he suffered toward the end of his life,
remaining in the Castle of his Sister, where he was for three days abstract,
as it were, from his body, and returning on the last to himself again, he
confessed to the aforesaid Reginald (but under the seal of a secret, until
his death) that he had notice of ^ore things and of more excellent misteryes in
that space only, then ever he had in all the labors, and watches he had
endured till that time.

And surely is it not to be past over in silence, that he being adorned with so
great gifts by nature, and besides that, so great a friend to labor, yet to
make new profit every day in sciences, he depended so much on God, as that
before his entering unto study, he would always recommend himself very
ardently to the eternal wisdom, as if he had expected all success from
heaven only, and by no other ways. An industry truly, very worthy to be
imitated of each Student: Because that such as without having recourse to God
more then so, do confide and in their proper gifts, by how much they go
forward, and proceed in learning, so much are they puffed up in their souls;
in such wise, as being thence blinded whence they might have had light, they
stumble themselves, and draw others withal into their miserable errors and
pepestiferous opinions. But the Angelical Doctor (as I said) did quite the
contrary, nor was he deceived awhit of his hope: since many conclusions, being
otherwise doubtful and obscure, by this only way he drew forth from the deep
abyss (as they say) of truth, as we shall clearly make appear by the example
following.

The Saint explicated the oracles of Esaias, and being come unto a passage,
whence by human help he could no ways acquit himself; according to his use he
recurred to divine, and gave himself to fast and pray for that intention, so
many days (taking besides S. Peter and S. Paul for intercessours) as that
those glorious Apostles at last one night appeared to him in his Cell, and
there sweetly conferring with him, a pretty while, put light into him, and so
quit him of al perplexity. In the mean time, Friar Reginald was in the
ante-cha^ber as he was wont, and though he heard the voices, yet nothing
understood what they said. The vision then being vanished; S. Thomas called him
in to write, and dictated the whole declaration to him, so largely, and without
stop, as if he had been taking it forth of another book in order. The dictates
being ended; Reginald, who had heard confusedly the murmr aforesaid, did most
ardently thirst, to have a distinct notice thereof, and therefore lying
prostrate on the earth, besought him not to hide or conceal it from him, and
that with so much affect, and with so great instance withal, as the servant of
God (under the condition and seal as before) ingenuously discovered it to him.

Besides that, this so frequent prayer anailed him much, to maintain his
spirit always very cheerful and fresh, which of its nature with much
speculation is wont to be arid and dry. Howbeit the holy man together with the
assiduity of prayer, would use also other potent and generous remedies. Whereof
the principal was, to approach to the fountain of all graces, the sacred
Eucharist; whereto he was so devout, that besides his saying every day Mass, he
would afterward humbly serve another. And as in preparing himself to that
banquet of the Angels, he would add particular study and attention; so after in
rendering of thanks, he would suddenly be ^pt into ex^sies, and being liquefyed
in celestial sweetnesses, ere he were once aware thereof, would be wholly bathed
in tears. He was exceeding sollicious moreover, in procuring the protection
and favor of the Saints, and especially of the glorious Virgin and Martyr
Ag^s, whose relics he had always hanging at his breast with so much faith,
as that one day touching Friar Reginald therewith being dangerously sick, he
recovered him straight. He was wont also at times to help himself, with the
reading affectuous and moral books, especially the Collations of Cassian;
wherein he knew likewise the Patriarch S. Dominicke to be exceedingly versed,
and to have gathered thence incomparable helps for discretion of spirits, and
solid virtues.

By which means, in so great an abundance of heavenly gifts, how he kept
himself humble, and magnanimous both, through his whole life (being qualities
not so disioyned from themselves, a^ some think, but dear companions rather,
and individual Sisters) may be easily gathered, by the acts that immediately
follow.

Some notable Acts of Humility of S. Thomas, with the like; and particularly
his devotion for the souls in Purgatory. Chap. 9.
SAint Thamas now ripe for glory and age, by this time passed to the Cloisters
of Bologna, addicting himself to most deep consisiderations: when a certain
Friar, new come from foreign parts, and having leave of the Priour, to go forth
into the City for some business with the first Companion he could meet with,
by chance lighted on S. Thomas, not knowing him by sight, and willed him in
behalf of the Superior, to go a long with him: at which voice, the Imitatour
of Christ, as sent from an Oracle, not only obeyed without delay, but also
being after not able to go so fast as the other, through a lame leg which he
had, with incredible patience he suffered some rebukes for the same; until
such time as being advised by Seculars of the person whom he entreated so ill,
being wholly confounded thereat, and excusing himself of his ignorance, very
humbly craved pardon of him for it. Whereupon S. Thomas being demanded of the
same Gentlemen, wherefore he had so abased himself, he made answer with a
grave countenance: Religion (forsooth) consists in Obedience, and obedience for
one man to submit himself to another for God, since God himself for our sake
would subject himself to Man.

From another thing, we may likewise gather, the love which the Saint had of
his own proper subjection; Which is, that he not only, in his own Order,
abstayned always from Prelacy and government, but even likewise abroad, being
called by Pope Clement the IV. to the Archbishopricke of Naples, he so refused
the same, as he supplicated withal, and as much as he durst took hold of the
chief Bishop, beseeching him not to offer him any dignityes. What shall we say
then of the regard and caution he had, not to attribute any good to himself?
In so much as to the honor of Christ, and for the help of souls, upon good
occasion he confessed sincerely, being then of good years, amidst so much
celebrity and humane praises, so many Magistrall Chayres, so many Preachinges,
lessons, disputes and so many public Acts maintained, and so great variety of
compositions and labors, he had never felt in his soul the least gust, or
complacence of Vainglory.

From this so chaste a love and fear of God, and from this care which the
Servant of Christ had of himself, sprung the fruit which he wrought with
others; and from his conversation in Heaven, followed his dealing securely with
men. In his preachinges (as we have said also of his Lessons) he attended more
unto profit, then pomp; he attempered himself to the reach of the people, and
above all, conformed his life with his words. Whence he came to be heard with
so great concourse, veneration, and silence, as he had been an Angel
descended from Paradise. And sometimes our Lord God would concur with evident
miracles, as it happened once on an Easter day in the City of Rome at S.
Peter's, where he descending from the Pulpit, a certain woman, now troubled and
afflicted a long time with an incurable flux of blood, approached unto him in
a press of people, and touching him by the hemme of his Cloak with much
faith, she was immediately made sound, and as strong as ever.

His private discourses also were of marvelous efficaay, wherein he studied
always to insert upon good occasions, some thing of edification, and if
perhaps in any grave matter, it were needful to persuade, or to examine out
the truth of any thing with reasons, there was hardly found any that were able
to make resistance against him, as may easily appear by the action following.
Being once present at the feast of the Nativity, for certain occurrences, with
the Cardinal Riccardo, at Molara, a place somewhat near to Rome, there met
also by good hap two Jews, by how much richer in substance and more learned
in the ancient Law, so much the more were they addicted to flesh, and more
obstinate in their perfidiousnes. Having taken in hand then to treat with those
two souls at the instance of the Cardinal, after an encounter had, with a
long dispute, he convinced them in such sort, that having both by accord taken
the space of a night to think upon it (while he in the mean time was praying
for them) at last they yielded, and the infant Jesus now corporally borne in a
vile manner, was spiritually borne anew in their hearts. So as repenting
themselves of their life past, and coming forth of darkness into a clear
light, they were both baptized with the common joy and gladness of all.

This singular Man had a notable zeal of the salvation of all; but yet
notwithstanding his familiar freindshipps were restrained to few. One of his
dearest and beloved was, the Seraphicall S. Bonauenture; and to this purpose it
is recounted, that going once to visit him, at such time as the Saint was
writing the life of S. Francis, finding him in an ecstasy, and with the body
elevated in the air; he stopped awhile, and turning to his companion said: Let
us suffer one Saint to work for another. One quality also was seen in him, very
proper for perfect men, that he being so rigid and severe to himself, was yet
exceeding benign and merciful to those, that sinned out of human frailty, in
taking compassion upon their defects, yea weeping also alike for them, as they
were his own. And besides had a pious and officious memory of the faithful
departed, so as his Sister, once being dead appeared to him in Paris, craving
succor at his hands to be delivered from Purgatory. And he as well by himself
as others, afforded such helps, and suffrages together, as a little after he
being in Rome, she returned to him, to let him understand, that now she was
quit of her pains, and for ever blessed, beholding the face of God. Upon this
occasion, S. Thomas required of her some news likewise of his of two Brothers,
both deceased: and she answered, that Landulph continued yet in Purgatory, but
Arnold rejoiced now in heaven; and thou soon shall be also in our company, but
with a great deal more glory, for thy labors endured in the service of the
holy Church.

The death of S. Thomas, with his funerals, and what happened there upon.
Chap. 10.
AS this great Servant of God, had so much charity toward every one, so he was
ordinarily esteemed and loved by as many as knew him, but especially he was
grateful and acceptable, to three several holy Popes, Clement the IV. Urban
the IV. and Gregory the X. The first whereof, as has been said, endeavored in
vain to make him Archbishop of Naples: the second helped himself much by him
in writing things of great importance, and especially in confuting the errors
of the Greeks: the third having intimated a Council at Lions in France for
weighty necessityes of the Catholic Church, among the chief, called for S.
Thomas thither; and here with, not thinking thereof, he hastened his end, and
the reward of his labors. Because being then at Naples, not well disposed for
health, to obey the Pope, he put himself on the journey without delay: and
being arrived at S. Seuerine a Castle of his Sisters, there fell sick. From
thence, being yet not well recovered, sustayning the weakness of his body with
the forces of the mind, against the will of his dearest friends, he went
forwards, until such time as he fell into a relapse at Fossa noua, a place of
the Cistercians in the Diocese of Piperno, in so much as he felt (and so told
Friar Reginald in secret) that now approached his last day.

Here he was received by the Abbot, and the other Monks with the greatest
Charity that might be, who the more they labored in curing and serving him, in
carrying among other things some fuel from the wood, on their own shoulders,
being then the time of winter, so much more was the sick man sorry and
troubled, to have them suffer so much for his sake, saying with great feeling:
And who am I, that the servants of Christ, should travail so much for me? Nor
would he likewise in that space be found to be idle, because at the instance of
some of them, who desired some issue of his noble wit, he briefly expounded
the Canticles of Solomon, foreseeing his passage out of this life, and aspiring
unto the Eternal Canticles. And for that now his forces began to fail him, he
devoutly required the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, which being brought
by the Abbot, withal the Convent, though now reduced to extremes, yet he
leaped from his bed, and cast himself on the ground with many tears.

Being afterward demanded (according to custom) if he believed indeed the
true Son of God, for our salvation borne of the Virgin, dead on the Cross,
and then risen again, to be contained in the sacred Host, with a clear and
confident voice he said: I wholly believe it, or rather more then certainly I
know, this to be JESUS CHRIST true God, and true man, the Son of the eternal
Father, and of the Virgin Mother. And as I believe it with a pure heart, so do
I also with sincere mouth confess the same.

That said, very reverently he received the Viatique, and the day following he
craved the extreme Unction, remaining always in his perfect judgment, so as
himself did answer very punctually to every thing: and finally with hands
united and lifted up to heauen-wards, recommending his spirit to the Creator,
he happily departed, in the morning on the seventh day of March, in the year
of our Lord 1274. which was of his vocation the 32. and the 50. of his life. At
this his passage, besides the Cistertians, were present many Dominicans and
Franciscans, being come at that time to visit him from sundry Monasteryes. The
Bishop of Terracina, likewise was there present. But the Nephew of the Saint,
running thither at the report of his danger, now finding him departed this
life, and being not able to enter into the Monastery, obtained with much
prayers, the sacred corpse might be exposed at the gate that he might behold the
same. Here arose a great and universal playnt for the loss of such a
personage. Yea the writers do affirm for certain, that the beast it self
which he was wont to ride on, breaking the halter by force wherewith he was
tied, ran thither at the same time also, to the Beer or hearse, and there in
the presence of all, falling to the earth, fell suddenly dead. Whereat the
standers by being astonished did glorify God, and carrying the body into the
Church of S. Thomas, with such and so great veneration they buried it, as
cannot easily be xepressed, and that before the high altar. He was of
complexion very corpulent, though he were so strict an obseruer of fasts and
abstinence. He was of a very delicate flesh, sensitive, and convenient for the
most excellent temperature of his organs; of stature straight and tall; of the
color of wheat; of eyes most modest; for strength robustuous, his head somewhat
great, and bald in diverse parts.

Of two notable presages of S. Thomas his death before hand. Chap. 11.
SOme notable signs did prognosticate the death of this our Saint. Because, he
lying at Naples, so indisposed as he was at first, before his departure to the
Council, a most bright star was seen by two honorable persons of the house
of Coppa, who were then with him, to enter in by the window, and to rest a good
while upon the Saints head. Besides this, some three days before his death,
appeared a Comet over his Inn at Fossa-noua, and when he gave up the ghost the
same vanished away. Moreover at the very same hour that he was in his passage,
a Dominican Father of great virtue, by name Friar Paul Aquilin, in the Convent
of Naples, saw in his sleep, how S. Thomas reading in the same City unto a
great Auditory, S. Paul entered into the School, with a great troop of Saints
in his company, and the Angelical Doctor being willing to descend from the
chair, the Apostle commanded him to proceed in his lesson: and at last
demanding of the same Apostle, whether he had penetrated the sense of his
Epistles or no; he answered: Very well truly, as much as humane understanding
in a mortal body can possibly arrive to. But I will lead thee into a place,
where thou shall understand them much better: and here with taking him by the
garment he lead him out of the School. And Friar Paul began to cry out with a
loud voice: Help Brothers help, because Friar Thomas is taken away. At which
cries of his, many in have running in, and requiring wherefore, he declared
unto them the whole vision in order. The hour was noted, and diligent
inquisition being made thereupon, it was found, that at that very instant the
blessed soul departed from the body.

Many miracles afterward of health, and of other supernatural effects, ensued
to the perpetual praise and exaltation of the Saint, which would be too long
and superfluous to relate in this place. But howbeyt by such events, is
discovered in a manner the greatness of the merits and rewards of the man of
God; yet more evident testimony thereof, gave another vision, which Friar Albert
a Dominica^ of Brescia had afterward, being a man very famous alike both in
sanctity and learning. This man being given to the doctrine of S. Thomas, and
much devoted to his divine virtues, had now a great while desired to know, what
degree of glory he was to have in Heaven. With this ardent desire, being once
in prayer with tears, before an Altar of the most Blessed Virgin, after many
enflamed sighs and fervent prayers, there appeared at last two persons unto
him, no less venerable in aspect, then for ornament and splendor admirable:
the one in Pontificalibus, with a Miter on his head, another with the habit of
the Dominican Fathers, with two very rich chains about their necks, one of
gold, the other of silver, and a Carbuncle on the breast, which with its rays
did illumine the whole Church. The rest of the garments besides were powdered
and beset with most noble Pearls, Diamonds and Rubyes.

Then he in the miter said: Brother Albert, what look thou on? I am
Augustine, the Doctor of the Church, sent hither to let thee understand the
glory of Thomas of Aquine, who is now-heere present with me, in following the
Apostolical traditions, and illustrating the Church of Christ. That same so
resplendant jewel which thou see at his breast signifyes a most right
intention, which he has had continually in teaching and defending the
Catholic faith. Those other precious stones here and there, do show the
multitude and variety of books he has written, and put to light for the help
of souls. In sum we are both equal in the essential of glory; for the rest
he exceeds me in virginal purity, and I him in Pontifical Excellency: which
saying they vanished away. Of this singular chastity of the holy Doctor,
besides what has been said already, there appeared very evident signs
thereof in his funerals.

Of the diverse translations made of the holy Body of S. Thoma, and where it
rested at last. Chap. 12.
A Little after the corpse of S. Thomas was enterred, the Abbot of Fossa-noua
with others of the Convent, fearing that such a treasure would be taken away
from them, especially since Friar Reginald, by Notary, and witnesses now had
consigned him as in deposito; in the midst of the night, they secretly
conueighed him into the Chapel of S. Steven. But S. Thomas appeared to the
Superior in sleep, threatening him much, if he carried it not back, into the
place again. Whereupon being terrifyed, he went with some lay men unto the
said Chapel of S. Steven, opened the sepulcher, from whence proceeded an odor
so fragrant, as presently drew thither all the rest of the Monks, in whose
presence, that chaste lodging of the holy Ghost, was found to be wholly and
throughout entire, together with the garments. Being a thing so much the more to
be wondered at, as the place was more humid, and the body (as has been said)
more full and corpulent. Replenished then with all consolation and marvel
atonce, they honorably conueighed him back where he was at first. And the day
following having a scruple to sing the Mass of the dead for him, through
divine instinct they celebrated Mass, of a Confessor not Bishop.

This first ranslation was made 7. months after his death: he afterward was
changed again more then once, while the same fragrancy continued still as
before, as well to make he sepulcher more magnificent, as also to affoard
others some part of the holy Relics. One of his hands was granted to his
Sister, in whose Oratory remaining a while, it was carried to Salerno. The head
was given to the Friars Preachers of Pipern. It being after understood that a
wicked man went about to rob and to sell away the rest, the Count of Fondi
prevented it, by taking it into his own custody, and after that at the
instance of his wife (who was therefore in sleep very greiuously reprehended
by the Saint) he consigned it to the convent of Preachers, in the same City of
Fondi.

The Monks of Fossa-noua resented the injury, and for the same having made
many times complaints to the Sea Apostolic. Pope Urban the V. at last to put
an end to so great quarells and contentions, caused it to be transported from
Fondi to Thoulouse in France to the end that University (there newly founded by
the Pope) might continually prosper under the shadow of such a Protector. And
this last Translation, was the most noble and solemn of all, as well for that
now after a full and exact information, he was canonized by Pope John the XXII.
as also for the great number of miracles, which in that Translation there
followed anew. The greater part of the Bishops there, and Lewis Duke of Angiou,
being the Brother of the King of France, with an infinite number of people,
came to meet with, and receive the sacred Pledge; by all which with great
preparation and exquisite pomp, it was decently reposed at Thoulouse in the
year of our Lord 1370. It has preserved that City even to these days from
many perils of body and soul.

FINIS.
B. ANDREW. B.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE very Star that is placed near the Line
That parts us from the other Hemisphere,
Through interposed vapors clear does shine,
When in our Zenith dim it does appear:
Blinded, we slight heavens joys, which we might gain
As well as earth, and with an equal pain.
I this perceyu'd, and learned to raise my heart,
And far above such feigned contents to soar;
I with the World, and with His Mothers dream (...).
the Wolf did part,
And took the Lamb, whom I contem'd before:
And borne by zealous love ascend the skies
In fiery Carre, to This Saint (...) C^
my Elias flies.
THE LIFE OF B. ANDREW BISHOP OF FESVLA.
Written by Francis his Successor, and others.
Of the Parents of B. Andrew: with the miraculous presage of his Birth, and
first beginnings. Chap. 1.
AMONG the noble families of the renowned City of Florence, is Corsina
worthily named for one, spread as we find, in other parts of Italy. Of this
blood Nicolas and Peregrina, being conjoined together with the holy band of
Matrimony, as they were both timorous and fearing God, and much frequenting
Churches, and the sacred offices, had a great desire to offer up to the high
Creator, and the most B. Virgin, the firstborn of their Progeny, to imitate
in this point also, the piety of the ancient Patriarks, so much celebrated in
sacred Scriptures. Nor did any thing hinder them from fullfilling their vow
then sterility, or want of fruit to present: from which being delivered through
the intercession of the same Virgin they at last had a son, in Baptism
called by the name of Andrew, for being borne on the feast of that glorious
Apostle. But the day before his nativity, for a clear presage, as it were of
things to come; it seemed to the Mother in sleep, that she was delivered of a
Wolf, which turning into the Church, was by little and little transformed into
a Lamb. At which apparition, though Peregrina remained in some fear, yet made
she no kind of demonstration thereof, but kept it secret until the time we
shall speak of anon.

In the mean time, the faithful parents trained up the child in learning, and
much more in manners, with that care, as was fit for the issue now dedicated
already to the service of the Queen of Angels. But soon might be gathered in
him without doubt, how prone to each vice is human kind, without the particular
aid and stay of celestial grace. Scarcely was he arrived to the use of
reason, when being enflamed within, by the ardours of concupiscence, and by the
incentiues of the false Angel, and outwardly allured by sensible objects, and
lewd companyes; he began, from the straight and direct way of salvation, to
bend to the spacious and large way of perdition, to abhor virtue, to fly his
studyes, to serve the belly, and dishonest pleasures, to follow the dissolute,
to give himself to pompes, to handle partly cards and dice, and partly also
his sword, and arms prohibited, to move often quarells, and to challenge now
this man, and now that into the field, to wast the goods of his family, and to
put himself continually into dangers both of body and soul.

These manners of his even pierced the Parents to the heart, seeming very unfit
for one, so conceived through prayers, and brought up for the service of the
Mother of God. In the mean while they sought, now with allurements, and now
with menaces, and again with reasons, to pull him back from the precipices he
ran into, without stay, but all in vain. The fierce youth had now shaken off
the yoke, he champed the bridle, he scorned the rod, and finally became every
day more rebellious, and refractary then other. Yet for all this the divine
Clemency, would not suffer so ill a bud of so good roots should eternally
perish, but through means unexpected reformed him on a sudden, in the height
of his deba^shments. Because having once among other times, answered not only
with contempt and contumacy to the wholesome aduises of them that loved him so
dearly, but even also with iniuryes and outrages very impiously turning his
back toward them; Peregrina remembering her ancient dream: Thou art surely
(said she to him) that infamous wolf, which in vision I seemed to bring forth
into the world, when thou wast borne.

At the sound of which words, B. Andrew, as awaked through divine operation, as
it were from a deep letargy, and returning to himself, stood still, and with
voice and countenance altered, turning himself to Peregrina: I beseech you,
sweet Mother (replied he) not to hide from me longer that monstrous prodigy,
which you now intimated to me: whence how beyt on the one side I find my self
terrifyed and astonished as stroke with a thunderbolt, yet me thinks on the
other, I do feel my self to burn with so ardent desire, to know the full
truth, as I shall never be at rest, until you give me a faithful and distinct
notice thereof.

Then the disconsolate Matron, being moved from the bottom of her heart, and
now brought into some hope of amendment in her Son: Know thou, said she, my
beloved Son, that after my espousals I lived many years without issue, but
with so great desire thereof, that to obtain the same I promised and obliged,
with solemn vow to the service of the divine Majesty and to his most holy
Mother, the first Son that should spring from my womb. Thy Father also
concurred in the same vow with me, and with the same deliberation which I did.
Nor was the remedy in vain. The Conception followed, and now being near to
those pangs of childbirth, I dreamed I was delivered of a Beast, which entering
into the Temple in the figure of a wolf, was changed into that of a lamb. The
day following wast thou brought forth into the world. What thou hitherto have
showed thy self to the world, thou know very well, and that surely no
rational creature, but a savage and ravenous wild beast. It were now high time
thou conuertedst thy self, and helpedst us in good order, to repay what we owe
as debtours for thee. For neither to Nicolas, nor Peregrina wast thou borne,
but rather to the Virgin Mary. A wake then my Heart now, once at last, nor go
thou on so blotting that victime, that should living and clean be presented to
the highest. By these, and such other words, full of just disdain, and of most
tender affect, through divine power, that stony breast, was mollifyed and
compunct at last, who casting his eyes with horror on his actions past, became
on a sudden to be a bitter accuser of himself. And finding no other remedy,
then to humble himself, to crave pardon, and to procure advocates, he went the
next day to the Carmelites, being a Family by an ancient Institute applied to
the honor of the most Blessed Virgin. Here then being prostrate before her
Altar, as well for shame of his offenses as fear of the punishments, with a
blush and palenes enterchangeably, going and coming in his countenance,
without motion of his lips, and with deep sighs, he remained a good while
begging of succor, and mercy at her hands.

B. Andrew is converted from his loose life, and enters into Religion. Chap. 2.
While B. Andrew was in that agony aforesaid, he was let see by divine power,
his debts to have gone so far, and grown to be so great, as there was no way
to be acquit of them, but to change himself, and to leave the world; and to
deal with some creditour, so exact and rigid on the one side, who should sift
out al what possible he might, without leaving a dram; and so magnanimous and
courteous on the other, that for so unequal a payment, should give not only a
full acquittance, but an Eternity moreover. The contrite young man was not
backward awhit to these heavenly consayls. He goes in all have to Father
Hierome Migorato Provincial of the Order, and beseeches him on his knees, he
would be pleased to accept him into the number of his subjects, he being most
resolute to leave the world, and promptly to follow the Euangelical cou^sails.

With this short manner of speech, so accorded his gestures and actions
withal, as left no place of sinister suspicions to any. The holy and discreet
Superior notwithstanding, regarding the qualityes of so noble and delicate a
subject, partly to assure himself the better of his vocation, and partly also
to avoid all scandal; giving good words for that time to the suitor, sends by
an express messenger to certify Nicolas Corsino, and Peregrina his wife, how
their Son Andrew had made great instance for Religion, and the habit. More
joyful tidings could not possibly arrive to the ears of the good and truly
Christian couple. But both full of joy and iubiley alike give infinite thanks
therefore to the divine goodness: after which without delay they went both
togeaher unto the Convent, where the feruorous Penitent anew, was set to prayer
at the same Altar as before. With this opportunity they likewise falling on
their knees, being quiet, and all of one accord made the defired oblation of
him, and so performed their vow. From thence the holy busynes being concluded
with the Provincial, the Father and Mother being wholly replenished with
consolation, returned home again, while the son so altered now and quite
transformed with the singular content and edification of the Friars, remained
in the Monastery; nor cared he awhit to change his name, while to him it seemed
the name of Andrew, would be a sufficient incitement for him to love and
embrace the Cross of our Lord Christ. And he converted his thoughts and
applied his whole mind by all means possible to suppress the vices which
infested him most, and particulerly pride, and a vain esteem of himself.

In which battle besides the actions which he did of his own accord, in
submitting himself to others, and flying all show and demonstration of vanity,
he was much furthered likewise by masters skillfull in that Religious list.
Who exercised him in those occupations point by point, which were most
accommodate to abate pride, and to subdue the appetite of disordinate
excellency. So as they deputed him to the vile services of the kitchen, to wash
the dishes, to sweep the house, to carry away the dust, to serve and wait at
the porch; which things he discharged with so great simplicity and fervor, as
they were all astonished thereat, and he remained every day more confirmed,
then other in his good purposes.

How B. Andrew was tempted by a kinsman of his, to leave his vocation, but in
vain. Chap. 3.
TO come now to some particular of the soundness of his vocation; he having
one day the care of the Gate, while the rest were at dinner, behold on a
sudden, there arrived thither, a Gentleman a kinsman of his, with a good train
with him, very rich and gallant, but exceeding subtle and practical in the
world. Who being let in, when he saw the servant of God with keys in his hand,
so meagre in the face, and so poorly clad; discovering at once both wonder and
scorn, with a voice full fraught of disdain: Is it possible (said he) this
same should be that Andrew Corsino, who but even the other day flourished so
among the noblest, and gallantest of our youth, of so royal aspect, of
sumptuous apparel, and of so great acquaintances of all? What madness or what
desperation, most dear Brother, has brought thee into this Cloister, to loose
thy best and fairest years, and to denigrate with so base a habit and abject
servitude, the tytles and splendor of thy family? Re-enter again into thy
self; Think on the irreparable loss thou incurrest, and that while thou art
as yet, but new in the rule, and may without note of leuity, resume again to
thy self, the passed course of thy happy life: Break off these bands, and
render thy self to thy sweet companions again, to thy dear blood, and
particularly to me, who thou know how dearly has ever loved thee. And if
some respect peradventure of Fathers or Mothers superstition does retain thee
from going hence directly unto their house, stay with me until such time as
things be accommodated between you, there shall be no division or difference
between us two. We will be all one, thou shall ever dispose of my Wardrob,
servants, and rents with the same security as of thine own. But if perhapps
certain gusts allure thee, which these Saints and precise Hypocrites tell thee
are found in that solitary and extrauagant life; make this account, (as so it
is likewise their own doctrine too) that after a little honey shall follow a
great deal of gaul. The memory of the commodityes and hopes so left shall vex
thee, unprofitable repentances shall gaul thee, and the rage of persecutions,
infirmityes of the body, and bitterness of mind shall torment thee; and when
there is nothing else, thou shall even carry thy self with thee, nor with the
flying world, have thou laid away thy flesh: whence the more continual the
wills are that do spring from thence (especially of things that are wholly
forbidden us) so much more shall thou find thy self to be suspended, and
strangled as it were amidst the incentiues of thy appetit, and impossibility to
quench them. Whereupon of necessity, either thou must needs dye of sadness, or
prolong thy days in infinite dolours, or abandon thy profession with eternal
infamy.

Remember, how the lyllies flourish not always, nor the leaves are ever
green: Let so many others be a warning and example to thee, who either in
Cloisters being forlorn of al, in their greatest necessity, have finished
their days upon straw, or after many years of Religion, being vanquished with
the labor and tediousnes thereof, and lastly turned back from Religion, are
at this day to their endless reproach, now pointed at in the City. So as now
while matters are yet but fresh and entiere, do thou look to, and provide for
thy self; and throwing away in good hour these keys and rags of thine, come
along with me without delay. And believe me, from others thou shall receive but
words only; but deeds at my hands thou shall really find, who vaunt my self,
that I will be to thee no seigned Friar, but a true friend, and loving kinsman
to my lives end. Therefore (dearest Nephew) let me preadmonish thee of these
future events, and seek with all thy diligence to prevent them; and return
again to thy most loving Companions, who will exceedingly rejoice at thy
presence.

With these, and other such like fiery darts, was the faith and constancy of B.
Andrew assailed this day. In which conflict he defending himself with the
sign of the Cross, and resolute silence, stood as firm as a tower, in such
sort as the domestical enemy, being astonished at such fortitude, and
confounded at his proofs so deluded, departed without more ado. It is held
indeed by many with probable conjectures, that some spirit of Hell, had
appeared in the figure of that Gentleman, but whether the Devil or some
Minister of his (for even also among the Children of Adam there want not such)
it is manifest, that with such assaults, he wrought no other effect, then to
affoard to the new Soldier of Christ both matter and occasion of a noble
fight, and of a glorious victory. Hence taking more courage and new vigor, and
after many other experiences, B. Andrew being admitted with solemn ceremonies
into the body of Religion, he gave himself together with the study of
perfection, to the purchase also of sciences: with particular caution, that the
vehemence and assiduity of speculation (as happens but too often) consume not,
or quite extinguish the oil of devotion, and the ardour of spirit.

Of the zeal of souls, which B. Andrew had, and how he converted a Kinsman of
his from a lewd life. Chap. 4.
B. Andrew had yet reguard to the age he was of, and to the strength and lively
temperature of his complexion: and above all things, held it a great baseness,
and a barbarous ingratitude to abandon Christ in his passion, and to have no
will to taste of the chalice, which the heavenly Physician so benignly for us
would first be proving himself. So as besides the continual guard and custody
of the heart, besides the familiarity with God, by the means of holy prayer,
besides the frequent interior acts of humility and of charity, he left not
also at times to macerate the body with abstinences, vigils, and sharp labors.
He wore on his bare flesh a cruel cilice, he made frequent disciplines, he
kept most exact and entire silence, at due hours, he fasted (besides other
obseruances of the order) in bread and water for three days of the week;
would take every occasion to serve and obey each one, even the least of all. He
would go forth with a wallet on his back, to beg from door to door,
especially In via maggia, a Way so called, where many of his noble friends,
kindred, and acquaintance were assembled together; rejoicing not a little to
labor in so ^ase an occupation for sustenance of the Monks. And much more for
having by that means frequent occasion to be mocked, scorned, and intured not
only by those, who call holy mendicity, a lazy and Gipsian life, but even also
by such that through his appearing so in that habit, with a foolish pride
reputed themselves to be much disparaged and digraced by him.

Unto this love of purity, and contempt of himself, and of true penance
indeed, and voluntary poverty, was added an inflamed desire, and zeal of
salvation of souls, whereto he attended not only with fervent prayers, and
good examples of life, but also as occasion served, with exhortations,
counsels and aduises. And the Eternal Goodness also sometimes failed not to
concur thereto with divine works: as it happened perticulary in the
conversion of a kinsman of his, by name John Corsino. Which fell out, as
follows.

This man being afflicted with a most trouble some disease of the Wolf, the
less hope he had to be cured thereof, so much sought he out solaces and
allurements to divert the thought thereof; and among other things gave place
to unlawful games, with such a number of debauched people, as his house at
last was become a public house of mis-rule, and was commonly called the
Dieinghouse. The Blessed Andrew not brooking so hellish an error, to so great
an infamy of the name of Corsino, and so grievous a scandal to the whole
City: First calling upon divine succor (as he was wont) he went at a fit
hour to visit the sick patient; and after mutual salutation and demands had
between them, which in such encounters are usual with those of the best
breeding, with a lively says and a lovely face he says to him: If thou
would but do as I would have thee, John, I do here promise thee with the
grace of God, to deliver thee suddenly of this soar, which seems so
incurable, and from the snares and deceipts of thine enemies, that so persecute
thee. To this promise of his the sick man, though he could hardly afford any
credit, yet for the great desire he had to be rid of his pains, did offer
himself very prompt and ready to any thing that B. Andrew should please to
command him.

Then answered the servant of Christ: I will have thee the first thing thou
do, to relinquish this ill practice and conversation of Gamesters; and after
that, for eight days, that thou attend to Fasting, and to recommend thy self
heartily to the most Blessed Virgin. The conditions seemed hard to John, and yet
notwithstanding to make some try all thereof, using some violence to himself,
he dismissed and abandonned the evil companyes, and with abstinence and
prayer, made the Mother of God so propitious to him, as not without the
amazement of the whole City, and his infinite joy, he was cured, both of the
Ulcer, which devoured his flesh, and of the greedy appetites, which under a
false shadow of good, consumed his sensual and unwary soul. Such then were
the acts which B. Andrew practiced with his neighbor, full of simplicity and
truth; by whose means we may well believe, that many others at that time, were
weaned from vices, and confirmed in virtue.

How B. Andrew was made Priest, and then Superior: and of the gift of
Prophesy, which he showed in a particular event. Chap. 5.
THough the modesty and submission of the Blessed Andrew were now already well
known, he had notwithstanding new commodity to manifest, with a noble
document, how much he sought to please God only, and how be abhord all worldly
glory.

It was in times past, and is yet to this day, a custom in Florence, as in
other places of Christendom also, to make feasts at the first Mass of a new
Priest, with music, pompes, and banquetes: which demonstrations of joy and
gladness, as they are not to be blamed, while they are kept with in the bounds
of a moderate festiuity; so when they exceed the same, there is much danger
incurred, least Christian ceremonies degenerate into gentil, and profane, and
that in operations of the spirit, and mind, the flesh and belly may intrude
themselves; and finally least in the service and worship due to God only, the
devil (a fearful thing) should have his part therein. Now the Blessed
Andrew, having passed over already the gulf of youth, and not being able to
resist Superiors, that he might not be promoted unto sacred Orders; as soon
as he knew the matter to be diu^lged, and how the Corsinoes striued to
celebrate the Primitia of his Priesthood, with exquisite music, rich
hangings, and sumptous banquetes; recollecting himself a little, and
considering such pompes were not any thing conformable with his profession, and
worthily fearing some manner of abuse therein, with leave of the Prelate,
retired himself into a Convent, which is called by the name of the Sylua, some
seven miles forth of the City; and here as without all noise, so with
extraordinary spiritual sweetenes, he offered his first sacrifice to the most
holy Trinity, which how grateful and acceptable it was, the Emperesse of
Heaven her self did testify, who over that same unbloody host, appeared to B.
Andrew encompassed with a troop of Angels, and with the words of Esaias the
Prophet very plainly said to him: Seruus meus es tu, and in te gloriabor.
Which said, by little and little mounting aloft, she vanished quite.

With which favors, the prudent man not puffed up awhit, but rather attending
to abase himself, and to acknowledge all good to proceed from the mere
benignity of the highest, became every day more worthy, and more capable of new
graces. So as a little after the aforesaid vision, being sent to Paris, to give
himself more exactly to his studyes, and thence afterward in his return
into Italy passing by Auignon, where the Cardinal Corsino his near kinsman
was, while there he entertained himself for some space, he gave sight to a
blind man, who in the Church porch according to custom was publicly begging
an Alms. From thence being come into Florence, he delivered one Friar Ventura
a Carmelite from a dropsy.

And to the end that B. Andrew might not seem to want the gift of prophesy
also; even much about that time, being entreated by a friend to baptize an
infant, which had been newly borne into the world, he did it lovingly, and in
taking him out of the sacred Font, had a revelation from heaven of the unhappy
success, which that poor creature was to have. Whereupon being moved to
compassion, and being not able to hold from weeping, he was demauded by the
Gossipe, what made him to weep so. Then B. Andrew though unwillingly made
answer: Know then, how this Child is come into the world to the total
destruction of himself and his house. Of which prediction as then the secular
made but little recknoning, but saw it at last to be too true. Because the Child
in progress of years being given to an ill life, and even laden with ^mes
and wickedness, at last with some men of ill demeanor conspired against his
country, and the conspiracy discovered, the miserable wretch by the hands of a
hangman finished his days, with a due punishment, and the utter ruin of his
Family.

The excellent tallent, and manner, which B. Andrew had, in government. Chap.
6.
THough B. Andrew endeavored what he could, to keep himself from the eyes of
mortal men obscure, and unknown; notwithstanding being now come into a
singular opinion and fame of sanctity, he was chosen by the Pouinciall Chapter
of the Carmelit Fathers to be Superior of the Convent of Florence; to which
charge, he maynly opposed himself: but yet the common consent of the Electours
prevailed, and the authority of him who of obedience might impose it upon him.
In which office, he let the world to understand clearly, that it is not, as
others think, that much spirit, and good government be incompatible in the
same person. B. Andrew through the habit of prayer and of other virtues now
already confirmed in him, conseruing that which he had so purchased for
himself continually (without loosing yet awhit of his authority) the least of
all; and not affecting preeminencyes nor titles, but endeavoring with all
possible diligence, that such as were under his care, should, wholly free from
all temporal solicitude, attend to God only, wherein without doubt consists
the true and essenciall fruit of the religious and monastical life; since
otherwise for a man to be shut up in Cloisters, and to think continually of
meat, drink, and cloth, and other such like necessityes, is not formally to
abandon the world, but materially to change the dwelling only; nor is it to
leave the old habits; but only to alter the objects; and it is even the same to
be drowned in the Haven, as in the wide Ocean, as much to be laden and
oppressed with iron as with lead. Whereas on the contrary the mind being
discharged of terren thoughts, like a dry feather flies lighlty aloft; and then
spiritual exercise^ do never tire, when the frail nature never wants its due
and convenient sustenance.

Which charge for that it singularly belonges to him that gouernes others in
the divine service; hence it is that Prelates and Princes, are worthily called
and said to be honorable servants; and for want of this solicitude and
providence, murmurs and scandalls do openly follow, and finally unhappy
propriations, the certain pest, and utter ruin of Congregations and Orders.
Which thing the man of God, well foreseeing, did not only hear benignely, but
even prevented the honest suites, and necessityes of his Monks: whence after
would appear that it was no hard matter to exact the rule and discipline of
every one; while to all it was manifest and clear, that he being wholly
attentive to the weal public, had no reguard to his particular interests,
gusts, or greatnesses. In sum, he in that Superintendency of his gave such
proof of the talent he had, in dealing with, and guiding men, as that even
both heaven and earth might seem to have accorded together to exalt him, with
the occasion that follows.

How B. Andrew, was miraculously elected Bishop of Fesula. Chap. 7.
IN those days, Fuligno the Lord Bishop of Fesula, a most noble City near to
Florence, though now quite destroyed as it were, dyed. Whereupon the Canons and
the rest, to whom belonged the nomination of a new Pastor, being assembled
together in the name of God, and moved through the constant fame that
resounded every where of the name of B. Andrew preferred him before any other,
that might be destined to that Chair. The news whereof, was speedily brought
to the Man of God. But knowing well the greatness of the weight, and esteeming
it far too burdensome for his shoulders, he retired himself from his
Convent, into the Monastery of Carthusians, a little out of Florence: and there
hid himself in such wise, as the Fesulans having sought him through the City
and Province, were resolved at last to come to a new election.

But to the end it might evidently appear, how that title was reserved by the
divine Providence, to no other then B. Andrew: behold while the Assembly was
ready to enter into the Scrutiny, a Child there present, cried out with a loud
voice, saying: Elegit Deus Andream in sacerdotem sibi, who is now in the
Charterhowse, making his prayer; there shall you certainly find him out. At
which voice those of the Council being astonished, without more ado
confirming the former election sent immediately messengers to the Carthusian
Fathers, beseeching them very earnestly to work so, as their Bishop, with so
marvelous an union chosen of men, and with a greater wonder approved of God,
might accept now at last the enterprise, whereto with so clear and evident
signs, he was called so by the high Rectour and Ruler of all. And even just at
that time, while this passed in Florence, there appeared to B. Andrew then,
being in deep contemplation, another Child in a white garment, which openly
declared to him, the will of God to be, that he should go forth to that
charge, nor fear the while, any danger, nor fly the travail. By this
declaration the servant of God being finally assured, and arysing from his
Oratory went to meet with the messengers of Fesula that sought for him: and
taking a sweet leave with a thousand thanks of his Hosts, he went cheerfully to
his diocese, being then some 58. years of age, and through divine favor
completly answered to the great expectation which all had already conceived of
him.

How B. Andrew, demeaned himself in his Bishoprike: and how charitable he was
to the poor. Chap. 8.
Our B. Andrew knowing both by learning and experience, that the office of a
good Prelate consists, in feeding the subjects as well with example as with the
word; and also in temporal necessity with meat and drink: first of all he
retained his ancient maxim in preaching Christ above all, with works. So as he
endeavored to show himself continually a Master of all disordinate passions,
to restrain sensuality, and to macerate the body with abstinencyes, and with
wearing on his bare flesh, not sackcloth and cilices now as he was wont to do,
but an iron chain; to sleep, instead of a matteresse, upon hurdles, to fly all
banquettings, to beware as much as possibly he might from discoursing with
women, to shut his ears to flatterers, to trample on vain confidence or
esteem of himself, not to remit the study of meditation, to walk always in
the presence of God, and to acknowledge him with amorous affects in all
creatures; whence afterward derived that charity of his toward his
neighbor, and that so tender compassion on the afflicted and distressed, as
that in hearing their calamities he could not hold from tears; and none had
recourse to him for comfort or succor, but he indeauoured by all means to
send them away both comforted and contented. Yea following the stepps of the
great S. Gregory he would have an exact catalogue with him of all the poor,
especially of the shamefast, and continued to sustain them with all possible
secrecy.

With which humanity and bounty of his, how much the Giver of al good was
pleased, very manifestly appeared in time of a cruel Dearth, wherewith the
people of Fesula being much tormented and oppressed, not finding on earth any
retuge more fit and opportune then the benignity of their Bishop, they came
running in troops unto him, and he shut not up his coffers, or dispense from
any: in so much as having one day very liberally distributed what bread was in
the house, and now beggars continually coming in, he commanded more bread to
be given unto them; and his servants knowing very well, there was not so much
as a loaf left, they endeavored to certify the Master thereof, who
notwithstanding perseuering in calling for it, and bidding them earnestly to
seek yet better; they not to seem contumacious, though against their wills,
turning back, found to their extreme wonder a great quantity of loaves, and
with great joy brought them to the man of God. Which presently he divided among
the hungry, imitating in this also, the mercy, and representing the infinite
power of the Savior. Besides this, he was wont truly, in memory of our said
Redeemer and Lord, the singular Master of holy humility, to wash every
Thursday with his own hands the feet of some poor folks, wherein he felt
particular gust and consolation.

Now it happened once, that among those Beggars, was called in one, who had his
legs in a loatsome manner very soar and corrupted, who as he was well bred and
modest, began to resist the admirable man, not suffering by all means he
should wash his feet: and B. Andrew demanding wherefore? The other answered: My
leges are so soar and putrifyed, as I have good cause to fear, they will
turn a Prelates stomach, and breed a loathing. Then answered the Saint, have
confidence my son in our Lord Jesus Christ, and so having said, he powered out
the water into the vessel straight, and sets himself to wash his feet. A
wonderful thing, scarcely had he finished to wipe that happy man, but his feet
were made clean, and his soars cured. Such was B. Andrews care and diligence
of the corporal necessityes of his flock, and upon these foundations of well
known goodness, did after securely arise the celestial building of souls:
because he had gotten so much credit and authority with those carriages of his;
as to reclayme and pull away ill livers from their lewd life, one word or beck
of his, had more moment with it, then the long and premeditated disswasions of
others.

How B. Andrew reconciled most deadly emnityes and debates; and how his death
was mir aculously foretold him. Chap. 9.
THough B. Andrew had great efficacy with him, in each kind of spiritual
remedies, yet showed he to have a particular talent in contracting honest
friendships, in taking up quarells, in composing controversies, and so much the
more willingly labored he in these things, as the Holy Ghost had given him to
understand, that in mutual fraternall love, consists the whole sum of the
Christian Law. The honorable fame now of all these noble actions dilating it
self, through all parts, Pope Urban the V. took particular contentment
thereat, and for some days, gave a large field unto so eminent virtue to
exercise it self in. The City of Bologna in those days was enflamed with
perilous tumults and discordes, nor was there any remedy of that evil to be
found, through the inueterated hatreds, disordinate passions, and obstinate
pertinacity of the parties. The common Pastor being worthily anxious and
sollicitous for it, after many cares and diligences in vain used about the
same, resolved with himself to make use of the person of the Bishop of Fesulae
for that business, and with an ample power sent him as his Nuntius to the
Bolognians: nor was he awhit deceived in his opinion, because B. Andrew being
arrived thither, began immediately to mitigate the exasperated wounds of their
minds, and with the didiuine help, had so lucky and dexterous a hand, as he
shortly recovered them, reducing the nobility and people, without new noise to
a desired peace and tranquillity. And some few more stiff and obstinate then the
rest, by divine judgment being struck with a greiuous and sudden infirmity, and
again through the merits of the Saint delivered thereof, did willingly yield
themselves likewise, and he with the like contentment of Citizens and Pope
Urban also, and with the universal applause of all Italy, returned home again
to his residence. Where besides the mayntayning and nourishing as we have said,
with great charity, the bodies and souls committed to him, he took likewise
particular account of the sacred buildinges; and among other restaurations
sumptuously repaired the Cathedral Church, which was even threatening ruin.

With these passages being arrived to the 71. year of his age, while he was
celebrating solemn Mass on the most happy night (...)

THE LIFE OF B. LAVRENCE JUSTINIAN, THE FIRST PATRIARCH OF VENICE.
Written by the Honorable Leonard Justinian.
Of the parentage infancy, and minority of B. Laurence: and what a strange
vocation he had. Chap. I.
BLESSED LAVRENCE was borne in the City of Venice, of the Magnifico Bernard^
(...), and of Quirina his wife (both of a high and noble lineage) in the year
of our Lord 1380. He was left a child, with other Brothers of his by his
Father, who dyed very soon. His heavy and disconsolate Mother being yet but
young, mac^rating her body, as well with fastings and vigils, as with a sharp
cilice and a brazen girdle, kept viduall state, not without a prosperous and
perpetual same of purity: nor attended she with less solicitude in the mean
time, in bringing up her children in learning, and that which more imports in
Christian manners: and though they all gave much ^ope, not to degenerate awhit
from their Ancestors, notwithsta^^ing a particular towardnes of a great
spirit, and generous thoughts went discovering itself, in the B. Laurence;
since that in those his first years, scorning and loathing the sports, and
other leuityes, which are permitted to that age, with a certain sage maturity,
he conuersed with men of stedder judgments, and of things indeed not childish;
in so much as this manner of proceeding of his, was attribured by some to an
overmuch desire of greatness of glory. Yea his own Mother, fearing he would
give up himself as a prey to Ambition, (as most commonly the nobler wits are
wont) of purpose said to him on a time: Go to, Laurence, leave this manner of
thine, this thy pride even savors of Hell. Where to he smiling, met^y made
answer: Doubt not Madame, you shall yet see me a great servant of God. Nor was
the prediction awhit in vain, because he being now come to nineteen years of
age, when as man commonly stands upon the point of taking the good, or ill
bent; in vision there appeared to him a woman more bright then the Sun, who
with a pleasing and grateful countenance spoke to him in this sort.

My beloved youth, why distracts thou thy heart into diverse parts, and seek
rest forth of thy self, now in this thing, and now in that? Look what thou
wishest for, is in my hands, and I promise to affoard it thee, if thou will
take me to thy Spouse. At which words B. Laurence being at first astonished,
and taking after more courage, to demand her name, and what her condition was,
the Virgin replied: I am the Wisdom of God, who for reforming the world
heretofore have taken mortal flesh. Which the happy Lover hearing, soon
yielded his assent; and she reaching him a chaste kiss of peace, very suddenly
vanished. At this vision now B. Laurence being stirred up to new cares, and
feeling unwonted flames of fire to burn within his breast, yet could not fully
interpret the inuitation made him, nor to which to betake himself above
others. It is true, that inwardly he found himself to be much inclined to a
religious and perfect life; but as yet not ^ing to his own judgment, he went
for counsel to a certain Cousin of his Mother, called Marinus, who leading a
monastical life in S. Georges of Alga, of the Congregation of Celestines, was
held in great opinion of learning and sanctity.

He now understanding the inspiration and motives of the young man more maturely
to examine the whole, exhorted him first ere he entered into Religion, or
changed the habit, he would secretly make some experience, what he were able to
suffer in a strict life. To which advice B. Laurence did very promptly obey,
and among other industryes, began instead of a soft and downy bed, to ly in
the night upon crabby and knotry wood. And with all to make his accounts the
better, he endeauours of purpose one day, to contemplate on the one side
Magistracyes, Honors, Wives, Children, riches, sundry sorts of pastimes and
sports, and all the pleasure besides which the world may afford; and on the
other, abstinencyes, fasts, vigills, poverty, incommodityes, heat and cold, the
abnegation of himself, with perpetual servitude, and other difficultyes
besides, which present themselves in the narrow way of more perfect virtue, and
divine service.

Hereupon as an Arbitour placed between two troops of obiectes, demanded he
account of himself, saying: Now consider well Laurence, what thou have to do:
Do thou think thou can endure these austerityes, and despise those
commodityes? Whereupon standing in suspense and contention within himself, at
last casting his eyes upon a Cross of Christ: Thou art (said he) my hope, O
Lord, in this tree is found comfort and strength for all, a secure and safe
refuge for all. And without doubting any more, he determined by all means to
follow the internal voice, and counsayles of the Chief Pastor.

Of the singular virtues of B. Laurence, and particulerly of his Fortitude in
suffering the pains of the body. Chap. 2.
IT cannot easily be explicated, how much seruour and spirit was augmented in
that blessed soul from that so free and well grounded resolution which B.
Laurence made. Which howbeyt he labored to hide by all means possible: yet
could he not so do, but those of the house, especially his Mother must needs
find it out. Whereupon she, though virtuous and devout, yet tender and anxious
for her deer son, fearing least through violence of nature, he might come to
be transported unto some hardy enterprise beyond his forces, she determined
upon agreement with others, to ty him, as soon as might be, with the bands of
Matrimony. So at having practically proceeded therein without delay, she soon
found out, and offered him a beautyfull, noble, and rich spouse. But the holy
youth being aware of the temptation, and conspiracy of his friends, would
defer no longer, to rid himself of the danger, and to convey himself as
secretly as he could, unto S. Georges: where taking the habit of Religion, he
manfully began to enter into the battle, against the invisible Enemy.

The first assault then, he gave to Sensuality, depriving himself of all
wantonness, and disports. To hungar he gave but that only, which even the utmost
necessity required. Thirst he did tolerate, in such sort, as that neither for
the vehemence of heates, nor wearines of the iourneys he made, or other labors
whatsoever, nor for any indisposition of body, would he ever call for drink.
But rather if sometimes, he were invited thereunto, he was wont to answer: how
then Brothers shall we be able to endure the fire of Purgatory, if we cannot
suffer this little thirst? At the vigils at night, and mattyns, he was the first
in coming thither, and the last to depart from thence: for that, it being the
custom of others, to return to bed again until the rising of the Sun; the
B. Laurence would never go out of the Church, until the hour of prime. He
would never approach to the fire, not so much as in the heart of winter: a thing
so much the more to be admired in so delicate a complexion.

A certain Father one day invited him to warm himself at the lyre, and not
being able to be brought unto it, he felt his hand, and finding it to be
benumbed through cold, he cried out: Great is the ardour O Son, thou have
within thee since thou feel not the extremity of cold without. But what
great wonder is it, that he approached not to the fire, who never went as it
were into the garden likewise, being the only recreation, and ordinary disport
of the Monks? At divine offices he would stand bolt upright, without leaning
awhit either on the right or left hand. He would secretly make most cruel
disciplines; as testified the many stripes all black and blew, through his
whole body, with the frequent staynes of blood thereon appearing.

In the dolours of infirmityes, he would show incredible patience. Being yet a
Nouice, his neck was full of swelling of the Kings evil. The Physicians for a
last and only remedy threatened him first cuppings, then launcings, and lastly
searing with fire. And the Fryats doubting, he would faint under the cure, he
courageously answered: what fear you Brothers? Let come the rasor, bring in
the burning irons; can not he happily give me constancy in this danger, who
affoarded it to the three children in the furnace? So as he was cut and burned,
without fetching the left groan or sigh, or sending forth other voice, then
Jesus for once only.

Howbeit indeed, it is no great matter, he should show such fortitude in the
greener, who gave such an example thereof in his latter age, and perhapps more
memorable then it: Because, that being vnmeasurably sweld at that time in the
throat, and being not able to resolve the corrupt humor thereof without
incision of the knife, the Father being desirous to be rid of the trouble, to
attend more freely to the care of souls, stood still at that launcing as quiet
and immovable as a stock, speaking to the timourous Surgeon: Cut on
courageously, for thy rasour can not exceed the burning hot irons of the
Martyrs. In this sort, the flesh being vanquished quite, and subdued, and the
noble Warrier, with full and perfect renunciation, quitting himself to his
power, of al terrene charge, endeauours to conquer the other impietyes one by
one; so much more powerful and dangerous, as more inward and spiritual they
be. But the principal fight which he took in hand, was against that horrible
monster of Pride, taming it as well in the interior as exterior, with
contrary, frequent, and intense acts. The garments that he wore were all
torn; the more abject offices, and more noisome of the Monastery, (most
manfully therein, subduing his stomach for the love of Christ) he would take to
himself.

Besides, he stuck not to go forth a begging of alms, with a Wallet on his
back. And wholly to trample under foot the foolish reputation and vain pride
of the world, he would put himself of purpose into the thickest nobility, and
where the greater concourse of the inhabitants was. He would come also
sometimes to the very house, where he was borne, and remaining in the streets
be crying aloud, for Gods sake. At which words and voice of his, the motherly
bowels being moved, to cut off at least the walk or circuit of her dear,
blotid, she suddenly commanded the servants to fill up his wallet with
victuals. But he contenting himself with two leauer of bread, and wishing
peace to such as had done him the charity, would depart from thence as
altogether unknown, and so com^ nuing his round from door to door, being
tired at last, with the burden, and sometimes over laden with reproaches, he
would return to S. Georges again

Being further provoked, though altogether unjustly truly, with other
occasions, or reprehended for some thing, he would force himself (in biting
his tongue sometimes) to repress the natural vehemence, which the Children of
Adam have to justify and defend themselves. Through which exercise, by little
and little he got such a power over himself, as that being once accused in the
open Congregation, by a perverse man, for having committed in government
something against the rule, though he knew the malignity of him, and could have
yielded* a good account of himself; notwithstanding without opening his mouth,
or changing his countenance, arising from his seat, with eyes cast down to
the earth, and with a moderate pace, he went into the midest of the Chapter,
and there falling down on his knees, craved humbly penance, and pardon of all
those Fathers: so as the accuser himself being quite confounded at so great a
patience of his, could not hold from casting himself at the feet of that
innocent, and in the presence of all to condemn his own malignity. And as in
public acts, so likewise in private conversation would D. Laurence most
willingly yield to the judgment and wills of others, and as much as he might
without affectation, always seek the lowest place.

He bare all respect, and veneration to Superiors, he held their becks instead
of Oracles. Nor only in things at large, and indifferent, by cutting off all
sensual appetite, he purely followed their will; but even also in things other
wise very lawful and virtuous, captiuing his own understanding, would not
dissent a whit from their rules and dictamens. Whence it happened (as all
virtues are with a wonderful harmony conjoined together) that the servant of
God, very perfectly acquiring a habit of Religion, became rich and adorned with
many others at the same time. Whereby preparing in his heart, a clean and
grateful chamber for the holy Ghost, in short time he obtained so high a gift
of tears, and so much familiarity with his Creator and Lord, as that
remaining with his body on earth, with his soul he conuersed in Heaven; and
dealing with men by diverse occurrences, he departed not at all from the
presence of God; chasing away from himself with great dexterity, all importune
and superfluous phantasmes. From this purity of conscience, soon after ensued
such a light, as far surmonted all learning purchased otherwise, and in the
will so great an ardour, as all the waters of the world had not been able to
extinguish it. But rather he sought always, to advance forwards, according
to the obligation of profession, and so much abhorred to turn himself, and
look back being (as they say) at the plough, or to reedify that which he had
destroyed, or to resume again any thing which he had left and renounced in the
world, as he could never be brought once, to put his foot in his Fathers house,
allthough he lived so near unto them, and his dearest friends were of the best
reputation, and of rare example of Christian virtue: Save only at the death of
his Mother, and Brothers, was he present to assist them with due piety in their
last passage.

How B. Laurence converted a kinsman of his from his evil purpose. And of the
goodly saying he was wont to use. Chap. 3.
B. Laurence, had not been yet many years in Religion, when a dear companion
of his, in the world, who for this mean while had been in the East, and but
newly returned to Venice (so powerful the instigation of the Devil is) went
presently to S. Georges, accompanied with music, loud and soft, to allure the
new Monk to his former life, partly also with a band of men, to use some
violence with the Convent, if need were. This Gentleman was a man of great
employments, and of much respect, so as he obtained very easily to speak with
Blessed Laurence; but yet with far different success from his designs.
Because at the first fight of the new Soldier of Christ, beholding the
modesty of his countenance, the gravity of his gestures, and composition of the
whole person, he remained astonished thereat. And notwithstanding using some
violence with himself, and taking courage withal, he began the enterprise for
which he came thither; but the servant of God permitting that breast full of
passion and youthful error to vent it self forth, with a cheerful
countenance and mild speeches, began first very dexterously to feel him: and
then with the memory of Death, of Hell, and of the last Judgment, and with
lively representing unto him, the vanity and deceipts of the world, pressed him
so hard, as the good man being now compunct, upon a sudden yielded himself;
and so yielded, as cutting of with the force of spirit, all transitory designs
whatsoever, resolved to adhere to that Rule, which he had thought to have
vioted, and from henceforth offering himself to the divine worship, he
perseuered ^n the holy Cloister, with like profit of his own, and amazement of
the whole City. In this manner the ancient adversary departed, and he who had
thought to have had a prey, was himself caught in the net.

Nor with the seculars only, being free and dissolute, were the persuasions of
the B. Laurence efficacious (especially his good example and seruent prayers to
our Lord concurring with all) but even also (a thing to my judgment yet more
hard) with the tepid and negligent Religious. Since he awaked some of them more
then once from the deadly sleep of slouthfullnes, and withdrew them from a
foolish and unwary presumption, to a sollicitous and wise fear of Christ:
others, being now weary with the spiritual warfare, or rather basely already
put to flight, he caused on a sudden to turn head again, and beyond all hope,
to stand stoutly in the front of the battle. For the eminent Pulpit, and
popular preachings he wanted strength of body: but yet in private assemblyes,
he would make sweet homilyes and devout discourses, to the great profit and
consolation of the hearers. And also in his daily speech, would often proceed
very notable sentences from his mouth, whereof for example sake we shall put
down some.

He would say, It was not the part of a Religious man to fly only the greater
sins, since that behooved every one to do, but even also, to keep himself
from the less, least Charity should wax cold. He was wont also to note
concerning fastings, that they are not to be remitted wholly as soon as the
body waxes lean, for as much as the wished extenuation thereof, is conserved
with that which procures it. Three things he judged to be necessary for a
Monk, to wit, fervor, discretion, and heavenly grace, because where any of
these are failing, there can be no perseverance. He compared the virtue of
Humility, to a river that swells with rain: for that even as a torrent is very
low and still in the summer, and runs outrageous and boystrous in winter; so the
humble man, being slack and remiss in prosperity, in adversity again appears
to be high and magnanimous. He added, that no man well comprehends, what the
gift of Humility is, but he that has received it from God, and that there is
nothing wherein men are more deceived, then in discerning this virtue, and how
true science consists in knowing two things; that God is all, and man nothing.

In the greater troubles of his Country (which at that time was much infested
with wars) he stuck not to admonish the principal Senators, that if they
would obtain mercy of God, they should hold for certain they were nothing,
nor could do any thing of themselves. He advised that none should be received
into Religion without mature examine, least by admitting the bad, the good
might be hurt. Besides that, when the number of subjects, is too much
increased, the Rule cannot long last in its rigor, because perfection is of
few only.

A Gentleman's son being come to S. Georges for the habit, as soon as the
Blessed Laurence heard that he was induced thither, through the artificious
inticements of the Monks, he renders him to the sollicitous Father with these
words: Here take him to you again, for this renouncing of the world should
proceed from the Holy Ghost, and not for human instigation, and much worse it
is to fail afterward, then to have never begun at all. From the day he was
made Priest, he fayld not to celebrate every day, unless by occasion of
infirmity; and concluded, that he who neglects when he may, to enjoy his Lord,
declares sufficiently that he maks little account of him. To go about to keep
chastity, amidst commodityes and ease, he protested to be as much as with fuel
to extinguish the fire. In the matter of Christ his counsails, he resolved
(among other things) that no man understands, how great a good this Poverty
is, but he that loves, when time is, contemplation and his Cell; and that God
of purpose keeps secret the felicity of the Religious state, because that if
it were known, every one would be running into it.

He often remembered, that we are never to loose our hope in God, since heerin
consists the life of the soul^. As for the rich he affirmed, that they cannot
be saved, but by dealing of alms. He held the Pastoral care to be so much
more greiuous and difficult then the government of the state of war is, as
the rule of invisible things is harder then that of the visible. He likened a
good Prince to a head, especially for this reason, that even as the head and
tongue are sufficient to crave help for the whole person, though the rest of
the body be quiet and stand still; so the seruent prayer of a Prince, sometimes
is enough to appeal the wrath of God, though the rest of the City apply not
it self, or attend thereunto. These violent enterprises, and such as meet
with encounters every foot, he counsayled to forbear, as growing from an evil
spirit, since to the good and holy, the divine Providence it self, is wont to
open the way, and quit the obstacles that hinder.

How B. Laurence was chosen to govern the Religion: and how afterward he was
made Bishop of Venice. Chap. 4.
BY these and other such like aduices, may well be discerned, what light the
man of God had, not only in abstract and spiritual matters, but even also ^in
the moral and practique; yea and without ever having attended to Scholasticall
doctrine, or subtle disputes, he would answer when need was to profound
interrogations of Theology, with so much acumen and clarity, as even the
Doctors themselves would be amazed thereat. With the same wisdom surely
infused more from Heaven, then borrowed from books, he composed diverse works,
fraught as well with sovereign conceits, as with amorous affects. Which
labors being publicly set forth, and put in print, do walk and pass at
this day through the hands of learned men with notable fruit and help of
souls. Amidst these things, after the Blessed Laurence had given a long and
sufficient proof of himself, he was elected by the Monks, full sore against
his will, to the government of the Religion, and he bare that burden with
singular approbation unto the 51. year of his age.

At which time, the good odor of such virtues, being now spread into diverse
parts, it seemed good to Pope Eugenius the IV. without doubt through divine
inspiration, to create him Bishop of Venice. At which tydinges, it may easily
be imagined, how much the holy man was confounded and troubled. Twice he was
ready to fly away and to hide himself: but the matter not succeeding so with
him, he determined at last to remit himself to the judgment of his
Congregation. And first having made for that intent many fastes and prayers,
the Fathers resolved at last to dispatch a man of purpose to the Pope, humbly
beseeching his Holiness, not to deprive their Order of such and so great a
Guide-maister, and Pastor. And being not heard the first time, they replied
the second with more instance, but al in vain, as appears by the two Briefs,
written by the same Eugenius to the said Congregation, with words very, amorous
and consolatory withal.

The Blessed Laurence then being not able to resist the Pope without sin,
accepted the power in such sort, as he not only changed not his manners to the
worse, as it happens, but continually made them more admirable and perfect then
ever. One day about the evening, he took possession of the Bishopric, so
simply, and so without all pomp, as even his nearest friends had no knowledge
thereof, till he was entered therinto. Then all that night without shutting his
eyes, he remained in prayer, beseeching our Lord with many tears, since for
the only service of his divine Majesty, so wholly against his own inclination,
he had condescended to that degree, he would not deprive him of his protection
and clemency: that he knew very well, the importance of the charge, the
greatness of the City, the variety and multitude of the Orders and states, the
forces of the secular power; and how great disgusts had passed heretofore,
between that Domination and the Bishops his Predecessors, and how poor a
stacke he had for such a manage, and for such accidents, being so a sily wretch
as he was, and ever shut up in a Monastery. His devout prayers, and seruent
sighs, were not powered in vayn. Because they found the ears of the divine
goodness to be opened to them. Whence, being illustrated with a sudden and new
light, he took so much vigor and comfort thereat, as he afterward governed
the whole Diocese, as easily as he had been but to rule some Convent, as shall
appear in the next Chapter.

How B. Laurence governed his House, and the City, with singular fruit and
edification of all. Chap. 5.
TO begin with domestical matters, Blessed Laurence ordained his family in
this manner. He chose out two virtuous companions of his Congregation; one for
divine offices, the other for the more weighty cares of the Bishoprike. For the
service of the house, he would have but five assistants and no more. To this
retinue of Courtiers was his Table and Wardrobe answerable. He had no plate but
of earthen-glasse. Arras, or Tapistry were not there to be seen at any time.
In his clothing he never altered the purple habit. In the night he lay upon a
scanty bed of straw, covering himself with a gross and course rugge. His
table by how much more exquisite it was for neatnes, so much the more was it
purposely neglected in vyandes. He never had longing for any thing, nor had as
little auersion from any, contenting himself ever with that which was set
before him.

His family thus ordered, he gave himself to the reformation of the City,
beginning first from the Cathedral Church, which through others default and
carelessness, had great need thereof. He set the Chapter on foot again, and
the Order of the Chanons, now brought almost to nothing, and increased it with
Priests and petty Chanons and Quiristers. He reduced many other Churches to so
good terms, where hardly any Mass was wont to be celebrated before, as they
seemed to be Cathedral and Pontifical. Applying himself afterward to the
censure of the Clergy, he made very excellent Decrees and Constitutions in this
nature, nor had he any great difficulty to procure them to be kept and
observed, such was the grace and benignity, wherewith he obliged the hearts of
his subjects, since he was helpful to many, and never imposed burden upon any,
permitting them fully to enjoy the fruits and their rents: howbeit on the
other side, when the matter required, he spared not to use due severity.

With the same care and love he dealt with the Monasteryes, especially of
Nuns; not suffering the frail sex to suffer any thing, neither in the body,
or spirit. He repaired the Parishes which were ruined, and erected so many a
new, as that finding some 20. of them, with good observance he left no less
then 30. behind him at his death, nor used he less diligence with all the rest
of his flock. It is incredible, what concourse there was every day at his
house of distressed persons, who resorted to him for counsel and succor.
Notwithstanding he was more particularly vigilant upon Curates and Vicars, as
they call them, reducing often into their memory, the strait account they are
to make to our Lord God. But how shall we express his great liberality? He
despised money as much as ever was despised of any. His gate, the dispense, his
chests, stood ever open to all the poor. He could not be brought by any means
to take account of the master of his house; while it seemed to him an unworthy
thing, that a superintendant for the care of gaining souls, should set himself
of purpose to cast for farthings. And took heed much more, least in the m^nage
of Episcopal rents, flesh and blood might have place: knowing how much this
imported for edificatio^, and for purchasing the minds of the City. And
therefore endeavored he always, that the world might clearly know, how in
temporal or oeconomicall matters, he had no manner of commerce at all with his
adherents.

So as, a certain poor man, being recommended to him, on behalf of the
Magnifice Leonard his brother: Go thy ways (said he to him) and bid him from
me, to do thee the favor, since God has afforded him the means. The good
Bishop answered to a certain kinsman of his, not very rich, who demanded some
succor to marry his daughter with: Consider I pray, good Sir, that if I give
you but a little, it is not that which you pretend: and if I give you much, I
shall wrong many to help one only. Besides, how little or much soever I hap to
give you, has been commended to me, by the Church for mayntenance of the
poor, and not for jewels, and other ornaments of women. He more willingly
gave alms in bread, wine, wood, garments, and other such like, then in money,
to take away (I believe) the occasion from many of spending it ill, and when
indeed he gave any money, he would divide it into many pieces, that the greater
number of the needy and necessitous might participate thereof. Nor in examining
their merits was he very scrupulous, or exact; but rather sometimes let
himself be deceived, as chosing rather to benefit some unworthy person, then
defraud in the least any well deserving. True it is that for the bashful and
shame-fac't poor (toward whom the holy man, had particular compassion) he
had certain Matrons deputed of much confidence, and of eminent virtue; who by
some good way or other, might take faithful and exact information of the
secret necessityes of each, especially of those who from good degrees through
divine permission have fallen into straits.

In sum, he was far from all tenacity, as when with monyes he could not
furnish others necessityes, he would supply with suretyships for them, or by
charging himself with their debts. And being demanded by his nearest
domestiques, upon what foundation he laid up his treasure? He would say, of my
Lord, who will pay me well for it. Nor was he awhit deceived of his hope, since
when others least thought of it, there would come to him here and there great
quantityes of gold and silver, that he might dispend them on the poor at his
own pleasure. With all these things went united together a peace and
serenity of mind, not easily to be expressed with words; as seeming in a
certain manner, he held the Moon under his feet, and had his mind fixed and
seated in a place, where the clouds of sadness, or the winds, and tempests of
other disordinate passions could not reach. And to this purpose I will not
spare to touch some things, not so light in substance, as they will seem
perhaps at first, if it be true indeed that by sudden accidents habits are
known.

Two not able examples of B. Laurence his Patience: and how welcome he was to
Pope Eugenius. Chap. 6.
THe Blessed Laurence being one day set at the table, one of the wayters
deceived (as sometyms it happens) instead of wine presented him with vinegar,
when the good Bishop having tasted it, without altering his countenance, or
speaking a word, went on with his dinner, and listened to the lesson read,
until at last the poor servant aware of the error, ^craued pardon for his
offense. The B. Laurence (as we have said above) was exceedingly reverenced and
beloved of the City. And yet nevertheless sometyms he had potent adversaries:
One whereof, taking by occasion a great disdain at certain Canons published
against pompes, assembling a great number of men together, for the most part
very noble and honorable personages, labored of purpose to make an Inuectiue
against the servant of God, tearing him (as he was wont) in his fame, and
exhorting all to oppose themselves mainly to the too much severity, and the
indiscreet seruours of the Monk. In the like tenor spoke some few of them,
but the others partly refented the same, and partly derided such arrogance; nor
was the conuenticle hardly dissolved, when as one devoted to the holy Pastor,
being exceedingly troubled at those blasphemies cast forth, went presently in
great have to acquaint him with what had happened, and that with words so
lively, and with such ardour of the eyes and gestures, as had been enough to
have set any one on fire, though he had not been sensible of the injury. But
the Blessed Laurence, not being willing to be further informed, either of the
fact, or the persons, made answer with a cheerful countenance: Do not
trouble your self, my Son, for God will have care of his honor; and so
indeed it fell out, since that wretched accuser with his followers was soon
very grievously punished by the Magistrates upon other occasions. I will add
another example like to this.

The vigilant Bishop, with great equity had condemned a certain Clerk for ill
life, not regarding much the protection which a seditious Layman gave unto
him. Whence this other lewd companion was so enraged against him for it, as the
solemn Procession of Corpus Christi passing before his doors, at the approach
of the Bishop who carried that sacred Custody, with a loud voice he vomited
forth a number of vile reproaches and contumelies upon him, calling him (among
other things) a Cosener, an Hypocrite, and warning the people to beware of
him. From which sacrilegious affront ensued so great a scandal, and choler of
the standers by, that the Majesty and reverence of that great Feast could
hardly hold them from running suddenly with their burning torches, to set his
house on fire. But the Priest of God, what did he in this case? Holding his
eyes fixed on the Venerable Sacrament, without altering his pace awhit, or
changing his countenance, he went forwaard with great gravity on his way.
Although indeed, without endeavor of the Saint, the unbridled presumption of
the Wretch was soon punished, because being constrained by the Senate, to
recant publicly, he was afterward miserably banished also. Nor amidst
persecutions and travails likewise the B. Laurence would show himself to be
stout and constant, but even also (a thing much more rare and difficult)
amidst favors and greatnesses themselves.

He was more then once invited by Pope Eugenius to Rome, but always in vain,
since he finding out new excuses every hour, eschewed honors, and pomp as
much as others sought them. True it is, the same Eugenius being come
afterward to Bologna, and renewing the inuitement, the Servant of God could
no more allege, as he was wont, either the weakness of his complexion, or the
difficulty and length of the way: so as recommending himself to our Lord, he
went his ways thither, and in the presence of many Cardinals, was very
graciously received by the Pope, and saluted with these words: VVelcome the
ornament, and splendor of the Episcopal order. And from henceforth his
Holiness with the rest of the Clergy and the City, held him in great veneration
all the time that he remained there, which was but short, through the care and
solicitude he had, to return to his Diocese as soon as might be. And
howbeit the Pope much desired to have him with him, with humble instance
notwithstanding effectually taking his leave, he departed from Court, without
the lea^t rust of avarice, that could once take hold of the fine polish of his
Charity.

How B. Laurence was made Patriarch of Venice: and what testimony was given of
him, by a holy Hermit. Chap. 7.
AFter Eugenius the IV. su^eeded Nicolas the V. who in a certain manner,
contending with his Predecessor to exalt B. Laurence, determined to create him
Patriarch of Venice, translating the Primacy into that City, from another
City and Island of the Adriatique Sea, called Gradus, very famous and
magnificent in times past, though now, as humane vicissitudes are, as it were
forgot, and utterly destroyed. This news at the beginning, was not very
grateful to the States of Venice, fearing least in process of time, with such
augmentation and advancement of the Prelacy and the Title, the troubles and
factions again, might come to increase, which had anciently grown between the
Ecclesiastical and secular Court. As soon then as the Blessed Laurence had
notice thereof, to show himself in deeds to be no less a good Citizen, then
a good Religious man, and a good Bishop, he went to the Senate, and there
publicly declared his desire was to retire himself rather, and to lay down
the charge now borne for these eighteen years against his will, then now in
old age to charge himself a new with such a burden. But for as much as the
name and title of Patriarcke offered by his Holiness, redounded not so much to
his honor, as the reputation and Majesty of the Common wealth, he would by no
means dispose of himself any thing in that case, without first comunicating
the matter with the Superintendantes and Tutours thereof. Wherefore they should
plainly signify in the mean time, their own inclination; since he would
wholly govern himself according thereto, in a busynes of that importance,
looking always a great deal more into the common good, then to any particular
consolation, or disdain of his.

These words and the like, said the B. Laurence, with such affect and candor
withal, as the Duke himself, through tenderness, being not able to hold from
tears, and the Senators astonished at so great a height of courage, conjoined
with Charity alike, by a common consent made answer; By all means, and
without respects he should accept the offer, as after he did, with the
extraordinary iubily, and joy of the whole people.

About the same time, to the new glory of the B. Laurence, fell out another
thing of great wonder. There lived for more then 30. years, near to Corfu, in
a craggy and desert place, a Man very famous for continual prayer, and strict
abstinence, and that which men more esteem of, for a notable spirit of
Prophesy. Now the Venetian Republike at that time, being much oppressed and
reduced to ill terms by the armies of Philip Duke of Millan: It came into the
mind of a certain noble Venetian, who had then some business at Corfu at that
time (so curious and sollicitous are men about future things) to learn of that
solitary man, whether true it were, as it was commonly spoken, that the
Venetian Empire was near upon ruin? To which demand the Prophet answered
without delay: You may all be thankful to the bitter plaints, and earnest
intercessions of your Bishop, without which take this for certain you had now
a good while since been quite undone; and that which had of old happened to
those five infamous Cittyes, had fallen upon yours, since you have so turned
your backs to our Lord, and put his holy Law so quite in oblivion.

This testimony gave the devout Hermit of the blessed Laurence; not knowing
the same by any humane way, nor understanding, but by divine inspiration, what
passed in the world in those days. Which thing being suddenly diuulged,
confirmed the universal opinion which was then had of such a Patriarch. So as
there arrived into the City of Venice no personage of quality, nor pilgrim,
(who then for sundry devotions came flocking from Hungary, Germany, France, and
Spain) who endeavored not to inform themselves exactly of his sharp and
austere life; and of his most irreprehensible manners, to receive his
benediction, to reverence his Relics as holy, the lodging he dwelt in, the
Couch where he lay in, and the clothes which he had worn. They never took
upon them any enterprise of moment, either in public or private, without
having recourse to the prayers of this great servant of God.

Lastly, he never likely went forth of doors, but the people would run to
him, as to an Angel descended from heaven, while every one held himself
happy, but only to beho^ld him, much more to treat with him, and to receive
answers or aduices from that Oracle. All these and many other thing besides,
which for breuityes sake are passed over, being apt to puff a man up, how wise
and wary soever; and to put him quite besides himself; yet were not able to
disseuer the B. Laurence from the love and fear of God, and from the knowledge
and contempt of himself.

The great talents which B. Laurence had, in deciding causes as Judge: and of
the blessed end which he made. Chap. 8.
What shall we say, of the manner, which B. Laurence held, in giving audience,
and dispatch of causes touching his tribunalls? Wherein he had such light and
so great dexterity withal, as howbeit it he gave the most part of his time, to
all other things, yet he seemed to be as borne only and created for this. He
would stand amidst the cries and clamours both of clients and pleaders, as
firm as a rock: and after he had listened to the parties what sufficed
(discovering now and then, with more then human understanding, the secret
traces, and frauds which lay often hid) he would briefly then give sentence,
but with such judgment and equity, as among other things in the Court of Rome,
they were always held in a high degree most just and irrefragable. Nor left
he those awhit less satisfied, who came to visit him in private, since to be
admitted to his presence, there was no need of waiting or attending more fit
opportunityes. For whether he studied, or wrote, or made his prayer, suddaynely
cutting of the thread of the present occasion, he would receive all with such
peace and benignity, as he seemed not to be subject to troubles, or clothed
with flesh, but with all love, all sweetenes, all spirit.

By these ways now approaching to the term of his pilgrimage, hardly had he
finished the Treatise entitled, The degr^es of perfection; when being now some
74. years of age, he was surprised by a burning pestilent fever. Whereupon
his domestikes preparing him a bed, according to his infirmity, the true
imitatour of Christ, being troubled at it, said to them: What then, do you
make ready feathers for me? My Lord was not laid upon feathers, but stretched
on a hard and cruel bat. And do you not remember that which S. Martyn
protested in his last article, that a Christian should dye upon ashes, and clad
in cilices? Finally there was no means to lay him otherwise, then upon his
wonted straw. Perceiving afterward, to cure his malady, there was no neglect
had of travail or costs, being angry as it were against himself. A^ (said he)
what pains is taken, and how much money cast away upon a vile sack, when the
poor of Christ have no food the while, nor fire, nor any remedy for their
necessityes.

Hereupon presaging his own death, he recollected himself more seriously;
and the two contrary affects, Fear, and Hope (as it happened in the like case
to the blessed Hilarion) began to go and come with him. So as now with a
cheerful and smiling countenance, forbidding tears to the standers by, he
exclaymed, Behold the spouse, let us go, and mere him: and added with eyes
cast up to heaven: Good Jesus, lo I come. And now again with just a balance
weighing the divine judgments, he would show forth signs of Fear: insomuch
as a friend of his saying to him, with tender eyes: How willingly, my Lord, may
you go to the palm which is now ready prepared for you? he answered with a
grave countenance: this palm, my Son, is given to the valiant combatants of
Christ, not to the base and cowards as I am. And yet taking courage at last
from his own conscience, and much more from the merits and Passion of our
Savior, he goes about to declare his last will.

And here now I could wish them present who do greedily amasse up treasures
and rents of the Church, converting the stock of the poor unto their private
use, and with diverse slights continuing the sacred benefices in the same
family. The faithful dispensour of Christ had not any thing to leave, having
always been so great an enemy of all propriety, as that (being a person
otherwise so addicted to learning) of purpose, not to seem to possess a
book, he had ever studied in volumes stiched up only. His Testament was then
to exhort his followers to true virtue, and very often to ordain expressly,
he might be buried at S. Georges, without any pomp, in the sepulcher of the
Monks there.

In the mean while, the rumor was spread of his last extremes through the
whole City. Whence hastened a world of people to behold him, upon whom having
for two continual days together, most dearly stretched forth his hands,
the door being open to all, amidst wholesome aduices and admonishments, which he
gave them, and the sweet colloquies he had with God; his strength failing him
by little and little, receiving the divine Sacraments with great devotion, he
finally expired on the 8. of January, in the morning being the third year of
his Patriarkall dignity, and the twentieth of his Bishopric. The sacred body
was put in the Church, and publicly celebrated, not with mourning blacks and
funeral exequyes, but with feasts and wonted processions as made for some
notable victory, as shall appear in the Chapter following.

A notable miracle wrought by B. Laurence in his life time, with anothor that
happened after his death. Chap. 9.
THe Co^fraternityes which are there called the Great Schools, went to honor
the body with lights, and festival garments, and guilt torches. There met also
the whole Clergy with the Magistrates and persons of each quality; and while the
offices lasted, was heard from above by two Celestine Friars, a sweet harmony
of celestial accents. Besides which miracle, are many recounted of the B.
Laurence, as well at his death, as also in his life, as the delivery of
possessed persons of evil spirits, curing of the sick, and predictions of
future or hidden things, and other like effects above nature. But we only for
assay, shall touch but two of them.

The one was, that in the Feast of Corpus Christi, the virgins of a certain
Monastery near to the Bishopric, being not able to communicate, by reason of
some troubles which then happened, were all exceedingly grieved thereat, but
particulerly one of rare devotion, and of excellent virtue, who was of the
opinion with others, to send to the Bishop in all have, to beseech him in his
high Mass he would dayne to remember them, that they remaining that day
deprived of the feast of Angels, might not also be defrauded of the
intercession of the Priest. The B. Laurence oftentimes did promise to do so.
When behold in the midst of Mass, after he had elevated the sacred Host,
being ravished quite besides himself, without departing awhit from the peoples
eyes, he carried the holy Communion, and gave it by divine privilege, to the
aforesaid Virgin alone; who, the other being distracted upon sundry occasions,
was even at the self same hour, in secret in her Cell, rapt likewise in deep
contemplation, and burning desire of receiving her Lord. From which office of
Charity the Servant of God returning immediately again into himself, so ended
the Mass, as none of the standers by could beware of what had happened: the
Confessor only of the Virgin had knowledge thereof, and told it to the
Patriarch, who exhorting them both to yield thanks unto God only for it,
imposed upon them a strict silence thereof, so long as he lived. And with this,
came to be renewed the ancient miracles, which are recounted of some other
Saints likewise in the same matter.

The other miracle was, that after the happy passage of the B. Laurence, there
growing a contention between the Chanons of the Cathedral, and the Monks of
S. Georges, about the custody of that sacred Treasure; and there wanting no
reasons for either part, it was necessary while the strife was deciding, to
keep it in deposito above ground; and so being a day or two, not only without
sign of corruption, but with yielding also a most sweet odor, on the third
day, began moreover the cheeks to look red, and the blood to come, with so
much the greatet astonishment of all, as they were certifyed, there was used no
preservative of Balmes, or of any other druggs about the same; and the
Physician sincerely affirmed, the fever to have been malignant and pestilent,
and of its nature apt enough to corrupt withal. Whereof the rumor, running
through the City, there was again such a multitude and press of people at
the Gates, as from the Sacristy where he was kept, they were feign to carry him
to the Temple, to satisfy the peoples eyes, who not contended with a simple
view, began with an audacious piety, to seize on his relics, so as his shoes
on a sudden were vanished, his garments were cut asunder, and perhaps the
fervor had proceeded further, if betymes remedy had not been found by a Guard
set upon the body.

From thence, being conueighed back again into the Sacristy, it perseuered
entire, until notwithstanding the Order left by him, sentence was given in
favor of the Chanons; while in the Cathedral Church remained a continual
concourse of people men and women, who being stirred up at so great a news,
came running thither, not only from the neighbor-countries there about, but
even also from diverse parts of Italy and Sclauony it self, for the space of
65. days; at the end whereof still untouched as at the first, in the same
Cathedral, it was reverently laid in a Vault, which to this day also is
visited by the faithful with much devotion, and not without fruit, since that
Blessed spirit, being there inuoked, obtaynes them many graces from Heaven. And
to speak some thing also of his exterior person, the holy man was tall of
stature, of well knit joints, of a pale color, of gracious eyes, and the
whole aspect both venerable and amiable; a thing truly not usual, because
indeed we do see many fair souls to be enclosed by the mighty hand, and sweet
disposition of the Highest in proportionable lodgings. To whom be all praise,
power, and glory, for all Eternity.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader.
THE faults which have escaped in printing (by reason of the uncorrected copy,
and employing of strangers not skillfull in our language) I hope are not very
many, nor yet such, as may not easily be corrected, by thy judicious Reading.


