The form and shape of a Monstrous Child / borne at Maydstone in Kent,
the.xxiiij. of October. 1568.
1568
ventral and dorsal view of deformed infant As ye this shape abhor
In body for to have:
So flee such Vices far
As might the soul deprave
In Gods power all fleshstands,
As the clay to the Potters hands.
To fashion even as he will
Jn good shape or in ill.


AT Maydstone in Kent there was one Marget Mere, Daughter to Richard Mere of
the said Town of Maydstone, who being unmarried, played the naughty pack, and
was gotten with child, being delivered of the same child the.xxiiij. day of
October last past, in the year of our Lord. 1568. at.vij. of the clock in the
after noone of the same day being Sunday. Which child being a man child, had
first the mouth slitted on the right side like a Libardes mouth, terrible to
behold, the left arm lying upon the breast, fast thereto joined, having as it
were stumps on the hands, the left leg growing upward toward the head, and the
right leg bending toward the left leg, the foot thereof growing into the
buttocke of the said left leg. In the midst of the back there was a broad
lump of flesh in fashion like a Rose, in the myddest whereof was a hole, which
voyded like an Issue. This said Child was borne alive, and lived.xxiiij.
hours, and then departed this life. Which may be a terror as well to all such
workers of filthynes and iniquity, as to those ungodly livers. Who (if in them
any fear of God be) may move them to repentance and amendment of life, which
God for Christ's sake grant both to them and us. Amen. Witnesses hereof were
these, William Plomer, John Squier Glasier, John Sadler Goldsmith, besides
diverse other credible persons both men and women.

A warnyng to England.
THis monstrous shape to thee England
Plain shows thy monstrous vice.
If thou each part wylt understand,
And take thereby advice.
For waying first the gaspyng mouth,
It does full well declare:
What rauine and oppression both
Is used with greedy care.
For, for the back, and gorging paunch,
To live in wealth and ease:
Such toil men take that none may staunch
Their greedy mind, nor please.
For in such sort, their mouths they infect,
With lying oaths, and slaightes:
Blaspheming God, and Prince reject,
As they were brutish beasts.
Their filthy talk, and poisoned speech,
Disfigures so the mouth:
That some would think there stood ye breech
Such filth it breaths forth.
The hands which have no fingers right
But stumps fit for no use:
Does well set forth the idle plight,
Which we in these days choose.
For rich and poor, for age and youth,
Each one would labor fly:
Few seeks to do the deeds of truth,
To help others thereby.
The leg so clyming to the head,
What means it but this?
That some do seek not to be lead,
But for to lead amiss.
And as this makes it most monstrous,
For Foot to clyme to head:
So those Subjects be most vicious,
That refuse to be lead.
The hinder part does show us plain,
Our close and hidden vice,
Which does behind us run amayne,
In vile and shameful wise.
Wherefore to each in England now,
Let this Monster them teach:
To mend the monstrous life they show,
Least endless death them reach.
Imprinted at London by John Awdeley, dwelling in little Britain street
without Aldersgate. The.xxiij. of December.


