THE CENTER OF THE CIRCLE OF COMMERCE.

OR, A Refutation of a Treatise, Entitled The Circle of Commerce, or The
Balance of Trade, lately published by E. M.

By GERARD MALYNES Merchant.

Magna est Veritas, praeualuit, (...) semper praeualebit. LONDON, Printed by
William Jones, and are to be sold by Nicholas Bourne at the Royal Exchange.
1623.

Regina Pecunia Loquitur.
Haec gaudere facit sapientis nomine stultum,
and grave Prudentis munus obire viri,
Quisquis in hac non est sapiens quasi stultus habetur
and quasi quod Vacuum, sit Ratione caput,
Regnat in incertis Regina Pecunia Rebus,
moribus Ambiguae, quae stat in orb deae.
TO THE MOST Illustrous and most excellent Prince CHARLES, Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, Earl of CHESTER, etc.
It may please your Highness.
THE Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, being demanded why Jupiter should be the
chiefest of the gods, since Mars was the best Soldier: Answered, Mars is
valiant, but Jupiter wise; concluding by this, that Council and Policy are of
more force to subdue then Valor; Parua sunt Arma foris, nisi sit Concilium
domi, says Cicero: but forasmuch that neither wisdom nor valor can well
subsist without treasure, since Moneys have obtained the title of the sinowes
of war, and the life of Commerce: I hope that the accumulating thereof may
properly be called The Praeheminent study of Princes, when the same is procured
by Trade: which is the sole peaceable instrument to enrich Kingdoms and
Commonweals.

This Trade is performed between us and foreign Countries under three
simples, namely Commodities, Moneys, and Exchanges for Moneys, which being
jointly and distinctly considered in their proper natures, will cause our
decayed Trade to flourish: but because one Edward Misselden did omit to handle
the Praedominant part of Trade (in a Treatise Dedicated unto your Highness,
Entitled) Free Trade, viz. the Mystery of Exchanges, and that not without an
aspersion laid upon me I was moved to make an answer thereunto, showing his
maine scope to be, to have the moneys of the Realm inhaunced, and the foreign
Coin to be current at an equal value: which was to reform things by a Remedy
worse then the disease; for the inhauncing of our Moneys will increase the
prices of all things, whereby the Kings most Excellent Majesty shall become
the greatest loser in the revenues of the Crown, and the Nobility and Landed
men also: and to make foreign Coin current within the Realm, will overthrow
his Majesty's Mint, and abrogate a mark of Sovereignty, the Coining of Moneys.

Hereupon having in the Epistle Dedicatory of the said Treatise unto his sacred
Majesty, entitled, The Maintenance of Free Trade: compared the same unto the
Little Fish mentioned by Plutarch, swimming before the Great VVhale: because I
had then under the Press a great volume of Lex Mercatoria, Dedicated likewise
unto his Majesty, and both presented unto your Highness.

The said Misselden (carping at the Simile, and directing his course from your
Highness) has lately published an opposition to the said Books, called the
Circle of Commerce, copious of uncivil speeches, whereby (in respect of private
cause) I have great occasion to implore his Majesty's favor against him; As
Homer did Ptolome the great King of Aegipt, against the railing commentaries of
Zoylus. But the matter concerning the Public, and being of far greater
consequence then a centention for Learning, I am compell^d humbly to beseech
your Highness to intercede for me unto his sacred Majesty, to be well pleased
to peruse this my third Book, entitled The Center of the Circle of Commerce,
wherein the means to provide his Kingdoms and Dominions with Bullion and
Moneys are more distinctly declared, according to the said Center of Co^merce,
which is ( gain,) without which his Circle is ( vain.)

To make A Definition of the Center of the Earth is difficult even amongst
learned Philosophers and Schoolmen, considering Aristotle his Doctrine
grounded upon Leuity of things ascending, and Gravity of things falling to
their Center: and the opinion of Copernicus, or rather of the Pithagorians,
ascribing a Stability to the Heavens, and a Mobility to the Earth; But to make
a Definition of this Center (gain) is easy, and engraffed in every man's
judgment.

This Center makes a perfect Orb, including all Geometrical proportions, and
can answer all Mathematical Problemes of Trade, for the doubling of the Cube
of Solids, and the Quadrature of the Circle in Plain, without Platos
Exposition, or Misseldens conceited Balance of Trade: for all the weight of
Commerce falls within the Circuit of the Circle of this Center (gain:)
insomuch, that if the due consideration hereof be neglected in the course of
Trade, nothing can be expected but the decay of Trade, and destruction of
Commonweals, according to the Demonstration of the following Allegory to a
diseased body natural so that Statesmen and Politicians are to bend their
judgments in all public causes to this Center (gain, which bears the sway
in all humane actions,) thereby to find out all fallacies and misprisions of
Trade, to the increase of the Kingdoms stock, without private regard of
particular Merchants making their benefit by the general loss of the
Kingdom: there is no man so simple but will avoid a loss if he can, and on
the contrary, procure a gain where he may or can; Shall it be imagined then
that Bullion and Moneys will be imported when the bringer thereof becomes a
loser, or that moneys will remain within the Realm, when so great a gain can
be had by the exportation thereof? Or will any man think that Trade can be
driven conveniently without moneys and Exchanges? will not the want of it make
a dead Trade within the Realm when this Vital spirit of Commerce fails?
surely it is questionles in every man's understanding.

Your Highness therefore may be pleased to advance the establishing of this
Center in the course of Trade, whereby his Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions
will flow with Bullion and Moneys, and infuse life thereunto, which will be
felt by the Pulces, the Hammers of the Mint: upon my life and reputation of
knowledge, which time and occasion seem to further by the price of Exchange,
inclining thereunto since this Treatise has been under the Press. If any
thing therein shall seem impertinent to the Gravity of the Center, I beseech
your Highness to attribute the same to the Leuity of the Circle, the rather
because Nugae seria ducunt. Thus with all humblenes taking leave, I shall
continue my fervent Prayers to the Almighty, to preserve your Highness in health
and happiness, to his glory, and your eternal felicity. London the 20. of
November. 1623.

Your Highness most obedient Servant GERARD MALYNES.

THE CENTER OF THE CIRCLE OF COMMERCE.
OR, A Refutation of a Treatise, entitled The Circle of Commerce, lately
published by E. M.
The Proeme.
STrong imagination, nourished by opinion, may cause most men to suppose, that
Edward Misselden, Salust of S^allenger.
in whom the Babylon of learning seems to be: would not publish any thing
which were not serious and substantial, which moved me to enter into
consideration of the Reasons, which caused him to entitle his Treatise, The
Circle of Commerce: and imagining that Giotto the Painter (having in the
turning of an hand made a perfect Circle without a Compass:) was the cause
thereof. I did instantly perceive, that the comparison was most proper and apt,
to make the matter perspicuous: for even as the Circle of Giotto, was made
without a Center, even so is his Circle of Commerce, without substance or
Center, like unto a stone cast into a standing water, which makes a Circle,
and that circle begets many Circles upon circles: but at last they all
vanish away, and leave neither Center nor any thing beside to build upon.

For when I do compare his circle to the Celestial Sphere, Epist. Dedicatory.
comprehending the figures or constellations within the twelve Signs: I am
first encountered with Comets or Blazing stars of Adulation; and with diverse
Meteors of watery vapors of high presumption; and then approaching near to the
Stars, I do find him to endeavor, that all his inferrences, might be as
powerful, as their influences to revenge his quarrel against me, which
concerns the whole kingdom.

In the great and little Bear, Absurdities in all the parts of his Treatise.
he finds an accusation of Scandalum Magnatum. In the Dragons Tail, vox
Pecudis concerning the whole kingdom. In Hercules a Club to defend the errors
of Merchants. In Serpentario, calumniation and detractio^. In Agitator, Logic
turned into Rimes and railing. In Pegasus, vain imaginations, swimming in his
brain: In the Whales belly, Great Whale and little fish.
he is like the Sexton in the Belfrey. In the little fish, euerstriuing
contradictions. In the great and little Dog, barking and biting. In the Ship,
he is sailing without a Rudder or Compass. In Centaure, frenzies and biting
scurrility. In Putius, A puddle of untruths. In vultur volans: a devouring of
fame. In the Harp, noyses and unpleasant tunes. In the Triangle, dreams of
Jews and Grecians. In Andromuda, accusation of ignorance. In Perseo,
scandelous Aspertions. In the crown, presumptuous exhortations to Superiors.
In Sepheo, obstinacy and vain disputations. In Orion, matter and form by
former and later. In vultur Cadens, deprivation of modesty. In the cup A
defense of Vinteners. In the Swanne, a preiudicating humor. In the Crow,
vexation of innocence. In the Dolphine, An intention of fishing. In via lactea,
a coniuration of circles. In the flying Horse, flattery of particular persons
and Societies. And finally in the other figures or constellations, a running
with the stream of ignorance, to maintain errors and fallacies, cutting
down with Arcturus Sith, all wholesome Laws and Ordinances, made for
Reformation of abuses.

To contract all these into the imaginary Circle of the 12 Signs, would be
more offensive, the^ troublesome, because of the application of the Cornuted
beasts of Aries, Taurus, and Capricorn: But I have resolved to make Libra the
balance of our discourse, and to use modest terms in opposition of uncivil
speeches. So that finding no Center in the Celestial Sphere: Time a destroyer.
Abbaddon coming by told me, that the Terrestiall Globe was the Center of it,
unless (says he) you will make this man to be the Center, and place him in
the middle thereof (as he speaks of Sapor King of Persia, P. 142.
sitting in his great Globe made of glass:) And so draw all the lines of his
circle, from the circumference of his aforesaid Passions to the undivided point
of the Center of his heart, from whence they have their Original.

Hereupon calling to mind his own confession, P. 5.
that he knows not how he is enclosed within this his Circle, and that he
will through the Center thereof draw a Diamiter, and divide the whole circle
into two Semi-circles to get out of it, (much like to the maget in a haselnut,
which after she has devoured the kernel, makes a hole to creep out, and then
it is but newly borne:) I have resolved to gird him within his own circle, by
the fi^e Zones or Girdles of this Terrestiall Globe, beginning from the Artike
circle unto the Tropicke of Cancer, equidistant and correspondent to the
Antartike circle and the Tropicke of Capricorn, placing the Equinoctial in
the middle of the five chapters following. And when I do exclude all the
Stuff contained in the former absurdities, together with the Logic and
Geomitry of Ramus: There remains little or nothing, but may be compared to
the conceited and witty enterprise of Aesop, who would undertake the drincking
up of the main Ocean: So as the Rivers were separated from it. Here you must
now imagine him to be able to determine with the Philosophers of the principles
of natural things, P. 11.
whether they be one, two, three and ten, and how they may be discerned from
their essence, and the^ to conclude with Aristotle his opinion, besides all
this, he can discourse of colors, Sounds, Smells, Tastes and qualities of
touching, which do offer themselves to his common sense, and are carried into
the inner closet of his Fancy, in whose mirror they are represented to his
simple understanding by simple terms, he will tell you in what respect a Man
is said to be a Man, that when a house is made of the pieces of a Ship: the
Ship is deprived of her fashion, and other the like singularities, of all which
I might make a pleasant application. For these (forsooth) are very material
matters of Commerce, but the remembrance of the picture of two fools, deriding
one another, made by our modern Paynters, with an inscription: We are three,
meaning the looker on for one, (deserving no less commendation, then Apelles
his apprehension; Ne suitor vltra crepidam;) caused me to set hereunto a Period.

But some will say, Why do you so much inculcate about a Center, when it is
apparent, that he makes his Balance of Trade ot be the Center? I answer, this
imaginary Balance is without a Parallel, as his Circle is without a Center;
and may rather be termed the periphery or circumference of his Circle, then a
Center, as shall be demonstrated hereafter. To prosecute therefore our Simile;
it is recorded that when G^otto had made his Circle for his masterpiece,
another Painter (perceiving the same to be without a Center) did instantly with
a pinsell make a point within the same, which made a perfect center; whereupon
his Art was much extolled and preferred before Giotto's conceit; which caused
me to entitle this Treatise the Center of the Circle of commerce. Gain is the
Center of Co^merce.
For therein is showed, that gain is the center of Traffic and commerce,
which being the scope of Merchants, draws more forcibly then the Adamant
stone; and all the direct lines of the circumference of the body thereof, must
be drawn to that center which is the end of Trade, and rules the course
thereof. This gain is procured by Merchants, by or under the three essential
parts of Traffic, either by Commodities, or by Moneys, or by exchange of
moneys, according to every man's profession and occasion in the course of Trade;
some by Commodities only, others by money, and others by exchanges for moneys,
or by all three means, Three means of Trade.
or some of them, which yields most benefit, as we shall declare in the
sequel of this Discourse in plain and significant words, fit for every man's
understanding, without affectation of superficiary terms of Art, by
demonstratiue reasons and infallible arguments, illustrated by similies,
notwithstanding the Refuters objections, which I intend to answer as they shall
occur unto me, having by this Index Purgatorius dissolved some frantic
diseases of his brain, which might have obscured the things material of this
important business.

Thus having resolved to contain my self within the circle of modesty,
remembering the saying of Socrates, If an Ass kick thee, will thou kick him
again? I am only to address some few speeches unto him by way of imitation.

Alas poor man, you do so often deplore my ignorance by these words, to extol
your learning, who was never graduated in Schools, do you think to conjure me
within the circuit of your Circle, wherein you are enclosed? I am not to
follow your method of circulation, especially when you strive to commend and
make good that within book which was never in question, and maliciously urge
some things without book, that were never meant by words nor writings to be
defended; neither can I be drawn from the matter by your Meanders or
excursions and vain disputations De lana Caprina, you do embrace with Ixion, a
cloud for Juno, and with Narcissus (loving your own shadow) for a water Nymph.
Leave your profanation of Gods word, in your passionate writings; for the
highest point of knowledge is to know that we know nothing. And so I end, with
an observation only of such other absurdities as are fit to be noted for the
better understanding of the matters to be entreated of.

The Contents of the five Chapters or Zones.
Chap. 1.
That exchange for moneys, by bills of exchanges is the public measure between
the Realm of England and other countries, placed under the Articke circle.
Chap. 2.
That the Moneys of the Realm are undervalued in exchange between us and
other countries, in the Tropicke of Cancer.
Chap. 3.
That Gain is the center of the circle of commerce: and that the
vndervaluation of our moneys in exchange, is the efficient cause of the
ouerballancing of Trade, placed in the Equinoctial.
Chap. 4.
An examination of the Center of commerce, in the Trades from England into
other countries, placed in the Tropicke of Capricorn.
Chap. 5.
The means to balance the Trade of England by the said Center: or the
Remedies against the causes of the decay thereof, placed in the Antartike
circle.
CHAP. I.
That exchange for moneys by bills of exchanges is the public measure between
the Realm of England and other Countries.

Entering into the first Zone or Artike Circle of the North, let us direct our
compass according to this North Star of the public measure between us and
other Nations, and so proceed methodically.

There is no Rule so general in any thing, which admits not some exception:
but to ground any thing upon an exception, and to leave the general rule, is
never done by any man of judgment. All Misseldens contradictions are grounded
upon exceptions, and the general rule is neglected. As for example:

The Ship named the Dragon, coming from the East Indies, Misseldens
absurdities.
was driven by necessity to sail a great part of her way without a Rudder: P.
22.
shall we make a rule hereof, and sail without a Rudder or compass?

Statesmen have observed for a general rule, that the inhauncing of the coin
does generally raise the prices of commodities: shall we term this a
fallacy, P. 39.
because that the linnens in Germany have these two or three years last, come
thence so cheap, notwithstanding they were bought with moneys given out at high
rates, especially when intestine wars make things good cheap, as Monsieur
Bodine has observed in France and other places?

Again, when the price of commodities is raised generally with the price of
moneys inhaunced; P. 25.
shall we contradict the same, because one commodity, as Cloves, is not risen,
but sold as a staple ware?

Likewise when moneys are not imported, when there is a loss by the bringing
of them: Moneys decayed of their price are imported again.
shall we deny this principle when moneys are brought in, being decried or
made bullion beyond the seas, as the Iacobus and other coins have bin of late
in Holland and those parts, which caused some quantity (for a time) to be
imported again?

When generally all Divines do interpret and understand the Hebrew word
Neshech to be the biting of a dog, or a gnawing as a dog does upon a bone,
concerning usury, which the learned Doctor Felton now Bishop of Ely, and Doctor
Wilson the Ciuilian have so plainly expounded in their two Treatises of Usury:
P. 44.
shall we disallow hereof, because one Rabbi Bechai does take it to be the
biting or sucking of a Serpent?

The general Trade, all the world over, is made by the rule and square of
moneys, which is therefore called publica mensura in all countries where moneys
are used to set a price unto all commodities. Now albeit that there are some
countries where they have no moneys, but commodities are bartred by way of
commutation in kind: shall we abandon therefore the general rule or
institution of moneys, and judge by the particular or exception? Absit
ignoranti^.

Misselden does confess: P. 20.
That Money is the Public measure between man and man, but exchange for
moneys he utterly denies to be so, between us and foreign Nations. This
assumed opinion of his by a certain Chymera swimming in his brain, might find
some kind of entertainment in a weak man's judgment, if the Laws of the
kingdom did not prohibit the Transportation of moneys. But where moneys are
forbidden to be carried out, there must of necessity some other means be found
to answer the same, unless we should return again to the Commutation of
Commodities in kind, and then moneys will not be useful. And this was the
beginning of exchange for moneys.

This exchange for moneys cannot be otherwise, but with a consideration of the
very value of the materials whereof the money is made, for we do not exchange
for cockle shells, so that the inward value of Silver and Gold by weight, is the
foundation of this exchange, as shall be declared, and consequently, this
exchange is the public measure, which all men will confess.

And to apply the common saying, P. 13.
Mendacem oportet esse memorem, by way of retortion, his own argument (like
unto Goliaths sword) will convince him, and take away the breath of his wilful
opinion, for he did speak plainly a little before, but it seems that some
Tobacco smoke did offend his memory; which made him forgetful.

There is no Merchant (says he) of any experience, P. 17.
but as he has one eye upon the value of his commodities, so has he the other
eye upon the money, both Intrinsique in the inward value or finenes, and
Extrinsique, in the outward denomination or account, as it is current in every
Country, together with the course of Exchange, whither he does direct his
trade. Otherwise, if the money rise in denomination, above the true worth in
valuation, and the Exchange also rise accordingly: if this Merchant do not
raise the price of his Commodity in due proportion answerable thereunto; he
shall be sure to come home by weeping cross, how ever he make his return,
whether by Exchange; or in Money, Bullion, or wares. etc.

IF I should take upon me to discourse upon this Text, and make no other answer
unto all his Assertions, surely here is matter enough to convince him of all
his folly, which by the Prouerbiall Text in the Title of his Pampflet is
quoted, but I intend to be brief and substantial.

All men of judgment may easily perceive, that the maine point in question
concerning our differences, does consist in the abuse of Exchanges, touching
the value of moneys of other Countries inhau^ced of late years, when the
moneys of the Realm did remain at a stand, and that there is an
vnderualuatio^ of our moneys in Exchange, whereby the denomination of foreign
coin does in some part answer us, as if by exchange we did really receive the
value thereof, there is no man blinder then he that will not see, if he were in
the Indies, where the inhabitants call the Europians, Free Trade. 113
one Eudman, as he has observed out of Mafscius History, they would call him
blind by his own reasons. He says that Merchants of experence do divide (as
it were) their eyes, by casting the one upon commodities, and the other upon
moneys, with a consideration of the inward value, and outward valuation
thereof, if they did so, there is no difference between him and me in this
principal point. So as the words Together with the course of Exchange, were
also considered of, and that the price of Exchange did rise proportionally with
the rising of the moneys, whereof we do complain: Shall this Merchant come
home by weeping cross that does not the same? and shall not Exchange for
moneys be the public measure? you will buy cloth of a Draper by the yard at a
certain price, and yet the yard whereby it is measured must not be called the
measure.

But some will say, why do you take Missolden so short, does not he say that
Merchants of experience do so, and herein he does use a little equivocation,
or rather providence in pondering of his words* well, I must crave pardon, and
prove that Merchants do not so, and then it must follow that experience is
wanting: but howsoever the Maxim is true: That Exchange is the Public Measure
between us and foreign Nations, where we deal by Exchange, according to
which all our domestike Commodities and foreign wares are bought and sold, The
ground of Exchange.
for the same is grounded upon the moneys of the Realm, and the moneys of
other Countries respectively, according to their inward value, truly to be
expressed by outward valuation imposed upon them, by the Authority of
Sovereign Princes and States, which are to sit at the Stern of Trade, for
Merchants may commit great errors in Trade, seeking their private gain, and the
Common wealth does receive an incredible prejudice thereby, as shall be made
plain hereafter.

To make this more evident, General Rules,
consider we of these general rules, even as plenty of money makes things
dear, and Scarsity of money makes things good cheap: even so plenty or
scarsity of commodities makes the price thereof to rise and fall according to
their use more or less, which rule is not without exception, howbeit, Money
must not be bereaved of her function, as the right judge thereof. And so it is
in matters of Exchanges, whereby commodities are dearer or better cheap,
according to the Positive Exchange, Positive Exchange.
wherein the prices of commodities do perpetually follow the rates of Exchange:
but the Exchange having also another course of rising and falling in price,
according to plenty or scarsity of moneys, and the few or many Takers or
deliuerers of money, Current Exchange.
which may be termed The current Exchange: has not the like operation, to make
daily (as it were) the prices of commodities to rise and fall according to the
said Exchange, for as the few or many takers or deliuerers of money does
proportionate this price of Exchange in all Countries, according to the true
value or above the same, grounded upon the said Positive Exchange, so does
plenty or scarsity of money do the like, and the commodities so bought by
moneys taken up by Exchange, are calculated by Merchants of experience in price
to cost accordingly. So that even as money does still remain the rule for
commodities; so does Exchange for money, remain the rule of moneys, and
consequently of commodities, Exchange does rule Moneys. etc.
without any such contradiction, as he untruly alleges.

This caused me to observe, that Exchange had two courses like unto the Sun,
the one Annual, which may properly be called Positive: the other by daily
rising and declinatio^ current exchange as aforesaid. But Misselden will no
more understand this, P. 20.
then he does the Simbolization of the elements, which (as it were) by striving
do subsist and are agreeing by Concordi Discordia, and are not therefore to be
termed in this A Dissimilitude, should I carpe at every word, and be ravished
with a foolish admiration at the word ( vpheld) and make the same an Oratory, I
might be as good a Rhetorition, as the Clarke was in calling a flock of sheep
to be an Auditory, which I think was the man, that would needs go in all
have to dwell in the immaginary flourishing commonwealth of Vtopia without
money, so much by him extolled.

Misselden (changing his immodest style in a more t^mperate manner) says, P.
93. ^
That Exchanges in general may be said to be Personal and Provincial: the
Personal Exchange is a plain buying and selling of commodities and of moneys,
and why not for exchanges of moneys by bills of Exchanges or letters of credit?
And here comes in his former and latter, the one is matter of Trade, the
other is matter of State: and so all kingdoms and commonweals are made
Provincial, and the money changers are brought in by ray^ing terms, because
they were whipped out of the Temple for abusing the place, if it were only for
the place, surely himself for abusing the places of Scripture deserves a
worse punishment.

Leaving the name of Exchange, Par pro Pari.
he brings in an other distinction of Natural and Politic, and the Natural
Exchange, he will not call Par pro pari, but value for value, according to the
inward finesse, which is known by the assay and melting, separating the pure
from the impure, the fine silver and gold, from the allay or copper; and herein
is no other observation, but look how much fine silver or gold you receive in
one place, just so much and no more you must pay and deliver in another place.
But you may not call this Parity nor Purity. This says he, is a better
direction then limitation of exchanges; whereby you may understand how he is
mistaken, supposing that the price of the Current exchange should be limited,
and not rise and fall according to the nature of exchange, upon plenty or
scarsity of money, and the many or few takers or deliuerers of the money, as
has been declared. So that he makes no difference between the Positive
exchange, and the Current exchange, the Positive exchange is properly the
matter of state, that concerns

The King and kingdom, P. 99.
(as himself confesses, howbeit without any mystery therein) It concerns
the King, when by the benefit of exchange his Majesty's affairs of state and
high concequence may be furnished with moneys in foreign parts upon all
occasions, without exportation of any of his own treasures: It concerns the
Kingdom, both in respect of Noblemen, and Tradesmen, including therein the
Clotheir and all Subjects in general.

HEre now he is fully persuaded to have spoken both ingenously and effectually,
for presently after (like a silly Hare) he insulteth over a dead Lion, as the
Proverb is: But we may say with the Fox that found a dead man's scull, O quale
Caput and Cerebrum non habet, will any man of judgment commend this Politic
exchange, to secure the King and Kingdom, when there is a greater loss to
both, by the abuse thereof in the delivering of moneys by exchange, then by the
transportation of the moneys inspecie, because when our moneys are undervalued
in exchange, the money is not only exported, but all the commodities of the
Realm are vndersold by so much also, and foreign commodities are (in the
nature of moneys inhaunced) put upon us. If this man did hear me, he would cry
out, P. 14.
what is the man mad? has he no less a crime to accuse our Merchants of then
ignorance, as he does the kingdom of Depudations: I leave him and it to the
judgment of the State. It is pity such stuff as this should pass the Press.

Good Sir have patience, let not any strong immagination prevent your
judgment. Tell me (I pray you) if the King or the Nobility and all other men
should deliver money by exchange at so low a price, under the true value of the
moneys, that there were ten or twelve in the hundredth to be gotten in a months
time, between the money inspecie and by exchange, whereby he that takes the
money, has an ability given him to export that money by all secret
conueyances: to pay his bill of exchange therewith beyond the Seas, and to put
the overplus (of this incomparable gain) into his purse, do not you think
that the money will be exported by them that are the takers thereof? whereby
the kingdom loses the money, and you that are the deliuerers of the money:
the benefit which they reap thereby, which you ought to have given you by just
and true exchange? Are not the King and the Nobility great loosers hereby in
delivering of their moneys? hereunto he replieth, you are wide, there is no
such matter, you mistake the business, this cannot be proved, it is the maine
pillar to support that strange and perilous Project of the Par, the foundation
whereof I have rooted out, P. 101.
for by taking that away, all Malines allegations are fallen to the ground,
there is not any such vnderualuation of our moneys in exchange, P. 76.
it is but foppery and delusion proceeding of a weak brain.

De homine imperito nunquam, quic quam iniustius:
Qui nisi quod ipse facit, nihil rectum Putat.
To this peremptory opinion, me must join a peremptory issue, and come to the
proof, putting him nevertheless in mind, that he does maintain: that the low
exchange for moneys is profitable for our Merchants, that are commonly the
takers of moneys here in England, and so beyond the Seas where they are
deliuerers, now how a low exchange can be imagined without the vnderualuation
of our moneys in exchange, I refer to his deep apprehensions, come we
therefore in the next place to prove this vnderualuation of our moneys in
Exchange, and then such as deserve the name of Mountebankes, Iugglers, or
impostures of Trade, will be found out as easily by the Center of Commerce, P.
17.
as the Cu'man Ass, was (wearing the Lions skin) by the stranger that had
seen a Lion, who knew him by his ears and braying: marvel not therefore that
I have written of Merchants Laws, which are extolled, and not disgraced
thereby, or by such a fellow who wills you to remember Maximilians Fool,
telling the Emperor that if he would derive his pettigree from Noah's Arc,
whereas now he reverenced him like a God, if he came once to the Arc, he
should be his fellow, for he was sure that he also descended from thence.

This vndervaluation being proved, will verify the Proverb, who is the fool
now: and Horace his Crow will be found to have lost his Cheese by too P. 144.
much Chattering: or Aesops Dog his Bone, by too much gaping, which similies
himself has used.

CHAP. II.
That the Moneys of the Realm are vnderuauled in Exchange between us and
other Countries.

FRom the North Star of the Artike Circle or Pole, we are come to the
Tropicke of Cancer, to entreat of the vnderualuation of our moneys in
Exchange, which may well be compared unto Cancer the Crab in going back, for
so does the wealth of the Realm (by these means) decay, for we look one
way, and go another way, like men that row on the water, or like Crabs on the
Land.

We have observed heretofore, that Polititions or Statesmen have noted, that
the often comparing of a thing unto his Principle or Original, produces the
longer continuance, showing (by Digression) how the same is decayed, and may be
reduced to the first integrity and goodness.

To reduce therefore the course of Exchange for moneys to the first
institution, may seem very necessary to explaime this important matter.

It is about 80. years since that there was an equal Exchange between England
and the Netherlands, Aequall Exchange.
which in true value may be called Positive, and according to alteration in
price Current, at which time, twenty shillings of their coin, and twenty
shillings Starlin, were alike in denomination, that is to say, were named all
one in price, and of intrinsique or inward value, for their Imperial Royal of
gold was valued and went current for Ten shillings Flemish, and our Angel was
valued at Ten shillings Starlin, being all of a goodness of Gold in value, which
we call Weight and finesse by the terms of the Mint, so the French Crown
which was valued here at Six shillings Starlin, English and foreign coin all
one in Exchange.
and beyond the Seas at six shillings Flemish, was correspondent: the Phillip
Doller of silver was valued at five shillings Flemish, and so was the Edward
Crown of silucr five shillings Starlin: our ten Groats being three shillings
and four pence, was correspondent to the Emperors Florin of twenty Stiuers:
and the Flemish shillings of six Stiuers or twelve pence Flemish, was all one
with our shilling or twelve pence Starlin: for an ounce of Starlin silver was
valued as five shillings, for there was five pieces or shillings made out of an
ounce: and although the Standards of moneys did differ in the finesse or
goodness of the silver and gold, yet the quantity in weight did answer and made
good the same: as for example, the Starlin Standard being 11. ounces 2. d.
weight in fine silver, in the 12 ounces Troy to the pound weight made into 60
s. caused the ounce to be five shillings; and the Philip. Doller being but ten
ounces of fine silver in the like pound weight of 12 ounces Troy: was
correspondent and current for five shillings, or the said pound was valued at
60 s. This Philip Doller weighs 22 penny weight, which is two penny weight
more then an ounce, to answer our silver by the more weight of such silver as
is not so good as ours, because it contains more allay or copper: so that
their inward value of silver is made by weight answerable and correspondent to
ours. And so the names for the price and value of the coin, were named alike;
and the prices of commodities (both here and beyond the seas) were likewise
named accordingly; whereby all fallacies concerning the value of moneys and the
prices of commodities were excluded; and then Merchants (to accommodate one
another by exchange) would give or deduct either 3 d. 4 d. or 6 d. or
thereabouts upon the pound of our 20 s. or a penny or two pence upon the Noble
(whereupon exchanges were then commonly made) to pay or receive their moneys by
exchange here or beyond the seas, according as they could agree: in so much,
that 20 s. Starlin has been given here to receive beyond the seas 19 s. 6 d.
Flemish by exchange. And the like has been given beyond seas, to receive here
20 s Starlin, according to the occasions of Merchants.

From this equality or paritie of exchange, we are fallen to very great
inequality, by the inhauncing of moneys beyond the Seas, whereby the price was
there altered in name or denomination, our moneys remaining here at a stand;
and the standards of moneys both here and beyond the Seas also remaining
unaltered, and so continued beyond the Seas until this day, albeit they have
caused diverse new coins of other standards to be made since that time, which
is to be observed hereafter, the rather for that it is a maxim, That the
silver coins do rule the markets in all places, because of the abundance
thereof, Silver coin do rule the Markets and Exchange.
being 500 to one of gold, which causes the exchanges to be made according to
the silver coins, which ouerruleth the coins of gold.

The first inequality crept in by the inhauncing of moneys, was upon the
Philip Doller, which was come from 30 Stiuers or 5 s, as aforesaid, to 33 and
35 Stiuers; whereby the price of exchange began to alter in the years of our
Lord 1563 and 1564, which then was looked into by the Merchants Adventurers,
according to the complaints of Mr. Hussy their Governor, and that made them
to make exchanges upon our pound of 20 s Starlin at 22 s. 6 d. and 23 s.
Afterward in the year 1575, the said Philip Doller went current for 36
Stiuers, or 6 s Flemish, which was inhaunced full twenty in the hundred, or
four shillings upon twenty shillings; whereby the paritie of exchange was
altered in name from 20 to 24, because that 24 s with them beyond the Seas and
our 20 s here was all one in value: so that 500 l Starlin was correspondent or
answerable to 600 l Flemish, by reason of the said valuation, without any
alteration of Standards. Before that time, that is to say, in the year of our
Lord 1567, the Burgundian Rickx Doller was coined in the Empire for 32 Stiuers
lups, or two Marks lubish, of 16 shillings the Mark. So that then one shilling
lubish and one Stiuer, Shilling Lubish and Stiuers all one.
was between Germany and the Netherlands all one in name; as we have more
amply declared in Lex Mercatoria and elsewhere.

From this position, let us come now to the vndervaluation of our moneys in
exchange by three several and infallible means; and therein observe the
progress of valuation and the course of exchange, for the maine places of
Trade.

First, by the Assayes of moneys made in former times, and the calculations of
exchanges made thereupon, upon, according to the prices or valuations of the
moneys inhaunced beyond the Seas, and not inhaunced with us in England.

Secondly, Three means to prove the vnderualuation of our moneys in Exchange.
by true calculations derived from the said Assayes and inhauncing of foreign
coins, as also of our moneys beyond the Seas, which rule cannot fail: so long
as the Standards of the moneys are not altered.

Lastly, By the trial of Assayes both of our moneys and the coins of foreign
Countries lately taken, concerning both the premises, by which three means,
any man of judgment may perceive that the Exchange is the Public means
between us and other Countries already proved. Concerning the first, it
appears of record, that in the said year 1575. there was (by order of the
Right Honorable the Lords and others of her Majesty's then Privy Council of
the late Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory) diverse Assayes made of the moneys
of sundry Countries, and the price of Exchange, that is to say of the Positive
Exchange, was set down accordingly, whereof I have made this Abstract, for so
much as makes for the purpose.

The Phillip Doller of 10. ounces fine at 36. Stiuers or 6. s. Flemish, made
the price of the said Exchange 24. s. as aforesaid, accounting 4 Dollers for
the l.

The Rickx Doller of 10. ounces 12. penny weight at 32. shillings lubish or
Stiuers Flemish made the said Positive Exchange to be 24. s. also, Exchange at
14. s. at Hamborough and the Low Countries.
accompting four, and a half Doller for 20. s. Starlin.

The Rickx Doller being inhaunced to 33. shillings lubish, made the price of
the said Exchange at one shilling more, upon the 4. prices and a half to be at
24. s. 9. d. which contained for a long time at Hamborough and other places in
Germany, Exchange at 24. s. 9d. in Germany.
and all their own coins were correspondent thereunto in the inward value:
but in the Low Countries the valuation did alter, and moneys were inhaunced by
intermissiue times, by the wars and division of the 17. Provinces.

Come we now to the year 1586. when Robert Lord Dudley Earl of Leycester
went over to take the Government of the United Provinces, at which time moneys
were much inhaunced, and the States did coin the great silver Royal of the
goodness of the Phillip Doller, as also Rickx Dollers, in every province of the
goodness of the said Imperial or Burgundian Dollers, and the Arch Duke Albertus
of Austria did the like in the reconciled Countries under his Government.

Hereupon there was Assayes made again of the said coins and other moneys,
and the goodness of them was by the said Assayes correspondent in weight and
finesse, and so the Positive Exchange was made accordingly upon the valuation
made in the said Countries, namely the said Phillip Doller being risen and
valued at 50. Stiuers, or 8. s. 4. d. Flemish made the said Exchange (by the
said 4. pieces) to be 33. s. 4. d. for 20. shillings Starlin: the said Rickx
Doller was valued at 45. Stiuers, or 7. s. 6. d. Flemish made the Exchange to
be after 4 pieces and a half to the pound Starlin 33. s. 9. d. but because our
shilling was valued at 20. d. Flemish, or 10 Stiuers, whereof 20. s. made 33.
s. 4. d. Flemish, it was agreed by the Commissioners, Exchange for the Low
Countries at 83 s. 4 d.
that the Positive Exchange should be 33. s. 4. d. for our 20. s: and all other
moneys had correspondence with the said price or thereabouts: and the Spanish
Royal of 8. was valued at 42. Stiuers, or 7. s. Flemish, as appears by the
Placeart or Proclamation then made by the said Earl of Leycester.

If you will be sure whether the said Assayes and Valuations are truly
calculated in exchange, Calculations upon Assayes and Moneys.
the Account by the Golden Rule is easy for any man of mean judgment to be
cast up, that is to say, if the Phillip Doller of 36, Stiuers made the price of
exchange to be 24. s. what must the price now be, when the said Doller is
valued at 50. Stiuers, facit 33. s. 4. d, again if the Rickx Doller at 33.
Stiuers gives in exchange 24. s. 9. d. what will 45. Stiuers give in exchange,
facit 33. s. 9. d: so that you see the Assayes and Valuations does agree in the
price of exchange, and rather somewhat to our disadvantage.

In the year 1600. (by a Commission granted to Sir Richard Martin Knight, and
Master of the Mint, Sir Richard Saltonstall, Sir Henery Belling sley knights,
Thomas afterward Lord Knynet, Mr. John Williams, my self and diverse others)
there was an examination taken concerning the goodness and valuation of moneys
in exchange, and there ensued but an alteration in the valuation of gold
concerning the proportion, with some small reformation concerning the
Standards: but in Exchanges nothing was effected, for some reasons here not
declared: come we now to this present time, and see how much the said moneys
have been inhaunced, Calculations up on the last valuation.
not by the tolleration of Merchants to receive them above their price, but
according to the Placcart or Edict of Proclamation of the said Estates made the
21 of July 1622.

There you shall find that the Phillip Doller is made Bullion: that is to say,
not current, as they have also done of other coins: but the Rickx Doller of
Germany and the Nether-lands are inhaunced and valued by Public Authority
(besides their tolleration to go above the same) at 50. Stiuers, now cast
hereupon what the Positive Exchange must be, when 45. is made 50. or when 5. is
gotten in 45, which is just one ninth part: take the ninth part of one
hundredth, and it is 11. and 1/9. that the said Dollers and other moneys are in
haunced thereby. But our Shillings or 12. pence Starlin (albeit they must be
delivered by weight) is but advanced to ten Stiuers and a half, which is but
5. d. 100. when it should be 11 1/9. part, or 11. l. 2. s. 2. d.. The Rule is.

If 45. give 5, what shall 50. give? Facit 11. and 1/9. parts.

Or if 45. give in true Exchang 33. s. 9 d, what 50? Facit 37. s. 6. d.

Or if 42. for the Royal give 33. s. 4. d, what gives 48? Facit 38. s. 1. d.

So that it plainly appears by grounded calculation upon Assayes, that from
33. s. 4. d. the moneys of the Realm between us and the Low Countries are
undervalued 11. l. 2. s. 2.. d. in every hundred pounds, Exceeding great gain
by the exportation of our moneys.
whereby we vndersell our home commodities, and buy the foreign Commodities so
much dearer, and loose for every hundredth pounds so much in the Kingdom
stock, for we do receive but 88. l. 17. s. 9.. d. for one hundredth pounds:
and he that exported our money may get ipso facto, or every month above 11.
per cent, which is 132. per cent by the year, and no money or Bullion can be
imported from thence without the like loss to the bringer thereof, unless by
gold, which is here more esteemed then in other Countries, whereby he may save
some part of his loss, especially the same being made Bullion beyond the seas,
as aforesaid.

And because Misselden will not allow of the supposition set down upon the
rates of 30. s. for 20. ^. P. 75.
Starlin, to show how Merchants may be correspondence accomodate each other, to
the Kingdoms great loss, by the means of a low Exchange, which must in the
comparison needs be under the price supposed in Exchange, and not at 33. s. 4.
d, which is called low in regard of the present, and hereupon he does miscast
100. l. in 1000. l. between the Londoners and the Amsterdamers, with other
cauillations in the answering thereof: I though good to observe the same
between the price of equal exchange, altered by the inhauncing of moneys
beyond the Seas at the beginning, when 20. s. Starlin was made 24. s. by
exchange, whereby 500. l. made 600. l. beyond the Seas as aforesaid, for the
said 600, l. Flemish was correspondent in account between the said Londonner
and Amsterdammer, after the said rate of 24 s. by exchange, so long as the
value was made good by exchange: but if the Exchange had not risen in price
according to the moneys inhaunced, and had remained at 20 s. for 20 s. and they
had still so kept their account between them; All men of judgment can very
well see that the 500 l. Starlin (being transported) will make 600 l. Flemish:
But the Londoner has not the like means to import his money in specie from
beyond the Seas, where the same is inhaunced: so that if he do not receive
their 600 l. in liew of his 500 l, he becomes a looser of so much, and the
Kingdom is bereaved of the others money, which the Amsterdammer caused to be
sent over unto him, as shall be made plain in the next Chapter.

To return to our aforesaid declaration of the vndervaluation of our moneys.
Exchange at 358. for the Low United Countries.
True it is, that since the said Proclamation of the States, whereby our
shilling is valued at 10. Stiuers, the price of exchange is risen to 35 s,
which some understand to be value for value, or Par pro Pari: and others will
say, who knows whether the said Assayes were truly made and reported
accordingly, and so speak against our benefit. I answer, admit that the loss
be but 6 1/9. per centum for a month, is this tolerable, when by the
exportation of our moneys there may be gotten above 73 per centum by the year,
which is a gain exceeding all other gains, besides the loss of our Treasure?

This is conuenience being opened to the Grand Commission of 51. Persons, of
diverse quallities and degrees appointed for matters of Trade, namely, The Right
Honorable the Lord Vizcount Man-deuile, The Grand Commission for Trade.
Lord President of the Council. The Lord Brook. Sir John Suckling Knight,
Comptroller of his Majesty's Household, Sir Julius Caesar Knight, Master of the
Rolls, and diverse other Knights, Baronets, and others: It pleased them to send
for his Majesty's Assay-master, Master Andrew Palmer a man of rare knowledge
and experience, and willed him to make Assayes of the principal foreign
coins, and to compare the same unto ours by way of Exchange, after the rate of
35 s. Flemish for 20 s. Starlin, whereupon he made the report here following,
in the Month of March last past, 1623.

Twenty shillings English money, Master Palmers report to the Commissioners.
contains in fine silver 3 ounces, ten penny weight, 23 grains, 4 mites, 12
droicts, 7 periods, 17 blancks. Five and thirty Hollands shillings contains in
fine silver, 3 ounces, 6 penny weight, 14 grains, 6 mites, 16 droicts.
Whereby the difference of fine silver is 4 penny weight, 8 grains, 17 mites,
20 droicts.

Every penny weight of fine silver is worth in our current silver moneys, three
pence farthing and half a farthing full: so the difference in value between
the moneys above said, is 14 pence half penny and one farthing, which is upon
the hundredth pounds, six ponnds three shillings.

Every Holland shilling contains in fine silver, one penny weight, 21
grains, 13 mites, 8 droicts, which is in value to our silver moneys, six pence
3/^ parts: every Holland Stiuer of the best contains in fine silver, 7
grains, 12 mites, 5 droicts, 6 periods 16 blancks: which is in value two
ounces, one penny, 1 mites, every 5 shillings English silver contains in fine
silver, 17 penny weight, 17 grains, 16 mites.

Every Holland Doller contains in fine silver 16 penny weight, 4 grains, 10
mites: the difference in fine silver is one penny weight, 13 grains, 6 mites,
which is in value Starlin, 5 pence full.

Every piece of 8 Royalls of Spain, contains in fine silver 16 penney
weight, one grain: the difference is one penny weight, 16 grains, 16 mites.
And in value Starlin, five pence, half penny full.

So to the difference of six pounds, three shillings in every hundredth pounds,
the 5 upon the hundredth added between 33 s. 4 d, and 35 s. is in Total 11 l.
3 s, by this calculation of Assay.

Thus it appears unto men even of the meanest understanding, that our moneys
are undervalued in exchange for the Low Countries, and for Hamborough and other
places much more, where the Rickx Doller is risen to 52, and 54 shillings
lubish, which by the precedent rules, makes the price of this Positive
Exchange to be above 40 s. of theirs for our 20 s, which to avoid prolixity, I
leave to every man's judgment to calculate.

Now because we have spoken of men of mean capacity, Inconveniences of the
vnderualuation of our. moneys.
and that I do labor to express my self in the plainest manner: I pray you,
is there any man living that will not conceive, that this exceeding great gain
had by exportation of our moneys, will still deprive us of our Treasure? And on
the contrary, that this great loss had by the importation of money, does still
debar us from any to be brought in? Again, when greater gain is given upon
the Spanish Royalls beyond the Seas, will not the same be diuerted from us and
carried thither, or if some be imported upon occasion or by accident, will not
other men transport them again, and so take away the life of Trade, and cause
the Vital Spirits thereof to languish? Surely all men are able to understand
this, yet it shall be made more plainer.

Thus may we observe the Disgression and inequallity between the said moneys,
which can never (conveniently) be reducted to their first price and equallity:
I might likewise make instance of the coins of gold which are more inhaunced,
for the Sovereign of 20 s. is now current at 37 s. 8 d. Flemish But the
premises declare sufficiently the vndervaluation of our moneys in exchange,
both by calculation and trial of the subtle Assay.

Misselden in his former Treatise misnamed Free-Trade, sets down, P. 7.
that the immediate cause of the want of money in England: is the
vnderualuation of his Majesty's coin, which hinders the importation, and
causes the exportation of ours, whereupon he would have the Kings coin
raised* and foreign coin to be made current at equal value: And in his
Circle of Commerce he says: P. 101.
that I would persuade the world, that there is a great vnderualuations of our
moneys in exchange to those of Germany and the Low Countries, which is the
maine Pillar to support the Par, and so now there is no vndervaluation. And
thus with the Saytre he* blows hot and cold at one instant with one breath*
and withal he does acknowledge, that if the premises by us declared were true
(as true and manifest they are) That they be fearful effects, and again,
that moneys are not so little inhaunced as 20 in the hundredth since the
inhauncing begun, which we have proved to be double, or 100 upon the
hundredth, well in good time, it is mistaken, to make it serve his turn.

He accuses me of gross errors, for that the exchange is risen in price
according to the valuation of moneys, which even now we have proved to be
false: and if exchange should rise and fall accordingly, that is to say, if
moneys rise beyond the Seas, that the price of exchange should rise
accordingly: and if moneys do rise here, that then on the contrary the
exchange should fall in price here, what remedy can there be then in the
inhauncing of the moneys, when the price of exchange will still over rule the
same, Misseldens Errors.
as it were an inhauncing upon an inhauncing between us and other Countries
upon the price of exchange, which (as has been showed) is the Public Measure?

But he will make this perspicuous by a familiar example, surely one of the
familiars of his Circle has del^ded him herein: for if a Gentleman makes over
100 l. for Amsterdam at 33 s. 4 d, and receives for it there 166 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Flemish in Holland Dollers, called Lion Dollers; at two Guilderes or 40 Stiuers
the Doller, which amounts just 500 Dollers, and upon occasion after he has
received the same, he is to deliver them there again by exchange to be paid in
London: the question is not upon the inhauncing of two Stiuers upon every
Doller and 35 s, which he must give there to have here paid him, 20 s. Starlin
for every pound, whereby the said inhauncing of the Doller there, and the price
of Exchange do just concur, and there can be neither gain nor loss. But
the point is, whether these 500. Dollers do contain so much fine silver by
weight, as there is in 100 l. Starlin here by him delivered, whereby it might
be at his choice to import the said 500. Dollers inspeci, or to deliver them
there by exchange, to receive the value thereof in England without loss: and
upon examination hereof, the difference (according to the premises) will be
found so great, that it cannot be put into one eye, for it will fill such an
empty skull without brains: as the Fox before spoken of had found by chance;
and we now perceive, here you may distinguish his Personnall Exchange
concerning Trade, and his Provincial Exchange concerning State, to be handled
in the next Chapter, for the said Lion Doller was by the said Proclamation of
the Earl of Leycester valued at 36 Stiuers, Phillip, Dollers,
which is now inhaunced to 40 Stiuers, Rick^ Dollers
being just one ninth part as before is declared. Lion Dollers al
proportionable.
Concerning others Dollers, and makes 11 1/9 part in the 100 being 11 l. 2 s.
2 d, whereby we may perceive that there is a proporcionable valuation of these
coins: so that the Gentleman was (according to the true value) to receive at
Amsterdam ^55. Hollands or Lion Dollers, and 5/9 parts, or 20 Stiuers, and even
so much is our money undervalued, from 33 s. 4 d. Flemish, as the Assay does
demonstrate. And according to the said Rule, if 42 Stiuers made the exchange
upon the Spanish Royal of 8. to be 33 l. 4 d, what shall the same be at 48
Stiuers for the said Royal, Facit, 38 s. 1 d. as aforesaid: This Flemish
reckonning is true, and truer then the Spanish reckonning, whereupon Misselden
directs his Argument. And if the said Gentleman had bestowed the last year
the said 100 l. in Royalls of 8, at 22 s. for the 5 prices, and paid them out
there at 51 Stiuers, and so returned his money by exchange at a low rate, or 33
s. 4 d, or under, he might have gotten 25 Per Cento, where the said Royalls
(when he bought them) did cost him but ten upon the hundredth: and thus you
may see what deep speculations this man has (whilst he is enclosed within his
Circle) to find out these Mysteries, and yet no Mysteries: like unto the Man,
An Eunuch.
that was no Man: which threw a Stone, A Pumex.
that was no Stone: at a Bird, that was no Bird: sitting upon a Tree, A Bat. A
dead Tronke.
that was no Tree: at which a Dog did bark, A Beech.
that was no Dog: And this is the manner of his Sophistry.

But he will come a little closer, and leave all the uncertain rates of
exchanges, and so bring me to the touchstone of the said last Proclamation of
the States of the United Provinces, whereby the Royal of 8 is cried down to 48
Stiuers, or 8 s. Flemish. And here he has calculated matters to a hair, by
the English weight of English and Ases, and penny weight and grains,
reckoning after 32 Ases for the penny weight or English, the penny weight
being but 24 granes, and making 4 pieces 3/^ parts to be equal with our 20 s.
in value, which at 10 (...); Stiuers for our shilling, according to the said
Proclamation, iumpeth all at 35 s. Flemish in exchange for the said 2 s.
Starlin; this is very prettily contrived by the dexterity of his ingenous
spirit, or rather by his supportes, who would help a lame Dog over the style,
as the prouer be is by abating the price of the Royal, and advancing the price
of exchange, taking care only for the present rate and time of exchange,
wherewith he charge me with a p^ace of Scripture, with such a Magnanimity, P.
113.
as if he were riding in his Triumphant Chariot, drawn by ignorance and
impudency, as a cupple of Coatch Horses: immitating Caligula, who following the
example of Julius Caesar in conquering Britain, Suetornius and Di^n.
and conducting his Army to the Sea side, commanded his Soldiers to gather
shells, which he called the spoils of the Ocean, and binding a few Germans
that never fought against him, led them in triumph to Rome: Even such is the
behavior of Misselden, who having gathered the shelles of knowldge, could
never attain to the solid flesh of truth and prudence, for an answer
therefore to this untrue Assertion, I utterly deny, that 4 Royalls ^/8 parts,
do answer our 20 s. Starlin, and by the aforesaid Rule of Arithmitike, if 22
s. will buy 5 pieces or Royalls of 8, then 20 s. requires 4 6/11 pieces, and
although the said Royal be decried, yet is the same current above the price of
the Proclamation in most places: moreover by the said rule, if one shilling was
worth ten Stiuers and more, when the Rickx Doller was valued at 45 Stiuers,
which is now inhaunced, and current above 50, which is 1/9 part increased: then
it follows that the said our shilling ought to be valued above 11 Stiuers and
1/9 part, especially now the same must be delivered by weight, which is the
cause that above six in the hundredth profit will be given in the Mintes there,
according to the policy in Mint affairs, when there is an intention to melt
down foreign coin, as we have amptly declared in the second Part of Lex
Mercatoria: now concerning the exchange for Hamborough, The vnderu^luation of
our moneys by Exchange at Hamborough.
where after the rate of 4 Rickx Dollers and one half, we are to look for
450 Dollers for one hundredth pound Starlin. I am conscious by bills of
exchanges made at Hamborough the last year between English money and lubish
amongst the Merchants Aduenturours, that for 381 Dollers delivered there, there
have been paid 100 l. here in England, which is 69 Dollers under the true
value, whereby they sold their clothes better cheap there, and so the
Kingdoms stock must answer for it, to the impouerishment thereof. There is no
man that has the name of a Merchant, that having there 381 Dollers, will
import the same into the Realm, knowing that he shall make but 4 s. 6 d a
piece, which makes but 85 l. 14 s. 6 d. when he can have by exchange 100 l,
which is 14 l. 5 s. 6 d. more in two months time. Is not this an intolerable
intrest between Merchants, falling upon those that have small stocks and are
takers up of money, when they ought to be deliuerers paying 70 and 80 upon the
hundredth to the vnderselling of our native commodities: let him here apply the
saying, Animus Meminisse horret, luctuque Refugit.

I his vndervaluation of our moneys in exchange by the inhauncing of foreign
coin is so plain, and Luce Meridiana Clarius in every man's understanding,
that there needs not any further explanation, yet Misselden will not
acknowledge, that the 15 Per Cento, P. 25.
more gotten by the Royalls of 8 beyond the seas then in England, comes to
pass by reason of the low exchange and vndervaluation of our moneys, in giving
there little by exchange to receive much for it here: in the same manner as the
precedent example of Hamborough does demonstrate, for he denies that the price
of commodities does rise with the inhauncing of the moneys, which he mistermed
Value of Moneys: and this is mere contrary to his former Assertion, Page 17.
where he says: That if the Merchants do nor raise the price of their
Commodities in due proportion to the moneys inhaunced in Exchange, they shall
come home by weeping cross: the best is, he can swallow up many of these
Guggions, and put down things never by me affirmed. As that the Exchange in the
year 1586, or at any time since, went constantly at 33 s. 4 d, and here he
might produce more then 1586 witnesses and Merchants Books; P. 28.
Surely this man does imitate the country Corydon, who seeing a sign for
Horses to be let to hire and livery, with the year of 1622 thereunto added:
was looking where those great Stables stood, that could contain so many
Horses. For he dare say and affirm any thing, though it be never so untrue,
and being convinced thereof, is no more ashamed, then a Horse which has
overthrown his Cart.

There was of late years a Merchant of great experience, A Worthy
consideration in Exchange.
who (by ruminating of his brain) was of opinion, that although sometimes the
price of exchange went low for some weeks, it went high again at other
weeks, and so accomp^ing one week with an other, this vndervaluation might be
recompensed and found to be correspondent: this consideration was very
material, and moneys were not then at all inhaunced at Hamborough, neither so
much risen in the Low Countries, whereupon it was thought convenient to cast up
the weekly price of exchanges one with another, according to the Brokers Bills
of the prices of exchanges which they deliver weekly, and (that for certain
years) after 52 weeks for the year, casting the Medium thereof, by certain
tables made thereof: and although the difference was not so much as it has
been, and continued these 12 years since by one third part; yet the loss
sustained thereby, came yearly to 35 and 37 Per Cento, by the year, the
operation whereof was to be felt in time, as now we do in the want of moneys,
for in the great bodies of Commonweals, things are not sensible but in
progress of time: which causes me to compare the working thereof to the
Planet Saturn, making his Sphericall course in Thirty years.

The Rule therefore (which Misselden called, Aniufal^ible Rule.
a Precept) is infallible, that when the exchange does answer the true values
of our moneys, according to their inward weight and finesse, and their out-ward
valuation: they are never exported, because the gain is answerable by
exchange, which is the cause of exportation: to this he answers. That the
stranger commits the fault, and I would have the English punished, which is as
sententious for him to lay, as that I teach Gentlemen a way how to improve
their wooles, To the Reader.
and to cosen the Kingdom of the Cloth; if the Reader will believe him, there
is not a word in his Pamphlet, P. 29.
but of some use: But my discourse is piect together with stolen stuff: If I
do borrow of others that have written learnedly, (as all Authors do) why will
your slanderous pen blame me, especially when you do nothing else but traduce
the writings of others, and some whom you do name, had first their light from
me?

Now if I should conclude this point and say, P. 16.
that to the iuditious Merchants I have given cause of offense to have written
so much in the defense of exchange, (as I may well do) do I, by your perverted
constitution bewray my want of wit and honesty? A Mule is a beast begot of a
Horse and a she Ass, and so are these answers begot between wit and idleness.

That serious observation of those most grave and Honorable Counselors of
State in the year 1576. concerning the Feats and Bankers, Maine of Free
Trade. P. 16.
and the examples of the French King Lewis the nineth, and Phillip the fair,
confiscating their goods, which was also done by Phillip de Valois, who indicted
them as cosonners of the Commonwealth: are not to be past over with jests and
untruths, for wise men look for better things, Suetonius in viat Vesp.
and will not be reasted withal, which caused Vespatian to remove such a
Busphoon as iested at his friends, willing him to jest at himself.

The Acts of Parliaments, Proclamations and Ordinances made upon this
consideration, with the treaties and conferences with other Princes, hereafter
to be declared, will manifest the importancy of this matter of State, which is
canker of the Commonwealth, and therefore placed in this Zone of the Tropicke
of Cancer, as before is noted: the operation whereof will be more perspicuous
upon examination of it, by the Center of Commerce to be entreated of in the
Equinoctial, being the middle and third Zone of the Globe of Trafficque and
Trade, according to our distribution, whereby the old Adage will approve. That
young men do think that old men are Fools: But old men do know that young men
are Fools which has a reference to the general, and may be applied in this
particular, Least per adventure he be wise in his own eyes, Proverbs 26. v. 5.

CHAP. III.
That gain is the Center of the Circle of Commerce, and that the
vnderualuation of our Moneys in Exchange, is the efficient cause of the
ouerballancing of Trade.

Now that we come to the Equinoctial Line, where the Center of the Circle of
commerce is to be found, upon the rule of equity and Parity, to be observed
between moneys and exchanges of moneys by Bills: let us note, that Aristotle
in his fourth Book of Metaphysickes, (which is commonly called the Book of
Distinction) has largely confirmed, that all errors proceeds from
Indistinction, now forasmuch as a Distinction can be no other thing then the
enumeration of sundry significations of the same, Difinition of Distinctions.
with an apt application to the thing in question: observe we the plainest way
to distinguish the opperatio^ of the said Center (gain) in the course of
Traffic: for even as a spider has the best quallity of feeling sitting with
the head downwards in her circular web, (as the Center thereof) to ketch her
living in all the parts of the circumference of her web: even so have all men
(but most especially worlings looking down wards with the Kite) an Action and
feeling of their benefit and gain, which rules the course of Trade in
general, by Gods direction to be observed therein.

The wealth of a Kingdom cannot properly decrease, Three means to decrease
the Wealth of the Realm.
but three manner of ways, namely: by selling our native Commodities too good
cheap: by buying the foreign Commodities too dear: and by the exportation of
our moneys inspecie, caused by a low exchange for moneys by Bills of exchanges,
as before is declared.

In the managing whereof, we are to make three distinctions.

The First, concerning the King and the Nobility, Gentlemen and Travelers,
Three Distinction considerable.
who are here deliuerers of money to serve their occasions beyond the Seas, or
else they are takers up beyond the Seas by letters of credit, to their greater
loss, when the price of exchange is low, or foraine coin is inhaunced or
ouervalued in exchange unto us, as is before declared in the first Chapter.

The Second distinction concerns particular Merchants, who do make a private
benefit by moneys and exchange to the prejudice of the Kingdom, by a low
exchange, and vndervaluation of our moneys.

The Third, concerns the whole Kingdom in general, wherein the said
particular Merchants do bear some loss unawares, although they have a greater
gain by a disordered Trade another way, to the utter undoing of all Trade, and
destruction of the Realm, which we are now to distinguish.

It is demanded, P. 17.
whether it be lawful for Merchants to seek their Priuatum commodum in the
exercise of their calling, whether gain be not the end of Trade, and whether
the private be not inualued in the public? The answer is extant, that Albeit
the general is composed of the particular, Maine of free Trade. P. 3.
yet it may fall out, that the general shall receive an intolerable prejudice
and loss by the particular benefit of some, the opinion and council therefore
in the reformation of abuses of some private Merchants, is to be held in
suspicion, and Kings and Princes are to sit at the stern of Trade, which
caused the wise man to say:

Consult not with a Merchant concerning Exchanges. Ecclesiasticus 37. ver. 11.


The gains which are preiuditiall to the Commonwealth, and beneficial to
some Merchants in particular, are these as follows.

English Merchants (being here the takers of money by exchange) have a great
gain when they take the same at a low exchange, Pernicious Asguments.
giving less by their Bill of exchange in foreign parts, and in (...) manner
beyond the Seas, in giving Flemish or other moneys there, to have here Starlin
money for it, they being there commonly the deliuerers of money, so that a low
price of exchange by the vndervaluation of our moneys is profitable to the
Merchant: and to maintain this, it is inferred, that merchant strangers would
export more moneys out of the Realm into foreign parts, if English Merchants
did not take the said moneys by exchanges, and that at a low price, whereby the
English Merchant becomes a gainer, and the Merchant stranger a looser.

Again, if an equal exchange were used, according to the Standards of moneys
of other Nations and ours: then could not English Merchants sell our native
Commodities so good cheap beyond the Seas, to vndersell other Nations, casting
their calculations of buying and selling according to the low price of exchange.

Also, if the price of exchange were high beyond the Seas: then the Spanish
Merchants could not make such gain by the Royalls of 8 which they transport
thither, making return of the proceed of them by a low exchange, to their
great benefit of 25 Per cento, where they can make here but ten upon the
hundredth.

If the moneys were not inhaunced beyond the Seas, Merchants could not sell our
native commodities at the prices they now do, and return the value thereof by
a low exchange from thence, or taking up the same here, give so little by
exchange there.

English Merchants buying here cloth upon their credits, and selling the same
beyond the Seas, have a good gain to return their money by a low exchange, to
pay the seller of the Cloth with his own, and so trading without stocks: are
instruments to sell the native Commodities of the Realm.

If the exchange were not low under the value of the Standard, Merchants could
not make a great benefit by taking up moneys here (be he either English or
stranger) and transport the same to pay their Bills of exchanges beyond the
Seas, and reserve a great part of the money for their benefit, neither could
they buy foreign Commodities beyond the Seas upon long days of payment, and
transport money to pay the seller at the said times.

All this is done by maintaining the vndervaluation of our moneys by a low
exchange, The Rule of justice and equity.
which must be distinguished from the true rule of justice and equity, which
requires an equal valuation in exchange, or an advantage over and above to
accomodate the course of Trafficque, and then it will be found that the
vnderualuation of moneys in exchange is intolerable, and that this gain
procured to the hurt of the Kingdom (although profitable to particular
Merchants) is to be abolished.

The like is done by selling of our Cloth good cheap beyond the Seas in
greater quantity, when Merchants have beaten down the price with the Clothier,
whereby the Clothier is forced to do the like with the Woolegrower, which
disimproueth the reuinew of lands. But the Merchant imployeth the lesser
stock, and has not therefore the less benefit: the Woolegrower and the
Clothier bearing the loss, besides other private dealings of Merchants, which
are errors of Trade, declared in out former Treatise. P. 75, 76.

The third distinction concerning the whole Kingdom, is now to be examined by
way of Antithesis or conterpointing, showing how gain does command and direct
Trade, in the said three simples of Trafficque, namely Commodities, Moneys, and
Exchanges, and especially in the exchanges of moneys which ouerruleth the other
two, whereby the ouerballancing of foreign Commodities, with our native
Commodities in price is procured: and this may be avoided and prevented by the
contrary, if it be put in practice according to the said rule of justice and
equity.

Inconveniences arising to the Realm of England, by the vnderualuation of our
moneys in Exchanges upon the pound of xx. shillings for the maine places of
Trade.

FIrst, when our moneys are undervalued in exchange, whereby there arises a
gain between the inward value of the moneys and the price of exchange: then
are our moneys continually exported into foreign parts, for the like gain can
never be made by any Commodity.

2 This exportation of money, causes not only the less moneys to be employed
upon our native Commodities, and returns in foreign wares, but takes away
also the Vital spirit of Trafficque, and gives a great cause of
ouerballancing of commodities.

3 The said vndervaluation of our moneys in exchange does the like, and causes
our native Commodities to be sold better cheap beyond the Seas, for want of
knowledge of the true value of our moneys and theirs: even as the inhauncing of
foreign coin beyond the Seas, caused the foreign wares to be advanced in
price, according as the said money is inhaunced, whereby the said
ouerballancing must needs come to pass of course.

4 It does hinder the importation of Bullion and Dollers from the said places
of Trade, which we have had in times past: for the said inhauncing coin not
being truly valued by exchange, cannot be imported but to an exceeding loss,
and Merchant strangers will not take the same at a low exchange, so that our
Merchants are compelled to make their returns by foreign Commodities, thereby
greatly increasing the said ouerballancing of Trade.

5 Young English Merchants are constrained to take up a great part of the said
money at a low exchange, to maintain their rechanges to their loss, or else
must make quick sales of their commodities, whereby they spoil the markets of
others, which causes them to set over their bills obligatory (received for
their Clothes sold there) either for money, to pay the money taken up here by
exchange, or for foreign Commodities at dear rates by the said inhaunced
moneys and otherwise, which cannot but breed an ouerballancing of Commodities.

6 The said low exchange (whereby the Spanish Merchants make a diuersion of the
Royalls of 8 unto to those parts finding there more gain, when they can make
over their moneys by a low exchange does also divert from us a great Trade, by
such employments as are made there upon foreign Commodities, as Bays, Says,
and other new Draperies made in those parts, which might be employed upon our
Commodities, and can this negotiation be without argumenting of the said
ouerballancing?

7 If by occasion or accident moneys or Bullion is impotted: (which might be
carried to the Mint, and the moneys made thereof would be delivered by exchange
to our Merchants, and so by them employed upon our Commodities, if the said
were high or indiffetent:) it falls out, that the said moneys or Bullion are
exported again by other Merchants, which bring in foreign wares for it, for
gain still bears the sway.

Thus by buying foreign commodities (as it were) by forcible means of course,
by reason of the said vndervaluation of our moneys by exchange: and selling our
native Commodities by a false measure of exchange to our loss, The causes of
ouerballancing and decay of Trade.
at the pleasures of other Nations: and by converting their inhaunced coin
into Starlin money by a low exchange, and the continual exportation of our
moneys affording such great gain, and being debarred to bring in moneys
because of the loss had thereby, is our trade decayed: and would be so,
although there were no more wares in Christendom, for these be the causes of
ouerballancing, whereby the Realm is impouerished: which shall be more amply
declared. Sublata Causa, T^ll itur effectus.

Now albeit that the contrary hereof does produce the benefits to the
Commonwealth, and does properly belong to the remedies of the inconveniences
of Trade, to be handled in the last Chapter: yet because it is more
intelligible in this place, let us declare the same.

Benefits which will arise to the Realm of England by the true valuation of
our Moneys in Exchange, to meet with the said inconveniences.

FIrst, Means to prevent the ouerballancing of Trade, and to restore Trade.
when the exchange does answer the true value of our moneys, then there is no
gain to be made by exportation, which is prevented thereby.

2 The transportation of moneys being prevented, will cause the greater
employment to be made upon our native Commodities, either by the Merchant
stranger, or by English Merchants to whom the stranger will deliver his money
by exchange, for by the exportation he shall have no gain, and therefore he
will expect the taker of it: by which plenty of money there will be a lively
Trade, and the cause of ouerballancing will diminsh.

3 The true value of our money or above being answered by a high exchange,
causes Merchants strangers to sell their Commodities according to the true
value of the money, whereby the ouerballancing must needs decrease of course,

4 The vndervaluation of our moneys, and the inhauncing of foreign coin being
met withal, and calculated in exchange, causes moneys and Bullion to be
brought into the Realm without loss, and most times with gain, and sometimes
with a little disadvantage, because our Merchants will rather then to buy
foreign commodities dear* have their money ready to be employed again. ^ this
does also meet with the said over ballancing.

5 Young English Merchants which are takers of moneys beyond the Seas, will
receive more by an high exchange there, and finding plenty of money, shall not
be driven to make rash sales or barters to their loss, and hinderance of
others, which will also moderate the said over ballancing.

6* When the Spanish Merchants shall not be able to deliver their Royal^s of 8,
or the money received for them by a low exchange beyond the Seas, but according
to the true value required by a just and lawful exchange: then they will find
no more gain there then here, which will cause them to import the said Royalls
here, where the inward value will be answered unto them: and the diuerted Trade
by these means will return into England, to employ the said Royalls or the
moneys made thereof, upon our Bays, Says, and other Draperies, which of
course will quallify the said ouerballa^cing.

7 Thus moneys and Bullion will then be imported by a necessity of nature
beyond all resistance, and the Dollers, Royalls of 8, and other coins brought
in upon occasion or accidentally, will remain within the Realm, when there
shall be no gain by the exportatio^, because this true exchange ( Rising and
falling nevertheless above the value, and not under) will answer the said
value, and prevent that gain, which is now procured in danger of the Laws,
adventure of the Seas, and of lewd persons.

So that by comparing the precedent benefits with the former inconveniences, An
application of the comparison.
every man of judgment may easily see how hurtful the low exchange and
vnderualuation of our moneys is to the Commonwealth: and on the contrary, how
beneficial the true valuation or high exchange will be, concurring with
equity and true policy, whereupon the Center of the Circle of Commerce is
grounded.

Consider we now this Center (Gain) in every particular upon the premises,
drawing from the Circumference all direct lines into it, and excluding all
obliquie, curuey, and Helicall lines, and we shall find, that Nothing does
force Trade but Gain.

Gain had upon moneys by vnderualuation in exchange, and inhauncing of
foreign coin beyond the Seas: causes our moneys to be exported.

Gain had upon moneys by exchange and true valuation, causes moneys to be
brought in.

Gain upon moneys being taken away and answered by true exchange, keeps
moneys within the Realm.

Gain given upon moneys imported here, equal to the gain made beyond the
Seas: will prevent the diuersion of the Royalls of 8.

Gain more made by our moneys, then by our commodities exported: causes less
employment to be made upon our Commodities, and greater exportation.

Gain made by a low exchange, undervaluing our moneys, causes them to be sold
less beyond the Seas, and foreign wares deerer, to ouerballance us.

Gain made upon our native Commodities, is Really imported by moneys and
Bullion, when there is no loss by the importation of moneys.

Gain had upon foreign coin within the Realm, being prevented by the value
in Exchange, keeps the coin within the Realm and Mint.

Gain upon moneys being greater beyond the Seas then with us in England,
draws moneys thither, and hinders moneys to be imported, the want whereof
makes a dead Trade.

Gain had by exchange upon young Merchants of small means, spoileth the vent
of our commodities, by overthrowing the Market of others.

Gain given by exchange of moneys by Bill, according to the true value or
above the same: causes foreign Commodities to be sold better cheap within
the Realm, and gives a direction ( Tacit) to sell our native Commodities
with more gain and reputation.

Gain procured by our Commodities outward, more then by foreign Commodities
inwards, which means to import Bullion and moneys to be done by this true
valuation in exchange as aforesaid, will prevent the ouerballancing of Trade,
and bring all things in tune, when the Center (Gain) finds rest in Proprio
Loco.

The consideration hereof excludes all unjust, unlawful, and private gain,
made to the prejudice of the Realm by the oversight of Merchants, which seem
to steer the helm when Palynicrus was sleepie.

This is that Geometrical Axiom or Maxim, Circulus Tangit Planum vnico Puncto
heretofore observed, this is properly the Scope of Merchants, P. 104.
all the Mysteries of Personal and Provincial Exchanges are comprised in this
Mystery, which Misselden will make to be no Mystery, and to use his own words
nevertheless. All the knowledge of Commerce is presented and represented in this
History. All the rivers of Trade spring out of this source, P. 142.
and empt themselves again into this Occean. All the weight of Trade falls to
this Center, and comes within the circuit of this Circle. This is that Par pro
Pari, that waighes down Misseldens Balance of Trade, which is without a
Parallel: which to prove let us now examine what is presented and represented
by his uncertain Balance.

A Merchant says he, when he will inform himself how his Estate stands, P.
130.
is said to take a Balance of his Estate: wherein he collecteth and
considers all his Wares, and Monyes, and Debts, as if he would cast
euery-thing into the Scale to be tried. etc.

IF this Merchant should not look to the Center. (Gain) in the mean time,
what will the taking of a Balance avail him, or to what end and purpose will
this tend? Surely only for a trial to find out whether he has gained or
lost, this is all a Balance can do. And although a Merchant can (in some
sort) do this: It follows not that the Royal Merchant or a Prince can do
it, albeit he is the Father of the great family of the Commonwealth, for the
cause of Trade is not in his own power, but Merchants do manage the same, who
(as has bin showed) may procure their private gain, and yet impouerish the
Kingdom. So that the Casting up of this Balance, P. 116.
can never be an excellent and policique invention to show us the difference of
weight in the Commerce of one Kingdom with another, unless the three Essential
parts of Trade be wisely directed and observed by the Prince, according to the
said Center of Commerce, and not by this conceited Balance.

Misselden having found an ancient worm-eaten Balance upon Record, which is
said to be made in the 28 year of Edward the Third: might very well have over
past the same, seeing the imperfection thereof: P. 30.
and that he found it in that Maniscript that he so little esteems, from
which (as he says) I have stored my self. For therein diverse Commodities of
the Kingdom, as Lead, Tin, Butter, Cheese, Tallow, Hides, Skins, Iron, and
other Staple Wares, are not mentioned, and yet concern the said Balance: so
that his comparison between those ancient, P. 123.
with these modern times, is but vain and a Superfluous tale. But he
delights i^ words for want of matter or substance.

Then he comes to a Positive constitution of the form of a Balance in the
years of our Lord 1612, and 1621. And here lies the Pot of Roses, to know
whether the native Commodities exported, and the foreign Commodities imported
do balance or ouerballance one another in the Scale of Commerce: P. 121.
and if the native Commodities exported do weigh down and exceed in value the
foreign Commodities imported, P. 127.
that overplus must either come in (as he says) in money or Merchandise, P.
117.
if not in money, then in Merchandise.

Surely he did not consider this without a nightcap, for it deserves to be
written in Capital Letters. Moneys will not be imported so long as there is a
loss by the bringing in of them: and if Commodities be brought in, it
increases the said ouerballancing, as a Deceptio Visus upon your Scale of
Commerce, whereby you cannot discern the truth: but you must of force find
your Balance false, The Balance, A deceptio Visus.
and your judgment uncertain: and herein is no more hope of a remedy, then
there is to overtake a man which runs to the East, and you pursue him
toward the West, running from him.

But let us come somewhat closer to the consideration of this Balance, and
suppose, that by increasing our Manifactures by four or five hundredth thousand
pounds yearly more to be exported, this balance will be reformed, is not this
like and feasible to be done? I answer, that although it were feasible to make
and vent such a quantity of Manifactures yearly: yet is it not like to
moderate the ouerballancing. For all men of judgment will say, that the
proceed or return of the said Manifactures will come unto us in foreign
Commodities, because moneys and Bullion cannot be brought in but to loss, as
the case stands. So that still our ouerballancing increases, for when more
Commod^^^ are imported, then the Kingdom spends: (...) must be exported again
for other places, and ot^^^ Commodities are imported again for the retu^^
thereof, to augment the said ouerballance, nay^^ force us to wear more
foreign wares through the abundance of it, and to neglect the use of our
native Commodities.

But says he, P. 123.
the form will illustrate this conceited course of Balance: Tot sensus, quot
capita: As many minds, as men: every man abounding in his own sense: a
marvelous grounded rule to build upon where there is so many Cannons, must we
needs sail between Scylla and Charibays of an uncertain Balance without a
Parallel, Absurd to admit such uncertainties.
when the Compass of our Center does direct us in the very negotiation, and
nothing can be directed unto us by this Balance without the said Center?

The uncertainty of this Balance does consist of many particulars, whereby it
is so far from understanding, as conclusion is from order.

First. This Balance cannot be certainly prescribed by one years time, The
uncertainties of the Realm.
or any certain or limited time, for sometimes (and that unexpected) some East
India Ship or other rich lading may come in, or the Spices and other goods
already come in, and to be exported, are not carried out, when the calculation
of the Balance is made.

Secondly for moneys secretly exported: the return in Commodities may be yet
to come, or if it be for gain had by intrest money or exchanges, it need
never to return for the Merchant stranger: as also for moneys taken up by
exchange to be employed upon Commodities and other means whereof the Balance
cannot be sensible, not coming to be Balanced.

Thirdly, The profit made upon our native Commodities, as also for the foreign
Commodities and the charges is incertaine, both in the exportation of the one,
and the importation of the other, which he brings upon the Balance by
estimate, and is merely coniecturall.

Fourthly, The foreign Commodities are not vnderrated by one third part in the
Custom Books, in comparison of our native Commodities.

Fifthly, The fine goods secretly conveyed inwards more then outward, by one
hundredth thousand pounds yearly, is but a supposition.

Sixthly, The payment of Customs being uncertain, and the concealing of
Custom coming to be twenty for one in the calculation, makes the account to
be most incertaine.

Seventhly and lastly, There may be so much gotten by Commodities exported and
retransported, and for that gain foreign Commodities brought in, that it may
seem to be an ouerballance, when it is not.

The premises considered, what Center is there in this Balance? is it not like
unto those great Balloons, that men play with all filled with wind? for there is
not any sollid substance, P. 126.
but all is coniecturall and immaginary, neither is it practiced by other
Princes and Countries, as he untruly alleges. For other Princes and States
are careful to augment Trade, by increasing of their Manifactures, and (...)
sell them to benefit, as also to make their Territor^^^ (as it were) Magazins
for all Commodities, Gains to be procured by Commodities, moneys, and
Exchanges.
and as they get by Commodities, so do they also by moneys and exchanges,
which cannot but prevent the ouerballancing.

We all agree that there is an ouerballance, which must be remeded by the
redress of the causes, and not by the study of Balances, which demonstrate
little in truth and certainty, but much in imagin^^^. on and conceit. It is
Gain that bears the sway, and it is more then necessary to Tautologize and
to repeat things of this nature, for they produce fearful effects, we feel
them, we complain of them: and woeful experience shows unto us, that it is
high time to reform them. For Abyssus Abyss^^ inuocat.

By the aforesaid distinction, every man of understanding can discern the
particular and private gain from the general benefit, whereby he may the
better perceive the weakness of Misseldens objections.

He says. P. 108.
The higher the exchange is in England, the more loss is it to the taker. And
the more gain to the deliverer, 1. Object.
which is the Merchant stranger.

Again. The higher the Exchange is in Dutchland, the more loss to the
deliver, and gain to the taker: which is likewise there the Merchant stranger,
and this he declares by example.

THis Objection is the first Pernicious Argument noted in this Chapter, (which
representing unto us the Equinoctial Line) requires equallity and equity in
the valuation of Moneys and true Exchanges for the general good, as before is
demonstrated: the absurdity of which objection let us now declare.

Suppose that (notwithstanding the inhauncing of the foreign coin beyond the
Seas) the price of exchange were still at even money, as it was about 80 years
past, as has been declared, namely at twenty shillings here with us, which is
a low exchange upon the Balance of Trade. A Merchant stranger selling here
his foreign Commodities bought beyond the seas with the inhaunced coin,
finding this low exchange to make his return by, will resolve either to buy
our Commodities, or to export our moneys, for by this low exchange he shall be
a very great looser: so that our English Merchants shall find no money to be
taken up by exchange, to make their ready employment upon our Commodities, and
the Merchant stranger will buy them, or else the money will be conveyed away
for the most part, notwithstanding the Statute of employment, which as it is a
loss to the Realm: so is it to the English Merchants in particular, who might
have employed the same. So then e contrario.

The lower the Exchange is in England, the less money 1. Answ.
is delivered by exchange unto English Merchants, and the more is the Trade
driven into the Merchant strangers hands. As also the more moneys are exported.

Again. The lower that the Exchange is in Dutchland, the less money is taken
up by the Merchant stranger there, and the more (...) are imported, both by the
English Merchants and the Merchant strangers,

Which brings an ouerballancing, and increases the transportation of our
moneys: and is also a hinderance to the importation, because their moneys are
inhaunced, whereby it is manifest, that one extremity enforces another.

What is now the Medium, or rather, The general benefit to be prefered before
the particular.
which of these extremes shall take place? The one conterneth the general
welfare of the Realm: The other concerns private Merchants. Shall not the
rule of justice and equity be preferred, whereby the Commonwealth is enriched,
and the private be abolished, which destroys the Kingdom? yes questionles.

But this reformation or Par of exchange, 2^ Object.
threateneth the decay of Cloth Trade. For the exchange is that, P. 109.
which represents to our English Merchant, his whole estate beyond the Seas,
for his ready use and employment thereof in England upon all occasions. So that
if there should be a stop in the course of exchange, Exchange the public
measure
then either the English Merchant will for bear to take up money by exchange;
or else he will lock to recover his loss of exchange, upon his Cloth.

I answer. 2. Answ.
That giving more to the Merchant stranger by exchange then formerly, the Trade
will be advanced. For the English Merchant will find more money for his ready
employment then before, and the money will not be transported. So that to
surmise, that the English Merchant will forbear to take up moneys by exchange,
or will be so in^urious to his Country to maintain an (...) of our moneys in
exchange, contrary to his Majesty's Proclamation, and the laws of the Realm,
is altogether without ground and sensles. The course of exchange rising and
falling shall have no stop, neither will there be any stand in Blackwell Hall,
whereby the remedy will be far worse then the disease. As Misselden labors
to prove.

But the English Merchant must needs recover the 3. Object.
loss^ of the exchange upon the Cloth, which must either be done in the buying
of it at home, or selling of it abroad: But it cannot be done in the sale of
Cloth abroad, for the Cloth Trade groans already under the burden, as
appears by the quantity and the price thereof which is diminished: and to
bring it upon the Ch^^hier, is a matter of grievous consequence.

Experience (as I have said) makes a full answer, 3. Answ.
that as there wanted no takers of money, when the late inhauncing of money at
Hamborough caused the exchange to rise from under 28 s. to above 35 s, which is
far more then the intended reformation, and Wool was at 33 s. the Todd,
which is now at 20 s. and under; so there will want no vent for our Cloth: for
if there were sale for duble the quantity then, when Cloth was sold dearer by
full one third part, we need not to doubt of vent, when other Nations are as
willing to buy the same, as they are willing to vent their Commodities unto us:
and it stands with more reason to advance the price thereof, when the same is
good cheap, and to reform the price of exchange then when this dear. Albeit
we never heard any complaint of the deerenesse of our Cloth.

Misselden will insinuate of many objections that can be made against this
reformation so much requisite: but they are but words, P. 11^.
as all former considerations do manifest, the taker will be ruled by the
deliverer. For albeit that Trade requires a natural liberty, (which in no
Country is so much restrained as in England) yet Gain the true Center does
ouerrule all (as it were) by a voluntary command, which makes the voluntary
contract by the mutual consent of both parties by him alleges: and when the
Gain of exportation of moneys fails, P. 113.
then the statute of employment is better observed, and moneys are more
plentiful by exchange.

For all these Arguments are as Lime Twiggs or Hops to keep him still enclosed
within his Circle. He replieth, that although there wanted not Takers of money
by exchange for Hamborough, when the exchange rise from 28 s. to 35 s, yet it
does not follow, that therefore there would be Takers at the Par of Exchange,
for it is a different case. Indeed he does not understand the case, P. 114.
for the Takers did not gain, neither did the deliverer loose (as he says) by
the fast rising of exchange at Hamborough, only he that was to take up money
back again to pay his Bills of exchanges taken upon him, might therein become
a gainer, although by the buying of Commodities he might have been a looser by
the enduring of Commodities there, upon the inhauncing of moneys. A Particular
makes no rule.
These accidents are particulars, and make no general rule.

That he understands not himself in the Par of Exchange, (which I have
distinguished by the Positive Exchange from the Current Exchange) appears
also by his inferrence, That it may prove also another bar to Trade, and cause
the Cloth Trade both in the Clothier and Merchants hands to be so much dearer
to them, and cheaper to the stranger by how much the natural course should be
altered in exchange, when it should be answered by the price of exchange, to
the great advantage of foreign Nations, and loss of the Kingdom. This man
seeks a knot in a Bulrush, and concludes, that all he has alleged is as
clear as the Sun: and that until the Kingdom come to an ouerballance of
Trade, P. 131.
the causes of the decay of Trade cannot be taken away: for the decay of Trade,
and the ouerballance cannot stand together. That is to say, a sick body cannot
be in health until it be cured: which is a sentence containing many sentences,
when the ouerballance is the decay of Trade.

To speak ingeniously, can the making of a Balance cause moneys and Bullion
to be brought in, or hinder the transportation of moneys? or can the
calculation of the said Balance procure that our native Commodities exported,
shall surmount in price and quantity the foreign Commodities brought in. And
lastly, can the said Balance bring to pass that Spanish Royalls of 8 (now
diuerted from us) shall be imported, and when the said Royalls and Dollers are
brought in, that they shall not be carried out again, but be brought to the
Mint: as the said Center (Gain) will do by the true course of exchange, to
the enriching of the Realm, and prevention of ouerballancing?

Questionles it cannot, for the end of the Balance (by his own confession) is
last in place, but first and chiefest in purpose, P. 130.
or in the beginning, which is nothing else but to make a trial of things
past: so that put this Circle of Commerce into the Seals of the Balance, and
lay a feather against it, and it will weigh down the same.

But some will say: Why do you expostulate or make inquiry of the end of this
Balance, P. 132.
has not he contracted all the causes of our vnderballance in two words?
Poverty and Prodigallity grounded upon Idleness and Excess; and therein used
such a Ciceronian style, to exhort the learned Divines and provident Statesmen,
that we may say Mouit Cornicula risum, assuredly he has: but this may not be
ascribed to the Balance of Trade, for riot and excess may be known without
such a Balance, and Poverty and want is not without feeling, neither ought to
be without commiseration. For the transportation of moneys to heaven is
lawful, by charitable giving to the poor, which God himself has promised to
reward, although men were never so unthankful.

Here (according to Misseldens manner) I have occasion offered me, to make a
very ample discourse concerning his presumption above the wisdom of the City
of London, his uncharitable disposition to prevent ten thousand pounds
yearly cast away to the poor, and his peremptory and absolute conclusion in
the government of State-affaires, wherein he is a mere nouice. But my
intention is to be brief and substantial.

To end therefore this matter of Balance, it may be thought strange that some
men would be seduced thereby, Discourse of the East India Trade, by T. M. P.
49. 52.
and give bridle to the present course of Trade, expecting an ouerballance to
happen on our side without removing of the causes, after they had spoken well
concerning exchanges: although they confessed to be a ground, as a matter much
too high for their handling: saying, That the abuse thereof is very
preiuditiall unto this Kingdom in particular, whilst in the interim the
benefits do arise unto other Countries, who diligently observing the prices,
whereby the moneys be exchanged, may take advantage to carry away the gold and
silver of this Realm, at those times when the rate of our Starlin money (in
exchange) is under the value of that standard, unto which place they are
conveyed, for in respect the prices of the exchanges do rise and fall
according to the plenty and scarcity of money, which is to be taken up or
delivered out: the exchange is hereby rather become a Trade for some great
moneyed men, then a furtherance and accommodation of Recall Trade of Merchants,
as it ought to be in the true use thereof: and thus many times money may be
made over hither by strangers to a good gain, and presently carried beyond the
Seas to a second profit. And yet the mischief ends not here: for by these
means the Takers up of money in foreign Countries must necessarily drive a
Trade to those places from whence they draw their moneys and so do fill us up
with foreign Commodities, without the vent of our own Wares* etc. And thus
we see how the ouerballance of Commodities is proceeding from the abuse of
exchanges, which ouerrule moneys, and moneys ouerrule Commodities, as
heretofore is manifestly declared.

That the vnderualuation of our moneys in exchange is the efficient cause of
the ouerballancing of Trade, Vnderualuation of our moneys inexchange is the
efficient cause of the ouerballancing.
does appear upon the consideration of the causes depending one upon another,
enforced by this Primum-Mobill, as follows.

1. The vnderualuation of our moneys in exchange, 2. proceeding of the
inhauncing of moneys beyond the Seas, which causes 3. (by gain) the
transportation of our moneys, 4. and debarred (by loss to be sustained) the
importation of moneys and Bullion, 5. hinders also the bringing of Royalls of
8. unto us, being otherwise diuerred. 6. The foreign Commodities are risen in
price according to the moneys inhaunced. 7. The native Commodities are in price
undervalued according to the vndervaluation of our moneys, all which are
fearful effects. For the treasure is exhaunced, the Realm impouerished, and
money is made a Merchandise. And this cannot be cured but by the contrary, as
shall be declared in the remedies.

Hitherto we have observed and manifestly proved. First, That exchange is the
public measure between England, and all places where we deal by exchange.
Secondly, That the moneys of the Realm are undervalued in exchange between us
and other Countries. And thirdly, That Gain is the Center of the Circle of
Commerce, and that the said vnderualuation is the efficient cause of the
ouerballancing of Trade: and withal we have showed that (...) conceited
Balance of Trade proposed by Misselden, can be but a Trial and Discovery of
the ouerballancing of Trade, without that it can produce any other benefit to
the Commonwealth.

By his last Balance we may perceive, that all the Commodities exported, and
the Commodities imported yearly, do amount unto five Millions, or fifty
hundredth thousand pounds, according to our observation in the Canker of
Englands Commonwealth. Now if the loss by exchange were but ten upon the
hundredth, (which we have proved above threescore and ten) it would amount
to five hundredth thousand pounds yearly: P. 37.
The loss whereof is greater to the Kingdom, then all the moneys employed to
the East Indies comes unto, An incredible loss.
which Misselden affirms to be an abominable untruth, which I cannot but
retort upon him, because he is unfortunate to find out the truth, as shall be
made more plain in the following Chapter, for he is in league with
equivocation in all his refutations, which challenges to be Cusen German to
truth, making his speeches a Centaure, half a man, half a horse: or like one
of the broodes of Nilus, half earth, half froggs, a thing both shapelesse,
and shaped in one mixture, which it thus distinguished by the Equinoctial in
this place.

CHAP. IIII.
An Examination of the Center of Commerce in the Trades from England into other
Countries.

THe Tropicke of Capricorn being the fourth Zone or girdle by our
distribution, is to vnderp^op and sustain (by the gain of Trades) the said
Center or Gain within the circumference of the Circle of Commerce, not by an
absolute power to be left unto Merchants in the managing of Trade, or in the
disposing of moneys, Commodities and exchanges for moneys: but by a direction
grounded upon Laws, Ordinances, and Proclamations. For in regard of State
affairs, Merchants are ignorant in the course of Trafficque, for as much as
they do only study for private benefit, so that they must have leaders and
conductors: whereunto Buckes and Goats have been compared in times past,
leading the silly sheep to feed in mountainous places. To prove therefore that
this is no new doctrine or invention of mine, as Misselden alleges: let us
enter into consideration of the following observations, before our intended
examination of the Center of Commerce in foreign Trade^.

It is near 350. years since King Edward the first did erect the office of
the Kings Royal Exchanger, Ancient Office of Exchanges.
which did continue successively by 16 several Letters Patents of the Kings of
this Realm: by means whereof the moneys were preserved within the same, and
the Commodities were orderly vented, and the Merchandising exchange was then
unknown.

King Edward the third, did constitute diverse exchanges 9. E. 3. 7.
in sundry places of the Realm, and caused tables of exchanges to be set up at
Doner and elsewhere, to answer the value of our moneys in the coin to be paid
for it beyond the Seas, according to the very value, with some allowance to be
given to accomodate Merchants affairs and travelers occasions. The like was
done by Richard the second: 5. R. 2. 2.
and this was the true Par pro Pari, 2. H. 6. 6.
then used and continued by Henry the sixth, and Edward the fourth, 4. E. 4. 16.
but more especially by that wise and politic Prince 2. H. 6. 6.
King Henry the seventh, 3. H. 7. 6.
absolutely forbidding the making of exchanges and rechanges for foreign
parts, without the Kings especial license had and obtained for the same; to
which end all the several Acts of Parliament touching the directing and
ordering of moneys and exchanges have been made, as in the margent.

In primo of King Henry the eight, Sir Thomas Bullen Knight, was the Kings
exchanger by Letters Patents for all changes and rechanges for foreign parts,
as by the Records appears in his Majesty's Exchequer: and there also you
shall find, that during the r^igne of the said king Henry the seventh, one
Petrus Contarin a Veneti^n Merch^nt, was sued in the tenth year of his reign
upon the said Statutes, and the like ^u^e was brought in the ninteenth year
following, against Dominico Polli^o^o the Popes collector. And Lorenzo Alb^rti
upon the like condemnation did pay 933 l. Graftons Cron.


This caused the said King Henry the eight in the twenty two year of his
Reign, to make a very severe Proclamation, that no person should make any
exchange contrary to the true meaning of the said Acts and Statutes: but as
Wars discompound all good orders, and necessity has no law: so (in the
latter end of this Kings Reign) by reason of the base money then coined, this
office of exchanges did discontinue; And in Edward the sixth his time, the
practice of exchange was for a time prohibited, but upon urgent necessity of
the conueniences thereof, again admitted unto Merchants.

In the beginning of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory,
the abuses of exchanges were called in question by Mr. Hussly, governor of the
Merchants Aduenturors: afterward the Lord Burghley, Lord Treasurer of England,
had a grant by Letters Patents of the said office for 23. years, who not being
informed how the same should be truly Governed, (after Proclamation made)
could not find convenient means to establish the same: this in progress of
time did touch the said Lord so much in his honor and reputation, that his
Son Sir Robert Cecill, Lord Treasurer of England after him, would never
incline to establish the said office, much less to reform the abuses thereof:
besides some other consideration might move him, because the business was
propounded by others. So that Misselden does speak untruly that the same was
rejected, P. 92.
for it has still continued and been in agitation, even as the fishing Trade:
(hitherto neglected) whereof more hereafter.

The importancy of the matter of exchange, Treaties of Exchanges with other
Princes.
does not only appear by the said general Acts of Parliament hitherto
unrepealed, and now most necessary then ever to be put in practice: but also by
diverse Treaties that the Kings of England have had by many conferrences with
other Princes and states. concerning the losses sustained thereby, now utterly
neglected. Let it be considered what incredible loss England sustaineth, when
we loose above two^shillings in the pound, when the Duchess of Sauoy* Regent
of the Low Countries, alleges that one half penny in the pound loss, would
ruin the State of those Countries: as by ancient records in the Exchequer
appears.

King Henry the eight being come to Callice, required the Arch-dutches of
Austria, then governor of the Low Countries, to permit his gold and silver to
pass current in her Dominions a little above the true value thereof, for the
better inabling of his Soldiers and Merchants.

The Duchess dispatched Thomas Gramay general of her mints, and John
Dewsbrooke her Assay-master, with instructions to the King of England;
aduertising him, Notable considerations.
that to suffer the English coin run at an ouervalue, was against all
Statutes and ordinances of the Mint: and that it would redound to the great
scandal, loss, and harm to the commonweal, and the harm and loss should
be so great, that it were imposible to esteem it: for the Merchant finds
that more might be gotten in England, then in her Do^inions for Bullion: by
this ouerualuation of the English coin, would carry away all five gold molten
and vnmolten, not only in ingotts, but also in pieces of gold, made in the
Archdukes Mint, to convert them into Angel Nobles, by which means the
Country and Subjects of the same should be totally consumed, spoiled and
destroyed, which would turn to a damage inestimable.

The like is affirmed to ensue by the tolleration of our English silver moneys
to be over valued, Gain is still the Center.
because all Merchants for their gain would carry into England not only the
materials of silver, but also pieces coined, whereby the intercourse of
Merchandise should cease, and the Merchants should become Merchants of silver,
without selling any other ware or Merchandise.

Furthermore she pleaded, that never any Prince would permit strange money to
pass higher then his own, but that of custom they use the contrary.

And which is most effectual, she urged that the ordinances of the Mints for
the benefit of the Prince and his Subjects, ought ever to be kept of good
policy for a Law, firm and stable, forasmuch the means of Princes and of
Noblemen, together with the rents, fees, and wages of all his Subjects are
taxed and valued, and all Merchandise ruled and governed thereby: wherefore
without great necessity or evident vtility, no alteration ought to be made in
the price of moneys.

Upon this remoustrance, the Arch-Dutchesse Commissioners and the Mint-masters
of the Tower made assayes of all English and Flemish coins, and after long
disputing and wrangling, the King could never obtain to have his coin pass
at an half penny above the true value.

What shall we say of these our days, wherein we suffer so great an
vnderualuation of our moneys in exchange, and inhaunoing of foreign coin:
whereby the Trade is decayed, the Realm impouerished, and every man (in a
manner) undone? Are all the precedent Laws and ordinances made in vain and
forgotten?

When Hercules had lo^t his oxen, Bateman in his Leaden gods.
and had long time sought them in vain, they were at last discovered by their
bellowing to be in Cacus Den: now Cacos in Greek signifies Evil, which
draws men backwards by the tail as Cacus did the oxen: whenc I do conclude,
that the said Laws and ordinances are hid in Misseldens Den; for in his
Circle he will take no notice of them, P. 9.
but keeps them back. But thanks be given unto God, and honor to the King,
who out of his Princely care and providence has Hercules strength to put the
said Laws in execution: to which purpose, and to advance Trade, his highness
has been graciously pleased; First, to grant a special Commitee to examine
the causes of the decay of Trade: next, an especial Commission directed to
diverse Noble Personages and Privy Counselors of State, associated with most
worthy persons of quality, to divise wholesome remedies for these diseases,
wherein they bestow vnfatigable industry and pains to receive all
informations, which may conduce them to find out the true remedies, and
discern them from all fallacies: to them (I doubt not) my labors will be
acceptable, done freely and sincerely for the common good. It may be that the
reformation hereof has also been reserved until these days, now the Right
Honorable Lyonell Baron Cranfield, Earl of Middlesex, is Lord High Treasurer
of England, (whose name Misselden has omitted in his Epistle Dedicatory) for
his Lordship having knowledge of moneys and exchanges, is better enabled to
advance this important matter, if it be possible that this time can entertain
good things; wherein I am the more confident, because the King himself in his
high wisdom was desirous to be informed hereof, by the Lord Vizcount
Mandeuill, Lord President of the Council, who calling (by his Majesty's
commandment) unto him, Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet, Sir Ralph
Maddyson, Knight, Mr. John Williams, his Majesty's Goldsmith, Mr. William
Sanderson, Merchant Aduenturer, and my self, in the Month of April 1622,
delivered to the Kings Majesty a Remonstrance made by us, A Report touching
Exchanges,
containning in substance: That having examined the nature of exchange of
moneys by Bills, how it went in the elder and euener times, and how it is now
carried to the prejudice of the Realm, and what will be the best means to
reduce it to the former equity and parity according to the Rule of exchange,
which is Par pro Pari: we did find that this equal and ancient Rule is broken
by the inhauncing of the price of moneys beyond the Seas, whereby ( in effect)
we exchange part of the intrinsicque value of our moneys for their outward
denomination or valuation, and that the redress of this unequal exchange
between us and foreign nations may be done by his Majesty's Proclamation,
without inhauncing of our moneys at home, or meddling with the finesse or allay
thereof, in such manner and form as therein is declared, and hereafter
expressed, according to our former declaration in Print, both in the Treatise
of the maintenance of free Trade, and Lex Mercatoria, wherein Gain the Center
has a Predominant power. And hereby it may appear that I have not forgotten
Cato his lesson, Ad consilium non accesseris, antequam v^ceris: neither am I so
audatious and unmannerly as Misselden would proclaim me to the world, he has
need of a leather case for his tongue, that in all his Circle supped up such
hot broth, P. 17.
Contra verbosos noli Contendere verbis, etc.

To examine now the Center (Gain) in every particular Trade of the Realm for
foreign parts, we will begin with the song of four parts, so termed by
Misselden; P. 52.
and answer most of his Satyrike speeches with merry conceits, which may prove
harmonious to the wise, but if any thing shall seem to be extreuagant, let it
be attributed to this Region of Capricorn, where Corneited beasts will be
skipping, the voices of his song is of strangers, of the staplers, of the
Interloopers, and of the Ports, and the poor Merchants Aduenturors are made
the burden of the song, P. 49.
on whom I do endeavor (as he says) to lay a Tacit and secret Aspersion, of
which he makes himself to be the informer. A Sycophant is taken for a
flatterer, of the Greek word Sycos, which signifies a Fig: for the Kings in
times past did so much esteem that fruit, as Princes do now their Dear, and
such Promouters as gave information of the taking of figgs, were so called,
which agrees with ours; howsoever I hope that his song will be a recantation
of his errors, (as all good Patriots ought to do) albe^t, he may perhaps (for
a time) recantare, that is, sing it over again. Humanum est errare, sed
perseuerare Diabolicum.

As I will not scatter any society or corporations, in that which proves
preiuditiall to the Commonwealth, so have I forborne to speak that which
nevertheless is very considerable, and has been observed by that worthy
Councellor and Secretary of State, Sir Francis Walsingham, touching
Corporations, where the absolute disposing of the Trade is left unto them,
without the Prince his guide and direction for Commodities, Moneys, and
Exchanges: all my writings are emblazoned with the praise and commendations of
Merchants, albeit Misselden goes about to make me distasteful in perverting or
misconstruing of them after his manner, especially that I would have the
indraping of our Woolls to be done in foreign parts, which he can never prove:
neither will I make any other answer in defense thereof then is made already;
For it is recorded, that he who will make a great fire continually, must rake
together much mean fuel: and he that will be always shaking the spleen of
others, must have (as this man has) much curiosity, more words, and most lies,
his face must be as hard as the shell of a Tortis; his tongue as sharp as the
quills of a Procerpine; his heart as unclean as the Stable of Augnis, before
Hercules brought in the river Alpheus to cleanse it. He says.

That the State has been abused by information, that the Dutch could not
subsist without our English Cloth. P. 51.


THere is not any such thing in my writings, neither did I ever stand so much
upon the necessary use of our Woolls: but I did insist upon two principal
points concerning the sale of Cloth, The advantage of the sale of our Cloth.
which was, that other Nations (buying heretofore our Clothes, when they were
sold deerer by the one half in price then they be now sold) did never
complain that the Clothes were sold too dear, but they did always complain
of the false making of Cloth: and again, that other Nations are as willing to
sell unto us their foreign Commodities, as we can be to sell our Clothes to
them: for those that make Clothes in their Countries, have no occasion to buy
foreign Wares, or the Commodities of other Countries, but seek to sell them
for ready money, or to be paid at some times of payment: whereby England has
a great advantage, and may enjoy the benefit of it in selling their Cloth with
reputation, which is ever accompained with request, and causes Commodities to
be sold at good rates; whereas vilifying the price of Wares, can never
establish a Trade, nor make Commodities more vendible, and this requires great
consideration.

That one man which Malynes out of Malice Pickes and Points at, is indeed an
ample Trader in colloured Cloth, but not in Kerseys: yet so as there are very
many others of the Company that are also Traders in colored Cloth as well as
he.

HAd not this man been one of his supporters, by whose mouth his pen speaks:
I would have imagined, that he had been in the City of Butus, and had
consulted with the Oracle of Laton^, where those that sleep before her image
can make a Prediction by the first word of them that next met them. Herodotus
in Euterpe.
I bare no malice to the man, nor to the Secretary of the said Company, in
whose commendation he so much speaks. P. 65.
For I am assured, that upon better consideration of the matters in question,
they will willingly embrace the true reformation of these great abuses.

Aspis a viper a venenum Mutuatur: Here Misselden* does mount his great
ordinance against the Merchants of the Staple and my self: for he stares as
wildly upon us, P. 62. Metamor. 3.
as Agane did upon her Son Pentheus, when she took him from a Bore: Ille
mihi seriendus Aper, etc. Accuses us both to be professed adversaries to the
Merchants Adventurers, for saying, that the Staplers have observed, that the
Merchants Adventurers have an inevitable oppertunity of combination, to set
what price they please upon Cloth to the Clothier, of Woole to the grower, and
of all Commodities exported and imported: and to make this to be but a
Suggestion, he cares not to accuse the said Company of an extraordinary
discord, whereby they do more bid and out bid one another at the market, then
any other Companies: surely his allegation that the Cloth Trade groans under
the burden and cannot recover, is then most untrue, P. 110.
for Merchants will not strive to run into an eminent danger of loss, but
(as is noted before) they will be sure to impose all upon the Clothier and the
Wool grower, to the disimprouing of the reuinew of Lands, and loss of the
Kingdoms stock: and on the other side, the Staplers would not be so desirous
to deal in Cloth if they saw no means to make a benefit thereby, and that
far greater then now is done, which would deserve the name of Free Trade,
especially when we should be enable to make our choice, to return the proceed
of our Native Commodities by all the three simples of Trade to our best
advantage, Commodities Moneys and Exchange.
whereby they should not be subject to my pen, neither to his defense that
presumes so much to have deserved at their hands by extolling their wisdom
and providence, which cannot be complete, unless the Commodities of the
Realm were advanced by them in price and sale for the general good of the
Kingdom, which he calls the Dowry and the Axis of the Commonwealth, P. 64.
whereon all the other Trades of the Realm do seem to turn and have their
revolution, so that the Center must be found in the middle of this Axis.
Again, the stranger would not be desirous to deal in Cloth if there were no
Center, nor the inhabitants of other Ports. Lastly, the Interlopers would be
quiet if there were no gain to be made, and the noyses of their songs would
not be heard all in one tune, but these latter will be prevented and cut off:
now that Misselden is employed beyond the Seas by the Merchants Aduenturors,
who having the Art of discovery to give information, will spy them out: I
cannot but lament their case. For when Sixtus Quintus was Pope, he made such an
extraordinary search in Rome for to discover inueterated offenses: that the
image of Saint Peter standing on the one side of the portal of his Cathedral
Church, did expostulate with Saint Paul standing on the other side, concerning
these strict proceedings, and was resolved to depart had not Paul diswaded him:
not withstanding that he had good cause, for having cut off Malchus his ear;
P. 74.
For the like fear may befall the said Interloopers by Misseldens examinations
of all their ancient and modern offenses. To conclude this point of the Cloth
Trade, which would be in danger to be wholly overthrown. I say: that even as
there was a man, that bringing his Mare to drink, thought that he saw the
Moon drunk up by his Mare, which indeed was only hid and obscured in a
cloud: the next day consulting with his neighbors of Gotham, after much laying
of their Cods heads together, it was concluded, that they should rip the Mare
and let out the Moon: and ever since these Goats of this Tropicke of
Capricorn, have thought all the world beholding to them for the recovery of
the Moon. Even so are the Merchants Aduenturors: nay, all the Kingdom
beholding unto Misselden for the preservation of the Cloth Trade.

By this time he is come to Monopolies, P. 66.
and here he does say: that there is not any worse Monopoly in the Kingdom,
then I would make of the exchange. And Monsieur Bodins allegation touching the
French Proverb, Il entend le par, is no good phrase in French: here he will
correct Magnificat, et nescit quid significat. The reformation of the abuse of
exchange is to be done by all men, and therefore cannot be termed a Monopoly.
And for the con^iderations requisite in Monopolies, I refer my self to the
Chapter of Associations in Lex Mercatoria.

Now for his finding fault with a Sillogisme made before he was borne, P. 91.
drawn from Negati^es: if I were but a Smatterer in any Science, and had
known the use of his Pill Panchreston, I would prove as good and skillful in
equivocation, as he is found to be in altering the state of a question, which
is nothing but an equivocation, as for example: Quite Animal dicit, verum
praedicat, and quite Asinum idem et te Animal dicit ergo. The Elenches of
Accidents secundum quid, are lurking: and yet withal the question is changed,
for the reason is drawn (as his manner is) from a particular to an universal,
which is preposterous and retrograde. So where the question is begged, the
stream of the disputation turns his channel. And this will serve for an
answer to his Paralogisme.

It follows, P. 69.
to make also some brief answer to his exception of the comparison I made of
things active and passive, because he will not understand the application of
it; for he replieth and confesses

That the cloth does not measure the yard, but the yard the cloth. But he
adds, the greater the measure is, the fewer yards the cloth contains; and
the less the measure, the more yards.

MAy it not be said, that the yard is active and the cloth passive, P. 40
wit^out Pacius explication, as the bough proceeding from Aristotle the ^oote?
Let him remember that our famous Recorder of London made this distinction very
perspicuous, when Dunscomb had stricken Cox; did not he give sentence that comb
should be taken from Duns who was active, and be given to Cox to make him a
Coxcomb, because he was passive. If he will not believe this, Staffords law may
make him feel it, when he meets with impatient men. It is enough for me to
prove, that exchange is active, and commodities and moneys are passive, wise
men do know it, and fools will not understand it, though you bray them like
Anaxarchus in an iron mortar. And so much might be said for the difference
between things done virtute officij and color officij. P. 70.
But this matter requires a more ample exposition and answer: for when he
meets with my recital of some short observations concerning the decay of
trade, which I gathered out of notes that past from the Merchants of the
Staple, and other Merchants at the last Session of Parliament, he seems by
his winsing to be somewhat galled, and that makes him turn and wriggle up and
down, that he cannot contain himself within his circle, but breaks out into
sundry contrarieties and contradictions, quarelling on the behalf of the
Merchants Adventurers, at the multitude of their aforesaid adversaries, whom he
cannot name without envy, nor let them pass his pen before he has cast his
As-pis and other his viperous venom upon them, as aforesaid. And in his
Oration to his Masters, the Merchants Adventurers, he magnifieth them, and
brayeth out: O ye Merchants Adventurers, that have worthily obtaine^ honor of
his Majesty, P. 63.
favor of the Nobility, fame in the world, love of strangers, good report of
all. This proceeds from some distemper, and is worse then the wild goose race
he taxes me withal: P. 68.
where (by the way) I observe that this Omnibus visus, that has such skill in
canting, P. 52.
quacksaluing, P. 91.
and what not, has here in this phrase of hunting mistaken his term, as he
often does his matter. For if he read Mr. Markham his book of Huntmanship, and
others Writers of that subject, he may find discourses of a wild goose chase,
but the wild goose race is his own. Wherefore I will leave him, and follow
the chase, as he pursues the forenamed supposed Adversaries, of which I would
have spoken in order as he has named them, but that according to the manner of
wild goose chase, he having got the leading, I must follow, and that within
distance. And first he leads me into a defense of that that I said, the
Merchants Adventurers had engrossed into their hands by color of their last
Letters pattents, the sole power of exporting cloth, etc. this he says is but
my liberty of speech, and so he endeavors to refute it by extenuating (as it
were) his Majesty's favor toward them in point of exportation. For says he,
page 53. in point of exportation of white and colored clothes, kersies, bays,
says, and other new draperies, there is no more power given them in the said
later, then his Majesty and his royal Predecessors have honored them with in
former Letters pattents, of which he recites the catalogue, and begins but in
the eighth year of Hen. 4. by which he says the aforesaid trade of cloth,
etc. was entrusted unto them. Let that be taken for granted, and it will
plainly appear that they have no privilege at all in this behalf, but only
power to assemble themselves to choose a Gouerner to rectify their own abuses,
and by way of justice to punish one another for their misdemeanors; and to
that purpose that foresaid grant was made unto them, Power of the Merchants
Aduentu^ers Letters patent.
wherein one William Oueray was assigned to be their Gouerner, as by the said
Letters pattents at large appears. And of this power and privilege, all
Merchants and Mariners of England, Ireland and Wales are to be equally
partakers without exception, limitation or difference of person, country or
commodity. And whatsoever freedom of trade into the parts therein expressed,
his Majesty's subjects are now barred of, is merely usurped. And if you ask
me, what means he then to mention such large grants of Henry the 4. and other
succeeding Kings, with new titles and privileges granted unto them, and that
with prohibition of all other, as he relates? I answer, this man either has
not seen or not understood the main of this matter, but has dealt in it either
ignorantly or concealedly: for the making plain whereof, let us observe, that
in that time of Hen. the 4. (which he mentions to be the beginning of the
Merchants Adventurers) there was then, The antiquity of the Merchants of the
Staple.
and long before that time settled (both in England and beyond the Seas) another
famous Society of English Merchants, called the Merchants of the Staple, as by
sundry ancient records hereafter specified appears; these were the Merchants
then entrusted with the trade of exporting the Staple commodities of the
kingdom, whereof Wool and cloth were the chief, which they exported in such
abundance, that they being trusted by the State to collect the Kings Customs
amongst themselves, they have paid out of the Staple into the Exchequer 68
thousand pounds starling per annum, as appears by record of 36 of Hen. 6. at
which time an ounce of silver was valued but at 30 d. which is now 5 s being
just double the said sum in value, or 136 thousand pounds. These were the
Merchants that (before cloth was made in England) exported the materials of
this Land, as Wool, Lead, Tin, etc. and returned for the same Gold or silver,
either coin or bullion; and to that purpose they made worthy laws and
ordinances amongst themselves, still extant, to which every Merchant of that
Society was sworn, and they did likewise give good bond to the Mayor of the
Staple (before their goods were suffered to pass) that they should not barter
away the Staple commodities of the kingdom, but should return a great
proportion (if not the whole value) in coin or bullion, whereby this kingdom
was at all times made rich and potent. And under these Merchants, trade was so
managed, that cloth making began in England; and they exported cloth before the
Merchants Adventurers or the Leidges their predecessors had a name or being.
And if you ask, how then came those Leidges and these Merchants Adventurers to
ship cloth, not being free of the Staple? I answer, that the purpose of the
State was then so bent to cherish the manufacture of cloth, that there was
liberty given to all sorts of Merchants and Mariners (subjects of this Realm)
for the exportation thereof. And though it was accounted a Staple commodity,
and exported by the Merchants of the Staple, yet other Merchants were likewise
permitted to export the same, though they did not at all times return coin
and bullion, according to the laws of the Staple; whereupon many Merchants and
Mariners of England, Ireland and Wales, not free of the Staple, did trade with
English cloth in foreign parts: and then finding themselves encombred with many
evils (which proceeded from want of government) some of them procured of King
Henry the 4. the aforesaid Letters pattents, granted (as before observed) to
all the Kings Leidges, trading beyond the Seas, into Holland, Zeland, Brabant,
and other Countries in amity with this Kingdom. This was the first original
and foundation of the now Merchants Adventurers, and from that their beginning,
there was not any other power, privilege or propriety of trade, or any other
title or addition given unto them, but a mere confirmation of that first grant
(as appears by Misselden his own book) until the xx. year of Hen. 7. when
(says he) they were honored with the title of Merchants, and had power given
them to keep their Courts at Callis. Herein he deals reseruedly; for though
he sets forth the truth, yet he sets not forth the whole truth; and that which
he concealeth, is the chief direction of that which he expresses. He sets
forth their authority to keep their Courts in their Town of Callis, but he
conceales two matters of consequence contained in their Letters pattents, viz
an Exception and a Command: An exception and a command of the Merchants
Adventurers grant.
the Exception, that if in their Courts they make any law or ordinance contrary
to the honor, dignity royal or prerogative of the King, or to the diminution
of the common weal of the Realm, it is of no force. The Command: We
straightly charge and command, that all and every Merchant or subject, any way
using or exercising the art or feat of a Merchant Aduenturer, be obedient unto
the Gouerner, and come into the said Fellowship of Merchants Adventurers, and
be free of them, paying the Haunce of ten marks sterling, according to a
certain Act of our high Court of Parliament made within the time of our
reign, etc.

And no marvel though he conceal it, for that the practice of the Merchants
Adventurers is so contrary unto it: for, to say nothing of their orders, but of
this disorder, they do not only refuse to admit his Majesty's subjects to be
free of their Company, according to the said Command contained in their
Letters patents, and according to that good and worthy law yet in force, as
aforesaid, but (as I am informed) they have utterly rejected and of late driven
out of trade (by procuring the imprisonment of their persons, and seizing their
goods, and other like vexations) such as have been brought up in the trade of
merchandise most part of their lives, and so many as have been observed to
trade for an hundred thousand pounds per annum and more; yea notwithstanding
that some great ones (whom I think not fit for me to name) have spoken, yea
and written in some of their behalfes.

Now to proceed according to his book. From this time the Merchants
Adventurers continued without any other addition or alteration until the sixth
year of Queen Elizabeth, P. 34.
at which time (says he) they were inscribed by the name of Merchants
Adventurers of England, and had authority to exercise their government within
this Kingdom; wherein is to be observed, that the power and privilege given
them by their former grants, was but for their government and use in foreign
parts, wherein such abuse was committed, yt they were at two several times
greatly complained of in Parliament, in the 36. of Hen. 6. for interrupting of
the Staplers, and in the 12. of Hen. 7. for disturbing of other English
Merchants, under pretense of a particular relation that they seemed to have to
S. Thomas Becket, for redress whereof there were at the same times two worthy
and memorable laws made, that are yet in force, wherein there is a large
expression of the complaints and remedies. And whereas he relates that in the
28. of Queen Eliz. these Merchants Adventurers had a new grant for enlargement
of their trade into Germany, with prohibition of all other her Majesty's
subjects not free of their said Fellowship, to trade into any of their
privileged places, which (he says) he has not by hearesay, but by his own
collection. I wish he had made a true collection, and expressed the especial
prouiso, that nothing therein contained should any way impeach or prejudice the
Mayor, Constables or Society of the Merchants of the Staple, but that they and
every particular brother of that Company should and might use their trade and
privileges, as formerly they had done, etc. And at that same time the
Merchants of the Staple had as free trade and large privileges in the Low
Countries and Germany as the Merchants Adventurers. And in his recital of the
Letters patents made unto the Merchants Adventurers by his Majesty, he
continues his former course, setting forth the tenor of the grant to the
utmost, but not a word of the limitation and exception. For it likewise pleased
his Highness into those Letters patents granted unto the Merchants Adventurers
in the xv. year of his reign, to insert a most gracious prouiso and large
exception for the Merchants of the Staple. The prouiso follows in haec verba,
viz. Provided always, that these our Letters patents, or any thing in them
contained, shall not in any wise be prejudicial or hurtful to the Mayor,
Constables and Fellowship of Merchants of the Staple of England, or to their
successors, or to any particular Fellow of the said Fellowship that now is or
hereafter shall be, but that they and every of them shall and may have and
enjoy all and every such grants, liberties and privileges as heretofore have
bin granted unto them by Us or any other our progenitors or predecessors as
they or any of them have lawfully used or had, in as large and ample manner and
form as they or any of them might or ought to have had or enjoyed before the
date of these presents, any clause, article or restraint in these patents
contained to the contrary notwithstanding. If they object that this prouiso was
in respect of the trade of wool, and not of cloth. I answer, that cannot be
so: for that his Majesty by his public Proclamation had forbidden all
exportation of Wool three years before; so that there was nothing to be
reserved to the Merchants of the Staple by this prouiso, but their trade of
cloth. And whereas he says, that the Merchants of the Staple never shipped any
clothes at any time as Staplers, but as Merchants Adventurers. I answer, that
the Merchants of the Staple in their notes aforesaid, exhibited to the high
Court of Parliament at the last Session, did set forth that they had used the
trade of shipping cloth before the Merchants Adventurers or the Leidgers their
predecessors had a name or being, as is before recited: and that they afterward
exercised the same trade into the same Countries together with the said
Merchants Adventurers, as they affirmed they could prove by Indentures of
composition made betwixt the said two Companies. They likewise signified, that
they have had their trade of exporting all Staple commodities, whereof cloth
was one, continued and confirmed unto them by sundry Acts of Parliament, viz.
in the 27. of Edw. 3. and likewise in the 36. of Hen. 6. together with many
other in the times of succeeding Princes, and also by diverse and sundry the
gracious Letters patents of Edw. 2. Edw. 3. Ric. 2. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. Hen. 6.
Edw. 4. Hen. 7. Hen. 8. Edw. 6. with a large and ample grant of new titles and
privileges in the third year of Queen Eliz of famous memory, which she
enlarged unto them in the 26 year of her reign; and that all these have been
effectually confirmed unto them by his Highness gracious Letters patents. And
for further proof of their use of the cloth trade, they exhibited a report of
three reverend Judges, viz. Sir Christopher Wray Lord chief Justice, The
report of three reverend Judges in the behal^e of the Merchants of the Staple.
Sir Gilbert Gerrard Master of the Rolls, and Sir Roger Manwood Lord chief
Baron, unto whom the examination of that business was referred by the right
Honorable the then Lord high Treasurer Burleigh, about the 25 year of Queen
Eliz. The report follows in haec verba, viz.

We have since our last certificate thereof made to your Lordship, according to
your Lordships latter direction, sundry times heard both the said parties and
their counsels, and think it best now to certify to your Lordship more at
large: the effect of all material things that has bin alleged and showed of
either party for the proof or disproofe of the matter now in question between
them, whereof some part now showed to us is more then was showed before.

And first for the effect of the proof for the Merchants Hen. 3. there was a
Wool Staple, and wool shipped, and officers belonging to it.

And also that there was a Mayor and Company Antwerpe an. 12. of Edw. 2. as
appears by a records out of the office of the Clarke of the Pipe in the
Exchequer.

Also they do show forth three several Statutes, Ric. 2. and another in the
11. of Hen. 4. ca. 8. and one other in the 9. of Hen. 5. ca. 9. whereby amongst
diverse other things woollen clothes are recited in the preambles to be
merchandises of the Staple.

Item, that the Merchants of the Staple have shipped woollen clothes, tempore
Hen. 6. as by the Custom book of Boston appears, wherein is entered that the
Merchants of the Staple shipped cloth versus Leiden in Holland, and also in the
ships of Camphire and Sirecsea in Zealand, which they allege is probable to go
into the Low Countries, for that at that time there was no trade into Spain
with clothes, and for France there is no trade of broad clothes thither, and
the ships be named in the Custom books Nauiculae, and therefore not meet to
brook the Spanish seas to carry clothes thither.

Item, that the Merchants of the Staple have proved above an hundred mere
Staplers not free of the Merchants Adventurers, to have been shippers of
woollen clothes, in the reigns of King Ric. 2. King Hen. 6. King Edw. 4. and
King Hen. 7. against which no proof has been made by the Adventurers to the
contrary, besides those which shipped in the reign of Hen. 8. and her
Majesty's reign.

Item, that King Hen. 6. an. 36. of his reign, by his Charter to the Merchants
of the Staple, did publish that the Charter of Hen. 4. granted to his Leidges,
and now alleged by the Merchants Adventurers for their part, were not meant to
trouble or disquiet the Merchants of the Staple in bodies or goods in the Low
Countries; and therefore concerning the Merchants of the Staple or their goods,
the said Charter of Hen. 4. should not extend.

Item, it is also proved, that the Merchants of the Staple have shipped woollen
clothes in the reigns of King Hen. 8. and some in this Queens time, as well as
in the reigns of Ric. 2. King Hen. 6. Edw. 4. and King Hen. 7. already
reported.

Item, That her Majesty an. 3. of her Highness Callis, by grant of Charter,
law, prescription or custom, notwithstanding none use, forfeiture, abuse, law
or statute, or any other thing to the contrary whatsoever.

14. May 1583. Thus subscribed, C. Wray. G. Gerrard. Roger Manwood.

This is a true copy of the original.

Ex. per A. Maynard.




Upon these, together with many other weighty reasons concerning the
conueniences and profit of this State, then tendered to their grave
considerations, the said house of Commons did pass a Bill for them, entitled.
An Act restoring the Free Trade of the Merchants of the Staple, for the
exportation of Cloth, and all other Manufactures made of Wool in the parts
beyond the Seas; as by the said Bill appears: so that whereas out of false
premises Misselden makes this conclusion, whereby it is manifest says he, that
the Cloth and other the Manufactures of this kingdom, have with the favor of
the State, been conferred upon the Merchants Adventurers: not only by their
last Letters Patents, but by many other former grants before recited. I answer,
That by this reply it is most apparent, that the Merchants Adventurers from
their first Grant, made in the eight of King Henry the 4, unto the last Grant
made unto them in the fifteenth year of his Majesty: they never had any
propriety or trust of Trade committed to them, but with exceptions and
limitations as is before expressed. And it is also most manifest that the
Merchants of the Staple might, and did from time to time Ship Cloth in their
own right into Holland, etc: as Staplers, and not as Merchants Adventurers:
wherefore the power which the Merchants Adventurers now assume unto themselves,
to restrain the Merchants of the Staple from Trading with Cloth, as formerly
they have done, and the practice which they use, to keep out other Merchants
being Subjects of his Majesty from being free of their Company, is merely by
color, and not by virtue of any of their Grants or Letters Patents
whatsoever: and hereby Misselden may understand what the difference is: P. 70.
between Authority and the Princes Letters Patents, and find cause not to
marvel, but to wonder at his exception.

And whereas he has put another gloss, P. 56.
saying: the Merchants of the Staple may Ship Cloth still, such of them as are
free of the Merchants Adventurers, whereof (says he) there are many. I answer,
That of all the Merchants Aduentuers that are now Traders in Cloth, there are
but only three of them free men of the Staple.

Thus far have I followed him in his chase after the Merchants of the Staple.
And now I find him persuing another of his supposed adversaries viz. the
Merchant Stranger, Concernin^ the Trade of Merchant Strangers.
and their loss or the lessening of their Trade he would salve with a
distinction of Cloth dressed and undressed, affirming that the Merchant
Stranger could never ship Cloth undressed, by reason of certain Statutes made
against it: and for Cloth dressed, and other Manufactures he says, they may
ship them still paying Strangers Custom, and perhaps better cheap also. This
point I think, and especially the ( perhaps) is worth the examining. It is
true that there are Statutes against shipping Cloth undressed above a certain
value, but there have been ever or for the most part means to dispense with
the said Satutes, as the Lord of Cumberland his License, and others of that
kind, for which business there has been usually heretofore an Officer in the
Custom House ready to admit composition with Strangers as well as with others,
and so the Strangers paying Strangers Custom, might ship Cloth undressed
as well as the Merchants Adventurers: but now the Merchants Adventurers have
engrossed the foresaid dispensations into their own hands, so that the
Strangers are now prevented of shipping Cloth undressed, as formerly they have
done: by reason whereof, one other means whereby great quantities of Cloth
have been heretofore vented, and the prices thereof advanced, is by the
Merchants Adventurers wholly intercepted.

But now come to the ( Perhaps) the Merchants Strangers may now ship dressed
Clothes, Karsies, and all other new Draperies, paying Strangers Custom: and (
Perhaps) better cheap says he; How may this better cheap be? I answer,
perhaps he may compound with some Merchant Aduenturer for the use of his name,
viz. to enter the Strangers goods in the Merchant his name, paying a certain
rate upon every parcel of goods, as upon every Karsey, Bay, Say, Parpetuana,
and likewise upon every dozen of Stockings, which composition being paid, the
Stranger shall ship his goods for English Custom. And for proof that this is
so, I refer my self to the Blanck Bills lately showed forth in Parliament by
certain Merchants of London, with the Seal of the Merchants Adventurers
fixed, and their Deputy his name also subscribed: into which Bills being left
blanck for the purpose, the goods of any other English Merchant not free of
their Company might be entered without enquiry whether he were Probatae fidei,
or an Interlooper, a Nouice, or a new Merchant, that for want of experience
might betray the Trade into the hands of Strangers; and if any Strangers goods
of any value whatsoever might have been entered in the said blanck Bills, and
so shipped forth upon English Custom, I leave to Misseldens examination, being
not desirous to inform.

The third sort of those that he would chase out of trade, he calls
Interlopers. Of the Interlopers.
This word of interloping is a Brat of their own breed: for such of their
Company as will not observe the shippings and Mart Towns appointed by their
orders, but convey over goods in other ships and to other places, are usually
punished for interloping, and hence comes this term of Interloper: but having
worn it thridbare amongst themselves, they now put it as a note of ignominy
upon all other English Merchants not free of their Company, if they have any
trade into their territories, whether they be Merchants of the Staple, or any
other English Merchants residing in London or any other the ports of this
Realm, whereof there have been heretofore so many as have usually shipped
forth most part of the colored clothes, kersies, and all other new Draperies
of the kingdom. For until the 15 year of his Majesty, that the Merchants
Adventurers obtained their new Letters patents, other English Merchants
constantly and continually traded therein as well as the Merchants Adventurers,
as may appear by the manifold entries daily made in all the Custom-books of
this Kingdom; for which purpose the Merchants Adventurers in their former
Grants (as is before observed) procured this clause to be inserted, viz. That
other English Merchants that should trade into their territories, might be
compelled to observe the Merchants Adventurers orders; whereby it appears
plainly, that though the Merchants Adventurers have procured a free license of
exporting certain thousands of white clothes to themselves ( non obstante) the
Statutes, yet the State never intended that they should also ingrosse the whole
trade of all colored clothes, kersies, bays, and other new Draperies into
their hands, to the utter ruin and wearing out of all other Merchants that
traded therein as now the Merchants Adventurers would have it. For they now
challenge an absolute power and propriety of trade into those parts, with all
the foresaid English manufactures, and seek to exclude all other English
Merchants from that trade, under this term of Interlopers: and have of late
(as aforesaid) brought so many vexations upon them, that most of them are now
constrained either to steal trade by secret means, to the prejudice of
themselves and the trade of the kingdom, or else they must learn to trade by
Misseldens perhaps.

The last sort of those that trouble him, are the Ports, Of the Merchants of
the Ports.
that is to say, all the Merchants of the outports of the Realm, who because
they made a loud cry of late in the Parliament hou^e, he affirms to bear a
part also in this song, whereof (says he) the Merchants Adventurers are made
the Burden; here he has found a fit Epithete for his Masters. If he had been
willing to set down all the Singers, he might have found a very large Quier;
for at that time not only those that he picked out, as the Merchants strangers,
the Merchants of the Staple, the Interlopers, and the Ports, but the Clothiers
of all sorts from all parts of this Realm, and Wooll-growers Of the Clothiers
and wooll-growers.
of all Counties of England and Wales being there assembled did sing the same
song, that they were all weary of this Burden, the Merchants Adventurers, as at
large appears by their several petitions, reasons, repetitions, and
continual suites for relief and remedy in that behalf; whereupon the Act for
restoring the free trade of the Staple was drawn for their relief, and passed
the house of Commons, as is before related.

Thus have I followed him to the end of this chase; and now I refer it to the
judgment of the Reader; whether the Merchants Adventurers have not engrossed
(and that by color of their last Letters pattents) the trade of the Merchants
strangers, the Merchants of the Staple, the Mercha^ts of the Ports, and of many
other English Merchants, concerning the exportation of cloth and all other
manufactures made of Wool into Holland, Zeland, Brabant, and other parts of
the Low Countries and Germany; and last of all I refer the remedy (as I am most
bound in duty) to the matchless wisdom of his most excellent Majesty.

And now he leads me to the place where he seems to be angry for my
saying, P. 59.
if they had engaged their trade for a sum of money, which I supposed was for
the use of their Company; he confesses the action, but trauerseth the
occasion, saying, it was borrowed for the service of the State, by which one
word he has barred my reply; but only this I observe, that his Masters whom
he says are probatae fidei, and trusted with that ( axis) of the Commonwealth,
he freely confesses they have laid this axis to pawn, and presses hard for
help to redeem the same. And I cannot but wonder when I compare that small
sum with the great loss, which others say they have borne by their
appropriating trade these six years to themselves, and with the great sums
they have raised by impositions upon cloth and upon other native commodities of
that kind, I cannot but wonder I say, that they have not long fithens fetched
their axis home. Thus ends Misseldens song, with my Contrator, concerning the
cloth trade, wherein we find a center for the publik good in general.

Come we now to the examination of the trade from England to the East Indies,
The trade for the East Indies.
by the said Center of Commerce, namely Gain, where Misselden (according to
his ordinary custom) thus chanteth against me; and we shall find that the said
Trade is unprofitable for England.

This Company also, that deserves so much pity, cannot escape Malynes envy:
for here he endeuoreth closely and cunningly to insinuate, that the cause of
the want of money, is the ready money sent to the East Indies in Reals of plate.

Again, P. 37.
Malynes takes notice of M. Mun's discourse of the East India trade; whereby
he is forced to confess, that the emploiment of the East India Company is
very profitable and necessary, that the gain of the Trade is very good; that
thereby the increase of the stock of the kingdom is very great; that the same
is a means to bring in much treasure, etc.

COncerning the first part, That I do insinuate, that the cause of the want of
money is the ready money sent to the East Indies; I am so far from that, that
although there were one hundred thousand pounds sent yearly where there is
only appointed thirty thousand, I would find no fault with it, if Trade were
so carried, that moneys were imported; and that the return of the East India
commodities retransported, did procure moneys from other places; and more
especially if there were a center or gain answerable to the adventure; which
caused me to say, If the discourse of the trade from England into the East
Indies be truly collected, no doubt the said Trade may be found very profitable
hereafter, albeit it has bin very difficult in the beginning.

But forasmuch as Misseldens words and constructions have moved me to examine
the said discourse farther, and for that my opinion has always been, That our
excessive charges would consume all; I have thought convenient to examine the
said Discourse, as it is laid down. According to which, to frame our Arguments
abeffectis, let us lay our foundation upon Mr. Mun's Abstract of the accounts,
collected out of the diverse volumes of the East India books, of all the moneys
and commodities sent thither from the beginning of the said Trade until July
1620, being the space of 20 years or thereabouts, as appears page 39. which
was done to satisfy the Parliament concerning the imputation of the moneys
exported by them.

All the ready money sent out of the Realm, and from all other places
whatsoever beyond the Seas, he says to be 548090 l starlin; and all the
commodities both English and foreign wares which have been sent thither during
that time, amounts in all but 292286. So the stock of moneys and commodities
sent in all is 840376 l.

Brought home in diverse sorts of wares within that time 356288 l. The loss
sustained by the Hollanders, and charges estimed at 84088 l. So there remains
for both the joint stocks in the East Indies 400 thousand pounds, which does
balance this account, whereof diverse returns are made.

The nature of the commodities is to be considered by way of Commutation called
Negotiatiua, The nature of commodities to be consideted.
whether they be Natural or Artificial, or Both, wherein the Manufacture is
much to be regarded; for the Rule of Polliticions requires, that the
commodities exported should be sold proportionably to the commodities imported,
with a consideration of customs, charges, adventure, shipping, and regard of
time, persons and place, with the circumstances, etc.

The commodities imported being 356288 l. as above said, were sold (although
the most part was transported for other places) for 1914 thousand and six
hundredth pounds: according to which proportion, the commodities exported should
produce 1558 thousand 858 l: that is to say, five and one third part for one:
whereas our commodities have produced by this account but 22 pro cento in liew
thereof, which is not one forth part of one, for they did cost 292286 l. as
aforesaid, and there is in return but employed 356288 l, which is but 64002 l.
more: so that the principal is but come home, and the said 64 thousand pounds,
which is but 22 pro 100 in three years time, with great adventure, to the
Kingdoms loss in stock, shipping, Mariners, and all things besides, to be
gotten and saved otherwise.

This disproportion is far greater, if we consider that the said goods were
carried thither by our shipping, and we pay them greater Customs for their
Commodities, then they pay without adventure of the Seas, and the circumstances
aforesaid.

The first Assertion then is. That by our native Commodities to be sent into
the East Indies, 1. Assertion.
there is no benefit to be made, but rather an evident loss: and the foreign
Commodities sent thither, namely Oliphants Teeth, Quicksilver, Vermillion, and
other things have yielded more gain then our Clothes, Lead, Tin, etc: which
upon due consideration is no gain, but a mere loss.

COnsider we of the commodities returned and sold for 1914 Thousand 600 pounds,
producing five and one third part for one toward custom charges, and all other
thiings as aforesaid: and we shall be ravished with admiration upon examination
of the prices in particular, by the said Author declared. This calculation is
to be made between the commodities bought in the East Indies, withal charges,
and the sale of them in England without charges. P. 11 and 44.


Pepper at 2 d the pound, sold for 20 d, is 8 for 1.

Cloves at 9 d, sold for 5 s, is 6 and two thirds for 1.

Nutmegs at 4 d. the l, sold at 3 s, is full 9 for 1.

Mace at 8 d. the pound, sold for 6 s, is full 9 for 1. Indico at 14 d. the l,
sold for 5 s, is but 4. for 1.

Raw-Silkes at 8 s. the l, sold for 20 s, is but 2 for 1.

Wherein the quantity of each kind of commodities is much to be respected, to
make a true calculation.

Hereupon any man of mean judgment may easily perceive, that the inferrence
to make the East India Trade more profitable, by the employments to be
increased of Indico and Silks by the Persian P. 7. and 14.
Gulf, is altogether mist^ken. For if Spices which yield 7. 8. and 9. for one,
have procured but small gains: how shall Silks and Indico augment and
increase the same, when they produce but 2. for one and 4? which is very deed
breeds a loss upon the aforesaid employment, and decreaseth the same.

The second Assertion therefore is, 2. Assertion.
that this imaginary blessing arising by the intended employment to be made in
Silks and Indico, is mistaken, and hurtful to the Realm: especially if the
Manufactures of Silk be increased in derogation of the Manufacture of our
native materials.

But some affectioned East India Merchant will say, that the general account
aforesaid to make five and one third part for one, is a great matter of benefit
toward custom, charges, and all other things incident to trade. For the
Author does say, that 10 s. P. 13.
employed in Pepper in the East Indies, will require but 35 s. for all charges
whatsoever delivered in London, which is 3 ^2. for one.

This Merchant cannot enforce his argument for want of a true judgment; for he
might have made a better conclusion, to say Pepper does cost but 2 d the pound,
and is sold for 20 d. which is 8 for one, as aforesaid. And if with all charges
in London it comes but to 3, then the benefit of 4 for one is an admirable
gain to enrich himself and the common wealth.

This judgment upon a particular, seems to prove a far greater gain then
the abouesaid general gain of 5 for one. But to find out the truth, there
must be a nearer calculation made, by a true distinction of the managing of the
Stock remaining at home, which was never adventured, and the aforesaid stock of
moneys and commodities sent into the Indies, and what both these did amount
unto. Next, if the goods taken from the Indians and Portugals be comprehended
in the said return, whereof the said sum of 1914 thousand 600 l was made, then
the case is altered, and will not produce the one half. Lastly, the building
and repairing of Ships, Wharfes, houses, magazins, and the like emploiment of
the stock at home, together with the allowances of Officers, Mariners, and
servants wages, will come to an incredible sum.

But let us come to the general consideration of this Trade, respecting the
weal public, by comparing the same to the former trade maintained by the
Portugals along the Cape of Good Hope; which is more proper then to compare the
same to the trade between us and Turkey and the said East Indies: for the
trade of Portugal made the Merchants trading Turkey, to sell the Spices
brought from Aleppo to loss, because the Camels back could not pass the
needles eye, without great charges and difficulty: nevertheless that trade was
very profitable to the kingdom, The Trade for Turkey.
selling our kersies, broad-clothes, tin, and many other our native
commodities with 60 pro cento gain; and there is far more to be gotten by raw
silks bought at Aleppo at 12 s the pound, then to be brought from the East
Indies at 8 s the pound, which is the difference which the said Anthor makes,
ascribing such happiness to the trade of silk, whom Misselden does imitate.

I may affirm by experience, that before the open wars with Spain, the
trade of Portugal and the Islands was very profitable to the Realm: The Trade
for Portugal and the Islands.
for we made an ordinary gain of 25 upon the hundred, by Bays, Says, Reding
and Kentish clothes, Northern and Western kersies, stockings, and diverse
other commodities: and the debts being turned over to the Contraction house,
return was made in Spices and Sugar in less then six months time, with little
adventure, fraught and charges, whereby the manufactures of the kingdom were
advanced, and moneys from time to time imported; and the life of Trade was felt
by Merchants; Tradesmen and the Mint did flourish: so that for matter of
commodities, there is no comparison in the sale of them into Portugal with 25
pro cento in less then 6 months, and 22 pro cento for the East Indies in 3
years, besides the adventure of the Seas and enemies. And it will be proved,
that the native commodities of the Realm vented in Portugal and Spain before
the East India trade began, did amount to 300 thousand pounds worth more then
since every year, which is more then all the domestique and foreign
commodities come unto, sent into the East Indies by the Company those 20
years, to say nothing of the mortality of men and destruction of ships. And
from Spain we had the West India commodities, The Trade for Spain.
as Cutchenelle, Ginger, hides and other commodities, with the wines, raisins,
oils and all other commodities of their growth for return of ours, especially
abundance of Royals of plate, now much hindered by the emploiment of Tobacco.

Let us now examine the price of Spices in those days within the Realm, and
we shall find that Pepper was sold for 2 s the pound, Cloves 6 s, Mace 7 s,
Nutmegs 3 s, and Indico 6 s; which small differenc in price, for so much as is
yearly spent in England, P. 44.
may be declared by the proportion set down by the said Author, which being
calculated at 4 d. upon a pound of Pepper, and 12 d upon Cloves, Mace and
Indico, and 6 d upon Nutmegs, amounts but to 21166 l. 13 s 4 d.

This true account will be proved by ancient Merchants books, and the weekly
price current of the Brokers bills, before the open wars with Spain. But the
said Author does set down the prices as they were in the time of wars, when
Merchants charges, P. 45.
adventure and all things were increased; and herein he makes his comparison
with Turkey, and according to that computation he affirms, that the trade in
Spice and Indico only, saves the kingdom yearly 74966 l. 13 s. 4 d: and
that less then one quarter of this sum shall buy in the Indies the
proportion of the yearly consumption thereof, being 400 thousand of Pepper, 40
thousand of Cloves, 20 thousand of Mace, 160 thousand of Nutmegs, and 150
thousand of Indico; which calculated by the prices of them, as they were sold
coming from Portugal, will amount to 128 thousand pounds, and not 183500 l, as
he reckons them coming from Turkey: so that the difference between Portugal
and Turkey in this account is 55500 l, being in truth but 21666 l. 13. 4. to be
reckoned upon the said allegation.

The third Assertion is, 3. Assertion.
that the kingdom saves not yearly the sum of 74966 l. 13. 4. by Spices
and Indico, as the said Author alleges.

FRom the particular account of Spices and Indico concerning England, come we
to the general account laid down by him for all Christendom, P. 12.
whereunto he has added the raw silk valued at 400 thousand pounds; and
thereupon he affirms, that in comparison of the said Turkey trade, there is
saved yearly 953543 l. 4 s. 4 d. starlin in ready moneys, that heretofore has
been transported out of Christendom into Turkey.

Deduct the said 400 thousand pounds for silk from the general emploiment of
511458 l. 5. 8. that the total sum amounts unto, and there remains but
111458 l. 5. 8. for Spices and Indico. Calculate now what the said proportion
for England did cost in the Indies according to the said prices, and you shall
find it to be 16749 l. 15. 0. which is almost the sixth part of all the Spices
and Indico spent in Christendom: and this being sold in England, produces
108333 l. 6. 8. Now deduct of the abouesaid 953543 l, the gains of the silk
being 200 thousand pounds, there remains 753543 l, whereof the sixth part
saved for England, comes near to 108 thousand pounds, which is as much as all
the Spices and Indico sold in one year in England comes to, as aforesaid.
Whereby it appears, that England saving yearly that sum, there is (as it
were) nothing spent in Spices and Indico, which he may very well call to be
incredible. So that

Our fourth Assertion is, 4. Assertion.
That there will be found an apparent great loss by all this negotiation, and
detriment to the kingdoms stock both for moneys and commodities; and that
there is not 953543 l. saved in moneys yearly in Christendom, especially the
Portugal East India trade considered.

NOw if upon the matter we do consider the Customs and Impost, the Factors,
Officers and Mariners wages, without interest of moneys and assurances, all
will prove but transmutations without increase, but with the great decrease of
the Kingdoms stock.

But to prove that the said accounts are made at random, P. 27.
rouing at the matter, let us consider of the proportion made by him of 100
thousand pounds in ready money to be employed yearly, whereof there are 52499
l in raw silks and Callicoes, and but 47501 l in Spices and Indico, which
should produce 500 thousand pounds or thereabouts: he does allot 120 thousand
pounds to England, and 380 thousand pounds for transportation; and of this 120
thousand pounds there is 108333^. 6. 8. in Spices and Indico named in the
sequel of his discourse, which is now become one third part of all the Spices
and Indico to be brought in by the emploiment of the said 100 thousand pounds,
amounting to 337083 l. 6. 8. Now if we take the like proportion of raw silks
and Callicoes of 162916. 13. 4. to make up the said 500 thousand pounds, which
is one third, it will amount to 54305 l. 6. 8. which with the 108333 l, makes
162638 l. 13. 4. which is 42638 l. 13. 4. more then he has allotted to
England to be spent in a year; which is a manifest contradiction.

The consideration hereof caused some Merchants of that Company to be as
crafty as Aesops Fox, who being desirous to drink, found a Well with two
buckets, and entering into one of the buckets, descended suddenly into the
water; but having satiated his thirst, could not get out, until one of the
Goats of this Tropic of Capricorn came to the said Well, Primum mihi,
secundum tibi.
whom he persuaded (by the goodness of the water, and by making her believe that
the Moon shining in the water was a Holland cheese to be divided between
them) to enter into the other bucket, which done, down came the Goat by
reason of her weight, and up came the Fox, leaving the Goat in the Well: even
so have some Merchants done, by extolling the great gain of this trade, until
they had drawn themselves out, by selling their adventures, leaving the buyer
to the hazard of the loss, which was (no doubt) to them well known. For to
make the best construction hereof, we may conclude, that 400 thousand pounds
lost by his account in the said Indies, are since come home, and employed by
the several Factors in the said Indies, and most of it in Silks and Indico,
and yet there is wanting 148 thousand pounds of the stock of 840 thousand
adventured, accounting the former returns made, to proceed of the commodities
and gain, as aforesaid, which is almost one sixth part of the stock adventured
to the Indies, whereof this account gives no satisfaction at all, unless the
31079 l lost in six ships cast away, were parcel thereof.

The conclusion which the said Author makes, is, That the East India trade
alone (although it be driven in no ampler manner then is before written) is a
means to bring in more treasure into this Realm then all the other Trades of
this Kingdom (as they are now managed) being put together. For if the rule be
true, That when the values of our commodities exported does ouerballance the
worth of all those foreign wares which are imported and consumed in this
kingdom, then the remainder of our stock which is sent forth, must of
necessity return to us in treasure, we must imagine it will do so with us in
time.

Here you may see from whence Misselden drew his Balance of Trade, which he
never dutst undertake to maintain before the aforesaid his Majesty's
Commissioners, who have often called him by Warrants and otherwise; for he was
not able to maintain an other man's Project. We have already showed the
incertaintie of the said Balance, and in the Remedies we shall entreat
thereof further; nevertheless I cannot omit Obiter, to say that this Rule may
serve for a Demonstration: but it can never be found true until it concur
with the Center (Gain:) for so long as treasure cannot be imported without
loss, we shall still receive wares in return, and augment the cause of
ouer-ballancing. And which is more, suppose there were an ouer-ballancing of
Trade (...) our side, whereby moneys should be forced upon us, yet should we
find it would be to the incredible loss of the Commonwealth, by the inhauncing
of the foreign coin beyond the Seas; and the vndervaluation of our moneys in
exchange, which may be demonstrated by a trifle, as well as by hundreds and
thousands.

One buyeth a pair of Gloves for 5 s starlin, An example of loss by an over
balance on our side.
and sells them beyond the Seas for 5 s. 6 d. where he receives a Rickx
Doller for 5 s. or 50 Stiuers: and moreover, 5 single Stiuers taken to be worth
6 d. and so gets 10 pro cento. Suppose now that the ouerballance is on our
side, and this alleged necessity showed her operation, and that he that sold
the said Gloves brings over this Rickx Doller and the 5 single Stiuers; and
going to exchange them, no man will give him above 4 s. 6 d. for his Doller, and
4 d for his 5 Stiuers, which is the true intrinsique value. Where is now his
gain of 10 pro cento, when he loses 2 d of his 5 s, besides his labor,
charges and customs? But how shall this revolution of ouerballancing ever come
to pass, when we use no means thereunto, as other nations do, as shall be
declared in the next Chapter?

To conclude then with the East India Trade, wherein we find no Center; let us
have a care that the moneys proceeding of Spices and Silks, may be partly
imported into the Realm to increase treasure. Trade for Russia.


The Trade for Russia was in times past very profitable for the venting of our
colored clothes, and returning from thence very useful commodities, as
Tallow, Wax, Hides, Furs and other wares, which for the most part being
carried out again for France and other places, made provision for wines,
canvas, etc. For heretofore the commodities of the Realm and other were vented
in France in great quantities, Trade for France.
and by delivering one third part in ready money, and two thirds in cloth,
kersies, stockin, and other native commodities; our Merchants made their
emploiment in wines, which is now done with ready money; wherein the exchange
is to be considered in a contrary course upon their French crown; but I will
omit to handle the same, to avoid intricatenesse, having declared the same in
Lex Mercatoria.

The Trade for Eastland and those parts, Trade for Eastland.
wants a center; for Merchants can hardly make return in any commodities for
their cloth: and upon moneys inhaunced, without the reformation of exchange,
they are great losers.

The Barbary Trade brings us some Gold; Trade for Barbary.
but our Cloth is there sold with so small profit, that it cannot quite charges
and adventure: nay it is come to that pass, that other nations can maintain
these trades for Russia, Eastland and Barbary, with our native commodities,
better then we do.

Misselden (passing over all these serious considerations, replieth, that
Malynes having run himself out of breath, and ouerrunne Monopolium with
telling tales) shows to be one of this Climate of Capricorn: for men of his
humor are called by the Italian (...) I shall therefore conclude this
enco^nter, and remember, Aristotle Oemund* Cap. 1.
that they that came to Athens, the first year were wise men, the second year
Philosophers, that is, lovers of wisdom; the third year Rhetorieians, that
is, mere babblers: the meaning is, first they deemed themselves to be wise,
casting up moutaines to heaven, like the sons of Aeolus; after feeling
themselves puffed with a Tympanie of Pride, Metamor. 11.
they desired that to be in themselves which they admired in others; lastly,
seeing the more they strayed, the less they could go back, they found a
harvest of wild corn was left them, and that was between Athens and Thebes,
P. 68.
where I left Misselden with his hounds (about one year since) which have lo^t
their sent, not knowing whether the Dear is gone, East, West, North or South;
for a wild goose chase is fitting for him that has lost his Game: and for his
verses, I refer him to Tailor the Water-man to rhyme with him, who can furnish
him with a pair of Oars, to transport him (with his Hebrew and Greek which
he has learned at the greater South door near Christ Church in London,
together with his Parrets and Bulls) into the Island of Antisera or Psittacorum
Regio, to have his brains purged with Helibon, and to read there Historia
Ventorum.

CHAP. V.
The means to balance the Trade of England by the said center; or the
remedies against the causes of the decay thereof.

FRom the Tropicke of Capricorn we are come to the Antarticke Circle in the
South, to make a perfect Orb, to keep Misselden and his Balance enclosed
within his own Circle. For in this Region, the transparent and splendent
beams of the Sun of truth, do dispell all foggie mysteries of deceitful
fallacies, insomuch that men of mean capacity and understanding may very well
demand a reason, wherefore we do not prevent (by contraries) the known Spring
of this disease, whereby the body of the Commonwealth is so much distempered.

For Res ipsaloquitur, that Gain the Center of commerce is excluded by error
of Trade, because no money or bullion can be imported but to loss, neither can
any money be kept within the Realm by reason of the great gain had upon
moneys by exportation: so that (Returns being made continually of our native
Commodities by foreign Commodities) nothing can be expected but an increase of
the ouerballancing of our Trade in nature before alleged.

But some Supporter of the conceited Balance of Trade will say, that Time by
the increase of Trade will turn the Tide, and bring all things in tune again,
by a necessity of nature beyond all resistance, when the sale of our native
commodities in foreign parts shall surmount the value of the commodities
imported unto us. Is not this in substance the hunting of our own shadow?
suffering other nations to use all means for their benefit, and we shall
amend all things when we come to Rome, and we never dispose our selves to
undertake the voyage to go thither: neither are the causes with us alike with
foreign nations, whereby we might expect the like effects. For, Effects
cannot be without causes.


We do not inhaunce our moneys as they do all foreign coin and their own;
neither do we ouervalue our moneys by exchange unto them, as the Low Countries
and East-land do unto us, breeding exportation, and hindrance of importation of
moneys, as has been amply declared.

We do not sell our native Commodities according to moneys inhaunced, as they
do theirs, but at an under value, according as our moneys are calculated in
exchange, to our loss and their benefit.

We do not deliver money at interest beyond the Seas, as the Merchant stranger
does here at 10 pro cento, which is there at 5 and 6 upon the hundred to be
had; neither do they pay 15 and 20 upon the hundred by exchange, as we do.

We do not procure by Gain or Pollic^e the importation of Bullion or Royals of
8 as they do, by inhauncing all moneys, and diuerting the said Royalls and
dollers from us, to be brought in as in times past.

We do not procure plenty of money to make a lively Trade, as they do by the
two Real means of impo^tation, and tolleration of exportation: as also by the
two Politic means of Transfering (...) of debts between man and man, and the
payment by assignations.

We do not prevent that the Trade of Bays, Says, and new Draperies should
not be carried from us by diuerting the Royal or 8 from us, nor that other
nations should drive a Trade with our Cloth and other commodities for Barbary,
Russia, Eastland, and other Countries; for being deprived of our own moneys,
and of the said Royalls, we do loose the Trade also.

We cannot make return for our native commodities by the three ordinary
means, A matter of great consequence.
either by money, or by exchange, or by commodities at our choice and best
advantage as they do: but are compelled (of course) to buy foreign
commodities at dear rates, by a disordered Trade; how is it possible then,
that we should expect any such imaginary ouer-ballancing of Trade to happen on
our side, when we have not the like causes to produce the like effects?

Others are of opinion, that some moderation might be procured herein, by
making the Spanish Royalls of 8 current within the Realm at 4 s. 7 d, or 8 d:
that is to say, above the value. But they do not consider effectually of the
inconveniences which will ensue, as follweth.

First, It will be the utter overthrow of his Majesty's Mint, and undoing of
the poor Moneyers, as well for the coins of gold as of silver; for gold will
not be brought so frequently when silver is advanced by altering the
proportion, and reducing the same to 12 to one, or thereabouts.

Secondly, The foreign coin will be advanced by these means 7 upon the
hundredth above our Starlin moneys, and thereby increase the exportation of the
said Royalls.

Thirdly, The King will loose his coynage money, being above 2 d. upon an
ounce: and the melting down of his moneys and effacing of his stamp, is a
great derogation of his Prerogation Royal, it being a mark of Sovereignty.

Fourthly, The inhauncing of the said Royalls will alter the price of Plare, as
also of other commodities within the Realm: which is a matter much respected
hitherto.

Fifthly, When moneys are inhaunced beyond the Seas, the price of exchange does
also inhaunce in some measure: but when moneys are inhaunced here, the exchange
abateth, which causes the exportation of our money to increase. As for
example, The propery of true exchange.
If to make silver equivalent to gold of 12 to one, the ounce should be valued
at 5 s. 6 d, whereby it would be inhaunced ten Pro cento, should be though
convenient, it would make the price of exchange to fall 10 Pro cento, or more:
which for the Low Countries would fall to 30 s. and under, and so it will be
still transported: and the making of foreign coin current within the Realm
above the value of ours, is not used upon any good order, as we have noted by
the Arch-Dutchesse of Austria.

To come therefore to the true remedy, we are to consider the true causes of
their operations, to which end we have declared in the Equin octiall, the loss
which the Realm sustaineth by a low exchange or the vndervaluation of our
moneys: as also the benefits which will arise by the high exchange, as merely
opposite unto it; so that we may conclude certainly, Causes to prevent the
ouerballancing.
e conuerso, I that when the exchange shall be rectified, and our moneys be
truly valued in exchange, 2 according to the inhauncing of moneys beyond the
Seas, 3 then will the transportation of moneys cease, 4 and the more native
commodities will be exported, and consequently the loss of that inhauncing
being prevented, 5 will cause Bullion and moneys to be imported, 6 and the
less foreign commodities to be brought in: 7, the Royal of Spain will not
be diuerted, nor the Trade depending thereupon, 8, which will procure plenty of
money, 9, to advance the price of our commodities, 10, and abating the price of
the foreign commodities, thereby effectually preventing the aforesaid
ouerballancing.

This is to be done only by his Majesty's Proclamation, The way to restore
Englands Wealth.
according to the aforesaid Statutes and Proclamation of exchanges, prohibiting
that after 3 months next and ensuing the same, no man shall make any exchanges
by Bills or otherwise, for moneys to be paid in foreign parts, or to be
rechanged toward this Realm under the true Par or value for value of our
moneys, and the moneys of other Countries in weight and finesse: but at the
said rate, or above the same as Merchants can agree, but never under the same:
which shall be declared by a pair of Tables upon the Royal Exchange in
London, with such cautions and observation as formerly have been noted,
whereunto I must refer my self to be seen at large in Lex Mercatoria.

For the better understanding hereof, and to show that the like has been
formerly done: but therein only direction was wanting hitherto: I have thought
convenient to put down the same verbati^, as follows.

A Proclamation for the ordering of the exchange of money used by Merchants,
Queen Eliz.
according to the (...) and Statutas of the Realm.

FOrasmuch as there are so great abuses of (...) years grown by the corrupt
dealing of sundry Merchants and Brokers, as well Strangers (...), upon bargain
of exchanges and rechange of moneys, to be paid both out and within this
Realm, as not only the good laudable and profitable use of natural
Merchandising is greatly decayed, the true values of the moneys of this Realm
much ^based, and her Majesty's Customs and subsedies (that are the ancient
inheritance of this Crown* diminished and withdrawn, with sundry of (...)
inconveniences, to the notable damage of (...) Realm; for the due remedy
whereof, there (...) been made heretofore sundry good Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, which do still continue^^ their force. The Queens Majesty
intending (...) have such great enormities and mischiefs (...), does give all
manner of Merchants, Broken, and all other persons using to bargain by exchange
and rechange, to understand that her meaning (...) have such Laws and Statutes
put in executi^^^ have been provided, and do remain in force for this
purpose: and therefore warns all manner of persons to have hereafter due
regard thereunto, (...) on such penalties as in the said. Laws, Statures,
(...) other ordinances remaning in their force is p^^uided.

And for the lawful satisfaction of all such as shall have necessary cause to
take or deliver any money by exchange, there shall be certain orders in (...)
set up in places convenient declaring the rates thereof, as the same shall or
ought to be paid to the use of her Majesty, or to her Ministers and Officers
thereunto authorized. Given at Green-wich the 20 of September 1576, in the
eighteenth year of the prosperous Reign of the Queens Majesty.

The Noble and renowned the Baron of Elsmere, Lord Chancellor of England
deceased, (unto whom I owe perpetual obligation) did at fouerall times advise
at the Council: Table to publish the like Proclamation with some other good
observations, seeing therein is nothing required but equity and justice,
agreeable to the Laws of Nations; But the evil man sowing Thres in the night,
made the weeds to grow so fast that the good feed could not prosper: so that
inueterated diseases breaking forth at last, makes us to feel the smart
thereof. For some men (upon private respects) will cast doubts beyond the
Moon. The nature of vnexperience.
Others will propound more questions in an hour, then a wise man can answer
in a year. And others are always consulting, and never deliberating. So that
the grave and discre^te Councillors of State are to determine these serious
businesses; And to the other I may say, Know you not that the s^ept the
Doctrine of Pyrrh^, Ariston, and Heri^^^^, has been long ago hist out of the
Schools, or rather banished and confined amongst the Barbarians? will you cause
us to doubt of all things: then shall we doubt whether you doubt or no: it is
possible you can carry bread in the (...) hand, and a stone in the other:
nevertheless to (...) unto these men some satisfaction, which make (...) whether
the said his Majesty's Proclamation (...) obeyed here and beyond the Seas; I am
to prove that the Center of Commerce will effect the same: for gain will
command effectually, The Center will Command.
Por el Dinero, bay la (...) Perro, said the Spaniard, A Dog will d^unce for
money.

The Merchant Stranger being here commonly the deliverer of money (casting his
eyes upon the Center) will easily be induced to make the most of his own,
receiving by exchange more for his money beyond the Seas: and if the English
Merchant (being the taker of the said money) would be so injurious to the
State, as to give less beyond the Seas then the value of the money of the
Realm by exchange contrary to the said Procla^mation, the deliverer of the
money will not let him have it: besides that the takers occasions are (in a
manner) enforced by necessity, and he can be no loser, for by this direction he
shall sell his commodities ac^^dingly.

English Merchants being the deliuerers of money beyond the Seas, and the price
of exchange altering there accordingly, will have the like consideration, and
the Merchant Stranger will provoke him thereunto by the Center (gain)
whereupon their eyes are fixed: and if there be no takers of Merchants
Strangers, the English Merchants may bring (...) the money inspecie, wherein he
shall become gainer when the exchange is rectified, where now he is a loser,
which causes him to import no moneys: although as Misselden says, There gates
stand wide open, P. 135.
you may carry out as much money as you will. So that unless we have are guard
to the premises by procuring importation of Bullion and moneys, and preventing
the exportation according to the said Laws and Statues it were better for the
Kingdom to set all at liberty, howbeit with (...) direct on in exchanges.

Now forasmuch as we have already answered the objections to be made against
this remedy in the Equinoctial. Let us now examine the rem^dies propounded by
Misseldens conceited Balance, and whether the calculation of the same be more
then a trial, as we have declared.

The remedy, Misseldens Remedies.
is in a word (says he.) nothing else but to make our importation less, and
our exp^ctation more, by the importation of superfluous things ^o be
restrained, and the exportation by Manufactures to be improued: but what can
the casting of a Balance effect herein? Just nothing. There is a practice
required to set the people more on work upon the materials of our own
growth, or of foreign growth: and therein examples is the best precept; And
hereupon we are sent to the (...) to learn frugality; industry, and policy, in
whose commendation he seems to speak: like unto the Temporising Friar
Cornelius of Bridges, (who (according to the events of things) would in his
Sermons speak of the Prince of Orange, during the late war^es of the Low
Countries, as the succes fell out, and call his auditory to witness that be
ne^^er spoke (...) the Prince, when he (...) and railed of him beyond measure
at other times (...), until some other accident falling out on the (...)
trary. So this man moves a question, and like him self, kicks down all at
once what he had spoken, saying, P. 37.
And why not the Belgicke Grasshopper? for the Grasshopper has no King, yet they
march out (...) Troops, they are a multitude by Sea and Land, and thy feed
upon Roots and Herbs; as he says in (...) the margent, P. 134.
which is only for the learned; as the said Friar Cornelius was wont to say,
when (speaking of Heritickes) he said there was a thousand burnt, Sed erant
Cespites, they were (...) this a full Frenzy. Like unto the Daughters of
P^^tus, that took themselves to be Kine: raging like Hercules and Ajax in the
Tragedy? Think you that Endimion did ever dream such dreams* Or the seven
Sleepers, that slept from the (...) Decius, to the days of Theodosius. But
what will not nouelty and singularity bring forth? I leave this Ianu^ to his
feeding of roots in the Low Countries, seeing he is fallen from a Gallum^frey
(...) Hotchpotch of other men's Cookeries: P. 30.
making (...) a doubt whether Her^^litus tears were more see^^ly to lament his
(...) ignorance o^ (...) laughter to reprove his foolishnes. Surely this (...)
proceed of some deepespeculation; P. 142.
Sitting (by imagination) which Sapor King of (...) in the Center of the Globe
(of a Glass, beholding the (...) reuolutions of Commerce represented (...)
Balance, acted by these Grasshoppers, which (...) full for the winter (as the
P^smire is) to (...) wealth: whereas the Grash^pper is a (...) Summer, and
dies in winner, and is found to be one of the plagues of Aegipt.

Being in this humor he falls into timing: P. 138.
The Persian trade will not let me pass, nor the fishing neither without a
word of either. The Persian Trade for Silks is of far less benefit then the
Trades of Spices and other East India commodities; and the increase of the
Manufactures thereof will decrease the indraping of our Woolls, and increase
our ouerballance: unless moneys were imported for the greatest part of the
return thereof. But the Fishing Trade (propounded so many years since by Mr.
John Keymer, with the assistance of the Noble Lord Sheffield, Sir william
Cokaine Knight, and diverse other worthy persons of quallity, who have promised
to lay out great sums of money therein) will effectually improve our
exportations, and afford much more benefit then any Persian or East India Trade
can do, if his Majesty were pleased to encourage them with preuiledges and
immunities, as the (...) of the action deserves. But the envious man sleeps
not, who is able (upon one man's undigested opinion sometimes) to overthrow the
long industrous study of others that sincerely intend the common good. Shall we
propound the example of other nations concerning their industry and policy*
and shall we not be able to imitate them? Can they increase Manufactures upon
the materials of other Countries?) And cannot we do the fame of our own
stuffes and materials? Shall we run into remote Regione and Countries for
their Commodities to make a benefit, and neglect Gods blessings at home before
their own doors? Do we feel the Politic Body of the Common wealth
distempered and full of diseases, and (...) found out the efficient causes
thereof) shall we not be able to provide the Remedies?

If things cannot be understood in plain terms it may be the Allegory
following will make us more sensible of natural Remedies.

An Allegory of the decayed Trade of England, compared to a diseased Body
natural: with the Remedies to cure the same.

Statesmen or Politicians (which are the Physicians of Commonweals) having
entered into serious consideration of the estate of the Politic Body of
Trafficque, do find that the external parts thereof look wan and pale,
prognosticating a consumption of the liver: ( Money) which causes the decay of
Merchants and Tradesmen; hollow eyes and dim sighted, through the exhalation
of the R^dicall Moisture of the Body, by the excessive use of Tabac^, whereby
the memory is decayed: and the sinowes of the ancient Statutes and
Proclamations are de^ilitated: the ordinances for the government of the brain,
( Exchange) and rectifying of the Liver ( Money) to comfort the heart of ( our
Native Commodities) are put in oblivion; Tobacco is imported in the liew of
Spanish Royalls and Pistolets, which causes the prises ( the Hammers of the
Mint) to be weak and faint: the Urine they found to be of a clear greenish
color, proceeding from weakne^ and the use of too much white Wine
sophisticated into Claret, the Legs full of dropsicke humors of consumption,
by the immoderate wearing of Veluets, Silks, Cambricks and Lawnes: engendring
an ouerballancing ( or surfeit) of foreign commodities, so that the Vital
Spirits of Bullion and Monly does languish with a continual Flux of
exportation.

Considering the internal parts, they found the liver ( Money) obstructed, and
the condinct pipes of Bullion and Moneys for importation stopped, whereby the
Hepaties could not minister good blood, with spirits sufficient to comfort the
heart of ( our native commodities) by a natural heat: for the gaul of
Customs and impositions is ouerflown also, depriving the stomach of his
appetie: hence the brain ( Exchange, wanting sleep) is distempered, whereby
the body is overtaken with a Trepidation or shaking, showing the very Symptoms
of death.

Hereupon some Empricke (being more forward then the learned Physicians) did
deliver his opinion, that the said body (by a surset, or ouerballancing of
foreign commodities) is fallen into a consumption: yet that nature is so
strong, that (without Physic) she will recover again her former health in
progress of time; But herein he shall find himself as much deceived, as the
Spaniard was (who being to go a journey on foot) resolved to go fasting,
conceiving he should go the lighter: but fainting by the way, cried out, Aora
hallo que las Tripas Ile^^anel vientre, y no el vientpe las Tripas: now do I
find that the Guts do carry the Belly, and not the Belly the whereupon he used
afterward meat and (...) for his sustenance upon the like occasion: and found
on the contrary, that the abuse thereof did (...) surfeits in the Body
natural: even as the abuse of money and exchanges does in the Body of
Traffic, whereunto Physic must be ministered upon necessity, according to
the disease.

Another Practitioner in Physic was of opinion; that the Flux of exportation
should be diuerted and stopped by opening the Meridian Vein, suffering moneys to
be exported at the pleasure of Merchants* but upon better consideration of the
weakness of the Body, (through the former profusion of Blood) he did alter the
said opinion: observing that Art given no facility, when nature wants ability
for to increase Manufactures and Fishing, thereby to cu^^ the said surfeit or
ouerballancing.

Whereupon the learned Physicians of experience (having examined the causes of
the diseases of this Body) did resolve to apply and use proper Remedies.

First, That the continual Flux of exportation of our moneys must be stopped by
taking away the cause thereof, which is ( Gain) had upon moneys, proceeding of
the vndervaluation of our moneys in exchange, and the inhauncing of moneys
beyond the Seas.

Next, That the obstruction of the Liver, ( Money, and the conduict Pipes of
Spanish Royalls and German Dollers) must be opened by the means of the
Brain, ( Exchange) to minister good Blood and Spirits to the Heart of our
native Commodities, to make a lively Trade, whereby Bullion brought to the
Mint, will cause the hammers (as the (...) of the Body of Trade) to beat with
temperate strokes, by means whereof the distemperature of the Brain (
Exchange) will be qualified: the bitterness of the Gaul shall provoke appetie,
when customs and impositions shall be moderated in the rates, without
diminution of substance: the Sin^wes of the necessary ancient Statutes and
Proclamations for the government of Trade will be corroborated; the Eye sight
will be illuminated when the over much smoke of Tobacco is vanished away: and
the Complexion will be lively when Merchants shall be encouraged.

We shall not need to use Mechoacan or Indian Roots against the Dropsy, or
Prohibitions against the overmuch importation of foreign Commodities in the
wearing of them (which will enforce the like use in other Countries:) for the
humors of the Legs will be euacuated, and the convulsion of the face (by our
native Commodities truly made and vented) will be extenuated: for plenty of
money shall advance the quantity and price of them, and abate the price of
foreign Commodities, whereby the Surfit or ouerballancing will be remedded, if
we preserve the good Blood in the Body by the wisdom of the Brain (
Exchange) where the seat of Judgment is placed to increase the same for the
comfort of the Heart, ( our native Commodities) which shall receive thereby his
tintered Chylus by his own mouth and stomach: and the blood full of Spirits
shall fill all the veins, and strengthen the Sinowes: by supplying the want of
moneys, the easy course and recourse of whose Exchange (finding rest by the
Basis of true valuation) shall supple the Joints and settle the blood to serve
all men's turns, whereby the said shaking of the body will cease, the color of
the urine will be rectified, the too much use of white Wine shall not be so
much offensive, but in some measure rejoice the Heart, and take away the
melancholic disease of the mind, which commonly procures the disease of the
Body. Finally, The Body will be cured of the said consumption, and grow fat
again by a true and lawful replection, of the general good of the King and
Commonwealth, through Gods blessings.

If this Allegory be truly considered, we shall find that therein is a lively
expression of the diseases of the Politic Body of Trade: and if a natural
Body had all the said diseases, there is no other remedy nor way to to cure the
same but after the manner here declared, as the learned Physicians of experience
will confess: for the reasons are plain and evident, and without Physic it
is impossible to cure it. Will any man of judgment think that the Flux will
be stopped of course by the strength of nature, so long as we minister such
things which of themselves are laxitiue? Or shall we expect that the Veins
will be filled with Blood, when the Hepaties want their operation? Or if Blood
did increase, shall the Body receive nutriment so long as there is a profusion
of Blood? Or shall the Heart be comforted with the lively spirits of the Blood?
Shall the Brain receive rest, unless she do find means to strengthen the
Heart: and that the Liver, the Heart, and the (...) may all in one Simpathy
perform their functions? The Stomach cannot digest, every thing provoke a
surfeit: the Gaul (by her ouerstowing) hinders appetite, which brings a
distemperature to the whole Body, and fills the same with crude humors,
engendring Dropsies and other diseases, which at last turn into a consumption:
the Brain wants sleep, for the spirits are fatigated and troubled.

To make application hereof to the Body Politic of Trade, we know that even as
in natural Bodies the Heart (which is the Center of the Body) receives life
first, and retains the same last; So Commodities in Traffic are first, and
moneys came afterward, whereby Commutation or Barter was brought into a Trade:
and to preserve that money, (as the Blood in the Body) exchange was devised as
a spirit to quicken the same; and shall it be used to destroy the Body because
the true use of it is not understood, and the same is made a Merchandise?

Shall we imagine that the exportation of our moneys shall be prevented, when
by taking inhaunced coin beyond the Seas above the true value in exchange, we
feed the causes of exportation? Or shall we expect that moneys shall be
imported unto us, when there is a loss by the bringing of them, which loss is
measured according to the price of exchange: which to avoid, compels us to
buy foreign Commodities? Or if any moneys are imported, (by accident or
occasion) shall the Body of Trade be the better by it so long as they are
carried out again? Shall the Trade of our native Commodities be lively, when
moneys are wanting? Can the exchange have his due course, unless the
foundation thereof according to Parity and Equality be respected, howsoever the
price thereof may rise and fall according to the occasions of Merchants, and
the plenty or scarsity of moneys? Shall not the price of this true exchange
impose a price upon our native Commodities, so that Commodities, moneys and
exchanges may (according to equity and justice) be governed in their proper
natures accordingly? The Kingdom cannot consume the foreign Commodities
imported, but they cause an ouerballancing; the Customs and Impositions (which
might be moderated in the rate, and yet not decrease in value by the greater
employment of Trade) does discourage Merchants, which brings a distemperature
in Trade: foreign wares are oueraboundantly brought in, in the liew of moneys,
whereby the Realm does swell with foreign Commodities, which (being
retransported) bring still other Wares in return: so that moneys and bullion
(the vital spirit of Trade) is neglected, which is properly the decay of
Trade; For the exchange (which rules Commodities and money) is ouerruled by
other Nations. Let us therefore practice the contrary, to find a full remedy
for Contraria contrarijs curantur.

The Turk, The Policy of the Turk Persian and Russian.
the Persian, and the Russians do exceeds in Policy, preventing the
exportation of their moneys, by maintaining the price of exchange above the
valuation of their moneys, causing Merchants thereby to make employment upon
their Commodities of course, and not by precept or compulsion, whereby they
accumulate treasure.

The King of Ba^tan and other Princes in the East do the like, selling their
corruptible Wares for silver to hoord up the same; cannot this awake us to
imitate them, when it may be done by so easy means through the Center of
Commerce so often repeated? I say no more, but leave it to the high wisdom of
the King and State to direct it, wherein Misseldens Balance is as necessary as
the first wheel in a Wagon.

To make an end therefore with his Copia Verborum, P. 143.
he much rejoices that (by Acadnes thread) he is got out of the Labyrinth of
the Little Fish and Great Whale; but this little Spawne will stick so fast in
his Throat, that he shall need of Cranes to pluck it out: so that I might
very well retort upon him his conceited dismission and capritious farewell,
borrowed of the ancient Fathers. But it is sufficient for me to show that (as
it is the fable of the Fox) he has only licked the out side of the Glass of
true judgment of this matter of State, but could never come to the Pottage or
Center, according to the old observation: Lucians Dialog.
showing how Jupiter was fed with bones and fat, Promethius reserving unto
himself the solid flesh: whereby is meant sound knowledge, by the fat, the
fleeting show of superficiary terms of Art, and by the bones are deciphered
the inextricable and perplexed labor in the curiosities of euerstriuing
contradictions: wherein he does aabound. Sed magna est veritas and praeualet:
He did think once to have made an Index (...) of my writings: but (finding
that his durty broom had employment to cleanse the Stables at Hack^^y and now
to find out the Interlopers beyond the Seas) he left it. I still do strive to
be temperate, but public slanders cannot be washed off but by public
defenses: sure I am that my Books are acceptable unto wisemen, and Lex
Mercitoria is translated into Spanish and French, and much respected beyond the
Seas; In the Conclusion of which Book to the Indicious Reader I gave notice
long since, that Envy would command Triple headed Cerberus to let loose the
Satyrs, Zoylus, Momus, and Mastix: for this latter was already come on a
Hackney Horse with a Blattant tongue to carpe at the actions of any man* (...),
To hurt.
although it were as commendable as Homers learning, or Hercules Acts, whereof
Virgil the Prince of Helicon was not free: neither the worthy one of former
ages, whose virtues darkened like the Moon with some blot are registered (with
the point of Diamond) in the Glass of true History.

Thus having made his Circle useful in some respect by placing of a Center in
it, P. 2.
it will be more close and durable, for (himself says in the Proeme) that it
is slightly set up and pinned together to try how the parts and joints thereof
would trent and fit the square, for by his Apostrophe ad Regem (whose most
judicial eyes can easily discern wilfulnes and ignorance) P. 14. 5
that of Horace is verified.

Pindarum quis quid studet aemulari,
Iuli ceratis open Dedalea,
Nititur Pennis, vitreo daturus,
-- Nomina Ponto.
Iulus who strives, Pinder to emulate
With waxen wings, which Dedals Art did make:
He flies in vain, to give by hapless fate
Names to the Icarian glassie bluish lake.
For Misselden having in his former Treatise (either ignorantly or willingly)
omitted to handle The Pradominant Part of Trade, namely the Mystery of
Exchange, which is the Public Measure between us and other nations, as we have
poued now in this his Circle of Commerce; he has undertaken (with the
Artificial wings of his supporters set on with wax) to fly so high in the
discourse thereof, that this hot climate of the Antartike Circle or South Pole
has dissolved the wax, and the splendant Beams of the Sun of truth has
dispelled all foggy mysteries of deceitful fallacies as aforesaid: so that he
is drowned (with his Balance) in the Sea of Exchanges, according to Ouids
Allusion. Ipse Misseldemus nomina facit aquis.

THE CONCLUSION.
Unto you therefore Noble Lords and Right Honorable Privy Councellers of State,
with the rest of the Right Worshipful his Majesty's Commissioners for Trade,
(whom I have at all times attended as becomes me) unto your grave wisdoms
and discretions (I say) belongs properly the serious consideration of this
Center of Commerce. This is the firm North Star of Trade, by which your
Compass is to be directed according to the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of
this Realm of England; This is the Rudder of the Ship of Traffic to guide
and steire Commerce to her right ports or Havens of profit. This is that true
Par of Exchange approved by the Laws of nations, that has no imposture,
froth, nor fallacy to amuse or abuse us with: as the casting of a deceitful
Balance has, wherein no certainty can be found.

Let not your Heroical Virtues for the Public good be blemished with private
Centers of Commerce: but be you a means that Phoebus himself will be pleased
to drive the Chariot of Trade: this Center, whereby the Horses of all societies
and corporations my draw a like in the course of Trade by his wise guiding and
direction: Masterr Milles Acroamata.
let the procuring of Bullion be your first study to set his Mint on work,
which is recommended unto you by the efficacy of other men's words.

For Money of it self (be it more or less) in whose hands so ever, without
Bullion to supply, is but water in a Cesterne taken from the Spring, that by
use becomes exhausted, or being but let alone, consumes it self to nothing by
strikes and putrefaction. So Coin becomes but Medals, out of use, of out of
fashion.

For Bullion being the Fountain, Money is but the Water, and Exchange the
River that serves all private turns.

Bullion being the Sun, Money is but the Beams, Exchange the Light that makes
the world to see.

Bullion being the Pilot, Money is but the Stern, Exchange the Compass that
guides all courses right.

Bullion being the Chylus, Money is but the Blood, Exchange the Spirit that
quickens all the Body.

To be short, Bullion is the very Body and Blood of Kings, Money is but the
Medium between Subjects and their Kings, Exchange the heavenly Mystery that
ioynes them both together.

Next therefore let the exportation of moneys, the profusion of Blood, be
prevented by the means of this Center, (wherein the vital spirit of Trade
does consist) and procure plenty of Money and Bullion by all Real Substantial
and Politic means; For plenty of Money will improve your Lands, advance the
price of your native Commodities, increase your Manufactures, establish the
Fishing, maintain foreign Trades, augment the Kings reuinewes, make foreign
Wares better cheap, prevent the ouerballancing, and enrich the Kingdom with
an advancement of all the dependances of Trade, contained in the Articles of
your Commission. God grant a blessing in all, to his Glory, the Kings Honor,
and the Kingdoms welfare.

Obsta Principijs, sedo Medicina Paratur.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. lin. 11. read. Reprehension, for apprehension. p. 17. l. 27. r.
Depredations, for depudations. p. 18. l. 29. r. We, for me. p. 25. l. 2. r.
Pieces, for prices. p. 37. l. 8. r. Pieces, for prices. p. 38. l. 2. r. 20 ^,
for 2 ^. p. 42. l. 20. r. Construction, for contution. p. 44. l. 17. r. Good,
for Gods. p. 58. l. 14. r. Caution, for cannon. p. 58. l. 22. r. Confusion, for
conclusion. p. 64. l. 18. r. Hoopes, for hops. p. 64. l. 31. r. Indeering, for
enduring. p. 68. l. 8. r. Mobile, for Mobill. p. 77. l. 22. r. Cornuted, for
corneited. p. 78. l. 7. r. Flatter, for scatter. p. 78. l. 30. r. Procupine,
for procerpine. p. 80. l. 20. r. For, for from. p. 81. l. 12. r. Enabled, for
enable. p. 101. l. (...). ^ Contratenor, for contratos.


