ENGLANDS VIEW, IN THE UNMASKING OF TWO PARADOXES:

With a replication unto the answer of Master John Bodine.

By Gerrard de Malynes Merchant.

Opposita iuxta se posita, magis apparent. ANCHORA SPEI



LONDON, Printed by Richard Field. 1603.

To the right honorable Sir Thomas Sackuile, Baron of Buckhurst, Lord high
Treasurer of England, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of
the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council: G. de M. wishes all
health, increase of honor and everlasting happiness.
THESE two Paradoxes (right honorable) having been presented unto the French
King, as a mean to qualify the general complaints of the dearth of things in
France, by proving that nothing was grown dearer in three hundred years, were
answered by the famous M. John Bodine: who dedicated his answer unto the
President of the high court of Parliament of France, as a matter of great
consequence and considerable in the government of a Commonwealth. Hence
proceeded that resolution, which emboldened me to present unto your Lordship,
the substance of both their writings, with all their arguments and propounded
remedies: to the end, that in the balance of your grave wisdom they may be
weighed with my Replication thereunto, showing how things are to be considered
of for the good of a Commonwealth. Your Honors judgment shall easily
perceive, that the Paradoxes are opposite, and do contradict one another,
besides the slender and weak ground of their foundation: as also that Master
Bodine has mistaken the true ground of the matter, by comparing the prices of
things within themselves in a Commonwealth: whereas the comparison must be
between the home Commodities of one Commonwealth, and the foreign
Commodities of other nations: and that, either by way of permutation of
Commodities for Commodities, or by Commodities for money in specie, or by
exchange. So that a due consideration must be had of the course of Commodities,
Money, and Exchange: which are the essential parts of all trade and traffic.
Wherein must be considered the end of all Merchants, which is Gain and
profit: at which scope they aim according to their profession and practice;
some by Commodities, some by Money, some by Exchange, some by all three, or
that which yields them most gain. For as money does rule the course of
Commodities: so the exchange for moneys does both rule the course of moneys,
and Commodities. By the disorder whereof it happens, that the riches of a
Commonwealth does so much decrease, as it is not always in the power of the
wise, that have the managing of the government thereof, to make choice of the
best, and to banish the worst: but must not only obey the tempest and strike
sails, but also cast over board some precious things to save the ship and
bring it into a safe port: and afterward by degrees overcome greater things,
changing the estate thereof from evil to good, and from good to better, which
otherwise might have been prevented in the beginning by removing the causes
thereof. To your most honorable judgment I refer the consideration of all:
and pray the Almighty to have your Honor in his divine protection. And so in
all humility I take leave. London, this 16. of January. 1603.

Your Lordships most humble and in all duty bounden, GERRARD DE MALYNES.

Englands view.
A SENTENCE alleged without application to some purpose, is to handle a matter
without conclusion: and he that will attribute unto any man the knowledge of
the essential parts, grounds, or pillars of any science, must make apparent
proof thereof: otherwise, his assertion is like clouds and winds without rain,
or like an arrow shot at randon. Quod oportet patrem-familias vendacem esse,
non emacem, is a worthy sentence to be duly executed of al good householders,
or fathers of families, especially of Princes, that are the fathers of the
great families of Commonweals: who (as Justinian says) are to provide
carefully for the two seasons, namely, the time of war when arms are
necessary, and the time of peace more fitting wholesome laws: in both which,
it cannot properly be said, that the office of a Prince is wholly employed about
the government of the persons of men, and of things convenient and fit for the
maintenance of humane society, according to the definition of the heathens:
but rather in the observation of Religion toward God, and administration of
Justice toward man: the one teaching us especially of the life to come; and
the other, how we should live in this life. Religion does knit and unite the
spirits of men, whereby they live obediently in unity, peace, and concord: and
Justice is as a measure ordained by God amongst men, to defend the feeble from
the mighty. Hence proceeds, that the causes of seditions and civil wars,
is the denial of justice, oppression of the common people, inequall
distribution of rewards and punishments, the exceeding riches of a small
number, the extreme poverty of many, the ouer-great idleness of the subject,
and the not punishing of offenders: which brings destruction of Commonweals.

Religion does teach the fear of God, which makes a good man, and is indeed
the beginning of a Prince. For since Princes reign by wisdom, and that the
fear of God is the beginning thereof: we must conclude, that it is the
beginning also of a virtuous and wise Prince. Now, as Princes reign by God, so
must they be directed by him: yea they reign best and longest, that serve him
best and most. Serve him they cannot but according to his will; and his will is
not known, but by his word and law: which made the Prophet David to meditate
therein day and night, preferring the cause of faith or religion before
temporal commodity. And this is properly the first and chiefest point, that
the Prince is to regard: whereunto the other is annexed and does depend upon.
For as justice is administered and prescribed by laws and customs: so reason
requires, that this gradation should be observed concerning all laws: that
even as the wills, contracts or testaments of particular men cannot derogate the
ordinances of the Magistrates, and the order of the Magistrates cannot abolish
customs, nor the customs can abridge the general laws of an absolute Prince:
no more can the laws of Princes alter or change the law of God and Nature.

By justice (properly called Distributive) is the harmony of the members of a
Commonweal maintained in good concord: howbeit, much hindered, where usury is
tolerated, which gives cause of discord; some few waxing thereby too rich,
and many extreme poor: the operations of effects whereof, are declared by me
under certain Similies or Metaphors in the Treatise of Saint George for
England.

By justice (properly called Commutatiue) is the co^merce and traffic with
other nations maintained, observing a kind of equality, which is requisite in
every well governed Commonwealth, where providence and policy cause the
Prince (the Father of the great family) to sell more then he buyeth, or else
the wealth and treasure of his realm does decrease, and it were his expenses
do become greater, or surmount his incomes and revenues. This kind of equality
is interrupted and overthrown by the merchandising exchange, as in the
Treatise of The Canker of Englands Commonwealth is declared. For as all the
trade and traffic between us and other nations, is performed by three
simples: namely, Commodities, Money, and Exchange: so (as we have proved) is
the course of exchange (being abused) become predominant and ouerruling the
course of money and Commodities; whereby the wealth of the Realm does decrease.

And this wealth cannot properly increase but two manner of ways: namely, by
bringing of money and bullion into the Realm, or any other things which are
not bought for our money, or bartered by way of permutation for our
Commodities: and by buying the foreign Commodities better cheap then we sell
our home Commodities. And so may the father of the great family become a
seller and not a buyer, as is before alleged.

We have hertofore noted the property of money to be: That plenty of money
makes generally things dear; and scarcity of money makes likewise generally
things good cheap: whereas things are also particularly dear or good cheap,
according to the plenty or scarcity of the things themselves, or the use of
them. According to which plenty or scarcity of money aforesaid, things
generally became dear or cheap: whereunto the great store or abundance of
money and bullion, which of late years is come from the West Indies into
Europe, has made every thing dearer, according to the increase of money: which
like unto an Ocean, dividing her course into several branches in diverse
countries, has caused a great alteration and enhancing of the price of every
thing: and most especially, because the money it self was altered in valuation
in most countries. So that the measure being altered and made lesser by
denomination, there went more number to make up the tale, and of necessity
other things went and were named accordingly in price. For money must always
remain to be the rule and square to set a price unto every thing, and is
therefore called Publica mensura, the public measure: whereby the price of all
things is set to maintain a certain equality in buying and selling, to the
end that all things may equally pass by trade from one man to another.

This money must have his standing valuation only by public authority of the
Prince: to whom properly belongs the disposing thereof, as a matter annexed
to his Crown and dignity. And as the money does set a price to the natural
riches of lands: so does it also set a price to the artificial riches
proceeding of the lands. And therefore reason requires a certain equality
between the natural riches and the artificial riches.

That plenty of money makes things dear, is found by daily experience:
whether it be in bullion of gold and silver, or the same converted into money.
But so long as it is in bullion, it remains in nature of Commodity, which is
given by way of permutation or barter in exchange for other Commodities.
Plenty or scarcity of Commodities does also alter the price of the things
wanting or abounding according to the use thereof, which is grounded upon
estimation by consent, after the pleasure and sensuality of man.

The History of the West Indies makes mention, that during the great
quantity or abundance of gold and silver that was found about fourscore years
past, and the rareness of other things, a cloak of cloth was sold in Peru for
a thousand ducats, a pair of breeches of cloth for three hundred ducats, a
good horse four or five thousand ducats: and other things then in use and
rare accordingly. The Romans after the conquest of the Persians, brought such
abundance of gold and silver to Rome, that the price of lands did rise above
two thirds.

And on the contrary, concerning scarcity of money, Grafton in his Chronicle
of England has recorded, that king Edward the third having great wars with
France and Scotland, and incorporating the money into his hands for the
maintenance thereof, caused through the lack of money the price of Commodities
so to fall, that a quarter of wheat was sold for two shillings, a fat ox for a
noble, a sheep for six pence, and other things after the rate.

The consideration of the premises, makes the two Paradoxes of Master
Malestroit (one of the Officers of the French kings Exchequer) to be most
Paradoxicall, that is to say, far differing from the vulgar opinion: which
Paradoxes (upon complaint of the people of the dearth of things in France) he
presented unto the king, thereby to qualify the cause of their complaint. The
substance whereof I have thought most expedient to set down, and the answer
also which Master John Bodine the greatest Politician or Commonwealths man of
France, has made thereunto: together with my explication thereof, and
Replication to his answer; whereby the truth will appear, and how things are to
be considered of for the good of the Commonweal.

The first Paradox.
To complain of the general dearth of al things in France is without cause,
seeing that there is nothing grown dearer these three hundred years.

The second Paradox.
There is much to be lost upon a Crown, or any other money of gold and silver,
albeit one do give the same in payment at the price he did receive the same.

Since that the ancient Permutation (says he) has been changed in buying
and selling, and that the first riches of men (which did consist of cattle) was
transferred to the gold and silver; whereby all things have received their
estimation, and have been praised and sold for: it follows, that those
metals are the right judges of the good cheap or dearth of al things*

We cannot say, that any thing is now dearer, then it was three hundred years
ago, unless that for the buying thereof we must now give more gold or silver,
then we did then* But for the buying of al things, we do not give now more gold
or silver, then we did then, says he. Therefore, since that time nothing is
grown dearer in France.

To prove this he does allege, that during the reign of king Philip de
Valois in the year 1328. the French Crown of the Flower-de-luce, as good in
weight and finenesse, as the French Crown of the Sun now; was then worth but
twenty sols tournois: which (for the better understanding) being valued
according to the common computation of ten sols for a shilling starling, is two
shillings. In those days (says he) the French elle or yard of velvet was
worth four livers, which is four crowns or 8 shillings starling: the said
yard of velvet does now cost ten livers, or twenty shillings: and the French
crown, which was then valued at two shillings, is now valued at fifty sols or
five shillings. So that four crowns do make the said 20 shillings; yet the
said french crowns do contain no more in gold, in weight, or in finenesse
then before: whereby there is no more gold given in substance then heretofore,
and consequently the velvet is not now dearer then it was then.

During the reign of king John his successor, in the year 1350, the price of
a measure of wine (being indifferently taken) was at 4 livers or 8 shillings
starling. And in his time were the golden francks coined and valued at 20 sols
or 2 shillings, and so 4 franks were 4 livers: the said measure of wine is now
worth 12 livers or 24 shillings, and the said frank of gold is valued at 60
sols or 6 shillings: so that four frankes valued now at three times the value,
will pay these 12 livers or 24 shillings; and yet the said frankes do not now
contain any more gold in substance then they did then.

Proceeding to the money of silver, he takes his beginning from the time of
king Saint Lewis, who began his reign anno 1227, and caused the first sols to
be coined worth 12 deniers tournois: which were (as he says) of fine silver,
and there went 64 pieces in the mark. The sols called douzains of late years
coined by king Henry the second, and now current, are of three ounces and one
half fine, and of 93 pieces to the mark: which accounted to the mark fine
silver is 320, which is five times 64 pieces which were in king Lewis his time.
So that one of those sols of his time did make five of the sols made now: and
consequently the twenty sols now are worth but 4 of the sols then; and the 25
livers, 5 livers; the hundred livers, twenty; and so more or less accordingly.

Now when we pay for one yard of velvet 10 livers or 20 shillings starling, it
is no more then 2 livers or 40 sols, which is two shillings starling: which was
the price of velvet in Saint Lewis his time.

The elle of cloth which now is sold for 100 sols or 10 shillings starling, is
no more then twenty sols or two shillings starling in those days.

The Gentleman that has now 500 livers by the year to spend, has no more
then he that had one hundred livers to spend in those days.

In the like manner he proceeds for corn, wine, and other commodities: and
thereupon concludes, that the dearth of all things is but imaginary, and that
it is a vain opinion of men without any substance of truth, that things should
be dearer now, then in those days.

The second Paradox.
There is much to be lost upon a crown or any other money of gold and silver:
albeit, one do give the same in payment for the same price he did receive it.

This (says Master Malestroit) is an old and common error rooted in the
judgment of most men, that are far from the mark and without their
reckoning, as he will manifest by the same terms of his former Paradox.

In the aforesaid time of king Philip de Valois, the French crown aforesaid
was worth but 20 sols, which is now current for fifty sols at the least.

The Gentleman that had fifty sols rent or income, did receive for it two
crowns and a half, or so much in silver accordingly: for which two crowns
and a half, he had half a yard and half a quarter of velvet after the rate
of 4 livers the yard, which was the price of velvet then. Now for this 50 sols,
the Gentleman does receive but one crown, or so much of silver money: and for
that one crown he can buy now but one quarter of a yard of velvet after the
rate of ten livers, that velvet is now worth; whereas before he had half a yard
and half a quarter: whereby he loses then one quarter and one half quarter
of velvet upon his crown, although he have given the same in payment for 50
sols, which is the price for which he received the said crown: and so
proceeds with other the like examples.

Then for the silver money, the gentleman (says he) who during the reign of
king Lewis had 16 livers of rents or incomes, did receive for the said 16
livers, five marks of fine silver, or in gold accordingly. For as by the first
Paradox is declared the mark of fine silver did contain 64 pieces or sols. Now
for the payment of this rent of 16 livers, he shall receive 320 pieces or sols,
which do contain but one mark of fine silver: which is but the fifth part of
that which was contained in the 16 livers of king Lewis. In those days 16
else of cloth would have been had for those 16 livers after the rate of 20
sols the elle, as good cloth and better then that which does now cost 100 sols:
whereof you shall have now but 3 else for your 16 livers: so that you shall
lose 12 else of cloth upon 16 livers: albeit you have given in payment every
liver for 20 sols, at which price you have received the same: which he does
also amplify with other examples; adding thereunto further: that if any man
would object and say, I care not what the crown, liver or sols is worth, so as
I having one hundred livers of rent, I may have one hundred livers paid me,
and that I can pay out again the said hundred livers. This man (says he) must
then make proof, that he can now have as much wares for two sols which are now
almost all of copper, as he could have had in times past for two sols, which
were of fine silver: and in doing so, he should make a third Paradox, more
strange then the former. For he should go about to prove every thing to be
become better cheap: which cannot be proved. And therefore he concludes still
with the former first Paradox, That nothing is grown dear.

The substance and intention of these two Paradoxes is (says he) to show, that
the king and his subjects do now buy al things as dear, as in times past: for
that they must give as great a quantity of gold and silver, as in times past.
But by the enhauncing of the price of the moneys of gold, from whence of
necessity proceeds the embasing of the silver moneys: the king does not
receive in payment of his revenues, such a quantity of gold and silver, as his
predecessors. In like sort, Noblemen and Gentlemen the kings subjects that have
great incoms, do not receive such a quantity of gold and silver as in times
past: but are paid (as the king is) in copper, in lieu of gold and silver. For
which copper, according to the second Paradox, they cannot have so much wares,
as they might have for the like quantity of gold and silver. So that the
loss, which we think to have by the growing dear of all things, comes not
by giving more: but by receiving less quantity of fine gold and silver, then
we were wont to have. Whereby we see manifestly, that the more we do enhance
the price of money, the more we lose: for thereby comes the great dearth of
all things now, which brings a general poverty to this realm.

The famous and learned Master John Bodine making answer unto these two
Paradoxes, first shows: how M. Malestroit has abused himself, to use the
example of velvet to prove his assertions. For he proves that veluets were yet
unknown in France during the reign of Philip surnamed the Fair. And that
although he should admit the example of veluets: yet it were no consequence for
all other things, which were not so dear proportionably. And concerning the
price of wines and corn, he does prove the same to be dearer 20 times, and
more or less upon occasions: concluding that those examples are also unfit.
And then he comes to the price of lands, which cannot increase or diminish nor
be altered of their goodness, if they be manured. Whereupon he takes occasion
to show the fertility of France: and that certain Dukedoms, Earledomes and
Baronnies are now worth of revenue as much yearly, as they were sold for in
times past. The lands being so much risen in price: he shows, that within
sixty years all things are grown dear ten times the price comparing it to
any money in France: and so sets down the causes of this dearth which are 5
in number:

1 The principal and almost only cause: The abundance of gold and silver now
extant in the kingdom, more then in times past. 2 The Monopolies. 3 The want
of things, caused by excessive trade and wast thereof. 4 The pleasure of
Princes, that advance the price of things. 5 The alteration of the valuation of
money.
Concerning the first and principal cause, he says, that the enhauncing of the
price or dearth of all things in what place soever: proceeds of the abundance
of that which gives price and estimation unto things: and herupon does allege
diverse examples. Plutarch and Pliny do witness, that Paulus Aemylius after
the conquest of Macedon against the Persians, did bring such abundance of gold
and silver to Rome; that the people was freed of all imposts, and the price of
lands advanced unto two third parts in a moment. The Emperor Augustus
brought such great riches from Egypt, that the price of usury did decrease,
and the lands, became much dearer then before: which was not for the want of
lands, which cannot increase or diminish; nor for the Monopolies, which can
take no place in this case: but it was the abundance of gold and silver, which
abated the estimation thereof; as it happened at Jerusalem at the time of the
Queen of Candace; and in the West Indies, when the Spaniards became masters
thereof. By which reason the Emperor Tiberius was much mistaken, to cause him
to be beheaded, that would have made glass soft and malleable; fearing that
gold and silver would thereby have lost their estimation: whereas the abundance
of glasses, which are made almost of all stones, and many herbs, would have
diminished the reputation thereof; as it falls out with all other things.
Therefore (says he) we are to show, that there was not so much gold and silver
in times past three hundred years ago, as there is now: which may easily be
known. For if there be money within the realm, it cannot be so well hidden, but
that Princes in their necessity and occurrences will find the same: whereas it
is well known, that king John in his great necessity, could not find 60
thousand frankes (let it be crowns) for his ransom; but did remain a
prisoner to the king of England for the space of 8 years. In like sort, the
king of Scots being prisoner, could not find means for his ransom of a hundred
thousand nobles, until the French king Charles the fifth paid the same, making
alliance with Robert the king of Scots, anno 1371. King Saint Lewis was in the
like predicame^t being prisoner in Egypt. And the ancient histories do record,
that for want of silver, money was made of leather with a nail of silver.
Whereby appears the great want of silver and gold in France in those days:
whereas coming to our age, we shall find that the king did find in Paris in
six months (besides the incomes and revenues) more then three millions 4
hundred thousand pounds; which after 10 pounds for the pound starling, is 340
thousand pounds starling. Herunto he has added a comparison between certain
revenues and moneys given in marriage with Princes and their kindred in those
days; with the like done by Princes of late years: and how Italy (through
peace and means of their traffic) had drawn all the gold unto them; the
treasure in Europe being generally increased since the discovery of the West
Indies. For it is incredible (says he) and yet true, that since the year
1533, there came from Peru more then one hundred millions of gold, and twice as
much in silver. Then he comes to the causes of the increase of the wealth and
treasure of France: showing how the Spaniard running to the uttermost corner of
the world for gold, silver, and spices, does come unto them for their corn,
linen cloth, and diverse other commodities. On the other side, how the English
man, Scot, the people of Norway, Swaden, and Denmark are continually digging
an infinite number of mines even to the very center of the earth, for metals
and minerals, for to buy their wines, prunes, and other Commodities; and most
especially their Manna of salt, which God sends as it were from heaven, their
Climate being more apt thereunto, then that of other countries: which causes
the Flemmings to come with their empty vessels, to buy the same for ready
money for the maintenance of their traffic of salt-fish. And this is the first
cause.

The second is the increase of people, which by reason of the civil wars which
ceased between the houses of Orleance and Burgundy, are much augmented
until the troubles for Religion. Whereas the wars of neighbor countries was
but a necessary purgation of the ill humors of the body of their
Commonwealth: and the wars at home had before that time wasted the country,
overthrown husbandry, and spoiled all handiworke: the Englishman having
sacked their towns, burned their villages, murdered and robbed the most part
of their people, and gnawed the rest to the bones: howbeit, within these 100
years, the towns have been reedified, villages new builded, woods increased,
and the people augmented in such sort, that colonies of Frenchmen have been
sent into other countries to inhabit them: and the Spaniard being negligent
and lazy, is for the most part in Arragon and Navarre without any laborers or
any other workmen, but only Frenchmen which are more serviceable and active.

Another cause of the riches of France, is the trade had since their king
Francis the first, with the Turk and Barbarian: and the Bank of Lions erected
in his time, brought abundance of gold and silver into France, when he paid
8 upon the hundred for money, and his successor ten, afterward 16, and 20 upon
urgent necessity: which made the Florentines, Lugueses, Genowaies, Germans
and others to come and dwell in the realm. By which means also the rentes
leauied upon the city of Paris are brought to amount unto 3 millions, and
three hundred and fifty thousand pounds tournois yearly. And the city would
be much richer, if there were a house as at Genes, called the house of S.
George, which takes all the money that men will bring, after the rate of 5 upon
the 100; and does deliver out the same to the merchants to traffic therewith,
after two and three upon the hundred: like as the great Emperors Antonie and
Alexander Seuerus did, which did deliver money at 4 per 100. And Augustus
delivered money freely without interest to them that would give sureties to
restore double the value, if they did not pay it at the time limited. By these
means their subjects got much, and Princes were not driven to borrow, or to
pill their subjects: but did rather diminish their imposts. And so he
concludes, that the abundance of gold and silver is the cause partly of the
derth of things.

The second cause of the dearth of things, namely the Monopolies, he does pass
over as a matter not considerable to the things entreated of: which is (says
he) when merchants, artificers or laborers do assemble themselves to set a
price upon the Commodities, or their handiworke with the augme^ting of wages.
For the preventing whereof, he commends the abolishing of their fraternities
or companies procured by the means of their Chauncelor.

The third cause of the dearth by the want of things, comes to pass by the
excessive trade of the things, and by the wast thereof. It is certain (says
he) that we have our corn and wine better cheap during the wars with the
Spaniard and Fle^ming, then after the wars when the trade is permitted. For
the husbandman being driven to sell and to make money of his wares, and the
gentleman finding the same perishable, when the merchant dare not lade his
ships, brings down the price of Commodities, and makes the people to live
good cheap: which according to the Proverb ( France can never be famished)
would always continue, if by the means of the stranger their storehouses were
not emptied. The Spaniard does buy and transport their corn before it is ripe,
because his country (except Arragon and Granado) is of great sterilitie:
therefore have the corn merchants great privileges for bringing corn unto
them, and are only licensed to export money for the same. From the Spaniard
(says he) we have but their oils and spices, and yet the best drugges come
unto us from Turkey and Barbary. From Italy we have their allumes, some
silks, and other Commodities. Oils we may have within our dominions of
Languedock and Prouence more then we do need: and there are as good silks made
with us, as at Florence and Genes. Touching allumes, if we would cut the veins
of the Pireney mountains, we should find an infinite number of allume and
copresse, as has bin sufficiently proved: whereas France does spend far
above the value of one million thereof yearly: and the wast of things is
incredible.

The fourth cause of the dearth of things, proceeds from the pleasure of
Princes, which do impose a price unto the things which they affect. For it is a
general rule in state matters, that Princes do not only give laws unto their
subjects, but also (as Plato has noted) they do change by their example the
manners of men. To which purpose he does use the example of their king Francis
the first, who being hurt in the head, caused his hair to be cut off: wherein
the people did presently imitate him, as following the will of Princes, and
praising that which they do commend. We have seen at one time (says he) three
great Princes striving (as it were) who should have the most learned men and
best artificers: namely, the great king Francis the first, Henry king of
England, and Pope Paul the third: in such sort, that the king of England could
never have the learned and reverend Beda; and the French king did pay 72
thousand crowns for a Diamond, rather then king Henry should have had the
same. Presently the Nobility and the people did give themselves to study and
to buy precious stones: and when king Henry began to make little account of
the stones, their general estimation and price was abated: whereof there are
many examples in like sort for the art of painting. The Princes of the East and
Alexander the Great had brought them into such credit, that a picture of Venus
issuing out of the waters which Apelles had made, was bought for 60 thousand
crowns; Alexander gave for his 200 talents, that is 36 thousand pound
starling. Apelles himself made no difficulty to buy a picture of Protogenes
for 50 thousand crowns: concluding with other examples, that the pleasure of
Princes makes things dear as aforesaid. And so returning to the wast or
consumption of things, wherein their example is also imitated, he does
reprehend the cutting of silk upon silk, or any other stuff, so that it can
serve but once for one person: which caused the Turks to call us mad men. And
further he finds fault, that our Lackies and servants are apparelled
therewith, and that so much stuff is put into the apparel, disguising with new
fangled fashions the proportion of our person or body, contrary to the
ancient modesty: when as the fashion of the apparel will many times cost more
then the apparel itself. To this is linked the desire of costly household
stuff, and dainty and delicate fare of al sorts of meat and drink; whereof
he alleged examples, which are better co^cealed then spoken of: for they bring
with them all licentiousness and excess, as a spring of vices of the
calamities and miseries of a Commonwealth.

If any man should here object (says he) that if things did still become
dearer, partly through the wast, and partly also for the abundance of gold and
silver, no man should be able to live because of the dearth: it is true. But
the wars and calamities happening to a Commonwealth do stay the course
hereof: as we may see, that the Romans have lived with great scarcity, and
to speak properly, in great misery almost five hundred years, when they had
but copper moneys of a pound weight, and without stamp, until king Seruius;
and they made no silver moneys but 485 years after the foundation of Rome; and
62 years after, they made moneys of gold. And here he takes occasion to
compare the price of things altered during the government of the Romans, and
the laws made by them for the suppressing of abuses: and that all their gold
and silver came unto them in a hundred and twenty years by the spoils of all
the world, which was brought to Rome by the Scipions, Paul Aemylius, Marius,
Sylla, Lucullus, Pompey and Caesar, especially by the two last. For Pompey did
conquer so much land, as made the revenue of the Empire to come unto 8 millions
and one half of crowns. Caesar notwithstanding all his expenses and
prodigalities brought to the treasury 40 millions of crowns: having given at
one time unto Paul Consul 900 thousand crowns for to hold silence, and unto
Curion Tribune 1500 thousand crowns to take his part. Mark Antonie went
further: (if it be true that which Plutarch and Appian have written) for he
gave unto his army for their service done 200 thousand talents, being 120
millions of crowns: which is to be credited, seeing that the Emperor Adrian
for to have the goodwill of 40 legions, gave ten millions of crowns. So that
we may here see abundance of gold and silver at Rome: but it did not last ever,
for in less then 300 years, the Parths, Goths, Hercules, Hongers and other
cruel nations did overcome the Empire and all Italy, and overcame the Romans,
burned their city, and took the spoil of them. The like does happen unto all
Commonweales, to wax and increase by little and little, and to flourish for a
time in wealth and power: and afterward to grow old and decline, until they
be utterly ruinated and destroyed.

Coming to the last cause of the dearth of things by the alteration of money,
he shows how Master Malestroit has mistaken the matter in the moneys
themselves made within 300 years. For whereas he says, that S. Lewis caused
the first sols to be coined worth twelve deniers, whereof 64 pieces went to the
mark; and that in Philip de Valois his time, the crown of the Flower-de-luce
without number, and as good as the crowns now, was valued but 20 sols; and that
afterward king John caused the franks to be made of fine gold which were but
valued 20 sols; and that the sols of silver of that time was worth five of our
sols: he does not say of what weight or finenesse the moneys were in those
days. And touching the last point he does contradict himself: for he does
acknowledge that the old crown weighing three penny weight, is no more worth
then 60 of our sols: so that the ancient sols of fine silver can be worth but
three of them: and yet the frankes of gold do weigh less by four grains then
the old crown, and are no better in finenesse then the other. And by the
proclamation of the year 1561, the old crown is valued at 60 sols, and the
frank at 50 sols: which if his proposition were true, and that it were five
sols for one; then would the old crown be by this proportion valued at 100
sols, and the frank at 90 sols. And if Master Malestroit (says he) does take
his comparison of the alteration of moneys at some one time in any such years
when moneys have been embased; that is no consequence at all: for within the
abouesaid time it is manifest, that the money was once so base in allay, that
one of our sols was worth 5 of those which were then. And then he shows, how
al things were rated for their customs, and how used within fifty or sixty
years: concluding that the price of things (notwithstanding his former
allegation) is not altered by the valuation of moneys. But well, that things are
grown dear, contrary to the first Paradoxe of Master Malestroit: and that
was the first point which he was to prove; and the second was the causes of
this dearth, as we have briefly rehearsed.

But forasmuch (says he) as some great personages do labor by words and
writings, that the trade should be cut off, and that no Commodities should be
transported out of the realm; making account that we could live peaceably
within our selves, and very good cheap without giving or receiving any thing
of other nations: he does reprehend them, and shows that they have need of
the strangers, and most especially of the traffic with them. Insomuch that
although they could live without them in regard of Commodities: yet charity
and humanity wills us to maintain friendship with our neighbors, and rather
to give them part of our blessings, then not to deal or to communicate with
them. Wherein the Romans were much to blame, who having extended their power
from the West unto the East, did refuse to take under their government some
nations, because there was nothing to be had of them: whereas the greatest gift
of honor that God gives unto man, is to give him the majesty to command, and
to do justice especially to the poor not being instructed. But if this lesson
does not please men of this humor, God has so bestowed and divided his graces
and blessings, that there is no country in all the world so fruitful, but
has need of diverse things: whereby he holds all the subjects of his
Commonwealth in friendship, or at the least does hinder them to make long
wars one with another. And so he proceeds to show some remedies to the
causes aforesaid.

The abundance of gold and silver now adays more then in times past, must
partly excuse the dearth of things: (says he) adding further touching
Monopolies and the wast of things, that in vain are good laws made if they be
not executed; especially if the king do not cause the courtier to observe them,
whom the common people does imitate: whereby also many superfluous things might
be avoided, and not brought into the realm; as is done by Italians with
perfumes, counterfeit stones, and such trifles. Concerning the excessive trade
of some Commodities, he declares, that as the things transported, cause the
like to grow dear by the exportation: so the things imported become the better
cheap. Whereof he excepteth the trade of corn, which is to be governed more
wisely: for they have had intolerable famines for want of such a due care as
Joseph had in Egypt. The mean to prevent the same, is to have many public
storehouses in several places, making provision of corn yearly, by selling
the old and providing new in place.

Touching the opinion of those, that would have the vines taken up, and corn
sowed in the place: or at the least to command that no vines should be planted
hereafter: the husbandman does with reason laugh the^ to scorn. For God
himself did so direct and dispose the nature of the ground, that all should
not be for corn, or all wine; seeing the one has need of a fat, and the other
of a stony ground. And if the vines were pulled up, we should (says he)
deprive France of one of the greatest riches of the land. But there is a mean
propounded by those that have understanding in matters of imposts, which would
very much enrich the realm, and relieve the common people: which is, to lay
part of the ordinary charges upon corn, wine, salt, wood, linen cloth and
draperie: and most especially upon wine, salt, and corn, which are three
elements whereupon (next under God) the life of the stranger depends, and
which can never fail. The mines of the North and of the Indies are exhausted
in a short time, and the metals cannot grow again: but our springs of corn,
salt and wine are not to be drawn out. And howsoever the season of the year
does hinder them to come to perfection: yet other nations do not regard, at
what price soever they buy the^. And it comes to pass many times, that salt
is better cheap in England, Scotland, and Flaunders, then in France: neither
can other nations take offense if impositions be laid upon these Commodities:
for they have done the like upon diverse Commodities of their own. And so he
concludes, that by these means there would be the less transported: and so
the dearth of things qualified by greater store remaining within the land.

Another remedy against the dearth of things, especially of victuals, is to
restore the use of fish to his ancient credit: by means whereof, beef,
mutton, foul, and all such kind of flesh would become better cheap: showing
to this purpose the commodious situation of France, and the great number of
rivers within their dominion. And so with Galen he does prefer fish before
flesh: for that fish is more wholesome, and is never unsound, as the porke and
hare, nor scuruie as the sheep, nor lousie as the bucke, neither subject to
diverse diseases as beasts are: neither has God created four hundred several
sorts of fishes (which do not cost any thing to feed) in vain, being almost
all fit for meat: whereas there is not 40 sorts of beasts and foul, fit for
the nourishment of man: but to eat flesh and fish together is very
unwholesome. And hereupon he shows, in what great estimation fish was in
times past: and that the principal banquets were made of fish; as that of
Caligula which did continue six months, who made all the Mediterrane sea to
be fished; and but for variety, foul and other meats were used with it. The
coast of Picardie where the sea is of a sandy ground, (says he) there the fish
is flat; the coast of Normandy and Guienne which is stony, brings forth
the rockefish; and the coast of Britain which is slimie, yields the round
fish, as Lamprays, Congers and such like: and yet man knows not from whence
at one season does come the infinite millions of Herrings about the coasts of
France and England, Pilcheards about Galisiea, and Whales and other fishes in
newfound land and other seas. Commending hereupon our custom of England,
where men are constrained (says he) to observe fishdayes in the week,
notwithstanding the great plenty of beasts and fowls. The only mean to bring
this to pass is the example of the Prince and great men, whom the people will
imitate* Adrian a Hollander was of a poor scholar made Pope, by means of the
Emperor Charles the fifth his disciple: and because he did love to feed upon
hake-fish, presently all the Courtiers, and his followers to please him did the
like, and the people also: so that nothing was dearer at Rome then hake fish.
The example therefore is of great efficacy, which inferior men do follow of
their superiors.

Then he comes to the last point, which may hold the price of Commodities in a
certain equality: namely, certainty and equality of money, which for the
time must not be mutable or incertaine: for if it were, no man could make an
estate certain: the contracts will be uncertain; the rents, charges, taxes,
wages, pensions, penalties, customs and impositions, and all things else in the
Commonwealth will be uncertain: whereas the Prince (says he) must be the
warrant of the moneys unto his subjects, and is to have a singular care to
avoid embasing and counterfeiting. And then he discourses of some ancient
moneys and waights used by other nations, and of the property and diversity
of metals, and of the alteration of money in France, together with their
finenesse, proportion, and valuation: which (for to avoid prolixitie) I do
pass over, albeit I mean to touch in part hereafter.

This is the substance and answer of Master Bodine unto these Paradoxes, which
he has dedicated unto the President of the French kings Parliament: for to
encourage all them (says he) that wish well to the Commonwealth, to continue
in the study of so good a subject; to the end that Princes which have the
power to command, together with those that do give them counsel, may be more
resolved in those things, for the honor of God, and welfare of the
Commonwealth: when they shall understand the just complaints and griefs of the
poor people, which do feel the smart, but cannot for the most part judge of
the causes thereof; and those that have some judgment, cannot have audience or
means to make it known, but by writings unto those that can easily remedy
the same.

But if Master Bodine had according to his wisdom and deep judgment in
other matters, considered of these two Paradoxes: he would have made a direct
answer thereunto, before he would have proceeded in his discourse before
alleged.

The first Paradoxe being considered of with the second, will show a manifest
contradiction or contrariety. For the first does consist in giving of more
gold and silver for Commodities now, then in times past: which he denies. And
the second, in receiving less Commodities for the gold and silver now, then in
times past; which he affirms: which both ways is to be taken in nature of
Permutation.

Now if we do not give more quantity of gold and silver for Commodities then
in times past: how can we receive less Commodities for the gold and silver,
and thereby receive a loss, as in the second Paradoxe is alleged?

Again, if we do receive less quantity of Commodities for gold and silver,
then in times past, according to the second Paradoxe, whereby we sustain a
loss: how can the first Paradoxe be true, That nothing is grown dear, for
that we give no more quantity of gold and silver for Commodities, then in
times past?

The explanation of his intention touching these 2 Paradoxes, is more absurd
considering the premises. For whereas he says, that the king and his subjects
do now buy al things as dear as in times past, by giving as great a quantity
of gold or silver for it: it follows, that the king and other his subjects do
receive the like quantity of gold and silver proportionably for their
revenues, and not a payment of copper in lieu of gold and silver (as he says)
considering the course of money is all alike between the king and the subject.
But if we will take his meaning to be, that he has excepted the Crown lands
and incomes of the king, and the revenues of Noblemen and others, whereof the
price (as it should seem) is not altered with them; like as the Crown lands
with us, which are at the ancient rent, when silver was at twenty pence an
ounce, which ounce is now esteemed five shillings: how can this construction be
admitted, considering that he* does conclude again in general words, that
the loss which we think to have by the dearth of things, comes not by
giving more, but by receiving less quantity of gold and silver, then we were
wont to have? which is by enhauncing the price of money (says he) which is the
cause of the dearth of all things now, and brings a general poverty to the
realm. A conclusion most opposite to the first Paradoxe.

And whereas he says, that of necessity the embasing of the silver moneys
proceeds by the enhauncing of the gold: the word Embasing must be understood
in price, according to the proportion of valuation which is observed between
the gold and silver: which in those days was 11 of fine silver to one of fine
gold. But the silver is not embased by allay or copper in advancing the price
of gold: for the substance remains unaltered and becomes only abated in
price in regard of the gold. Now if Master Bodine had not showed before, that
Malestroit has mistaken himself in the setting down of the enhauncing of
money in price, and the embasing by allay: whereby the gold moneys by him
alleged to be risen from one to two and a half, and three in price, and the
silver moneys from one to 5: we might have examined this proportion between
gold and silver according to his allegation; and thereby made known, that he
had mistaken the matter as well in the alteration of moneys in valuation,
finenesse, and weight, as he did the whole ground of his Paradoxes. For having
lost the line, wherewith he went into the Labyrinth of moneys and their
property: he is like unto a man, who having lost his way amongst the woods, the
further he goes, the more he erreth from the right way.

Master Malestroit might have declared his intention in two words, if he had
had the true ground, and understood the matter he went about: by proving only,
that when moneys do alter in weight, or in finenesse, or in valuation, or in
all three; the price of things does alter only by denomination, if the
valuation be made accordingly.

As for example: an ounce of starling silver was divided heretofore by the
kings of England in 20 pieces, and so valued 20 pence, every penny in value
waighing a penny weight. This ounce in process of time (as we have showed
elsewhere) was divided afterward into 30 pieces, then 40 pieces, 45 pieces,
and now 60 pieces: so that a penny weight of starling silver is now three
pence, and the piece is only altered in name: for a three penny piece waigheth
but a penny weight. So that the ounce of silver being altered only in
denomination, the price of Commodities must needs receive the like name or
denomination. And if the price of Commodities were not risen above this
estimation of three for one: then M. Malestroit might have made good his first
Paradoxe: howbeit failed in his second Paradox. Again, let us suppose that the
Queen of England should reduce the valuation of an ounce of starling silver
unto 20 pence, presently the price of things would be altered accordingly: and
that, for which we give now 3 pence, should but bear the name of a penny;
which would seem to be better cheap, and yet would not be so in effect. For
we should give still the quantity of silver of three pence, albeit the name
thereof were altered: and therefore not better cheap. True it is, that the
Queen should receive for her incomes and revenues of Crown lands such a
quantity of gold and silver as her predecessors did in times past: and
Noblemen and others in like sort for their lands, and officers for their fees
being after the old rent and custom. But this reduction would prove very
prejudicial, considering that other Princes have enhaunced the price of their
moneys, which does carry a show of gain in the eyes or judgment of most men,
which are thereupon inclined to carry money unto the^: albeit, the price of the
Commodities of those Princes dominions, does not only counteruaile that
supposed gain in the general course of traffic, but also far surmount the
same. But the money with us not being altered in weight, finenesse or valuation
within these fifty years (in which time the price of Commodities is so much
altered) how can the first Paradoxe take any place? And if his second Paradox
had been of a true ground, what reason has any man to measure things present
with the things of former ages, so long as there is no alteration of the money
almost within the age of any man? For if above fifty years past I have
received an angel of such weight and finenesse as the angels now adays, for
ten shillings, and do pay out the same again for ten shillings; there can be
no loss, although I should receive less quantity of Commodities for the
same: which if I do, I cannot attribute the loss thereof upon my angel, but
rather to the dearth of Commodities, the money not having been altered within my
time.

King Henry the 8 in the beginning of his reign, did find the ounce of starling
silver to be valued at 40 pence, and the price of Commodities accordingly, the
money being in weight and finenesse according to the ancient standard of
England: at which time the moneys of other countries adjacent was not so much
advanced in price. For an angel being in his time valued at 6 shillings 8
pence, was then worth beyond the seas 9 shillings 7 pence, and the silver
money accordingly. Afterward toward the latter end of his reign upon
especial occasion, he caused all his money to be embased by allay of copper,
and made very base money: whereby the price of all Commodities was advanced.
So that the money (being altered in substance) was the cause to advance the
price of Commodities: albeit that afterward when (to her Majesty's great
honor) the substance of money was reduced to her former purity and finenesse,
had not the like effect; which seems to contradict our matter in hand. But we
must note here, that there is a coherence to be considered of in the money
between the weight, finenesse, and valuation; whereby if generally either of
these be altered, all things do alter in price accordingly: but if it be
altered in part with due consideration, it has not the like effect or
operation. King Henry did alter the finenesse of the money by allay of copper,
and withal did advance the valuation of an ounce of silver from 40 pence unto
45 pence, and the gold accordingly; accounting one of fine gold to 11 of fine
silver: whereby an angel was worth 7 shillings 6 pence. The money being
brought to the former goodness in her Majesty's reign, would have abated the
price of other things accordingly: had not the valuation been altered and
counteruailed the same, together with the increase of money. For this ounce of
silver aforesaid was valued at 60 pence, and that which before did bear the
name of 45 was called 60: which denomination caused al other things to remain
at the old price, whereunto they were come through the baseness of the money
before that time. Now before we conclude, it is worthy the noting, that when
in this kings time the angel was worth under the Archduke of Burgundy, 9
shillings 7 pence; the King did send unto the Duchess (whiles her husband was
in Germany) desiring her to value the angel at 10 shillings Flemish: but he
could not obtain the same. Which seems very strange, considering that the
advancing of the price of money, does cause the money to be transported to the
places where it is advanced: whereby all the angels might have bin carried into
her dominion. But she like a wise and politic Duchess, caused the matter to
be examined and considered of, sending men skillful in mint causes into
England. And finding that the golden fleece, alias Toison d'or, was the money
then most current with her: and that the same was worth both in regard of
weight and finenesse, as much as the angel, and was also valued at 9 shillings 7
pence: she could not grant the kings requests without altering also her money,
unless she would have suffered the English merchants to bring angels unto her
for 10 shillings, and to carry away the golden fleeces for 9 shillings 7 pence
to be converted into angels, to the great loss of her dominions, both in the
money, and to leave the Commodities of her country vnuented: so long as there
were a gain upon the money, which abated the price of commodities.

These two Paradoxes being thus unmasked, are easily conceived of any man of
judgment to be far from the truth: and therefore will the understanding
thereof be accounted a matter of small moment, as all things else are when they
be known; like unto the egg of Columbus, who having discovered the West
Indies, and hearing some say at a dinner, that if he had not done it, another
might and would; called for an egg, and willed all the guests one after another
to set it up on end: which when they could not do, he gently bruising the one
end of it did make it flat, or rather by swinging did break the yolke within,
and so set it up: showing how easy it was to do that which a man had seen
done before him.

Now let us examine the answer of Master Bodine.
Master Malestroit was of opinion, That nothing was grown dearer in three
hundred years, as is before showed. But Master Bodine was of a contrary
opinion, and shows five causes of the dearth of things, as we have also
declared. Whereunto for a general and direct answer by way of Replication, we
say: that to show the alteration of the price of things and the causes thereof,
is of small moment, the true ground of the matter being by him mistaken. Which
true ground must be by making a comparison of the enhauncing of the price of
the Commodities of one country, with the price of the Commodities of other
countries: and thereby to find out, whether things are grown dear with us in
effect; and whether we pay more proportionably for the foreign Commodities
within the aforesaid time of three hundred years, then we do receive for the
price of our home Commodities. For if we do now pay more for corn, wine, and
all other victuals; and sell our Commodities for more then we were wont to do
proportionably: here is no alteration in effect, but in name only, so long as
the substance of the money is not altered in property. But if we sell our
Commodities dearer, and buy our victuals dearer then heretofore; and that over
and above the price thereof, we must pay far dearer for the foreign
Commodities, then proportionably the price of our Commodities is risen: this
causes us to be aloser in particular, and brings by an ouer-ballancing of
foreign Commodities with our home Commodities, a general loss to the
Commonwealth: which to supply, causes us to make up the inequality with money,
which is the treasure of the realm. The consideration then must be, not to
compare things within themselves in the Commonwealth where we do live; but
between us and other nations with whom we deal, either by way of permutation
of Commodities for Commodities, or Commodities for money in specie, or by
exchange. So that we must examine the course of Commodities, Money* and
Exchange, which are the three simples, under the which all the trade and
traffic is performed: whereof we shall entreat, when we shall have examined
the matters by him alleged in particular.

The five causes of the dearth of things by him alleged, are to be
distinguished according to our form* observation. For the first and last cause
concerning plenty of gold and silver, and the alteration of the valuation of
money, may be causes that generally things are dear. But the other three
touching Monopolies, the want and wast of things, and the pleasure of Princes;
can but make things particularly dear, according to the use thereof: wherein
the time makes also now and then an alteration upon occasion; as when arms
are dearer in time of war, then in time of peace: victuals in time of famine:
wood in winter, and water in desert places, and such like.

Seeing then that plenty of money makes not only the Commodities of a
country dear, but that they are also Nerui bellorum, the sinews of war;
every Prince is to have a singular care for the preservation and augmentation
thereof: especially those Princes that have no mines of gold or silver within
their dominions, or such as have had them, and are now without them. The gold
was wont to come much out of the mountains of Boheme, and rivers of Pannonia
and Swaden. Out of Spain, there was wont to come both out of the rivers and
monntaines above 20 thousand pound weight yearly, which is all exhausted: then
it came from the West Indies, first from Santo Domingo and other places, where
it does also cease: now it comes from Peru by certain millions, which will
also take an end. The silver is brought also from the West Indies, and was much
found in Germany: but is now in many places drawn out.

The most noble Kings of this realm have always had a singular care to
accumulate treasure; deeming therefore, that it was neither expedient nor
convenient for them to suffer the transportation of their moneys or bullion out
of the same: as by diverse acts of Parliament may be seen, whereby it was made
fellonie for the space of many years continuing.

William the Conqueror caused a description to be made of the realm, and the
land to be measured, reserving so much thereof, as he thought convenient for
the Crown: and the rest he divided amongst his Barons and knights, who did pay
him therefore a certain sum of money: whereby he did gather a treasure.

Henry the second succeeding him within one hundred years, having had many
great wars, and joined Ireland to the Crown of England, conquering also
Scotland, and reducing Normandy and other places in France to the Crown; and
having reigned 35 years, had never cause to impose any tribute, subsidy or
tax upon his subjects: and left notwithstanding behind him in treasure 900
thousand pounds; which in those days was not only a great matter (the West
Indies not being discovered) but also for that it would make now with us 27
hundred thousand pounds, the ounce of silver being esteemed at five shillings,
which then was but at twenty pence.

Edward the third made many good laws to keep the treasure within the realm,
and for the advancement of his home Commodities, and had a great care, that the
foreign Commodities, should not ouer-ballaunce his home Commodities: knowing
that if he paid more for them, then he made of his Commodities, the
difference must be made up and balanced with the treasure or money of the
realm. For having brought the working and making of cloth into the realm, he
did devise by all means to find vent for the same, observing a due course for
to prevent the transportation of his money: and that the true value of his
money might be answered by exchange with the moneys of other countries. And
forasmuch as the same course of exchange could not be done by a multitude of
people so conveniently, (the most part being ignorant of the true value of the
moneys of other countries) he did appoint and ordain an Exchanger, who did
make exchaunges with all men for foreign parts, according to value for value,
and specie for specie, proceeding in all things most orderly, as may appear
also by that: a sack of wool contains 13 Tods according to the Lunar
months of the year, every Tod 4 nails for the 4 weeks to the month, and so
52 weeks in the year: every nail 7 pounds to the 7 days of the week, and
so 28 days for the month, as 28 pounds for a Tod: and in all 364 pounds for
so many days of the year.

Richard the second having an especial regard to the ouer-ballancing of
foreign Commodities with his home Commodities, caused the Statute of
Employment for merchants strangers, to be duly executed. And if they could not
sell their Commodities within a convenient time, they were to transport the
same again: and if they made not their return in Commodities, they might
deliver their money by exchange, but only to the Exchaunger by him ordained,
and none other.

Henry the fifth confirming the former statutes, caused the Staplers to bring
into the realm in return of their wools a great part in bullion, and the
Statute of Employment to be duly executed. And the like was done by other kings.

Henry the seventh, in the 3 year of his reign, made an Act of Parliament for
explanation of the former Statutes, prohibiting all manner of exchange or
rechaunge within his realm, or for any foreign parts: and that no person
should make any exchange without the kings license, or of his exchanger
according to the statute of Richard the second. For in his time the Bankers had
their beginning, who did invent the merchandising exchange, and made of money a
merchandise: whereby they found the means to overrule the course of
Commodities, and to advance the price of their Commodities, abating the price
of others. But this prudent and politic king, having his coffers stored with
standing treasure, did (for the furtherance of traffic, and for to advance
the price of his Commodities) lend great sums of money freely to the
Merchants. And whereas other nations came into the realm to buy his
Commodities, which he knew to be staple Commodities and of great request, as
being most necessary for the use of man; he did inhibite them the buying of
any, unless they became bound in Recognizance not to carry any to the place,
where his subjects kept their Marts: and did so qualify the course of
Commodities, money and exchange, as he left an incredible wealth and treasure
in those days, when the West Indies were but newly discovered, and an ounce of
silver but valued at 40 pence.

Henry the 8 in the 18 year of his reign, perceiving the price of money
continually to rise beyond the seas, after remission made unto the Archduke of
Burgundy, and no reformation ensuing, caused the angel noble to be valued
from 6 shillings 8 pence, unto seven shillings 6 pence: whereby an ounce of
silver was worth five and forty pence: afterward requested the Duchess to
value his angel at a higher rate, as is before showed, which was clean
contrary. And then Cardinal Wolsey obtained a patent to alter the valuation
of money, as he should see cause from time to time. In the 22 year of his
reign, the king being informed, that diverse nations brought abundance of
foreign Commodities into his realm, and fearing an ouerballancing of
Commodities (for that those nations receiving ready money for their
Commodities, which money they ever delivered by exchange unto other Merchants,
and never employed the same on the Commodities of the realm; whereby his
Majesty was hindered in his Customs, and the Commodities of the realm less
vented) he caused a Proclamation to be made according to the former statutes,
That no person should make any exchange contrary to the true meaning of the
said Statutes, upon pain to be taken the kings mortal enemy, and to forfeit
all that he might forfeit: which took place but for a short time, because the
wars brought all things out of order. So that at last the base money was coined,
which being done without any order, brought diverse inconveniences to the
realm.

Edward the sixth did cry down those base moneys of his father, and caused new
money to be coined, according to the ancient standard of the realm, and did
also prohibit very severely the transportation thereof by Proclamations:
albeit they proved fruitless, as they have done in her Majesty's time.

By this brief collection is to be seen, the great care these noble Princes
have had, to the end they should not find themselves and their kingdom without
treasure of gold and silver, drawn by means of their Commodities: and to
avoid Not to fall into that error of the French king Charles the ninth; who
after the massacre of Paris finding the treasure of his realm exhausted, and
his subjects wealth to consist more of plate then of ready money, was advised
by some, that under color of the suppressing of pride, it were good to take a
course to prescribe every man, what store of plate he should keep according to
his degree and quality, and the rest to be converted into money. Others were
of opinion, that it would not only breed a coffeehouse unto his subjects,
but a derogation and dishonor of the kings reputation; seeing that the estate
of a Prince does as much consist by reputation as by strength: wherefore like
good Politicians did advise the king to embase his money, which would cause the
same not to be transported, and the plate to be of course converted into money.
Which was done accordingly, and had also that effect: saving that where they
thought money would not be transported, they found themselves deceived. For the
course of exchange was not looked into by them, which did cause a gain to be
had upon the money, and so long as the gain remained, it was still transported:
whereby at last he lost the plate of the realm being converted into money, as
well as he had lost his money before that time.

M. Bodine does show by diverse examples, that there was not so much silver and
gold in times past 300 years ago, as there is now, he might well have said in
100 years and less: howbeit this general examination is to small purpose. For
every Commonwealth is to make a particular examination, whether they do
proportionably participate of the general abundance or plenty of gold and
silver found now adays, and not by co^paring the same unto the quantity of
times past: for so should they be deceived. And we need not to prove, that
there is now more gold and silver then in times past; for it is clear in every
man's judgment. And even of very late years, we find recorded in our
Chronicles of England, that during the government of the most victorious king
Henry the eight in the 14 year of his reign in a Parliament then holden, the
whole substance of London was not taken to be worth 20 hundred thousand pounds:
this city being the head of the realm where the wealth is heaped up, as the
corn of a field into a barn. And in the year following, upon the demand of
a subsidy of four shillings of the pound, it was proved that the same demand
(amounting to 800 thousand pounds) was more then all the ready money and plate
of the realm came unto, which was out of the kings hands: and yet did amount
but to about one hundred mark a parish, not reckoning so many parishes as
Machiauell has done; but only about 12 thousand in the whole realm: the
spacious country of France containing but 27400 parishes. Which ready money
and plate of the realm would be now adays found far differing, and much
more, and yet not proportionable to the abundance of gold and silver found in
other countries: and as we may see, that Master Bodine has noted of the city
of Paris, and of the many millions which have come from the West Indies;
whereby the realm should be stored with sufficient treasure and wealth. For as
he called their salt to be a Manna: so may we call our cloth, lead and tin,
which be our staple Commodities most necessary for the behoof of man. And
therefore ought this with us to be the first cause of the increase of the
wealth of the realm, the rather for that in the second cause, which Master
Bodine notes to be The increase of people: we are not proportionably inferior
unto them, as we may judge by diverse causes: namely, First, for the marriage of
the Clergy. Secondly, by the people driven into the realm for Religion by
the wars of other countries. Thirdly, the seldom plague or mortality.
Fourthly, the seldom famine. Fifthly, the small wars of countries adjacent or
foreign wars, having had no civil wars at home. And sixthly, the untimely
marriages of both men and women now adays. Whereby Colonies might be spared for
the inhabiting of other dominions, as heretofore was once taken in hand. The
third cause concerning the trade for Turkey and Barbary, is not only common
with us for those countries: but also with diverse other countries, where the
French men have no trade at all. And as for their Banks of money, they would
rather be prejudicial and impouerish the realm, (as they are used) then do any
good, as is sufficiently declared in our Treatise of Exchanges: which other
nations will find in time, and most especially Princes that have occasion to
use them, and might well avoid them; if a due care were had for the
accumulating of a standing and yet a running treasure within such bounds, as
would still ebb and flow for the good of Princes and their Commonwealth.

Concerning Monopolies, it is strange that Master Bodine does with such
brevity pass over the^, showing only what he means thereby according to
the Etimologie, true sense and definition of the word: when merchants,
artificers, or laborers do assemble themselves to set a price upon
Commodities, which one man alone may also count when he buyeth up all, that is
to be had of one kind of merchandise, to the end he alone may sell the same at
his pleasure. The engrossing, forestalling, or incorporating of any Commodities
or victuals, is intolerable in any Commonwealth, unless that the trade of
those Commodities would decay, if a kind of incorporation were not used. For
when the co^mon-people do buy generally things dear; they can generally also
sell their Commodities dear accordingly: but when some particular things are
dear, they cannot do so. Now as the effects of al Monopolies is to make the
price of Commodities dear: so must the price of things in this regard be
considered between our home Commodities, and the price of foreign: which if we
will but examine within the compass of 50 years, that our moneys have been
without alteration, as is before expressed: we shall easily procure the great
error or malice of those that do accuse the company of Merchants adventurers
to be a Monopoly; which false imputation may be reproved by by this only, that
all foreign Commodities are dearer then our home Commodities: which are not
risen in price accordingly, and yet of late years are for the most part amended
in the making and the other impaired: and one sort of cloth is sold at one time
beyond the seas by 2, 3, 4, or more pounds differing in a pack one from
another: neither have the merchants adventurers the trade of cloth only in
their own hands. For diverse other companies of merchants are privileged, and
do transport great quantity of clothes into foreign parts, as well as they;
and it is free for all strangers that are in league with her Majesty to buy
cloth and to transport the same at their pleasure. Which reasons do concern
the effects of Monopoly. Whereas for the manner of their traffic, whereby
every man tradeth particularly and apart with his own stock, sells by his
own factor or servant, with diverse other reasons: we will refer our selves to
that which their Secretary has written of late, in defense of their good
orders and constitutions. Concluding, that as their trade is the most
important, and as in all traffickes the universal does govern the particular:
so the dissolution of that society would be the undoing of all the trade, and
bring a great confusion to the Realm. For albeit, that some would have other
nations to come and buy the commodities of us within the realm: for, say they,
there is (according to the Proverb) twenty in the hundred difference between
Will you buy? and will you sell? these men have no consideration for the
maintenance of nauigatio^, which is the greatest strength of the realm: whose
defense (next under God) consists most in ships and well experienced
mariners, that most carefully are to be provided for. Whereas also the
transporting of our cloth to certain places, does cause other nations to
resort thither to buy them: which may be more properly called to be, Will you
sell? seeing that those nations do bring their own Commodities unto our
merchants to the places by them appointed, which is in effect as much as, Will
you buy? And would not this be, VVil you buy? if in a dispersed and straggling
manner our cloth were carried to al markets be yond the seas in several places?
which would take away the desire of buying: for he that buyeth, does it in hope
of sale with a gain to the places where he intends to carry the Commodity.
Which Commodity, if he knows to be extant in most places to be vented; will
quench his desire of buying: and he that comes to barter other Commodities
for ours, has also the like consideration. But let us admit, that our cloth
would be advanced in price, when men should (by multitudes) run to the
markets, or into the country in all places to buy it: what would be the event
of it? It would not only be sold beyond the seas with a smaller gain, and
many times to loss: (we being naturally inclined to make speedy returns)
but we should also pay dearer for the foreign Commodities, which we should
obtain by way of permutation, or for the bills obligatorie of the Merchants
to whom we should sell our cloth. And if our merchants were cut off, and that
other nations should buy the cloth within the realm, and so advance the price
thereof (as it happens most commonly in France and Spain at the vintage time
with their wines and raisins) then foreign Commodities would be sold dearer
unto us by them again. For the small gain had upon our home Commodities
causes us, and would cause them to seek a better gain upon the foreign
Commodities, to the general hurt of the realm, and to the exhausting of our
moneys which (to balance the matter) must supply the same. So that the
enhauncing of the price of cloth in this manner would be but an imaginary
gain, and bring in the end an exceeding loss to the general Commonwealth:
whose welfare is to be preferred before any particular Commodity of any member
thereof. And it were to be wished, that laborers and workmens wages were
augmented, although our cloth should cost so much the dearer, as we have noted
elsewhere: and that with great regard the poor people were set on work, and
(by way of corporation) their handiworke were vented; which (without incurring
the compass of Monopoly) is very commendable in all Commonwealths, and used
in many countries. Lastly, that the Statutes concerning the maintenance of
navigations were duly executed.

The third cause (says Master Bodine) is the want of things, proceeding of
the excessive trade of things, or by the wast thereof. Touching the trade of
any particular Commodities of the realm we may well pass over, as he does,
and make only our stay with the trade for corn. Which if it were guided with
that due consideration, both for preservation and transportation, as is
requisite; would make plain the Proverb ( France cannot be famished) to be
more incident and proper to the realm of England, then to the realm of
France: because that proportionably we have more fertile ground for corn, and
that in all places of the kingdom, then France has but in some places. For
those countries where the vines do grow, are unapt for corn, and must have
their provision from the countries adjacent, and many times out of England:
when our corn is thither transported, being with us too good cheap in regard
of their wines and other Commodities. The comparison whereof being made, and the
goodness of our corn regarded, will make manifest, that to sell our wheat
for thirty shillings the quarter, and other grains after the rate, is good
cheap: and that the Prince notwithstanding may impose a great custom or
license for the transportation thereof, which transportation might be done
moderately, and according to the quantity extant, and for so much thereof as
might conveniently be spared, if the Magistrate and those that are in
authority had the rule of the market, in such sort as the Venetians have; who
by the means of the Justices of every province, do know little more or less
the quantity of corn in all places: whereupon certain substantial men are
appointed from time to time to have a consideration of the quantity or
scarcity thereof; which quantity being known and in what places, may be a
direction to those that are in authority, to consider what the realm may
spare, having a regard to the season of the year, and making the price
accordingly. And when the price of corn is limited and made known in writing
in certain public places on every Monday of the week: all ingrossers,
forestallers or others, that buy corn to sell again, are prevented, because
that the price thereof is not in their own power, but by the direction of
those honest men rated at all times according to the quantity, and as the
harvest is distant, or at hand, which is so notified unto all men, as
aforesaid. Whereby the execution of the law for the making of the loves of
bread is duly observed, without any trouble unto the magistrate. For the baker
knows how to make his loves and of what weight, delivering the same according
to the true weight by those men appointed, unto any man that does call for it:
which the poor does so well observe (for that his indigence gives him cause)
that without troubling any officer, he is sure to have his penni-worth: and if
he should find it wanting of his weight, presently with the assistance of an
Officer, (as it were) the Constable, he does seize upon all the bakers bread
then extant, and takes the one moitie for him, and the other for the poor of
the Hospitals. And who would buy corn to sell again, being debarred not to
sell at his pleasure or with gain, and uncertain what the price will be made
by others? And what baker is he that would make his loaves of a lesser weight,
when he must sell them by weight as aforesaid? By these means is corn brought
to the market, and none may be sold but in the market, and the Clerk of the
market takes notice thereof: and what is by license transported, is done upon
due knowledge, and without defrauding the Prince of his custom. To have many
storehouses in several places of the realm in the principal towns, is most
convenient for the preservation of corn; which when need requires, may be
provided from foreign countries, when the unseasonable times cause us to have
scarcity or want thereof notwithstanding all the industry and care of man.
Concerning the immoderate use of foreign Commodities in wearing and wasting,
by cutting and putting into several strange new fangled fashions, we do
refer the examination thereof unto those that have authority to reprehend men
of their actions: wishing reformation where things are amiss. And albeit, that
gay and sumptuous apparel is a demonstration of pride, yet a country clown
may be as proud in a frize coat, as a gentleman in a velvet gown. For pride
harbors in the mind, and the difference is only in the giving of example
unto others: wherein the costly and gorgeous apparel gives offense, which may
be handled hereafter. Concluding therefore this point with Master Bodine
touching allume (whereof abundance is spent with us) we say that there is
stuff sufficient within the realm, whereof to make it exceeding good: but so
long as we be able to afford the Romish allume for 24 shillings the hundred,
and other sorts accordingly, being brought into English ships, it is better for
the Commonwealth to bring it from foreign parts, then to make it within the
realm.

The fourth cause of the dearth of things, being The pleasure of Princes or
great men, which does give a price unto things; is grounded upon estimation,
the very ground of the value of all temporal things: which things in regard of
the behoof of man, are serving for food, houses, and apparel, and (as they
say) for the back and belly. This estimation is authorized by common consent
almost of al men and nations: and therefore of such efficacy, that some
Politicians have observed, that things that be in d(...) things that be not in
deed, b(...)med to be in deed, make n(...)rence in the course of traffic.
(...) rule the Bankers, have study(...) (...) might be made apparent, if I
we(...) solued that it would tend to the g(...) of the Commonwealth. But
leaving this, let us consider of the second rule observed by Plato, That as the
Prince is, so are the subjects, who by imitation follow his example, which
sooner enters into their eyes the^ their ears: and the greater their
authority is, the more affectionate is their imitation. Alexander cast his
head aside, and all the Court held their necks awry: Denis was purblind, and
his Courtiers stumbled at every step, and iustled each other as if they had
been euill-fighted: and so of other Princes, whose examples have been
contagious to their subjects. Master Bodine makes mention of three great
Prin(...) (...)ne time, which did advance (...)g and precious stones. Tou(...)
(...)arning, unless it be accom(...) with the knowledge how to (...)r to
hauewealth, it is little accoun(...) whereas a lumpish blocke-head (...)le
without wit or wisdom, shall be much made of, only because he has money or
wealth; whereof by adverse fortune or casualtie being deprived, he is then
seen in his own color, and laid open to the world. And concerning pearls
and precious stones, it is not strange, that some men do despise and account
them as glistering toys and trifles, considering the diversity of men's
opinions, which made the ancient Philosophers to say: That the world was
governed by opinions. But if these men should well consider the pure creation
and virtue of the stones, they would judge otherwise; and their own opinion
(opposite to most men) would condemn their error: seeing that a general
estimation does approve the value of things, especially of things that are
durable. Which was the cause that when Commodities began to abound in the
world, all metals (as being fit for preservation) were esteemed, and the
purest metal most. The holy Scripture does manifest unto us, in what
estimation precious stones, gold, and silver, have been always from the
beginning: and to what holy uses they have been employed and appropriated,
especially gold and silver. Was not Jericho destroyed with the inhabitants and
their goods by Gods commandment, as things execrable: and would not God have
the gold and other metals preserved, and to be consecrated and kept in his
treasury? Was it not gold and silver wherewith his temple at Jerusalem was
adorned and beautified? But why should I enter into the enumeration of
examples, to illustrate and prove the antiquity of the estimation of gold,
silver, and precious things: seeing that in all Commonweales and countries,
that only is decent and of estimation, which the custom does allow or
approve? Hence the Proverb took beginning, Countries fashion, countries
honor: which makes the Indian and Blackemoore to dominiere with his
glistering beads, brass rings for their ears and arms, and to give us gold
and silver for them. Strange was therefore the imagination of Sir Thomas Moore
in his conceipted Commonwealth of Vtopia: where he fained gold to be in such
contumely, that they made their chamber-pots and other vessels that serve for
most vile uses, of pure gold; and have the same in every man's private house.
And their chains, fetters and gyues wherein they tie their bondmen, were all
of gold, as being the reproachful badge of infamous persons. Their gemmes and
precious stones were holden for toys for young children to play withal. And to
prove the estimation of things to be according to the fashion of every
country, and to give gold his due commendation, we will use his own pleasant
tale, in manner as he has set down the same. The Ambassadors of the next
countries unto Vtopia, which knew the manners and fashions of the Vtopians
(which give no honor to sumptuous apparel, and hold gold to be infamed and
reproachful) came to Amaurote (the principal city of that I Will) in very homely
and simple array. But the Anemolians because they dwell far thence, and had
very little acquaintance with them, hearing that they were all apparelled alike,
and that very rudely and homely; thinking them not to have the things which
they did not wear: being therefore more proud then wise, determined in the
gorgiousnesse of their apparel to represent very gods; and with the bright
shining and glistering of their gay clothing, to dazzle the eyes of the silly
poor Vtopians. So there came in four Ambassadors, with a hundred servants,
all apparelled in changeable colors, the most of them in silks: the
Ambassadors themselves (for at home in their own country they were Noblemen)
in cloth of gold, with great chains of gold, with gold hanging at their ears,
with gold rings upon their fingers, with brouches and aglets of gold upon their
caps, which glistered full of pearls and precious stones: to be short, trimmed
and adorned with all those things, which among the Vtopians were either the
punishment of bondmen, or the reproach of infamed persons, or else trifles for
young children to play withal. Therefore it would have done a man good at his
heart, to have seen how proudely they displayed their Peacockes feathers, how
much they made of their painted sheathes, and how lustily they set forth and
advanced themselves; when they compared their gallant apparel with the poor
raiment of the Vtopians: for all the people were swarmed forth into the
streets. And on the other side, it was no less pleasure to consider how much
they were deceived, and how far they missed of their purpose, being contrary
ways taken, then they thought they should have been. For to the eyes of all
the Vtopians (except very few, which had been in other countries for some
reasonable cause) all that gorgeousness of apparel seemed shameful and
reproachful. Insomuch that they most reverently saluted the most vile and most
abject of them for Lords, judging them by their wearing of golden chains to be
bondmen: yea, you should have seen children also (that had cast away their
pearls and precious stones, when they saw the like sticking upon the
Ambassadors cappes) dig and push their mothers under the sides, saying thus
to them: Look mother, how great a lubber does yet wear pearls and precious
stones, as though he were a little child still. But the mother, yea and that
also in good earnest: Peace son (says she) I think he be some of the
Ambassadors fools. Some found fault at their golden chains, as to no use or
purpose, being so small and weak, that a bondsman might easily break them: and
again so wide and large, that when it pleased him, he might cast them off, and
run away at liberty whither he would. But when the Ambassadors had been
there a day or two, and saw so great abundance of gold so lightly esteemed; yea
in no less reproach, the^ it was with them in honor: and besides that, more
gold in the chains and gyues of one fugitive bondsman, then all the costly
ornaments of them three was worth; they began to abate their courage, and
for very shame laid away all that gorgeous array, whereof they were so proud.
Which in effect is as much as to accommodate and fashion himself to the manner
and fashion of the country, being also grounded upon estimation although of
baser things: which is to prefer earthen and glass vessels, wherein they
eat and drink (as he says) before gold, silver, and other precious things.
But if all the wit and wisdom of man were as yet to devise, what thing would
be fittest to set a price unto all other things, and to be as a just measure
and proportion between man and man in the trade and traffic of things, they
could not find any thing more proper then pure gold, and other metals
accordingly. The four elements have such an equal proportion in gold, that
none is predominant over the other; whereby all corruption is excluded, whether
you take the same according to the qualities of hot and dry, cold and dry,
hot and moist, and cold and moist with Galen: or according to the substance of
the elements drawn into salt, sulphur, and mercury with Paracelsus. For it
never wastes or consumes by fire, and the more it is burned, the purer it is;
which cannot be said of any other metal: there is no rust or scurfe that
diminishes the goodness or substance thereof: it abides the fretting and
liquors of salt and vinegar without damage, which wears any other thing: it
needs no fire ere it be made gold, for it is gold as soon as it is found: it
draws without wool, as it were wool: and it is easily spread in leaves of
marvelous thinness: you may adorn or guild any other metal with it.
Neither is it inferior unto any other metal to make vessel and curious
works: it defiles not the thing it touches as silver does, wherewith you may
draw lines: it resembles in color the celestial bodies, and it is
medicinable and brings gladness to the heart of man: it is fit also to be cut
or divided into many pieces to make money, and goes into a little room, being
easy and (...) table to avoid the combersome (...)age of Commodities from one
country into another. And what thing can be invented or devised, that for this
purpose has all these qualities and properties? With great reason therefore
has gold his due estimation above other things. Also such things wherein the
art of man is illustrated; as in pictures and other curious works, are worthy
of great commendation, and to be preferred before many other things that man
does use, for to live in the most ciuille manner above other nations which live
barbarously. In all which, the general care of the Prince must be, and the
particular regard of the subject, that the same be done for the good of the
Commonwealth: so that the expenses thereof do not surmount the incomes or
revenues, having a due consideration of the moderate use of foreign
Commodities, and at reasonable rates, according as the price and vtteranc(...)
of our home Commodities, both (...)victuals and other wares: without studying
how to live without the traffic and commerce with other nations; seeing that
God caused Nature to bestow and distribute her benefits, or his blessings to
several Climates, supplying the barrenness of some things in one country
with the fruitfulness and store of other countries, to the end that
intercha^geably one common weal should live with another.

Concerning the last cause of the dearth of things by the alteration of money,
wherein Master Malestroit had a certain good purpose if he could have proved
the same to have been in France: Master Bodine concludes that the price of
things is not altered by the valuation of moneys in sort by him alleged, and
yet that things are grown dear: which only the^ comes to pass by one cause,
which he called almost the only cause, which is the aundance of gold and silver
of late years running with us into these parts of the world. For the other
causes (as we have noted before) make particularly some things dear, but not
generally all things. And for as much as we have spoken hereof in answer of the
Paradoxes of Master Malestroit, therefore we pass over it: and come to the
examination of the remedies which Master Bodine alleges which do only tend
to remedy things in particular, being well considered of.

He says, that the abundance of gold and silver now a days more then in times
past, must partly excuse the dearth of things: which being so, it follows,
that this is not to be taken as a remedy, nor yet as a true cause of the dearth
of things; for what coherence is there to allege a matter as a remedy against
the dearth of things, when this remedy (as I have showed before) is the only
cause of the dearth it self (as he says) which must excuse the same? which
excuse being admitted in defense thereof: does consequently prove, that things
are not grown dear to our hurt in particular, or to the prejudice of the
Common wealth in general, because that having more gold and silver then we had
heretofore, we are made able to give more then before. And if we will say: Take
away the cause, and then the effect will cease, that is to say; Take away or
diminish the abundance of gold and silver, and then things will become better
cheap: this would be a very great absurdity. For as he is a foolish Physician,
that cannot cure his patients disease, unless he cast him in another sickness:
so the Prince that cannot govern his subjects but by taking from them the
wealth and commodity of life, must needs grant that he knows not how to
govern me^. A provident and wise Prince therefore will rather conclude thus:
Are things grown dear, through the abundance of gold and silver of late
years? then is it most requisite for me to procure to participate of that
abundance, as much as lies in my power, and to accumulate treasure for me and
my subjects by importation of gold and silver, and prevention of the
transportation of any: the rather that the course of commodities in particular
has this property, that as by the excessive exportation of some things, the
like things do grow dear: so by the ouerabundant importation of other
commodities things do become better cheap.

Another remedy against the dearth of things, especially victuals is to restore
the use of fish to the ancient credit and estimation: and hereupon he takes
occasion to commend our custom of England for observing fishdayes in the
week. And for effecting of the like in France: he propounds the example of
the Prince and magistrate whom the people will imitate. We may wish that both
the one and the other were duly executed or observed, whereby fishing would be
better maintained, and most especially the navigations: and flesh would in some
seasons of the year be used more commodiously, and better for the health of
man. The great number of all sorts and kinds of fish according to the
observation of the Romans (noted by master Bodine) ought to move us
thereunto; fish being so pure a creature, that were it not, that we see the
same subject unto diseases, it would be very doubtful, whether the same amongst
other creatures was cursed for man's transgression, the Scripture speaking only
that the earth was cursed therefore: considering also the Proverb, As sound as
a fish: and if any be subject to diseases it is fish of rivers or of standing
waters and fishponds, which may be cured by strawing much parsley into the
water. And because that flesh and fish are two principal things for the food
of man, and that our purpose is not to omit any thing, that incidently may be
handled for the good of the commonwealth, therefore will it not be exorbitant
the rule of our method to discourse somewhat thereof. The best season of the
year to eat fish is from September until March, if we will regard the
goodness of the fish: howbeit that for the increase of beasts, we are
commanded with great reason and consideration, to eat most fish in March and
April, when he loses his taste. The fresh fish of rivers is of more
digestion, and better for sick persons; but the seafish is of more
nourishment. All fish being moist and cold of nature, is qualified by the
addition of salt: and being eaten with much bread cannot do any hurt,
especially unto choleric persons, with whose complexion it agrees best. And
whereas all other creatures do first decay and putrify in the belly, the fish
does first putrify in the head: for no other reason, but that having only one
gut, the meat does easily pass the same, without digestion or corruption;
which by staying long with other ereatures causes putrefaction: an argument
that fish is more healthful then flesh, howbeit that (through the continual
use) flesh is more agreeable with our nature. And whereas master Bodine says
that it is unknown unto man, from whence at one season the infinite millions
of herrings do come: we are of another opinion. For the Herring (against the
nature of all fish, which goes against the water and tide, fearing the lifting
up of his scales) comes from the Northern seas, and goes to the West Ocean
to enjoy the temperature of the air. For whereas all the summer he has taken
his ease and pleasure in the Northern seas, desirous to enjoy the water
thereof, as being sweeter then that of other seas: he returns in winter to
those places, that have been most beaten of the Sun, being hotter and deeper,
as also less troubled with the winds and tempests; unto the which the
Northern seas are more subject, and where the sands are thereby elevated, and
concurring with the water. For the Herring above all other fishes cannot endure
the cold, and therefore are they also dead as soon as they be out of the water.
Air is the cause of putrification, which those that have studied to preserve
flesh long without salt, have found by experience. Salt does bite out the blood
of the flesh, which we see will not keep unless it be covered with brine made
of salt: yet those that do travel under the line called Aequinoctiall, do
keep fresh mutton, veale, or any other flesh for a long time without salt; for
they press out the blood, and having well dried the same with linen clouts,
they put it into their barrels of meal, especially meal of Rye, as it comes
from the East contries, and so they do closevp the same, that no air can
enter: which is an easy matter, and their meal not the worse for to be used.
Some do also a little perboile their flesh, and keep it close stopped in
vinegar: but that is not so sauory to be eaten. The knowledge hereof is fit for
Nauigators. But for the good of all the inhabitants of a Commonwealth, let us
commend the singular care of those Magistrates which (to prevent all corruption
and diseases of evil air and corrupted blood) do command, that oxen and all
other beasts should be fasting a day or two before they should be slain: and
then hanged up for the like time, or more, as the season of the year will
permit, to let the blod run out before the Butchers may sell the flesh
thereof; who knowing the loss of weight by the bleeding, and that it does not
show so well, are hasty to sell the same to the great hurt and danger of the
health of man. This care of the Magistrate therefore tends to the
preservation of the health of the subject. And to this purpose we do not hold
impertinent to commend a good order observed in other countries, for keeping of
their cities and towns clean without having so many scauengers in every
parish, as we do, to the great charge of the inhabitants. For whereas the
cleansing of all vaults is brought to certain places and used for dung, there
are certain three or four scauengers which for two or three hundred pounds a
year take the same, and the dirt of the streets to farm and do every one of
them keep twelve or more horses and carts to carry the dirt away: which by
scattering straw along the streets from time to time is gathered up, and so
carried to the places where the cleansing of the vaults is mingled with it,
which makes good dung, and is carried all the country over; preventing hereby
corruption of air, and bettering their grounds for increase.

His last point concerning certainty and equality of money, which may hold the
price of commodities and all other things in a certain equality by a due
course of exchange, is a matter of great moment, as we have showed heretofore:
which master Bodine holds so difficult to be understood, that when any man
is said to be of experience, and to understand matters wherein he is surpassing
others; that hence the proverb is derived, that One does understand his Par,
or Equality: be it in matter of exchange or moneys, whereby the course of
commodities is ruled. But this cannot properly be taken as a remedy against the
dearth of things, for it does keep a due equality in the price of all things,
and makes not any alteration. So that we may conclude as before, that master
Bodine having mistaken the true ground of the matter he entreated of: the
remedies by him propounded are also incertaine. For as we have said before, we
are not in this regard to compare things within themselves in the Commonwealth
where we do live: but between us and other nations with whom we deal or
traffike, either by way of permutation of commodities for commodities, or
commodities for money in specie, or by exchange. Therefore let us examine the
course of commodities, money and exchange: whereby the wealth of a Realm may
increase or decrease.

Riches (as Aristotle has defined) are either Natural or Artificial. And
Plato (before he did revoke his opinion concerning equality, when he willed al
things in a Commonwealth to be common, whereby every man might have enough: and
in regard of these words Mine and Thine, whereby the property of things is
distinguished) did use to say: That there was no man that did gain, but
another was a loser: supposing both the Natural and Artificial riches to be
appertaining and proper to some* that were owners thereof. Wherein he did note
a kind of absurdity at that time, in regard of his purpose. But afterward
having had a due consideration of far greater absurdities that would happen, if
(to avoid strife and contention) goods were common, and consequently women and
children; whereby families (whereof Commonweals are compounded) would be
dissolved and overthrown: he did wisely revoke his former opinion, holding the
matter to be impossible and incompatible. For there can be no Commonwealth
without a private wealth; whereby these two words, Mine and Thine, were
restored to their former and ancient credit: which all good householders or
fathers of families are to consider in particular, and the Prince as the father
of the great family of a Commonwealth in general, as well touching the
Natural riches of lands, as of the Artificial riches proceeding of the same,
and to make and moderate his charges and expenses accordingly. To which end,
first in regard of Natural riches, the knowledge of his dominions and
territories is requisite to be considered of, being compared with other Princes
dominions, which oftentimes are accounted to be more spacious then they be. By
reason whereof, we have made this Geometrical description following, whereby
the spaciousness of one kingdom or country, may be compared with another,
observing only the difference of the number.

A Geometrical Description of the world.
The circumference of the Globe, which according to the imaginary account of
Ptolomy, contains 360 Geometrical degrees of 15 leagues every degree, makes
in the whole 5400 leagues, which we do reckon after one thousand measures of
land for every league of four English miles, or 60 miles for a degree. The
Diameter being 1718 2/11 leagues, making the superficies both of water and land
9278 thousand, 181 leagues, every league being 4666 measures square: which
makes the whole globe of the world to contain 43 millions of millions, 298
millions, 170 thousand measures of land and water: whereof the water being
deducted, accoumpting above two third parts of the whole, and the other third
for the earth; there remains (not accompting fractions and unnecessary
numbers) nine millions of millions, 381 millions, 627 thousand measures of
land, known to be inhabited: whereof follows a particular distribution upon
every kingdom and country, with a note of their situation.

Beginning our voyage from England the most renowned Island in the world, and
traveling all the world over (which by water may be compassed in one year and
a half) as may be seen by the globe set forth at the charges of Master
Sanderson, by the voyages of Sir Francis Drake, and Sir Thomas Candish knights:
we find England with the Islands adjacent under her Majesty's dominion, to
contain 34 millions 438 thousand measures of land, after the computation
aforesaid.

Ireland the Island which lies most West of those that be of any fame,
contains 21 millions 785 thousand measures.

Scotland being adjoined to England contains 12 millions 250 thousand
measures.

The most Western country of Europe is Spain: which is bounded the South
with the Mediterranean sea: on the West with the Atlanticke: on the North with
the Oceanus Cantabricus, or the Spanish seas: and on the East with France,
from which it is severed with the Pireney hills. Under Spain we reckon the
eight kingdoms following:

Castile containing 31, 886. m. Andaluzia 3, 700. m. Granado 3, 150. m. Navarre
1, 868. m. Portugal 12, 600. m. Leon gallicia 9, 520. m. Arragon 16, 760. m.
Biscay 4, 666. m. All, 84, 150. m. measures of land.

France, which is bounded on the West with the Pirency hills: on the North
with the English seas: on the East with Germany: on the Southeast with the
Alpe hills: and on the Southwest with the Mediterranean sea: containing 32
Provinces.

Normandy 2, 022. m. Campagney 1, 785. m. Xantogne 1, 791. m. Poitou 2, 644.
m. Berry 1, 437. m. Limogis 140. m. Picardie 1, 307. m. Anjou 840. m. Calis 46.
m. Bulleyn 135. m. Languedoc 2, 240. m. Dauphiney 900. m. Burgundy 757. m.
Prouence 1, 178. m. Vermandois 116. m. And Vienois, Lionois, Gascoine, France,
Lorreyne, Britayne, Guien, Nivernois, Bourbon, Auverne, Velay, Pierigueux,
Viemois, and the rest: Containing all 91, 350. m. measures.

The next country unto France on the East side is Germany, which is bounded
on the West with France, and the Low countries: on the North with Denmark and
the Danish seas: on the East with Prussia, Poland, and Hungary: on the
Southeast with Istria and Illiricum: and the South with the Alpe hills and with
Italy.

Under Saxony.
Saxonia 3, 750. m. Misnia 3, 360. m. Turingia 1, 120. m. Under Austria.
Lusatia 2, 614. m. Slesia 5, 558. m. Bohemia 7, 000. m. Austria 6, 300. m.
Morauia 4, 200. m. Beyeren 3, 360. m. Assia 3, 947. m. Heluetia 12, 585. m.
Basle and Swetia 2, 992. m. Wirtenbergh 1, 270. m. Embden 244. m. Collen 214.
m. Salsburie 1, 089. m. Cleues 257. m. Gulich 357. m. Westphalia 2, 450. m.
Ofnab 357. m. Pomerania 3, 360. m. Marquis brandeburgh 6, 293. m. Machalburgh
2, 100. m. Franconia 6, 440. m. Tiroll 3, 360. m. Carinthea 1, 634. m. Stiria
1, 866. m. Count Palatin 4, 450. m. Oldeburg and Dulmar 462. m. Liege 571. m.
Trier, Ments, Strasbourgh, Spiers, Worms: together 4, 324. m. All, 97, 884. m.
measures.

The 17 Provinces of the Lowcountries accompting 550 towns, and 12 thousand
villages, bounded on the West with Germany and France consisting of 4
Dukedomes, 7 Earledomes, and 6 Seigniories.

Brabant 1, 502. m. Guildres 420. m. Luxenborgh 1, 400. m. Limborgh and
Walkenborgh 233. m. Flaunders, Lyle, and Doway 1, 559. m. Henault 1, 050. m.
Artois 722. m. Holland 572. m. Zealand 101. m. Ouerysle 840. m. Freezeland 464.
m. Malnies 15. m. Namure 196. m. Vtricht 227. m. Grocninghen 250. m. Zutphen
357. m. Meiers 35 m. and other places of the Empire. 141. m. All, 10. 049. m.
measures.

Italy, which lies on the Southside of the Alps and Germany, and stretches
it self out in length toward the South and East, may thus be described:

Under Spain.
Naples 14, 700. m. Lombardie 2, 100. m. Under Venice.
Treuisana 3, 290. m. Verona 740. m. Frioul 1, 400. m. Mantua 570. m. Under
Rome.
Liguria 1, 865. m. Romagnia 1520. m. Latium 570. m. Hetruria 642. m. Sauoy 2,
520. m. Piamont 2, 100. m. Tuscane Florence 6, 160. m. Siena 570. m. Marca
ancona 1, 790. m. Parma plaisance 2, 015. m. Sicily 4, 200. m. Cyprus 2, 100.
m. Candia 2, 800. m. Corsica 1, 680. m. Sardegnia 5, 600. m. All, 55, 580. m.
measures. Prusia lying on the East and North corner of Germany. 11, 200. m.
Poland lying on the East side of Germany, contains 21, 000. m. Russenia 10,
500. m. Volhimia 6, 300. m. Massouia 2, 098. m. Liuonia 30, 152. m. All, 70,
050. m. measures.

Denmark lying on the North side of Germany, having on the North and East
side, the kingdom of Sweden: and on the North side and West of Sweden, lies
the kingdom of Norway, containing all with their dominions, as follows:

Denmark 13, 643. m. Norway 37, 296. m. Sweden 64, 000. m. Finland 8, 392. m.
Holsten 1, 398. m. Ditmars 442. m. Gothia 23, 334. m. All, 148, 505. m.
measures.

The great Monarchy of Russia or Moscouia, beginning on the East side of
Sweden extending it self from Lapland and Finmarke unto the Caspian sea,
contains in it a great part of Europe, and part of Asia; whereof we are to
make a division, having only purposed to make a particular description of
Europe. That part which is under Europe contains 302, 957. m. measures. So
all Europe contains 940, 198. thousand measures of land.

Hungary containing 21, 000. m. Dalmatia 4, 900. m. Transiluania, 7000. m.
with whole Turkey co^taining 527,100. m. and Moscouia 187,143. m. Tartarie
containing 420,000. m. Persia 560,000. m. and the lands of Calicout 840,000. m.
makes all Asia to contain 2567* 143. m. measures.

Africa and all Egypt 2240,000. m. America contains 1674,286. m. Noua Spania
contains 1960,000. m.

Summa tot. 9, 381, 627. m. measures, the whole earth of 1000. measures for a
league of 4 English miles.

The territory of Rome after the foundation of Romulus did contain but 18
thousand iourneys of land, which he did divide into three equal parts:
allotting the one third, as it were Ecclesiastical lands, for the defraying of
the sacrifices: the other third to the common wealth, as it were Crown land:
and the last third part was divided between three thousand citizens of all
sorts, after the rate of two iourneys for every one.

William the conqueror, caused (after the conquest) a description to be made of
the Realm of England, and the land to be measured, reserving for the Crown so
much as he thought convenient: and bestowing the rest upon his Barons and
Knights, he caused an imposition or tax to be made of six shillings upon
every hide of land, being twenty acres, making 160 acres to be a Knights fee.
And so having left the Dukedom of Normandy unto Robert his eldest son, did
thereby maintain his royal estate and dignity. The Grecians had diverse
means to maintain their estate: but the Romans having a very large and
spacious jurisdiction, had most means by conquest and tribute of other nations.
The ordinary means that Princes have now a days for the maintenance of their
royal estates or dignities, may be comprehended under these three: The first
upon the estimation of the body of their lands and dominions of all immovable
goods, according to their value by a computation upon the hundredth, or a
proportion of the fruits thereof: which is comprehended under Natural riches.

The second upon the things which are consumed proceeding thereof: namely of
victuals, as of flesh, fish, wine, bear, fruit, and such like: of rents, as of
houses and farms, liberties and franchises, manors and towns: of fire, as of
wood and coals: of apparel, as of woollen clothes, silks, furs, flax, and
such like.

The third upon the trade and traffic of merchandise, and upon the persons of
men according to their degree and quality. Which means are increased by the
inhabiting of countries and multitude of people: which causes Princes to study
to make their countries populous, and to increase the co^merce and traffic,
by the gains whereof, the wealth is increased. For albeit, that the multitude
of people makes the price of lands to rise, and victuals to become dearer: yet
the Prince and the subjects means of maintenance do also increase, and one
does live by another, always so as there be had a singular care to set poor
men on work, and that the idle droane do not consume the sweet honey.

Hereupon two special points are incidently to be handled, namely, that as I
have made a commparison of country and countries under the dominion of the
Princes in Europe: so is it not very difficult for me to make a comparison of
the wealth thereof, and likewise of the ordinary means which these Princes do
use for the maintenance of their estates, and what ordinary charges and
expenses they do sustain: whereby would appear manifestly, that England is
able to hold out with any kingdom in Europe. But fearing the reprehension of
some Apelles (this being a matter of State) I will contain my self within the
compass of my profession. The second part is to delare many and diverse
extraordinary means, which Princes have used heretofore, and might use in
their necessities and occurrences. But this would prove unnecessary,
considering we do live under so gracious a Princess (whom God long preserve to
reign over us) whose most royal disposition and clemency, does rather moderate
impositions and taxes, then invent any that never were: her subjects also being
most dutifully obedient, and thankfully inclined to make her Majesty
voluntary offers of subsidies and other means for the general defense of the
Realm, not expecting that the same should be of them required.

Yet to give some glaunce of comparison between England and France the
greatest kingdom of Europe: let us take notice of the observation of
Politicians, which affirm England properly to be divided into 52 thousand
villages or hamlets, as there are weeks in the year: much after the division
which the Athenians made of their land in 365 parts, as there are days in the
year; and to contain (as they say) 2800 thousand families, every family 6
persons, is 16800 thousand persons: England containing by our computation but
34 millions 438 thousand measures of land square: whereas France containing 91
millions 350 thousand measures of land, is but esteemed to have 4400 thousand
families, and five persons to every family: which is but 22000 thousand
persons. The commodities of France are not so rich and of estimation, as the
commodities of England: much less the commodities of Denmark, Russia, Poland,
and other great countries. Wherefore let us now examine, for the second point
concerning Artificial riches, the goodness of our commodities.

Master Bodine does call ( Salt) to be their manna, and we may call our wools
to be the Golden fleece, which we shall not need to seek in Colchos, but here
in England, in regard both of their goodness and quantity. Great was the loss
and hinderance which the Realm received by the license, which king Edward the
third gave unto king John of Aragon, for to transport into Spain certain
number of Cotswold sheep, both in respect of wools and wool fels. For we see
what great quantity of wools (bettered under their climate) does continually
come from diverse places of the king of Spaines dominions, into France and the
Low Countries: especially in Flaunders, where diverse fine stuffes are made,
and brought unto us and other nations, causing a decrease of the custom of the
Prince, as may be known by this: that the custom of wool in this king Edward
his time came to above threescore and five thousand pounds yearly, the ounce
of silver being valued but at 20 pence: which would make now 200 thousand
pound. For there went out of the realm at the least a hundred thousand sackes
of wool, whereof were made 300 thousand clothes at the least: whereas there is
now computation made of 100000 clothes yearly, or somewhat more, the custom
being 35 thousand pou^ds. Whereby we may see manifestly, that there is a great
over ballancing of foreign commodities with our home commodities, as shall be
made more apparent.

It is well known, that since the Statute made in the sixth year of her
Majesty's most happy reign, all sorts of white clothes, have bin amended for
length and goodness; likewise kerseys, bays, cottons, Northern dozens, and
diverse other kinds of clothes have bin bettered since that time: whereas the
commodities of other countries have been made worse. Howbeit it were to be
wished, that with us good order were taken for the continuance thereof: as also
that clothiers would devise to make their clothes after the manner of Venice,
as it were in hot-houses; saving thereby a great part of their oil for the
making of other clothes, which is now wasted and spent: which practice is of
late put in ure by the Flemmings in some places; and yet can they not sell
their clothes so good cheap, but that our cloth is with the^ in great request.
For all that merchants (besides other great charges) pay unto them above 20
shillings custom and license for every cloth to bring them thither, over and
above the charges and custom of the dominions of other Princes and States,
when cloth is not carried directly unto them.

Coming to our other Commodities of lead, tin, copper, iron, belmettall, and
other minerals, we shall not need to make mention of gold, silver and copper,
because our mines do not yield such quantity thereof as in other countries,
which have a better temperature of climate to that effect. Howbeit, greater
store would be found, if men did endeavor to find the same: as for any thing we
can as yet learn, one man only has bestowed extraordinary charges therein,
as some have done for the copper, which by their means is found somewhat
plentiful: whereby with the addition of the Calamine stone, many manual
things are now made within the realm by milles and otherwise, which heretofore
were brought unto us. And now let us speak of the particulars, as of lead,
tin, and iron.

Our lead (whereof we have abundance) does exceed in goodness that of Germany
and other countries, and contains more silver then theirs, which is black,
harder and unclean: and therefore serves them to make pieces of Ordinance,
whereof the Duke of Brunswicke has good store. But iron is far better for
that purpose: and that which is found in other places is not comparable unto
ours, neither has any Prince the like.

Tin, a most royal Commodity, is exceeding in goodness all other Tin
found elsewhere, which is but little, as it is not very abundant with us. For
all our mines do not yield above 10 or 12 hundred thousand pound weight yearly
at the most; which in regard of the use thereof, is and has been sold by us
very good cheap, especially in such places from whence we bring very
corruptible Commodities of wines, raisins, prunes, currants and such like:
giving them this and the like staple Commodity for them. We have noted how of
late years, gold, silver, copper, iron, and lead, have been found more
plentifully then in times past: but we cannot say so of Tin, the use thereof
in Turkey and other places being considered. By reason whereof, if heretofore
the proportion of metals observed by the Germans and other nations, was 150
pound weight of copper to one pound of silver, or 700 pound of iron, 600 p. of
lead, or 25 pounds of quicksiluer, and but one hundred p. of tin: much more
ought we to diminish this proportion^, considering (as aforesaid) the great
quantity of al other metals found in diverse places, and but this small
parcel of Tin of that rare goodness found only in England: where above 80
years past, the price thereof was about forty shillings the hundred, when
anounce of silver was esteemed forty pence, and when the best velvet was sold
for ten shillings the yard. And omitting to speak of saltpeter, coppresse,
allume, and such like minerals (whereof we have great store) let us conclude
with the consideration of the great abundance of sea-coles, that are found in
England: the price whereof might (with more reason) be far advanced above
the price of salt The Manna of France: seeing that (as Master Bodine has
noted of all mines) the mines hereof can be exhausted, and so cannot salt be,
which with less labor does in a manner rain from heaven under their climate:
the rather for that woods are not only decreasing with us, but also with other
nations that shall in time have as much need of our coals, as we of their
salt: whereof the impost in France amounts to 450 thousand pound starling
yearly, as the matter is handled.

Safforne and cony skins are two commodities exceeding also in goodness:
likewise corn, bear, fels, tallow, hops, wood, hose, and many other things
are all better then the like had in other countries; and so might leather be,
if the laws did suffer it to be dressed accordingly. For albeit that the
difference of water in goodness for that purpose makes an alteration: yet
they might be qualified and made serviceable to that effect. Our wax is also
better then that of Moscouia and the East countries: and this being a commodity
had with little labor, and without the use of much ground, and of late years
advanced in price; we would exhort many to practice the having thereof, in
regard both of the honny and wax, the rather for that the making of Bees of a
Heighfer is natural. Whereupon Pliny has noted, that the flesh of oxe^ is
converted into Bees, as the flesh of horses into waspes, that of man into lice,
and so of other flesh according to the nature thereof: but I will not affirm,
that the flesh of a Cuckoo is converted into toads, as some do report.

Touching the price of our commodities, which certainly may be known as of
tin, lead, and certain known sorts of clothes: we shall find, that when an
ounce of silver was valued at 40 pence, tin was worth (as we have said) about
40 shillings the hundredth, which now makes 3 pound, and the price thereof in
regard of velvet, silks and other commodities, ought now to be 5 pound a
hundredth all circumstances considered. Wool was worth 10 shillings the tod,
equivalent with the best yeard of velvet: color kentish cloths, not of so good
making as now, were ordinarily sold for 8 and 9 pound the cloth of that money
which is now 12 pound and 13 pound 10 shillings: calue skins 5 shillings the
dozen: Devonshire kersies, and all other cloth accordingly. At which time the
bale of Venice fustians was sold for 18 pound: of horn fustians 15 pound: the
best black Sattine 6 shillings the yeard: color Damask and Sattine 5
shillings: Bolonia Sarcenet 20 pence the yeard: all by retaile; millian
fustians 18 and 19 shillings the piece: Messina silk 8 shillings the pound:
vnwatred Chamblet 13 shillings the piece, and all other Italian wares
accordingly; which (although they are now more used then in those days) cannot
counteruaile the difference in price being compared together, because that the
making thereof in Italy and France is also much more increased, and on the
contrary the making of cloth much diminished since that time. And in this place
we must not forget to mention of the making of Venice gold thread, which might
be more practiced and made in England then it is, to set poor people on work,
and so be had far better cheap. For we shall find that whereas the pound of
12 ounces is now ordinarily sold for 3 pound 5 shillings, or thereabouts: the
same (being untwisted) does not co^taine above 4 ounces, or 5 ounces at the
most of gilded silver, which may be worth some 25 shillings: and all the rest
goes toward some very course silk and the workmanship, which is a very easy
spinning. To say nothing of the Easterlings wares of pitch, tar, wainscot,
cables, flax, hemp and such like, because these are very necessary
commodities, and cannot be much ouerbought; we are only to note, that if the
Statute for the sowing of hemp were well observed, all manner of cordage might
be made within the Realm, and thereby be had better cheap of others. Howbeit
the intercourse and commerce with other nations, requires that every country
should have their peculiar Commodities; whereof we are to consider the price,
and to have a care not to ouer-buy them, and to sell our home Commodities too
good cheap: which generally may be said for all commodities, and particularly
for Lawnes, Cambrickes and such like, and most especially when claret wine was
sold for 3 and 4 pound the tun: prunes 5 shillings the hundredth: civil oil
12 pound the tun: soape of Civil 20 shillings the hundredth: malmesey 5 pound
the But: and so the like of diverse other Commodities, if we do consider the
great abundance thereof found now a days, and more commodiously and directly
brought unto us, then heretofore; as Spices, Sugar, Currants, Raisins, Figs, and
such like are. By all which comes a notable ouer-ballancing of foreign
Commodities with our home Commodities in nature before alleged, which does
co^sistin the price, and not in the quantity. This ouerballancing is known by
the increase of the custom of the goods inwards, and the decrease of the
custom of the goods outward: for which purpose let us observe, what the
custom of wool did amount in king Edward the third his time, as aforesaid.
Thus finding things to be dear, and the price thereof hurtful to the
Commonwealth, because we do not sell our home Commodities so dear
proportionably, as we do buy the foreign commodities: we may see that we are
become buyers and not sellers, as the good father of the family ought to be,
as is aforesaid. Wherefore let us now consider of the causes of this dearth of
foreign commodities over and above the price of our home commodities, which
makes us to give the treasure of the realm to boot, by advancing the price of
the one, and abating the price of the other: which might be attributed to the
ignorance of permutation of commodities for commodities, if money did not rule
the price of commodities; and the course of exchange for money, did not
overrule the property of money: wherefore let us note the causes, which are
declared in the treatise of the Canker of Englands Common wealth: where we may
see that our home Commodities are abated in price four manner of ways.

1 By scarsitie of money with us, which makes things good cheap. 2 By the
gain sought upon money, which otherwise would be sought upon the commodities.
3 By a high course of exchange, which draws the money to be delivered in
nature of exchange only, or by a low price of exchange, which is the efficient
cause of the exportation of our money. 4 By the rash sale of our Commodities by
such as have small stocks.
Foreign Commodities on the contrary are advanced in price four manner of
ways.

1 Through plenty of money in other countries, which makes things dear. 2 By
a high exchange beyond the seas, which yields a loss; and by a low exchange
which causes few takers up of money, and drives men to make return in
foreign Commodities. 3 By the advancing of the price of their money above the
value. 4 For that the principal Commodities are engrossed into rich men's
hands.
The course of this inequality may be illustrated by the comparison. Suppose
that you were a Lord of some Island, that did yield great store of corn or
grain, and also great quantity of wools: and another were Lord of another
Island, that did yield great abundance of spices, and sugar, and great quantity
of silk and silk wares, being things serving either for the belly or back.
Both of you do desire to live in the ciuillest manner that you can devise or
imagine, and which is pleasing most your mind: and (wanting the use of money)
you are desirous to have some of his spices, sugar and silks; and willing to
give him by way of permutation or barter, corn, grain, or wool for them:
whereupon by mutual conference according to reason, both of you do agree what
quantity of each Commodity, one will deliver for the Commodities of the
other; and that chiefly in regard of the use of every man's Commodity. But
because many questions do arise, and to avoid much carriage of wares up and
down for the transporting from Island to Island; you agree by mutual consent,
that a thing of metal (because it goes in least room, and continues
longest without perishing, and is carried too and fro with the least charge, and
is also fittest to be cut and divided in most pieces without loss) shall be
devised to be coined, as the mean in wares to exchange all wares by. And to
the end there should be always neither more nor less wares brought into your
Island, then were equivalent with the wares of your Island (and this thing you
call Money, which is now a measure to set a price, or to measure every thing
by) it comes to pass, that you have more then sufficient for the inhabitants
of your Island of corn, wools, and other Commodities, which in this regard may
be called Superfluities: and because some of them are perishable and cannot
keep long, you seek to utter and convert into money: whereby you draw great
store of money into your Island. Whereupon some of your inhabitants (perceiving
the same to be the measure and mean to command and obtain all other things)
through a covetous desire do practice to be masters of that measure: so that
no man can come by it, but with their consent, and paying well for it: and in
so doing, they make the money to become a merchandise, and heap up much wealth
to themselves, and bring thereby a dearth also of all things within your Island.
For when one takes a hundred pounds, to pay 10 pounds over and more then he
borrows, that man in uttering of his ware must sell accordingly: whereby the
measure between you is become falsified. The lord of the other Island perceiving
this breach does dissemble the matter, and knowing that by these means he is
bereaved of a great part of his ready money, and therewithal, that the
Commodities which he was wont to have of you, are become dearer; and that on
the contrary the price of his Commodities is abated through scarcity of
money: he deuiseth a course to draw the money out of your Island, and to advance
the price of his Commodities: you thereupon make a law, that no ready money
shall be transported: but you are contented to admit an exchange for money on
both sides, grounded upon the weight and finenesse of his money and yours, and
according to the valuation to nominate the same; and thereby to make return of
each others Commodities, which exchange in nature of trade you suffer to rise
and fall in price according to plenty and scarcity of money. By means
whereof, he has an ability given him to compass the rule of this exchange,
and so does abuse the same both ways, that he draws all the ready money out
of your Island, and does advance the price of his Commodities, which he thereby
sells the dearer unto you. You do also sell your Commodities dearer, but you
do not make a proportionable price unto his, neither a due return of the
prouenue of your Commodities. For if you make your return by exchange of money
by bills, he takes an advantage thereby in the price of exchange, by
ouer-valuing his money, and vnder-valuing yours; or else you are driven to make
return in his Commodities at a dear rate: whereby of necessity he does
ouer-ballance your Islands commodities with his, and does of course expel your
ready money to be given to boot with your Commodities. Where is now become
that equivalent proportion of wares for wares? or to what purpose serves the
measure of money, between you and him? do not the inhabitants of your Island
pay for all? And whence comes all this? was not usury the beginning, and the
merchandising exchange the efficient cause of all? which being taken away, will
make the effects to cease: and what might be done ex conuerso, we leave to the
consideration of the wise to determine what may stand with the course of
politic government. And to their judgment we will now propound three means
for the advancing of the price of our home Commodities by increase of trade,
besides the operation of plenty of money which makes things dear: whereof we
shall entreat more hereafter.

The first is, to give an ability unto Merchants to set over or transport
their bills obligatorie or bonds, which they receive upon sale made of their
Commodities for other Commodities. For whereas they sell most commonly all the
foreign Commodities payable at some short time, if (having received bills or
bonds for their wares) they might lawfully set them over for other Commodities,
there would be greater quantities of our Commodities bought from time to time.
To which end the statutes of Champertie and maintenance might be qualified, and
the bills might be made payable to the party or the lawful bearer or bringer
thereof, as is used in other countries. But because the strictness of the
Common law of the realm, does require a greater perfection of formal deeds,
then the Civil law of other countries, where plain and sincere dealings have
hitherto excluded Non est factum: therefore were it requisite to have one
general office for all notaries and scriueners, as there is in other
countries: where every act, bill, or bond should be registered, not only by the
notarie or scriuen or that made the same, but also by a Prothonotarie, who
should keep register of all, and where every thing should be enrolled upon a
penalty. A matter in reason as well belonging to the Chauncerie, as the
recording of the deeds of lands, Statutes, and Recognizances. This would
greatly ease the most honorable Court of Star Chamber of many suits, which
daily happen for forgeries and otherwise, and disburden also the Court of
Common laws of the like. And finally, many protractions in law would be
abrogated, that now are used to the hurt both of the party plaintiff and
defendant.

The second is, that the city of London, and every principal town of a
shire, or the most part of them, would take upon them, to take money casually
at the hands of such, as will deliver the same upon the adventure of their
lives: as at Venice, where a man for the sum of four or five hundred pounds
once given, shall be sure to have a hundred pound a year during his life:
whereby a great stock might be raised for the general good of all parties,
and especially to set poor people on work, and (by incorporating their
manufacture and handiworke) to sell the same afterward with a reasonable gain
toward their adventure. Besides that, experience has taught in all places
where the like is used, that the city becomes always a gainer by the
decease of the parties, that do deliver money in this nature.

The third mean to advance the price of our home Commodities, is (as before
has been noted) the example of great personages in the wearing of our
Commodities, whom the people will imitate: and so the more used, the more
advanced by the request thereof: wherein the example of the Prince is
predominant. But leaving the matter of Commodities, let us come to entreat of
moneys.

Money (as we have said before) being the rule and square to set a price unto
every thing, as being the public measure to maintain a certain equality in
buying and selling; must therefore have his standing valuation only by public
authority of Princes, as a matter annexed to their Crowns and dignities. For
they be the warrant of the moneys unto their subjects. And to the end that this
measure of things, namely money, should not be falsified, by making the same
generally more or less (whereby the price of things would become incertaine,
if private men be suffered to have the handling thereof) therefore are Princes
so careful to observe a certainty and equality of the price of money from
time to time. Howbeit, that the due regard which is to be had between their
moneys, and the moneys of other Princes, is by some less regarded, then the
course thereof within their own dominions being of less importance, having
some base money current with the good. The price of money becomes incertaine
in particular, when private men will give or receive any money in specie above
the price of their valuation imposed by the authority of the Prince: whereby
every man undertakes to advance still the price according as he sees
occasion to advance his gain by the necessity or use of another man, that
has cause to employ the money. The use hereof is in many countries severely
prohibited, and yet another way in a manner suffered for the good of their
Commonweales, as those that are skillful in mint matters, do very well know.

The price of money in general becomes incertaine, when usury is tolerated,
whereby one hundredth pounds are esteemed and valued (in regard of time) to be
worth one hundredth and ten pounds, and in some other countries more: which was
the cause that commodities were sold accordingly, when days were first given
for the payment thereof, every man supposing that he could make so much of his
money which did proceed of his commodities.

This course being tolerated by the laws of the land, makes us to forbear,
to speak hereof sparingly, because Policy does think that thereby greater
evils are avoided, which (being compared to the operations and effects of usury
written allegorically by me in another treatise) may be balanced in the
judgment of the wise. Only to the end that (through ignorance) merchants and
others might not fall within the compass of the Statute of usury, we have
thought good to give them this Caveat, and to make them to understand the true
sense and definition of the branch of tolleration of that Statute: the rather
for that some men do seem to charge the makers thereof with a great absurdity.
For say they, the Statute gives ability for a man to take one way ten pounds
ten shillings or more for the use of one hundredth pounds for one year, being
delivered out for two years: and another way he cannot take ten pounds five
shillings and less for one year, but he shall be within the compass of the
Statute. But if they had a due consideration, that Time is properly the Judge
hereof, and that they could not make the Statute without the limitation of a
time certain: they would not find any absurdity therein. For it was impossible
to make it otherwise more certain. The words of the Statute be in effect: None
may have, receive, accept or take for the lending or forbearing of his or their
money for one whole year, or for a longer or a shorter time, or for a more or
less sum above the rate of 10 pound pro 100 yearly. 37. H. 8. And this
Statute to be most strongly and strictly co^strued for the suppression of all
usury, both directly and indirectly, as by the Statute of the 13. of her most
excellent Majesty.

To make it evidently appear, that of necessity ( Time) is herein Efficient
and Active, and the rate of 10 pro 100 Positive and Passive. Let us suppose
that you do deliver at interest one hundredth pounds for three months after ten
upon the hundredth, you may lawfully receive at the three months end two pounds
ten shillings for your interest, and continue the hundredth pounds again for
other three months, by a new contract or agreement: and then receive again
two pounds ten shillings, continuing in this manner for the whole year by
four several agreements: whereby you do receive three parts of your interest
at several times within the year: which interest you may put out also to
usury, and so take above 10 pro 100 without incurring the danger of the Satute,
because your agreements have from time to time altered the property of the
interest money which you did receive, and that which before was another, is
thereby become yours, and thereof you may lawfully dispose again. But if you
do deliver out 100 pounds from the beginning for one whole year, then you can
have but 10 pounds interest for the same at the years end with your
principal: for the property of the 10 pounds is not till then altered by your
agreement. Thus is it with money delivered for a shorter time.

In like manner is it for money delivered out for a longer time, as for
example. One delivers out an 100 pound for four years, for the which at the
four years end, he can receive but 140 pound: but if he do deliver out 100
pounds for one year, he may at the years end receive 10 pounds for interest,
and continue the 100 pounds again for the second year by a new agreement: and
then receive another 10 pound: and so for the third and fourth year. Now
whereas by reason of his several agreements according to the time he has
altered the property of the interest money and received 10 pounds the first
year, he may put out again this 10 pound as his own for another year, and
so have interest thereof twenty shillings: whereby he receives 11 pound the
second year, which being put out for the third and fourth year, will yield
him accordingly: in like manner for the 10 pound received the second and third
year which will yield him after the same manner accordingly. So that he shall
have above 146 pound being thus delivered out, the body of his sum still
remaining whole, and being only distinguished by time which makes the
difference. Again let us suppose, that the 100 pound were delivered out from
the beginning for four years, to be repaied by 25 pound a year and the
interest: it follows proportionably that the first year he is to receive 27
pound 10 shillings, the second year 30 pound, the third year 32 pound 10
shillings, and the fourth year 35 pound, which makes all but 125 pound: add
unto this the interest of 25 pound received, in deduction of his principal
three years before the time, which is 7 pound 10 shillings, and of 25 pound
more in like manner for 2 years which is 5 pound, and of 25 pound more for one
year, which is 2 pound 10 shillings; all 15 pound: which together makes the
140 pound, as aforesaid. But when moneys are repayed in this manner, as it were
by way of anticipatio^, then the body of your sum of 100 pound is divided:
and still time and use or interest must concur. For you may not deliver out
300 pound for 3 years to be repayed by 100 pound yearly, and receive the first
year 130 pound, the second year 120 pound, and the third year 110 pound: but
you must receive the first year but 110 pound, the second year 120 pound, and
the third year 130 pound, because you have not forborne your money for any
longer time proportionably, according to your contract and agreement. And the
property of the interest money is not altered effectually according to the law:
for 10 pro 100 for one year is the Cubicke root which does increase and
decrease both ways proportionably. Yet some will say: Suppose that I have 3000
pound in money to deliver at interest, are not my 3000 pounds worth 300 pounds
at the years end? and may not I lawfully receive that 300 pounds, and any part
of my principal, and continue the rest for one other year, and so do the like
for more years? Who doubts thereof? So that you do make new contracts or
agreements from year to year, whereby the property of the interest money
becomes effectually altered according to the law (as aforesaid) your money
from the beginning being delivered out but for 1 year. But if you do deliver
your 3000 pound from the beginning by one sole contract or agreement for six
years, to be repayed yearly, and receive 550 pounds the first year, that is
to say, 300 pound for your interest and 250 pound for part of your principal:
then do you incur the danger of the Statute. For in this which is for a more
sum and a longer time: there is the like reason, as there is with a less
sum and and a shorter time, as by the former example of 100 pound is
declared. And as there is more gain, when money is delivered out for three
months or less time, and so continued from time to time within the year,
then when money is delivered out for one year: so is there more gain when
money is delivered out for one year, and continued by new agreements from
year to year; then when it is originally delivered out for 6 or more years,
agreeing with the rule of Geometriall delineation, and Arithmeticall
proportion. Wherefore he that should say, what reason have I, to put out my
money for one year, and to have but 10 pro 100: when I may put out the same
for three months, or a shorter time, and take above 10 pro 100? speaks
unadvisedly: for he must do it according to occasion. Reason also requires,
that there should be difference between money delivered out for one year, and
money delivered out for more years according to the Statute For he that
receives his interest in this manner, as aforesaid, has an ability given him
to put out that interest money to use also unto another: whereby he has
interest upon interest, though not of the same party, and therefore in equity
is not to take it of two parties. So that every man must take heed not to put
out money for a longer time, and for several years, and to reckon interest
thereof as if he had (from the beginning) delivered out his money but for one
year: and so continued from year to year, reckoning interest upon interest,
as many do through a covetous desire in danger of the branch of this Statute,
which must and may be most strongly and strictly construed against them, both
directly and indirectly, as aforesaid. But to speak properly and effectually
concerning usury: let us not only dispute de lana Caprina, but seek to
qualify the extreme dealings of those that do feed upon the sweat and
labor of the poor, by taking (and that upon pawn, whereby many times their
means of living are hindered) twelve pence for the lending of 20 shillings for
one month, which is above 60 pro 100: nay when the mere poor are glad to pay
one penny for the use of twelve pence for a week, which is above 400 pro 100 by
the year: a most pernicious and damnable dealing, not to be suffered amongst
Christians. For the reformation whereof, if there were in some places the use
of a Lombard, where they might find relief after 10 pro 100, especially in the
city of London: it would prove a matter very necessary and commendable, whereas
now the poor artificer does ordinarily pay (besides this horrible interest)
under the color of brokerige or bill money above 20 upon the hundredth: which
in small sums, and that often borrowed, is not perceived to amount to this
biting usury. And to this effect, would such money very commodiously be
employed, as casually would be delivered by Gentlemen and others that would
purchase an annuitie during their life, as before has been touched. Thus much
concerning usury, which alters the certainty of the price of money in effect.
Now let us entreat of the very substance of the moneys consisting of matter
and form. Of matter as in regard of substance, we know that Princes have their
several Standards both for gold and silver, which by some are allayed with
more copper (commonly called Allay) then with others: whereas the only cause
that moneys are counterfeited and falsified comes by the commixture of the
three metals, gold, silver, and copper. And omitting to speak of many
particular Standards of Princes, having handled that matter heretofore: let us
note the opinion of Master Bodine, who to cut off all counterfeiters,
clippers, washers, cullers and falsifiers of moneys; would have the money so
made, that every simple man should be able to know it. Concerning the
proportion between the gold and silver, it ought to be, as it is (by his
saying) in all countries 12 to 1, whereunto he would have made the weight,
finenesse and valuation answerable. As for example touching finenesse, if we
made the moneys of gold to be 23 carrats, then the Standard for the silver
(after two carrats of gold for an ounce of silver) should be 11 ounces fine;
and the piece of silver (weighing an equal weight with the gold) should be
valued to be worth the twelft part, or the gold 12 times the value of silver,
as if a French crown (waighing as much as the Ryall of Spain) were valued at
six shillings the Riall being six pence. And the third sort of moneys,
namely, small moneys he would have made of mere copper, although (says he) it
were better (if it were possible and commodious) to have no other money, then
of gold and silver which never rusteth as copper does: the price of copper
being also incertaine and differing in many countries. During the Punicke
wars, one pound of silver was worth 840 pound of copper: afterward through
the abundance of silver it came to 224 pound of copper for 1 pound of silver:
and so is it taken diversely in diverse countries, according to the plenty of the
one or other metal upon all occasions. The like shall we find touching the
proportion between the gold and silver, which with us in England has
continued for many years, 11 of fine silver to one of fine gold, or 11 of
Standard silver to 1 of crown gold, which of late years was taken according
to our Angel and Crown gold, supposing that other nations did hold these
proportions following.

The Low Countries where they reckon two Philip Dollors for their golden Royal
or our Angel made 11 to 1; if the tolleration had not altered the valuation of
their moneys in effect; the Royal being valued at 16 shillings 8 pence
Flemish, and the Dollor 50 stiuers.

The Pistolet of Spain of 22 Cariats to 11 Ryals of plate made 11 to 1, now
but 10: but the ouer-valuation makes greater difference.

The French crown to three Frankes is 11 to 1, when the crown was at 60 sols,
which is now current for 64 and 65 sols: besides that at that time gold was by
valuation at 74 crowns the Mark of 8 ounces, and silver 6 crowns, which is
11 13/19 for one.

In Germany one Mark of silver at 8 Florins D'or is 11 for one.

At Rome 108 Carlins for 1 pound of silver and 99 Ducats, the gold is 12 to 1.
But by valuation or tolleration being altered in all places, they hold all
either 12 to 1 or more: besides that in most places their weight is inferior or
less then ours. King Darius did tax 13 of silver for one of gold: and Plato
makes mention of 12 to 1. But if we will have a due consideration of the great
quantity of silver which comes from the West Indies yearly, and
proportionably the small quantity of gold, and that for guilding gold is more
used then silver: we should by all means advance the price thereof, rather
then to abate it. And whereas some men naturally inclined to correct
Magnificat, seem to find fault with our former writing for saying by way of
interrogation, that if a man should receive beyond the seas for our gold after
12 for 1, we holding but 11 for 1 in proportion, who sees not an evident gain
of 1 in 11, if the silver moneys do not counteruaile the same by way of
tolleration, being received far above their value beyond the seas: we cannot
omit to answer them, to the end they may understand the truth. Imagine (say
they) I have an ounce of gold here, which cost me 11 ounces of silver. Now if I
do transport this ounce beyond the seas: there they will give me 12 ounces of
silver in money for it. But if I do bring over again that money, here I shall
have but 11 ounces for it, because there is no more silver in substance in it:
for the valuation thereof is made far above the value or e conuerso, if I
bring over 12 ounces of their silver moneys, I shall have but 1 ounce of gold
for it, or 11 ounces of our silver, ergo, there is no gain. These arguments
are grounded by surmise, and drawn of necessity, as if we must needs make an
exchange of gold for silver, or silver for gold, whereas it falls out thus.

One brings certain Commodities from beyond the seas into the realm for to
be vented; and after sale made, he does consider how to make return with his
most advantage: which he must either do by making employment upon the
Commodities of the land, which do yield him so little gain beyond the seas
(being sold generally too good cheap) as he will buy none: and then either he
must carry away the money in specie, or deliver the same here by exchange unto
others, to be repayed beyond the seas. Now if the price of exchange be low, and
will yield him not so much gain as the money will do, being carried in specie,
their money must be transported; for the scope of merchants is Gain. Whereupon
he does consider, that gold is more portable and better to be conveyed,
especially being beyond the seas taken by valuation to hold in proportion to
the silver 12 to 1: which he enjoys in the payment of the gold, and not in
receiving again silver for it: but in buying more Commodities to be brought
unto us, exchaunging in effect from time to time their Commodities for our
gold, as also for our silver. A matter, that the officers of the mint ought to
look into: for they know how to prevent it, as we have set down in the
Treatise of Exchanges.

Touching those that would have the transportation of money to be made
fellonie by the law, as it was heretofore, thereby to hinder the exportation;
they are not well advised, considering that such Statute laws are neglected,
and that Informers do not regard to sue for the life of men, but well for their
goods upon such penal Statutes, if the money it self (having so great a
command) cannot make way when it will depart, (a gain being offered) which
draws more forcibly then the Adamant stone.

To describe the course of the sea of moneys (which like an Ocean deuideth her
branches in all countries) were very difficult: but we may well observe, that
the greatest part of the silver which comes from the West Indies, is
transported into the East Indies; where diverse nations now trafficking for
spices, cause the price thereof to rise in those countries: who buying dear,
must sell accordingly, or else prove to be small gainers, as the sequel of
that trade will manifest. Gold is chiefly exhausted in all countries by the
trade of silks, which caused the Frenchmen to prohibit the bringing in of any
into France, where diverse stuffes of silk, as veluets, satin, grograines, and
such like are made by the inhabitants.

Touching the form of moneys, whereunder we comprehend the stamp or figure:
let me commend unto you the ancient making of moneys by mils or engines. When
gold and silver began much to abound amongst the Greeks, Latins, Persians,
and Egyptians, the use whereof did cease, upon the declining of their
governments: when gold and silver became so scarce, that moneys were made so
thin, that with the hammer they were stamped or coined. Great are the
Commodities that would arise thereby to the Commonwealth, besides the charges
which Princes may save, and the facility and expedition in the making exactly
of greater quantities of money, fairer and rounder, more certain in weight,
and without crack or flaw, and the stamp or figure of longer continuance; then
that which is made with the hammer with a greater noise. By the roundnes and
fairness is clipping prevented, which in pieces proportionate, and of a fair
impression is easily discerned. By the certainty in weight, when pieces of one
sort shall weigh one as much as the other, are Cullers cut off, which are used
to cull out the heavy ones for their use of melting or transportation, and to
pay out the light ones especially in silver. Counterfeiters, washers and
falsifiers of money, will be sooner detected, and the false money known, when
pieces of one sort, shall be of one bigness and thickness, and of one sound
and fairness of stamp, with their private mark for the time: the thickness
will be seen, the weight will be found, and the sound will be heard by
comparing one piece to another, especially when the redness or color of the
money does give suspicion that the same is counterfeited. For there is great
difference in the lump of metals of equal weight, as we may partly perceive,
and is exactly found by the last trial made thereof. The mass or lump of
gold to the lump of silver, does differ as much as 9 to 5, that the body of
silver is bigger then that of gold, which is 1. Between copper and silver, is
as much difference, as between 11 and 13. Lead to silver, as from 15 to 14:
but that will not join with any other metal then tin, which is lighter
then silver, and does differ from it as 9 to 13: and from the gold, as 7 to 18.
Iron does differ from silver, as 4 to 3: and from the gold as 6 to 9, that the
body of gold is lesser. Quicksiluer which is volatile, comes nearer unto
gold, and does differ as 3 to 4, the fixing whereof is difficult.

Touching the scisell which comes by the making of moneys by mils or engines,
it is soon made and converted into moneys, and may be lessened by good casting
of the metal into plates proportionate, which by degrees may be reformed,
according to the increase of the quantity of gold and silver. To which end it
will not be amiss to exhort and require all Goldsmiths and others, to be
vigilant and diligent in bringing of bullio^ into her Majesty's mint, where
they may have very speedy and assured payment thereof at all appointed times.
And in this place we must not forget, that care may be had, that the Moniers
(which work by the hammer) may be provided for their lining, or be set on
work by the milles or engines.

Lastly, it were very convenient and commodious, as also good for the poor to
make small moneys of copper, as halfepence and farthings, which might be called
Pledges of the poor, and would increase charity toward them. Whereby also
all leaden tokens (used in Tauernes, and by such as sell small wares) would be
taken away; and would be very commodious in so populous a kingdom, being made
exactly to prevent counterfeiting: which generally we do hold so difficult to
be done, as is the counterfeiting of the hand of an excellent writer, amongst
the ordinary writings of most men. And the making thereof can breed no
inconvenience in the Commonwealth in the prices of Commodities, whereas some
Princes do use to coin some moneys for to remain within their dominions, and
some other kind of moneys for to be transported into other countries, reaping a
great gain by the coynage thereof. And omitting to show the important causes
and reasons which Princes have, to maintain a standing treasure: we do not
hold it impertine^t to reduce to memory, that which is recorded of the
treasure of Princes in times past to awaken care in others.

The greatest mean that the Romans had to save their state, when Hanniball
had almost brought them to ruin, was 450 thousand crowns that the treasure
did amount unto, which was gathered by the redemption of slaves, and never
touched until that time. Pope John the 22. left 23 millions of gold:
Sardanapalus, 40 millions of crowns: Cirus, 50 millions: the Athenians, 60
millions: Tiberius the Emperor, 67 millions: Alexander the Great found in the
treasury of Darius Occhus the Persian king, 80 millions. But the greatest
treasure mentioned in the Scripture, which king David left, was 120 millions,
which did exceed far the treasure recorded of the Romans, when they
flourished most under Traian the Emperor: which is 74 thousand talents, being
44 millions 400 thousand crowns. To say nothing of the silver and gold found
upon the discovery of the West Indies, and the ransomes which were collected,
when Atabalippa king of Peru gave only for his ransom ten millions 326
thousand ducats. Let us consider what great treasures Princes might have now
adays, when money does abound: whereas it is reported, that king Henry the 7
of England, left in bullion after his decease, 53 hundred thousand pounds
starling in those days, when an ounce of silver was valued but 40 pence. And
so co^cluding for moneys, let us come to the matter of exchange, which is the
third and last mean, whereunder the trade is performed. But because my
Treatise of The Canker of Englands Commonwealth does handle that matter
particularly, therefore shall it suffice to make mention only of the Contents
thereof. As money does rule the course of Commodities: so the exchange for
moneys with us does not only rule both the course of money and Commodities;
but (being abused by the merchandising thereof) is become predominant, and does
overrule the course of them both to Englands great and incredible loss:
whereas the right exchange is most commendable, necessary and convenient for
the maintenance and traffic of intercourse betwixt merchant and merchant, or
country and countries, being grounded upon the weight, finenesse and
valuation of the money of each country according to value for value, which
accordingly should be kept at a certainty, as a measure betwixt us and other
nations. For we have amply declared and proved, that when the exchange does
fall or rise in price, the same being either high or low; it turns every way
to the loss of the Realm, both for the price of our home Commodities, and the
transportation of our moneys, and by advancing the price of foreign
Commodities, causing an ouer-ballancing in nature before alleged: which to
supply, draws or expels our treasure. For we do (in effect) give the same
to boot unto other nations with our home Commodities, to have their
Commodities for it.

Some men of judgment have found my writing to be inuectiue and patheticall
against Bankers, wherein they are not mistaken. For the use of Banks is
incompatible in any well ordered Commonwealth, as time will manifest more and
more daily. The French kings, Lewis the 9, and Philip the Fair, did with great
cause confiscate the Bankers goods: and for the discovery of their debts,
ordered their subjects to pay only the principal money unto their Treasurers.
Philip de Valois did the like, and indicted them as couseners of the
Commonwealth. For it was found, that in a short time with 24 thousand pounds
starling, they had accumulated and gotten above 2 millions 400 thousand pounds.

Others which (through envy, malice, or other passions, have the eyes of their
judgment blinded) have censured my writing to be Apologeticall for the erection
of a Bank under the color of the restoration of the office of the ancient
Kings Exchanger: which, how absurd it is, let the wise judge by the difference
between a Banker, and a general Exchanger. The Banker does draw unto himself
all the moneys of other men, making his small stock to be infinite: and the
Exchanger must with his own stock supply other men's occasions; for no man is
commanded, or by Policy (of course) compelled to deliver money unto him. The
Banker does make the price of exchanges with the correspondencie of others
Banks elsewhere, at his pleasure or most advantage: the Exchanger can have no
correspondencie with other Banks; for he is limited how to deal at a
certainty in price by exchange, and therefore must have his factors or
servants at his own charges in the places of traffic. But because it is
difficult to please men's humors in the reformation of abuses, which either for
gain some would have to continue, or others through ignorance do not
understand; therefore is there another mean propounded, to keep a due course
in matter of exchange without an Exchanger: By a Proscription in a pair of
tables to all sworn Brokers, how to make the price of exchanges for all places
according to value for value. Which would be easy and in effect aequum and
bonum (as we have declared) so as a due regard be had of the circumstances of
things; noting always this coherence, that even as plenty of money makes
with us a low exchange, and the low price of exchange is the efficient cause of
the transportation of our moneys: that so by procuring plenty of money, we do
not procure therewithal the cause of exportation, and hunt (as it were) after
our own shadow.

Some others have thought this matter to be in a manner incurable, or
impossible to be effected now adays, considering the great trade; when (to
speak truly) the trade of our Commodities is much decayed and: without that
they can yield or give any probable reason thereof, but that the difficulties
and sickness of the Commonwealth cannot admit it, as who should say: It is
better to let a sick body languish to death, then to make him drink an
unsavory potion to restore him to health. For mine own part, I have thought
it my duty in regard of profession, to publish and prefer sincerely
(according to my small talent) any thing which may make for the good of the
Commonwealth* especially it being agreeable with the most noble and ancient
laws of the Realm: wishing that other men endued with more learning, and
adorned with excellent virtues, would be always careful to do the like in
that which concerns their profession. And hereunto I have been the more
encouraged, for that since the publishing of my Treatise aforesaid, and by
means of my private advice unto diverse, (without boasting or arrogancy be it
spoken) there has been a better course taken, by observing the nature of
exchanges; whereby great store of silver bullion and some gold, has been
brought into the Realm for the general benefit and good of the bringers
thereof: which does put me in hope, that the like vigilancie and regard will be
had by diverse, in the sale of our home Commodities, and the buying of foreign
Commodities beyond the seas, with a due inspection to equity and justice in
the course of traffic: which recommendeth unto us Providence, and does not
altogether exclude Policy, especially in respect of the government of a State
or kingdom, in studying the way of preservation and augmentation of the wealth
thereof; which cannot properly be done, but by these means. For the same
cannot decrease, but by the transportation of our money and treasure, and by
selling our home Commodities too good cheap, and paying too dear for the
foreign Commodities, as we have noted before. To which end we are to compare
the prices of things betwixt us and other nations with whom we deal: and not
to show the causes of the dearth of things with Master Bodine, by examining
the prices thereof within the Commonwealth where we do live, without making any
application thereof for the general good of the realm: for the conservation
whereof, prayers and means are requisite at all times.

Veritas vnita valet.

