NICHOLAS MACHIAVEL'S PRINCE.

ALSO, The life of Castruccio Castracani of Lucca.

AND The means Duke Valentine used to put to death Vitellozzo Vitelli,
Oliverotto of Fermo, Paul, and the Duke of Gravina.

Translated out of Italian into English; By E. D.

With some Animadversions noting and taxing his errors.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop, for Will: Hills, and are to be sold by Daniel
Pakeman at the sign of the Rainebow near the Inner Temple gate. 1640.

To the most noble and Illustrious, JAMES Duke of Lenox, Earl of March, Baron
of Setrington, Darnly, Terbanten, and Methuen, Lord Great Chamberlain and
Admiral of Scotland, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of
his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel in both kingdoms.
Poisons are not all of that malignant and noxious quality, that, as
destructives of Nature, they are utterly to be abhord; but we find many, nay
most of them have their medicinal uses. This book carries its poison and
malice in it; yet me thinks the judicious peruser may honestly make use of it
in the actions of his life, with advantage. The Lamprey, they say, has a
venomous string runs all along the back of it; take that out, and it is served
in for a choice dish to dainty palates. Epictetus the Philosopher says, Every
thing has two handles, as the firebrand, it may be taken up at one end in the
bare hand without hurt: the other being laid hold on, will cleave to the very
flesh, and the smart of it will pierce even to the heart. Sin has the
condition of the fiery end, the touch of it is wounding with grief unto the
soul: nay it is worse; one sin goes not alone, but has many consequences.
Your Grace may find the truth of this in your perusal of this Author: your
judgment shall easily direct you in finding out the good uses of him: I have
pointed at his chiefest errors with my best endeavors, and have devoted them
to your Graces service: which if you shall accept and protect, I shall remain

Your Graces humble and devoted servant EDWARD DACRES.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Questionless some men will blame me for making this Author speak in our
vulgar tongue. For his maxims and tenants are condemnd of all, as pernicious
to all Christian States, and hurtful to all humane Societies. Herein I shall
answer for my self with the Comoedian, Placere studeo bonis quam plurimis, and
minime multos laedere: I endeavor to give content to the most I can of those
that are well disposed, and no scandal to any. I grant, I find him blamed and
condemnd: I do no less my self. Reader, either do thou read him with a
prejudicate opinion, and out of thy own judgment tax his errors; or at least,
if thou can stoop so low, make use of my pains to help thee. I will promise
thee this reward for thy labor: if thou consider well the actions of the
world, thou shall find him much practisd by those that condemn him; who
willingly would walk as thieves do with close lanternes in the night, that
they being undescried, and yet seeing all, might surprise the unwary in the
dark. Surely this book will infect no man: out of the wicked treasure of a man's
own wicked heart, he draws his malice and mischief. From the same flower the
Be sucks honey, from whence the Spider has his poison. And he that means well,
shall be here warnd, where the deceitful man learnes to set his snares. A
judge who has often usd to examine thieves, becomes the more expert to sift
out their tricks. If mischief come hereupon, blame not me, nor blame my
Author: lay the saddle on the right horse: but Honey soit qui mal y pense: let
shame light on him that hatched the mischief.

Nicholas Machiavelli, to the Magnificent Laurence, son to Peter of Medicis,
health.
THey, that desire to ingratiate themselves with a Prince, commonly use to
offer themselves to his view, with things of that nature, as such persons take
most pleasure and delight in: whereupon we see they are many times presented
with Horses and Arms, cloth of gold, precious stones, and such like ornaments,
worthy of their greatness. Having then a mind to offer my self to your
Magnificence, with some testimony of my service to you, J found nothing in my
whole Inventory, that I think better of, or more esteem, than the knowledge
of great men's actions, which I have learnd by a long experience of modern
affairs, and a continual reading of those of the Ancients. Which, now that J
have with great diligence long work^ it out, and thoroughly sifted, J commend to
your Magnificence. And however I may well think this work unworthy of your
view; yet such is your humanity, that I doubt not but it shall find acceptance,
considering, that for my part I am not able to tender a greater gift, than to
present you with the means, whereby in a very short time you may be able to
understand all that, which I, in the space of many years, and with many
sufferances and dangers, have made proof and gaind the knowledge of. And this
work I have not set forth either with elegancy of discourse or style, nor with
any other ornament whereby to captivate the reader, as others use, because J
would not have it gain its esteem from elsewhere, than from the truth of the
matter, and the ^ravity of the subject. Nor can ^his be thought presumption; if
a man of humble and low condition ^enture to dilate and discourse upon the
governments of Princes; for even as they that with their ^ensills design out
countries, get themselves into the plains below to consider the nature of the
moun^aines, and other high palces above; and again to consider the plains
below, they get up to the ^ops of the mountains; in like man^er to understand
the nature of the people, it is f^t to be a Prince, and to know well the
dispositions of Princes, suits best with the understanding of a subject. Your
Magnificence then may b^ pleased, to receive this small present, with the same
mind that J send it; which if you shall thoroughly peruse and consider, you
shall perceive therein that J exceedingly wish, that you may attain to that
greatness, which your own Fortune, and your excellent endowments promise you:
and if your Magnificence from the very point of your Highness shall sometime
cast your eyes upon these inferior places, you shall see how undeservedly I
undergo an extreme and continual despite of Fortune.

THE PRINCE; Written by Nicholas Machiavelli, Secretary and Citizen of Florence.
CHAP. I. How many sorts of Principalities there are, and how many ways they
are attained to.
ALl States, all Dominions that have had, or now have rule over men, have been,
and are, either ^epubliques, or Principalities. ^rincipalities are either
herdita^y, whereof they of the blood of ^he Lord thereof have long time been
Princes; or else they a^ new; and those that are new, a^ either all new, as was
the Dutch^ of Millan to Francis Sforce; or a^ as members adjoined to the
hereditary State of the Prince tha^ gains it; as the kingdom of Naples is to
the King of Spain. These Dominions so gotten, are accustomed either to live
under ^ Prince, or to enjoy their liberty and are made conquest of, either with
others forces, or ones own either by fortune, or by valor.

CHAP. II. Of Hereditary Principalities.
I Will not here discourse of Republiques, because I have other^ where treated
of them at large I will apply my self only to a Principality, and proceed,
while I weave this web, by arguing thereupon, how these Principalities can be
governed and maintained. I say then that in State of inheritance, and
accustomed to the blood of their Princes, there ^re far fewer difficulties to
keep ^^em, than in the new: for it suf^^ces only not to transgress the ^ourse
his Ancestors took, and so ^fterwards to temporize with those accidents that
can happen; that if such a Prince be but of or^inary industry, he shall always
^e able to maintain himself in ^is State, unless by some extraordinary or
excessive power he be ^eprived thereof; and when he has lost it, upon the
least sinister chance that befalls the usurper, he ^^covers it again. We have in
Ita^^ the Duke of Ferrara for example thereof, who was of ability to resist the
Venetians, in the year 84, and to withstand Pope Julius in ^he tenth for no
other reason, than because he had of old continued in that rule; for the
natu^^ll Prince has fewer occasions, and less heed to give offense, whereupon
of necessity he must ^e more beloved; and unless it ^e that some extravagant
vices of his bring him into hatred, it^ agreeable to reason, that natura^ly he
should be well beloved b^ his own subjects: and in the ant^quity and
continuation of the Dominion, the remembranc^ and occasions of innovations a^
quite extinguished: for evermo^ one change leaves a kind o^ breach or dent, to
fasten the building of another.

CHAP. III. Of mixed Principalities.
BUt the difficulties consist i^ the new Principality; an^ first, if it be not
all new, but as member, so that it may be term^ altogether as mixed; and the
v^riations thereof proceed in the first place, from a natural diff^culty,
which we commonly find^ in all new Principalities; for me^ do willingly change
their Lord believing to better their condit^on; and this belief causes the^ to
take arms against him th^^ rules over them, whereby they de^^ive themselves;
because they ^^nde after by experience, they ^ave made it worse: which de^ends
upon another natural and ^rdinary necessity, forcing him ^wayes to offend
those, whose ^rince he newly becomes, as well ^y his soldiers he is put to
enter^^in upon them, as by many other ^^juries, which a new conquest ^aws along
with it; in such man^er as thou find all those thine ^^emies, whom thou have
endam^aged in the seizing of that Prin^^pality, and afterward can ^ot keep
them thy friends that have seated thee in it, for not being able to satisfy
them accord^^g to their expectations, nor put (...) practice strong remedies
against ^^em, being obliged to them. For ^^wever one be very well pro^^ded
with strong armies, yet has (...) always need of the favor of ^e inhabitants
in the country, (...) enter thereinto. For these rea^^ns, Lewis the twelth,
King of France, suddenly took Milan* and as soon lost it; and the first time
Lodwick his own forces served well enough to wrest it out o^ his hands; for
those people tha^ had opened him the gates, finding themselves deceived of
their opinion, and of that future goo^ which they had promised themselves,
could not endure the distastes the new Prince gave them* True it is, that
countries tha^ have rebelled again the secon^ time, being recovered, are hard^
lost; for their Lord taking occasion from their rebellion, is less^ respective
of persons, but car^ only to secure himself, by punishing delinquents, to
clear all suspicions, and to provide for himself where he thinks he is
weakest: s^ that if to make France lose Milan the first time, it was enoug^ for
Duke Lodwick to make some small stir only upon the confines yet afterward,
before they could make him lose it the second tim^ they had need of the who^^
world together against him, and ^^at al his armies should be wasted and driven
out of Italy; which ^roceeded from the forenamed ^auses: however though, both
^he first and second time it was taken from him. The general ^auses of the
first we have treated ^f; it remains now that we see those of the second, and
set down ^he remedies that he had, or any ^ne else can have, that should ^hance
to be in those terms he was, whereby he might be able ^o maintain himself
better in his conquest, than the King of France did. I say therefore, that
these States which by conquest are annexed to the ancient states of their
Conqueror, are either of the ^^me Province, and the same language, or
otherwise; and when ^hey are, it is very easy to hold them, especially when
they are ^ot used to live free: and to enjoy them securely, it is enough to
have extinguished the Princes line who ruled over them: For in other matters,
allowing them their ancient conditions, and there being not much difference of
manners betwixt them, men ordinarily live quiet enough; as we have seen that
Burgundy did, Britany, Gascony, and Normandy, which so long time continued with
France: for however there be some difference of language between them, yet can
they easily comport one with another; and whosoever makes the conquest of them;
meaning to hold them, must have two regards; the first, that the race of their
former Prince be quite extinguished; the other, that he change nothing, neither
in their laws nor taxes* so that in a very short t^me they become one entire
body with their ancient Principality. But when any States are gaind in a
Province disagreeing in language, manners, and orders, here are the
difficulties, and here is there need of good fortune, and great industry to
maintain them; and it would be one of the best and liveliest remedies, for the
Conqueror to go in person and dwell there; this would make the possession
hereof more secure and durable; as the Turk has done in Greece, who among all the other courses taken by him for to hold that State, had he not gone thither
himself in person to dwell, it had never been possible for him to have kept
it: for abi^ing there, he sees the disorders growing in their beginnings, and
^orthwith can remedy them; whereas, being not there present, ^hey are heard of
when they are grown to some height, and then ^s there no help for them.
Moreover, the Province is not pillaged by the officers thou sendest thi^her:
the subjects are much satisfied, of having recourse to the Prince near at
hand, whereupon have they more reason to love him, if they mean to be good;
and intending to do otherwise, ^o fear him: and foreign Princes will be well
aware how they invade that State; insomuch, that making his abode there, he can
very hardly lose it. Another remedy, which is also a better, is to send
Colonies into one or two places, which may be as it were the keys of that
State; for it is necessary either to do this, or to maintain there many horse
and foot. In these colonies the Prince makes no great expense, and either
without his charge, or at a very small rate, he may both send and maintain
them; and gives offense only to them from whom he takes their fields and
houses, to bestow them on those new inhabitants, who are but a very small part
of that State; and those that he offends, remaining dispersed and poor, can
never hurt him: and all the rest on one part, have no offense given them, and
therefore a small matter keeps them in quiet: on the other side, they are wary
not to err, for fear it befalls not them, as it did those that were dispoyld.
I conclude then, ^^at those colonies that are not ^^argeable, are the more
trusty, ^^ve the less offense; and they that ^re offended, being but poor and
^^attered, can do but little harm, (...) I have said; for it is to be no^^d,
that men must either be dalli^^ and flatterd withal, or else be ^ite crushed;
for they revenge ^^emselves of small damages; ^t of great ones they are not
^de; so that when wrong is done (...) any man, it ought so to be ^one, that it
need fear no return (...) revenge again. But in lieu of ^^lonies, by
maintaining souldi^^s there, the expense is great; for ^e whole revenues of
that State ^e to be spent in the keeping of (...); so the conquest proves but a
^sse to him that has got it, and ^da^mmages him rather; for it ^urts that
whole State, to remove ^e army from place to place, of which annoyance, every
one has (...) feeling, and so becomes enemy (...) thee; as they are enemies,
I wis, who are outraged by thee in their own houses, whenever they are able
to do thee mischief. Every way then is this guard unprofitable, a^ that of the
colonies is profitable. Besides, he that is in a different Province, (as it is
said) should make himself Head and defender of his less powerful neighbors,
and devise all ways to weaken those that are more mighty therein, and take
care, that upon no chance there enter not any forreiner as mighty as himself;
for it will always come to pass, that they shall be brought in by those, that
are discontented, either upon ambition, or fear; as the Etolians brought the
Romans into Greece; and they were brough^ into every country they came* by the
Natives; and the course o^ that matter is, that so soon as a powerful
Stranger enters a country, all those that are the less powerful there,
cleave to him* provoked by an envy they bear^ him that is more mighty tha^
they: so that, for these of the weaker sort, he may easily gain them without
any pains: for presently all of them together very willingly make one lump
with that he has gotten: He has only to beware that these increase not
their strengths, nor their authorities, and so he shall easily be able by his
own forces, and their assistances, to take down those that are mighty, and
remain himself absolute arbitre of that country. And he that playe^ not well
this part, shall quickly lose what he has gotten; and while he holds it,
shall find therein a great many troubles and vexations. The Romans in the
Provinces they seized on, observed well these points, sent colonies thither,
entertained the weaker sort, without augmenting any thing their power, abated
the forces of those that were mighty, and permitted not any powerful forreiner
to gain too much reputation there. And I will content my self only with the
country of Greece for example hereof. The Achayans and Etolians were
entertained by them, the Macedons kingdom was brought low, Antiochus was
driven thence, nor ever did the Achayans or Etolians deserts prevail so far
for them, that they would ever promise to enlarge their State, nor the
persuasions of Philip induce them ever to be his friends, without bringing him
lower: nor yet could Antiochus his power make them ever consent that he should
hold any state in that country: for the Romans did in these cases that, which
all judicious Princes ought to do, who are not only to have regard unto all
present mischiefs, but also to the future, and to provide for those with all
industry; for by taking order for those when they are afar off, it is easy
to prevent them; but by delaying till they come near hand to thee, the remedy
comes too late: for this malignity is grown incurable, and it befalls this, as
the physicians say of the Hectique fever, that in the beginning it is easily
cured, but hard^y known: but in the course of ^ime, not having been known in
^he beginning, nor cured, it be^omes easy to know, but hard to ^ure. Even so
falls it out in mat^ers of State; for by knowing it a^^ofe off (which is given
only to (...) wise man to do) the mischiefs ^^at then spring up, are quickly
^elped; but when, for not having ^een perceived, they are sufferd (...)
increase, so that every one sees them; there is then no cure for them:
therefore the Romans, see^^g these inconvenients afar off, ^lwayes prevented
them, and ^ever sufferd them to follow, ^or to escape a war; because they
knew that a war is not undertaken, but deferrd for a^others advantage;
therefore would they rather make war with Philip, and Antiochus in Greece, to
the end it should not afterward be made with them in Italy, though for that
time they were able to avoid both the one and the other, which they thought not
good to do: nor did they approve of that saying that is ordinarily in the
mouths of the Sages of our days, to enjoy the benefits of the present time;
but that rather, to take the benefit of their valor and wisdom; for time
drives forward every thing, and may bring with it as well good as evil, and
evil as good. But let us return to France, and examine if any of the things
prescribed have been done by them: and we will speak of Lewis, and not of
Charles, as of whom by reason of the long possession he held in Italy we
better knew the ways he went: and you shall see he did the clean contrary to
what should have been done by him that would maintain a State of different
Language and conditions. King Lewis was brought into Italy by the Venetians
ambition, who would have gotten for their shares half the State of Lombardy: I
will not blame his coming, or the course he took, because he had a mind to
begin to set a foot in Italy; but having not any friends in the country, all
gates being barrd against him, by reason of King Charles his carriage there; he
was constraind to join friendship with those he could; and this consideration
well taken, would have proved lucky to him, when in the rest of his courses he
had not committed any error. The King then having conquered Lombardy, recoverd
presently all that reputation, that Charles had lost him; Genua yielded to him,
the Florentines became friends with him; the Marquess of Mantua the Duke of
Ferrara, the Bentivolii, the Lady of Furli, the Lord of Faenza, Pesaro, Rimino,
Camerino, and Piombino, the Luccheses, Pisans, and Sieneses, every one came and
offered him friendship: then might the Venetians consider the rashness of the
course they had taken, who, only to get into their hands two Towns in
Lombardy, made the King Lord of two thirds in Italy. Let any man now consider
with how small difficulty could the King have maintained his reputation in
Italy, if he had followed these afornamed rules, and secured and defended those
his friends; who because their number was great, and they weak and fearful,
some of the Church, and others of the Venetians, were always forced to hold
with him, and by their means he might easily have been able to secure himself
against those that were mightiest: but he wa^ no sooner got into Milan, than
he took a quite wrong course, by giving aid to Pope Alexander, to seize upon
Romania, and perceivd not that, by this resolution he weakened himself, ruining
his own friends, and those that had cast themselves into his bosom, making the
Church puissant, by adding to their Spiritual power, whereby they gaind their
authority, and so much temporal estate. And having once got out of the way,
he was constrained to go on forward; insomuch as to stop Alexanders ambition,
and that he should not become Lord of all Tuscany, of force he was to come into
Italy: and this sufficed him not, to have made the Church mighty, and taken
away his own friends; but for the desire he had to get the kingdom of Naples,
he divided it with the King of Spain: and where before he was the sole arbitre
of Italy; he brought in a competitour, to the end that all the ambitious
persons of that country, and all that were ill-affected to him, might have
otherwhere to make their recourse: and whereas he might have left in that
Kingdom some Vice-King of his own, he took him from thence, to place another
there, that might afterward chase him thence. It is a thing indeed very
natural and ordinary, to desire to be of the getting hand: and always when
men undertake it, if they can effect it, they shall be praised for it, or at
least not blamed* but when they are not able, and yet will undertake it, here
lies the blame, here is the error committed. If France then was able with her
own power to assail the Kingdom of Naples: she might well have done it; but
not being able, she should not have divided it: and if the division she made of
Lombardy with the Venetians, deserved some excuse, thereby to set one foot in
Italy; yet this merits blame, for not being excused by that necessity. Lewis
then committed these five faults; extinguish^ the feebler ones, augmented the
State of another that was already powerful in Italy, brought thereinto a very
puissant forreinner, came not thither himself to dwell there, nor planted any
colonies there: which faults while he lived, he could not but be the worse for;
yet all could not have gone so ill, had he not committed the sixth, ^o take from
the Venetians their ^tate; for if he had not enlarged ^he Churches territories,
nor ^rought the Spaniard into Italy, ^t had been necessary to take them ^ower;
but having first taken those other courses, he should never have given way to
their de^truction; for while they had been ^trong, they would always have
^^ept the others off from venturing ^n the conquest of Lombardy. For ^he
Venetians would never have ^iven their consents thereto, un^esse they should
have been made ^ords of it themselves; and the others would never have taken it
from France, to give it them and then ^hey would never have dared to go and
set upon them both together. And if any one should say, that King Lewis yielded
Roma^ia to Alexander, and the Kingdom of Naples to Spain, to avoid a war; I
answer with the ^easons above alleged, that one should never suffer any
disorder to follow, for avoding of a war* for that war is not saved, but
put off to thy disadvantage. And if any others argue, that the King had given
his word to the Pope, to do that exploit for him, for dissolving of his
marriage, and for giving the Cardinals Cap to him of Roan, I answer with that,
which hereafter I shall say, touching Princes words, how they ought to be
kept. King Lewi^ then lost Lombardy, for not having observed some of those
terms which others used, who have possessed themselves of countries, and
desired to keep them. Nor is this any strange thing, but very ordinary and
reasonable: and to this purpose I spoke at Nantes with that French Cardinal,
when Valentine (for so ordinarily was Caesar Borgia Pope Alexanders son
called) made himself master of Romania; for when the Cardinal said to me,
that the Italians understood not the feats of war, I answered, the Frenchmen
understood not matter of ^tate: for had they bin well versed ^erein, they would
never have ^ffer'd the Church to have grown (...) that greatness. And by
expe^^ence we have seen it, that the ^ower hereof in Italy, and that of ^pain
also, was caused by France, and their own ruin proceeded ^^om themselves. From
whence (...) general rule may be taken, which never, or very seldom fails:
that he that gives the means to ^^other to become powerful, ru^es himself;
for that power is ^^us'd by him either with his in^ustry, or with his force;
and as well the one as the other of these ^wo is suspected, by him that is
^rown puissant.

CHAP. IV. Wherefore Darius his Kingdom taken by Alexander, rebelled not
against Alexanders Successors after his death.
THe difficulties being considered, which a man has in the maintaining of a
State n^ gotten, some might marvel ho^ it came to pass, that Alexand^^ the
Great subdued all Asia in (...) few years; and having hardl^ possessed
himself of it, died* whereupon it seemed probable the all that State should
have rebelled nevertheless his Successors kep^ the possession of it, nor
found the^ other difficulty in holding it, tha^ what arose among themselves
through their own ambition. (...) answer, that all the Principalities, whereof
we have memory left us, have been governed in tw^ several manners; either by
(...) Prince, and all the rest Vassall^ who as ministers by his favou^ and
allowance, do help to govern that Kingdom; or by a Princ^ and by Barons, who
not by their Princes favor, but by the antiquity of blood hold that degree*
And these kinds of Barons have both states of their own, and Vassalls who
acknowledge them for their Lords; and bear them a tru^ natural affection.
Those States ^t are governed by a Prince and (...) Vassalls, have their Prince
ru^^^g over them with more autho^^^^: for in all his country, there ^one
acknowledged for superi^^, but himself: and if they ^d obedience to any one
else, (...) but as to his minister and of^er, nor bear they him any par^^^ular
good will. The examples ^hese two different Goverments ^w in our days, are,
the Turk, (...) the King of France. The Turks ^ole Monarchy is governed by
(...) Lord, and the rest are all his ^^ssalls; and deviding his whole ^^ngdom
into diverse Sangiacques (...) Governments, he sends several ^ther: and those
he chops and ^nges, as he pleases. But the ^ng of France is seated in the
^^dst of a multitude of Lords, ^o of old have been acknow^^^g'd for such by
their subjects, ^d being beloved by them, enjoy ^^eir preheminencies; nor can
the ^^ng take their States from them without danger. He then that considers
the one and the other of these two States, shall find difficulty in the
conquest of the Turks State; but when once it is subdued, great facility to
hold it. The reasons of these difficulties in taking of the Turks Kingdom from
him, are, because the Invader cannot be called in by the Princes of that
Kingdom, nor hope by the rebellion of those which he has about him, to be
able to facilitate his enterprise: which proceeds from the reasons aforesaid;
for they being all his slaves, and obliged to him, can more hardly be
corrupted; and put case they were corrupted, little profit could he get by it,
they not being able to draw after them any people, for the reasons we have
showed: whereupon he that assailes the Turk, must think to find him united;
and must rather rely upon his own forces, than in the others disorders: but
when once he is overcome and broken in the field, so that he cannot repair
his armies, there is nothing else to be doubted, than the Royal blood, which
being once quite out, there is none else left to be feared, none of the others
having any credit with the people. And as the conqueror before the victory
could not hope in them; so after it, ought he not to fear them. The contrary
falls out in Kingdoms governed as is that of France: for ^t is easy to be
entered, by the gain^ing of any Baron in the Kingdom; for there are always
some malcontents to be found, and those that are glad of innovation. Those for
the reasons alleag'd are able ^o open thee a way into that State, and to
further thy victory, which ^fterwards to make good to thee, draws with it
exceeding many difficulties, as well with those that have aided thee, as those
^hou have suppressed. Nor is it enough for thee to root out the Princes race: for
there remain ^till those Lords who quickly will be the ringleaders of new
changes; and in case thou art not able to content these, nor extinguish them,
thou losest that State, whenever the occasion is offered. Now if thou shall
consider what sort of government that of Darius was, thou shall find it like to
the Turks dominions, and therefore Alexander was necessitated first to defeat
him utterly, and drive him out of the field; after which victory, Darius being
dead, that State was left secure to Alexander, for the reasons we treated of
before: and his successors had they continued in amity, might have enjoyed it
at ease: nor ever arose there in that Kingdom other tumults, than those they
themselves stirred up. But of the States that are ordered and grounded as that
of France, it is impossible to become master at such ease: and from hence grew
the frequent rebellions of Spain, France, and Gree^^ against the Romans, by
reason of the many Principalities those States had: whereof while the memory
lasted, the Romans were always doubtful of the possession of them; but the
memory of them being quite wiped out, by the power and continuance of the
Empire, at length they enjoyed it securely; and they also were able afterward
fighting one with another, each one of them to draw after them the greater part
of those provinces, according as their authority had gained them credit
therein: and that because the blood of their ancient Lord was quite spent, they
acknowledged no other but the Romans. By the consideration then of these
things, no man will marvel that Alexander had so little trouble to keep
together the State of Asia; and that others have had such great difficulties to
maintain their conquest, as Pyrrhus, and many others; which proceeds not from
the small or great valor of the conqueror, but from the difference of the
subject.

CHAP. V. In what manner Cities and Principalities are to be governed, which,
before they were conquer d, lived under their own Laws.
WHen those States, that are conquered, as it is said, have been accustomed to
live under their own Laws, and in liberty, there are three ways for a man to
hold them. The first is to demolish all their strong places; the other,
personally to go and dwell there; the third, to suffer them to live under
their own Laws, drawing from them some tribute, and creating therein an
Oligarchy, that may continue it in thy service* for that State being created by
that Prince, knows it cannot consist, without his aid and force, who is like
to do all he can to maintain it; and with more facility is a City kept by
means of her own Citizens, which has been used before to live free, than by
any other way of keeping. We have for example the Spartans; and the Romans; the
Spartans held Athens and Thebes, creating there an Oligarchy: yet they lost it.
The Romans to be sure of Capua, Carthage, and Numantia, dismantell'd them
quite, and so lost them not: they would have kept Greece as the Spartans had
held them, leaving them free, and letting them enjoy their own Laws; and it
prospered not with them: so that they were forced to deface many Cities of that
province to hold it. For in truth there is not a surer way to keep them under,
than by demolishments; and whoever becomes master of a City used to live free,
and dismantells it not; let him look himself to be ruined by it: for it
always in time of rebellion takes the name of liberty for refuge, and the
ancient orders it had; which neither by length of time, nor for any favors
afforded them, are ever forgotten; and for any thing that can be done, or
ordered, unless the inhabitants be disunited and dispersed, that name is never
forgotten, nor those customs: but presently in every chance recourse is
thither made: as Pisa did after so many years, that she had been subdued by
the Florentines. But when the Cities or the Provinces are accustomed to live
under a Prince, and that whole race is quite extirpated; on one part being used
to obey; on the the other, not having their old Prince; they agree not to make
one from among themselves: they know not how to live in liberty; in such manner
that they are much slower to take arms, and with more facility may a Prince
gain them, and secure himself of them. But in Republiques there is more life
in them, more violent hatred, more earnest desire of revenge; nor does the
remembrance of the ancient liberty ever leave them, or suffer them to rest: so
that the safest way, is, either to ruin them, or dwell among them.

CHAP. VI. Of new Principalities, that are conquered by ones own arms, and
valor.
LEt no man marvel, if in the discourse I shall make of new Principalities,
both touching a Prince, and touching a State, I shall allege very famous
examples: for seeing men almost always walk in the paths beaten by others,
and proceed in their actions by imitation, and being that others ways cannot
be exactly followed, nor their virtues, whose pattern thou set-st before
thee, attained unto; a wise man ought always to tread the footsteps of the
worthiest persons, and imitate those that have been the most excellent: to the
end that if his virtue arrive not thereto* at least it may yield some savor
thereof, and do as good Archers use, who thinking the place they intend to
hit, too far distant, and knowing how far the strength of their bow will
carry, they lay their aim a great deal higher than the mark; not for to hit
so high with their arrow, but to be able with the help of so high an aim to
reach the place they shoot at. I say, that in Principalities wholly new, where
there is a new Prince; there is more and less difficulty in maintaining them,
as the virtue of their Conqueror is greater or lesser. And because this
success, to become a Prince of a private man, presupposes either virtue, or
fortune; me thinks the one and the other of these two things in part should
mitigate many difficulties; however he that has less stood upon fortune, has
maintained himself the better. Moreover it some what facilitates the matter in
that the Prince is constrained, because he has not other dominions, in person
to come and dwell there. But to come to these, who by their own virtues, and
not by fortune, attained to be Princes; the excellentest of these are, Moses,
Cyrus, Romulus, Theseus, and such like; and though of Moses we are not to
reason, he only executing the things that were commanded him by God; yet
merits he well to be admired, were it only for that grace, that made him
worthy to converse with God. But considering Cyrus, and the others, who either
got or founded Kingdoms; we shall find them all admirable; and if their
particular actions, and Laws be thoroughly weighed, they will not appear much
differing from those of Moses, which he received from so Sovereign an
instructor. And examining their lives and actions, it will not appear, that
they had other help of fortune, than the occasion, which presented them with
the matter wherein they might introduce what form they then pleased; and
without that occasion, the virtue of their mind had been extinguished; and
without that virtue, the occasion had been offered in vain. It was then
necessary for Moses to find the people of Israel slaves in Egypt, and
oppressed by the Egyptians* to the end that they to get out of their
thraldom, should be willing to follow him. It was fit that Romulus should not
be kept in Albia, but exposed presently after his birth that he might become
King of Rome, and founder of that City. There was need that Cyrus should find
the Persians discontented with the Medes government, and the Medes delicate and
effeminate through their long peace. Theseus could not make proof of his
virtue, had not he found the Athenians dispersed. These occasions therefore
made these men happy, and their excellent virtue made the occasion be taken
notice of, whereby their country became ^nnobled, and exceeding fortunate.
They, who by virtuous ways, like unto these, become Princes, attain the
Principality with difficulty, but hold it with much ease; and the difficulties
they find in gayning the Principality, arise partly from the new orders and
courses they are forced to bring in, to lay the foundation of their State, and
work their own security. And it is to be considered, how there is not any
thing harder to take in hand, nor doubtfuller to succeed, nor more dangerous to
manage, than to be the chief in bringing in new orders; for this Chief finds
all those his enemies, that thrive upon the old orders, and has but lukewarm
defenders of all those that would do well upon the new orders, which
lukewarm temper proceeds part ly from fear of the opposers, who have the
laws to their advantage; partly from the incredulity of the men, who truly
believe not a new thing, unless there be some certain proof given them
thereof. Whereupon it arises, that whenever they that are adversaries take
the occasion to assail, they do it factiously; and these others defend but
cooly, so that their whole party altogether runs a hazard. Therefore it is
necessary, being we intend thoroughly to discourse this part, to examine, if
these innovators stand of themselves, or if they depend upon others; that is,
if to bring their work to effect, it be necessary they should entreat, or be
able to constrain. In the first case they always succeed ill, and bring
nothing to pass; but when they depend of themselves, and are able to force,
than seldom it is that they hazard. Hence came it that all the Prophets that
were armed, prevailed; but those that were unarmed, were too weak: for besides
what we have alleged, the nature of the people is changeable; and easy to
be persuaded to a matter; but it is hard also to settle them in that
persuasion. And therefore it behooves a man to be so provided, that when they
be^eeve no longer, he may be able to compel them thereto by force. Moses,
Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus would never have been able to cause their Laws
long to be obeyed, had they been disarmed; as in our times it befell Friar
Jerome Savanarola, who perished in his new constitutions, when the multitude
began not to believe him; neither had he the means to keep them firm, that
had believed; nor to force belief in them that had not believed him. Wherefore
such men as these, in their proceedings find great difficulty, and all their
dangers are in the way, and these they must surmount by their virtue: but
having once masterd them, and beginning to be honored by all, when they have
rooted those out that envied their dignities, they remain powerful, secure,
honorable, and happy. To these choice Examples, I will add one of less
remarque; but it shall hold some proportion with them, and this shall suffice
me for all others of this kind, which is Hiero the Siracusan. He of a private
man, became Prince of Siracusa, nor knew he any other aid of fortune, than the
occasion: for the Siracusans being oppressed, made choice of him for their
Captain, whereupon he deserved to be made their Prince: and he was of such
virtue even in his private fortune, that he who writes of him, says, he
wanted nothing of reigning, but a Kingdom. This man extinguished all the old
soldiery, ordein'd the new; left the old allyances, entertained new; and as he
had friendship, and soldiers that were his own, upon that ground he was able
to build any edifice; so that he endured much trouble in gaining, and sufferd
but little in maintaining.

CHAP. VII. Of new Principalities, gotten by fortune, and other men's for^es.
THey, who by fortune only become Princes of private men, with small pains
attain to it; but have much ado to maintain themselves in it, and find no
difficulty at all in the way, because they are carried thither with wings: but
all the difficulties arise there, after they are placed in them. And of such
sort are those, who have an estate given them for money, by the favor of some
one that grants it them: as it befell many ^n Greece, in the cities of Jonia,
and Hellespont; where diverse Princes were made by Darius, as well for his own
safety, as his glory; as also them that were made Emperors; who from private
men by corrupting the soldiers, attaind to the Empire. These subsist meery
upon the will, and fortune of those that have advanced them; which are two
volu^ble and unsteady things; and the^ neither know how, nor are abl^ to
continue in that dignity: the^ know not how, because unless i^ be a man of
great understanding and virtue, it is not probable* that he who has always
lived i^ private life, can know how t^ command: neither are they able because
they have not any force that can be freindly or faythful^ to them. Moreover
those State that suddenly fall into a man hands, as all other things in nature
that spring and grow quickly, cannot well have taken root nor have made their
correspondencyes so firm, but that the fir^^ storm that takes them, ruin
them; in case these, who (as it i^ said) are thus on a sudden clamberd up to
be Princes, are not o^ that worth and virtue as to know how to prepare
themselves t^ maintain that, which Chan^^ has cast into their bosoms, an^ can
afterward lay those foundations, which others have cast before they were
Princes. For the one and the other of these ways about the attaining to be a
Prince, by Virtue, or by Fortune, I will allege you two examples which have
been in the days of our memory. These were Francis Sforza and Caesar Borgia;
Francis by ^ust means and with a great deal of virtue, of a private man got to
be Duke of Millan; and that which with much payns he had gaind, he kept with
small ado. On the other side Caesar Borgia (commonly termd Duke Valentine)
got his state by his Fathers fortune, and with the same lost it; however that
for his own part no pains was spard, nor any thing omitted, which by a
discreet and valorous man ought to have been done, to fasten his roots in those
Estates, which others arms or fortune had bestowed on him; for (as it was
formerly said) he that lays not the foundations first, yet might be able by
means of his extraordinary virtues to lay them afterward, however it be with
the great trouble of the architect, and danger of the aedifice. If therefore we
consider all the Dukes progresses, we may perceive how great foundations he had
cast for his future power, which I judge a matter not superfluous to run
over; because I should not well know, what better rules I might give to a new
Prince, than the pattern of his actions; and however the courses he took,
availd him not, yet was it not his fault, but it proceeded from an
extraordinary and extreme malignity of fortune. Pope Alexander the sixth,
desiring to make the Duke his son a great man, had a great many difficulties,
present and future: First he saw no way there was whereby he might be able to
make him Lord of any State, that was not the Churches; and if he turned to take
that from the Church, he knew that the Duke of Milan, and the Venetians would
never agree to it; for Faenza and Riminum were under the Venetians protection.
Moreover, he saw that the arms of Italy, and those whereof in particular he
might have been able to make some use, were in their hands, who ought to fear
the Popes greatness: and therefore could not any ways rely upon them: being
all in the Orsi^s and Colonnies hands, and those of their faction. It was
necessary then, that those matters thus appointed by them, should be
disturbed, and the States of Italy disordered, to be able safely to master
part of them, which he then found easy to do, seeing the Venetians upon three
considerations had used the means to bring the French men back again into
Italy: which he not only did not withstand, but furthered, with a resolution
of King Lewis his ancient marriage. The King then past into Italy with the
Venetians aid, and Alexanders consent; nor was he sooner arrived in Milan,
than the Pope had soldiers from him for the service of Romania, which was
quickly yielded up to him upon the reputation of the Kings forces. The Duke
then having made himself master of Romania, and beaten the Colonnies; desiring
to hold it, and proceed forward, two things hindered him: the one, his own
soldiers, which he thought were not true to him; the other, the French men's
good wills; that is to say, he feared that the Princes soldiers, whereof he
had served himself, would fail him, and not only hinder his conquest, but
take from him what he had gotten; and that the King also would serve him the
same turn. He had experience of the Orsini upon an occasion, when after the
taking of Faenza, he assaulted Bolonia, to which assault he saw them go very
cold. And touching the King, he discoverd his mind, when having taken the
Duchy of Vrbin, he ^vaded Tuscany; from which ^ction the King made him retire;
whereupon the Duke resolved to ^epend no more upon fortune, and other men's
arms. And the first thing he did, was, to wea^en the Orsini and Colonnies
^actions in Rome: for he gained ^ll their adherents that were gen^lemen,
giving then large allow^nces, and honoring them ac^ording to their qualities
with ^harges and governments: so that in a few months the good will they bare
to the parties was quite extinguished, and wholly ^ent to the Duke. After this,
^ee waited an occasion to root ^ut the Orsini, having before dispersd those of
the family of Co^onna, which fell out well to his ^and; and he used it better.
For ^he Orsini being too late aware, that the Dukes and the Churches greatness
was their destruction; held a Counsel together ^n a dwelling house of theirs
in the country adjoyniog to Per^sia. From thence grew the r^bellion of Vrbin,
and the troubl^ of Romania, and many other dangers befell the Duke, which (...)
overcame all with the help of the French: and having regaind h^ reputation,
trusting neither France nor any foreign forces, to the end he might not be
put (...) make trial of them again, he b^ took himself to his sleights; an^
he knew so well to disguise his intention, that the Orsins, by the mediation of
Paul Orsini, we^ reconciled to him, to whom the Duke was no way wanting in a^
manner of courtesies whereby to bring them into security, g^ving them rich
garments, money and horses, till their own simplicities led them all to
Sinigallia into his hands. These head being then plucked off, and their
partisans made his friends, the Duke had laid very good foundations, to build
his own greatness on, having in his power al^ Romania with the Duchy of
Vr^in, and gaind the hearts of those people, by beginning to give them ^ome
relish of their well being. And because this part is worthy to be taken
notice of, and to be ^mitated by others, I will not let it escape. The Duke,
when he had taken Romania, finding it had been under the hands of poor Lords,
who had rather pillaged their subjects, than chastis'd or amended them, giving
them more cause of discord, than of peace and union, so that the whole country
was fraught with robberies, quarrels, and all other sorts of insolences;
thought the best way to reduce them to terms of pacification, and obedience to
a Princely power, was, to give them some good government: and therefore he set
over them one Remiro D' Orco, a cruel, hasty man, to whom he gave an absolute
power. This man in a very short time settled peace and union amongst them with
very great reputation. Afterward the Duke thought such excessive authority
served not so well to his purpose, and doubting it would grow odious, he
erected a Civil Judicature in the midst of the country, where one excellent
Judge did precide, and thither every City sent their Advocate^ and because he
knew the rigours past had bred some hatred against him, to purge the minds of
those people, and to gain them wholly to himself, he purposed to show, that
if there was any cruelty used* it proceeded not from any order of his, but from
the harsh disposition of his Officer. Whereupon laying hold on him, at this
occasion* he causd his head to be struck off one morning early in the market
place at Cesena, where he was left upon a gibbet, with a bloody sword by his
side; the cruelty of which spectacle for a while satisfied and amazed those
people. But to return from whence we have digressd: I say, that the Duke
finding himself very strong, and in part out of doubt of the present dangers,
because he was armd after his own manner, and had in some good measure
suppressd those forces, which, because of their vicinity, were able to annoy
him, he wanted nothing else to go on with his Conquest, but the consideration
of France: for he knew, that the King, who now, though late, was advisd of his
error, would never suffer him: and hereupon he began to seek after new
allyances, and to waver with France, when the French came toward Naples
against the Spaniards, who then besiegd Gagetta; and his design was only to
be out of their danger, which had been effected for him, had Pope Alexander
lived. And thus were his businesses carried touching his present estate. As for
the future, he had reason to doubt, least the new successor to the Papacy
would not be his friend, and would endeavor to take that from him that
Alexander had bestowd on him; and he thought to provide for this four ways:
first by rooting out the races of all those Lords he had dispoyled, whereby to
take those occasions from the Pope. Secondly, by gaining all the gentlemen of
Rome, whereby he might be able with those to keep the Pope i^ some awe.
Thirdly, to make the College of Cardinals as much at his devotion as possibly
might be. Fourthly, by making of so large Conquests, before the Popes death,
as that he might be able of himself to withstand the first fury of his
enemies. Three of these four at Pope Alexanders death he had effected, and
the fourth he had near brought to a point. For of those Lords he had stripd*
he put to death as many as he could come at, and very few escaped him* he
gaind him the Roman gentlemen: and in the College he had made a great
faction. And touching his new Conquest, he had a design to become Lord of
Tuscany. And he had possessed himself already of Perusia, and Piombin, and
taken protection of Pisa: and so soon as he should have cast of his respect
to France (which now he meant to hold no longer) being the French were now
driven out of the Kingdom of Naples by the Spaniards, so, that each of them
was forced to buy his friendship at any terms; he was then to leap into Pisa.
After this Lucca and Siena, were presently to fall to him, partly for envy to
the Florentines, and partly for fear. The Florentines had no way to escape
him: all which had it succeeded with him, as without question it had, the very
same year that Alexander died, he had m^de himself master of so great forces,
and such reputation, that he would have been able to have stood upon his own
bottom, without any dependence of fortune, or resting upon others helps; but
only upon his own strength and valor. But Alexander died five years after
that he had begun to draw forth his sword: and left him settled only in the
State of Romania, with all his other designs in the air, sick unto death,
between two very strong armies of his enemies: and yet was there in this Duke
such a spirit and courage, and he understood so well, how men are to be gaind,
and how to be lost, and so firm were the grounds he had laid in a short time,
that, had he not had those armies upon his back, or had he been in health,
he would have carried through his purpose in spite of all opposition: and
that the foundations he grounded upon, were good, it appeard in that Romania
held for him above a month, and he remaind secure in Rome, though even at
deaths door: and however the Baglioni, Vitelli, and Orsini came into Rome; yet
found they none would take their parts against him. And this he was able to
have effected, that if he could not have made him Pope whom he would, he
could have hindered him that he would not should be Pope. But had he been in
health when Alexander died, every thing had gone easily with him; and he told
me on that day that Julius the second was created Pope, that he had
forethought on all that which could happen, in case his father chanced to dye,
and for every thing provided its remedy: this only excepted, that he foresaw
not that he himself should at the same time be brought unto deaths door also.
Having then collected all the Dukes actions, me thinks I could not well blame
him, but rather (as I have here done) set him as a pattern to be followd by
all those, who by fortune and others arms have been exalted to an Empire. For
he being of great courage, and having lofty designs, could not carry himself
otherwise; and the only obstacle of his purpos^ was the brevity of Alexanders
life, and his own sickness. Whoever therefore deemes it necessary in his
entrance into a new Principality, to secure himself of his enemies, and gain
him friends, to overcome either by force, or by cunning, to make himself be
belovd, or feared of his people, be followed and reverenced by his soldiers, to
root out those that can, or owe thee any hurt, to change the ancient orders
with new ways, to be severe, and yet acceptable, magnanimous, and liberal,
to extinguish the unfaithful soldiery, and create new, to maintain to
himself the amities of Kings and Princes, so that they shall either with
favor benefit thee, or be wary how to offend thee; cannot find more fresh and
lively examples than the actions of this man. He deserves to be found fault
withal for the creation of Julius the second, wherein an evil choice was made
for him: for, as it is said, not being able to make a Pope to his mind, he
could have withheld any one from being Pope; and should never have consented
that any one of those Cardinals, should have got the Papacy, whom he had ever
done harm to; or who having attaind the Pontificate were likely to be afraid
of him: because men ordinarily do hurt either for fear, or hatred. Those whom
he had offended, were among others, he who had the title of St. Peter ad
Vincula, Colonna, St. George, and Ascanius; all the others that were in
possibility of the Popedom, were such as might have feared him rather, except
the Cardinal of Roan, and the Spaniards; these by reason of their alliance and
obligation with him, the other, because of the power they had, having the
Kingdom of France on their party. Wherefore the Duke above all things should
have created a Spanyard Pope, and in case he could not have done that, he
should have agreed that Roan should have been, and not St. Peter ad Vincula.
And whoever believes, that with great personages new benefits blot out the
remembrance of old injuries, is much deceived. The Duke therefore in this
election, was the cause of his own ruin at last.

Till we come to this seventh Chapter, I find not any thing much
blameworthy, unless it be one ground he lays in the secon^ Chapter;
whereupon he build^ most of this Fabric, viz. Tha^ Subjects must either be
dallyed o^ flatterd withal, or quite crush. Whereby our Author advises hi^
Prince to support his authority with two Cardinal Virtues, Dissimulation, and
Cruelty. He considers not herein that the head is but a member of the body,
though the principal; and the end of the parts is the good of the whole. And
here he goes against himself in the twenty sixth Chapter of his Rep. l. 1.
where he blames Philip of Macedon for such courses, terming them very cruel,
and against all Christian manner of living; and that every man should refuse to
be a King, and desire rather to live a private life, than to reign so much to
the ruin of mankind. The life of Caesar Borgia, which is here given as a
pattern to new Princes, we shall find to have been nothing else but a cunning
carriage of things so, that he might thereby first deceive and inveigle, and
then suppress all those that could oppose or hinder his ambition. For if you
run over his life, you shall see the Father Pope Alexander the sixth, and him,
both imbarqued for his advancement, wherein they engaged the Papal authority,
and reputation of Religion; for faith and conscience these men never knew,
though they exacted it of others: there was never promise made, but it was only
so far kept as servd for advantage; Liberalite was made use of, Clemency and
Cruelty, all alike, as they might serve to work with their purposes. All was
sacrificed to ambition, no freindship could tie these men, nor any religion:
and no marvel: for ambition made them forget both God and man. But see the end
of all this cunning: though this Caesar Borgia contrivd all his business so
warily, that our Author much commends him, and he had attaind near the pitch
of his hopes, and had provided for each misadventure could befall him its
remedy; Policy showed it self short sighted; for he foresaw not at the time of
his Fathers death, he himself should be brought unto deaths door also. And me
thinks this Example might have given occasion to our Author to confess, that
surely there is a God that rules the earth. And ^any times God cutts off those
cun^ing and mighty men in the hight ^f their purposes, when they think ^hey
have near surmounted all ^angers and difficulties. To the ^^tent that the
living may know, that the most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives
it to ^homsoever he will, and sets ^p over it the basest of men. Da^iel.
4.17.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning those who by wicked means have attaind to a
Principality.
BUt because a man becomes a Prince of a private man two ways, which cannot
wholly be ^ttributed either to Fortune or Virtue, I think not fit to let them
pass me: howbeit the one of them may be more largely discoursed upon, where
the Re^ublicks are treated of. These are, when by some wicked and unlawful
means a man rises to the Principality; or when a private person by the favor
of his fellow Citizens becomes Prince of his country. And speaking of the
first manner, it shall be made evident by two Examples, the one ancient, the
other modern, without entering otherwise into the justice or merit of this
part; for I take it that these are sufficient for any body that is forced to
follow them. Agathocles the Sicilian, not of a private man only, but from a
base and abject fortune got to be King of Siracusa. This man borne but of a
Potter, continued always a wicked life throughout all the degrees of his
fortune: nevertheless he accompanied his lewdness with such a courage and
resolution, that applying himself to military affairs, by the degrees thereof
he attaind to be Praetour of Siracusa, and being settled in that degree, and
having determind that he would become Prince, and hold that by violence and
without obligation to any other, which by consent had been granted him; and to
this purpose having had some private intelligence touching his design with
Amilcar the Carthaginian, who was imployd with his army in Sicily, one morning
gatherd the people together and the Senate of Siracusa, as if he had somewhat
to advise with them of matters belonging to the Commonwealth, and upon a sign
given, caused his soldiers to kill all his Senators, and the richest of the
people; who being slain, he usurped the Prineipality of that City without any
civil strife: and however he was twice broken by the Carthaginians, and at
last besiegd, was able not only to defend his own City, but leaving part of his
own army at the defense thereof, with the other invaded Affrique, and in a
short time freed Siracusa from the siege, and brought the Carthaginians into
extreme necessity, who were constraind to accord with him, be contented with
the possession of Affrique, and qui^^ Sicily to Agathocles. He then that should
consider the actions and valor of this man, would not see any, or very few
things to be attributed unto Fortune; seeing that as is formerly said, not by
any ones favor, but by the degrees of service in war with many sufferings
and dangers, to which he had risen, he came to the Principality; and that he
maintaind afterward with so many resolute and hazardous undertakings. Yet
cannot this be termed virtue or valor to slay his own Citizens, betray his
friends, to be without faith, without pity, without religion, which ways are
of force to gain dominion, but not glory: for if Agathocles his valor be
well weighd, in his venturing upon, and coming off from dangers, and the
greatness of his courage, in supporting and mastering of adversities, no man
^an see why he should be thought any way inferior even to the ^blest
Captains. Notwithstand^ng his beastly cruelty and inhumanity with innumerable
wickednesses, allow not that he should be celebrated among the most excellent
men. That cannot then be attributed to Fortune or Virtue, which without the one
or the other was attaind to by him. In our days, while Alexander the sixth
held the sea, Oliverotto of Fermo, who some few years before had been left
young by his parents, was brought up under the care of an uncle of his on the
mothers side, called John Foliani, and in the beginning of his youth given by
him to serve in the wars under Paulo Vitelli: to the end that being well
instructed in that discipline, he might rise to some worthy degree in the
wars. Afterward when Paulo was dead, he served under Vitellozzo his brother,
and in very short time, being ingenious, of a good personage, and brave
courage, he became one of the prime men among the troops he served in: but
thinking it but servile to depend upon another; he plotted by the aid of some
Citizens of Fermo (who liked rather the thraldom of their City than the
liberty of it) and by the favor of the Vitelli, to make himself master of
Fermo; and writ to John Foliani, that having been many years from home, he had
a mind to come and see him and the City, and in some part take notice of his
own patrimony; and because he had not imployd himself but to purchase honor,
to the end his Citizens might perceive, that he had not vainly spent his time,
he had a desire to come in good equipage and accompanied with a hundred horse
of his friends and servants; and he entreated him that he would be pleased so to
take order, that he might be honorably receivd by the inhabitants of Fermo;
which turned as well to his honor that was his uncle, as his that was the
nephew. In this, John faild not in any office of courtesy due to his nephew:
and caused him to be well receivd by them of Fermo, and lodgd him in his own
house: where having passd some days, and stayed to put in order somewhat that
was necessary for his intended villainy, he made a very solemn feast, whether
he invited John Foliani, and all the prime men of Fermo: and when all their
cheer was ended, and all their other entertainments, as in such feasts it is
customary, Oliverotto of purpose moved some grave discourses; speaking of the
greatness of Pope Alexander, and Caesar his son, and their undertakings;
whereunto John and the others making answer: he of a sudden stood up, saying,
that those were things to be spoken of in a more secret place, and so retired
into a chamber, whether John and all the other Citizens followd him; nor were
they sooner set down there, than from some secret place therein came forth
diverse soldiers, who slew John and all the others: after which homicide
Oliverotto got a horseback and ravagd the whole town, and besiegd the supreme
Magistrate in the palace, so that for fear they were all constraind to obey
him, and to settle a government, whereof he made himself Prince; and they
being all dead, who, had they been discontented with him, could have hurt him;
he strengthened himself with new civil and military orders, so that in the
space of a year that he held the Principality, he was not only secure in the
City of Fermo, but became fearful to all his neighbors; and the conquest of
him would have proved difficult, as that of Agathocles, had he not let himself
been deceivd by Caesar Borgia; when at Sinigallia, as before was said, he took
the Orsini and Vitelli: where he also being taken a year after he had
committed the parricide, was strangled together with Vitellozzo (whom he had
had for master both of his virtues and vices.) Some man might doubt from whence
it should proceed, that Agathocles, and such like, after many trecheryes and
crueltyes, could possibly live long secure in his own country, and defend
himself from his foreign enemies, and that never any of his own Citizens
conspired against him; seeing that by means of cruelty, many others have never
been able even in peaceable times to maintain their States, much less in the
doubtful times of war. I believe that this proceeds from the well, or ill
using of those crueltyes: they may be termd well used (if it be lawful to
say well of evil) that are put in practice only once of necessity for
securities sake, not insisting therein afterward, but there is use made of
them for the subjects profit, as much as may be. But those that are ill usd,
are such as though they be but few in the beginning, yet they multiply rather
in time, than deminish. They that take that first way, may with the help of
God, and men's care, find some remedy for their State, as Agathocles did: for
the others, it is impossible they should continue. Whereupon it is to be noted,
that in the laying hold of a State, the usurper thereof ought to run over and
execute all his cruellties at once, that he be not forcd often to return to
them, and that he may be able, by not renewing of them, to give men some
security, and gain their affections by doing them some courtesies. He that
carries it otherwise, either for fearefullnesse, or upon evil advice, is
always constraind to hold his sword drawn in his ^and; nor ever can he rely
upon ^is subjects, there being no pos^ibility for them, because of his daily
and continual injuries, to live in any safety: for his injuries should be
done altogether, that being seldomer tasted, they might less offend: his
favors should be bestowd by little and little, to the end they might keep
their ^aste the better; and above all things a Prince must live with his
subjects in such sort, that no accident either of good or evil can make him
vary: for necessity coming upon him by reason of adversities, thou have not
time given thee to make advantage of thy cruellties; and the favors which then
thou bestowest, will little help thee, being taken, as if they came from thee
perforce, and so yield no return of thanks.

CHAP. IX. Of the Civil Principality.
BUt coming to the other part, when a principal Citizen, not by villainy, or
any other insufferable violence, but by the favor of his fellow-citizens
becomes Prince of his native country: which we may term a Civil
Principality; nor to attain hereunto is Virtue wholly, or Fortune wholly
necessary, but rather a fortunate cunning. I say, this Principality is climbed
up to, either by the peoples help, or the great men's. For, in every City we
find these two humour^ differ; and they spring from this that the people
desire not to be commanded nor oppressed by the great ones, and the great one^
are desirous to command and oppress the people: and from these two several
appetites, arises in the City one of these three effects, either a
Principality, or Liberty, or Tumultuary licentiousness. The Principality is
caused either by the people, or the great ones; according as the one or the
other of these factions have the occasion offered; for the great ones seeing
themselves not able to resist the people, begin to turn the whole reputation
to one among them, and make him Prince, whereby ^hey may under his shadow vent
their spleenes. The people also, not being able to support the great men's
insolences, converting the whole reputation to one man, create him their
Prince, to ^e protected by his authority. He that comes to the Principality by
^he assistance of the great ones, ^ubsists with more difficulty, than ^e that
attaines to it by the peo^les favor; for he being made ^rince, has many about
him, who account themselves his e^ualls, and therefore cannot dis^ose nor
command them at his ^leasure. But he that gains the ^rincipality by the
peoples favor, finds himself alone in his throne, and has none or very few
near him, that are not very supple to bend: besides this, the great ones
cannot upon easy terms be satisfied, or without doing of wrong to others,
whereas a small matter contents the people: for the end which the people
propound to themselves, is more honest than that of the great men, these
desiring to oppress, they only not to be oppressed. To this may be added also,
that the Prince which is the peoples enemy, can never well secure himself of
them, because of their multitude; well may he be sure of the Nobles, they
being but a few. The worst that a Prince can look for of the people become his
enemy, is, to be abandond by them: but when the great ones once grow his
enemies, he is not only to fear their abandoning of him, but their making of a
party against him also: for there being i^ them more forecast and craft, the^
always take time by the forelocks whereby to save themselves, and seek credit
with him, who they hope shall get the mastery. The Prince likewise is
necessitated always to live with the same people, but can do well enough
without the same great men, he being able to create new ones, and destroy them
again every day, and to take from them, and give them credit as he pleases:
and to clear this part, I say, that great men ought to be considerd two ways
principally, that is, if they take thy proceedings so much to heart, as to
engage their fortunes wholly in thine, in case they lie not always catching at
spoil, they ought to be well honored and esteemed: those that bind themselves
not to thy fortune, are to be considerd also two ways; either they do it for
lack of courage,, and natural want of spirit, and then should thou serve thy
self of them, and of them especially that are men of good advice; for if thy
affairs prosper, thou do thy self honor thereby; if crossed, thou needst not
fear them: but when they oblige not themselves to thee of purpose, and upon
occasion of ambition, it is a sign they think more of themselves than of thee:
and of these the Prince ought to beware, and account of them as his discoverd
enemies: for always in thy adversity they will give a hand too to ruin thee.
Therefore ought he that comes to be Prince by the peoples favor, keep them
his friends: which he may easily do, they desiring only to live free from
oppression: but he that becomes Prince by the great men's favor, against the
will of the people, ought above all things to gain the people to him, which he
may easily effect, when he takes upon him their protection: And because men
when they find good, where they look for evil, are thereby more endeard to
their benefactour, therefore grows the people so pliant in their subjection to
him, as if by their favors he had attaind his dignity. And the Prince is able
to gain them to his side by many ways, which because they vary according to
the subject, no certain rule can be given thereupon, wherefore we shall let
them pass; I will only conclude, that it is necessary for a Prince to have the
people his friend, otherwise in his adversities he has no help. Nabis Prince
of the Spartans supported the siege of all Greece, and an exceeding victorious
army of the Romans, and against those defended his native country and State,
and this sufficed him alone, that as the danger came upon him, he secured
himself of a few: whereas if the people had been his enemy, this had nothing
availd him. And let no man think to overthrow this my opinon with that common
proverb, that he who relyes upon the people, lays his foundation in the dirt;
for that is true, where a private Citizen grounds upon them, making his account
that the people shall free him, when either his enemies or the Magistrates
oppress him. In this case he should find himself often deceived, as it befell
the Gracehyes in Rome, and in Florence George Scali: but he being a Prince that
grounds thereupon, who can command, and is a man of courage, who has his wits
about him in his adversityes, and wants not other preparations, and holds
together the whole multitude animated with his valor and orders, shall not
prove deceived by them, and shall find he has laid good foundations. These
Principalityes are wont to be upon the point of falling when they go about to
skip from the civil order, to the absolute: for these Princes either command
of themselves, or by the Magistrates; in this last case their State is more weak
and dangerous: because they stand wholly at the will and pleasure of these
Citizens, who then are set over the Magistrates, who especially in adverse
times are able with facility to take their State from them, either by rising up
against them, or by not obeying them; and then the Prince is not at hand in
those dangers to take the absolute authority upon him: for the Citizens and
subjects that are accustomed to receive the commands from the Magistrates, are
not like in those fractions to obey his: and in doubtful times he shall
always have greatest penury of whom he may trust; for such a Prince cannot
ground upon that which he sees in peaceable times, when the Citizens have need
of the State; for then every one runs and every one promises, and every one
will venture his life for him, when there is no danger near; but in times of
hazard, when the State has need of Citizens, there are but few of them then,
and so much the more is this experience dangerours, in that it can be but once
made. Therefore a prudent Prince ought to devise a way, whereby his Citizens
always and in any case and quality of time may have need of his government,
and they shall always after prove faithful to him.

CHAP. X. In what manner the forces of al Principalities ought to be measured.
IT is requisite in examining the quality of those Principalities, to have
another consideration of them, that is, if a Prince have such dominions, that
he is able in case of necessity to subsist of himself, or else whether he
has always need of another to defend him. And to clear this point the better,
I judge them able to stand of themselves, who are of power either for their
multitudes of men, or quantity of money, to bring into the field a complete
army, and join battle with whoever comes to assail them: and so I think
those always to stand in need of others help, who are not able to appear in
the field against the enemy, but are forced to retire within their walls and
guard them. Touching the first case, we have treated already, and shall add
somewhat thereto as occasion shall require. In the second case, we cannot say
other, save only to encourage such Princes to fortify and guard their own
Capital city, and of the country about not to hold much account; and whoever
shall have well fortified that town, and touching other matters of governments
shall have behaved himself toward his subjects, as has been formerly said,
and hereafter shall be, shall never be assaild but with great regard; for men
willingly undertake not enterprises, where they see difficulty to work them
through; nor can much facility be there found, where one assailes him, who
has his town strong and well guarded, and is not hated of his people. The
cities of Germany are very free; they have but very little of the country
about them belonging to them, and they obey the Emperor, when they please, and
they stand not in fear, neither of him nor any other potentate about them: for
they are in such a manner fortified, that every one thinks the siege of any of
them would prove hard and tedious: for all of them have ditches and rampires,
and good store of Artillery, and always have their public sellers well
provided with meat and drink and firing for a year: besides this whereby to
feed the common people, and without any loss to the public, they have always
in common whereby they are able for a year to employ them in the labor of
those trades, that are the sinews and the life of that city, and of that
industry, whereby the commons ordinarily supported themselves: they hold up
also the military exercises in repute, and hereupon have they many orders to
maintain them. A Prince then that is master of a good strong city, and causes
not himself to be hated, cannot be assaulted; and in case he were, he that
should assail him, would be feign to quitt him with shame: for the affairs of
the world are so various, that it is almost impossible that an army can lie
incampt before a town for the space of a whole year: and if any should reply,
that the people having their possessions abroad, in case they should see them
afire, would not have patience, and the tedious siege and their love to
themselves would make them forget their Prince: I answer that a Prince puissant
and courageous, will easily master those difficulties, now giving his subjects
hope, that the mischief will not be of durance, sometimes affrighting them
with the cruelty of their enemies, and otherwhiles cunningly securing himself
of those, whom he thinks too forward to run to the enemy. Besides this by
ordinary reason the enemy should burn and waste their country upon his
arrival, and at those times while men's minds are yet warm, and resolute in
their defense: and therefore so much the less ought a Prince doubt: for after
some few days, that their courages grow cool, the damages are all done, and
mischiefs receivd, and there is no help for it, and then have they more
occasion to cleave faster to their Prince; thinking he is now more bound to
them, their houses having for his defense been fired, and their possessions
wasted: and men's nature is as well to hold themselves obliged for the
kindnesses they do, as for those they receive; whereupon if all be well
weighed, a wise Prince shall not find much difficulty to keep sure and true to
him his Citizens ^earts at the beginning and ^atter end of the siege, when ^ee
has no want of provision ^or food and munition.

CHAP. XI. Concerning Ecclesiastical Principalities.
THere remains now only that we treat of the Eccle^iasticall Principalities,
about which all the difficulties are before they are gotten: for they are
^ttain'd to either by Virtue or ^ortune, and without the one or ^he other they
are held: for they ^re maintaind by orders inve^erated in the religion, all
which ^re so powerful and of such nature, that they maintain their ^rinces in
their dominions in that manner soever they proceed and live. These only have an
Estate and defend it not; have ^ubjects and govern them not; and yet their
States because un^efended, are not taken from them; nor their subjects, though
not governed, care not, think not, neither are able to aliene themselves from
them. These Principalities then are only happy and secure: but they being
sustained by superior causes, whereunto humane understanding reaches not, I
will not meddle with them: for being set up and maintaind by God; it would be
the part of a presumptuous and rash man to enter into discourse of them. Yet if
any man should ask me whence it proceeds, that the Church in temporal power
has attaind to such greatness, seeing that till the time of Alexander the
sixth, the Italian potentates, and not only they who are entitled potentates,
but every Baron and Lord though of the meanest condition, in regard of the
temporality made but small account of it, and now a King of France trembles at
the power thereof, and it has been able to drive him out of Italy, and ruin
the Venetians; and however this be well known, me thinks it is not superfluous
in some part to recall it to memory. Before that Charles King of France past
into Italy, this country was under the rule of the Pope, the Venetians, the
King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines. These potentates took
two things principally to their care; the one, that no forreiner should invade
Italy; the other, that no one of them should enlarge their State. They, against
whom this care was most taken, were the Pope and the Venetians; and to
restrain the Venetians, there needed the union of all the rest, as it was in
the defense of Ferrara; and to keep the Pope low, they servd themselves of the
Barons of Rome, who being divided into two factions, the Orsini and Colonnesi,
there was always occasion of offense between them, who standing ready with
their arms in hand in the view of the Pope, held the Popedom weak and feeble:
and however sometimes there arose a courageous Pope, as was Sextus; yet either
his fortune, or his wisdom was not able to free him of these incommodities,
and the brevity of their lives was the cause thereof: for in ten years, which
time one with another, the Popes ordinarily lived, with much ado could they
bring low one of the factions. And if, as as we may say, one had near put out
the Colonnesi, there arose another enemy to the Orsini, who made them grow
again, so that there was never time quite to root them out. This then was the
cause, why the Popes temporal power was of small esteem in Italy. There arose
afterward Pope Alexander the sixth, who of all the Popes that ever were, showed
what a Pope was able to do with money and forces: and he effected by means
of his instrument, Duke Valentins, and by the occasion of the French men's
passage, all those things, which I have formerly discoursed upon in the Dukes
actions: and however his purpose was nothing at all to enlarge the Church
dominions, but to make the Duke great; yet what he did, turned to the Churches
advantage; which after his death, when the Duke was taken away, was the heir
of all his pains. Afterward succeeded Pope Julius, and found the Church
great, having all Romania, and all the Barons of Rome being quite rooted out,
and by Alexanders persecutions all their factions worn down; he found also
the way open for the heaping up of monyes, never practiced before Alexanders
time; which things Julius not only followed, but augmented; and thought to make
himself master of Bolonia, and extinguish the Venetians, and chase the French
men out of Italy: and these designs of his proved all lucky to him, and so
much the more to his praise in that he did all for the good of the Church, and
in no private regard: he kept also the factions of the Orsini, and Colonnesi,
in the same State he found them: and though there were among them some head
whereby to cause an alteration; yet two things have held them quiet, the one
the power of the Church, which somewhat affrights them; the other because they
have no Cardinals of their factions, who are the primary causes of all the
troubles amongst them: nor shall these parties ever be at rest, while they
have Cardinals; because they nourish the factions both in Rome, and abroad, and
and the Barons then are forced to undertake the defense of them: and thus from
the Prelates ambitions arise the discords and tumults among the Barons. And now
has Pope Leo his Holiness found the Popedom exceeding puissant, of whom it
is hoped, that if they amplifi'd it by arms, he by his goodness, and
infinite other virtues, will much more advantage and dignifie it.

CHAP. XII. How many sorts of Military discipline there are: and touching
Mercenary soldiers.
HAving treated particularly of the qualities of those Principalities, which in
the beginning I propounded to discourse upon, and considered in some part the
reasons of their well and ill being, and showed the ways whereby many have
sought to gain, and hold them; it remains now that I speak in general of the
offenses and defenses, that may chance in each of the forenamed. We have
formerly said that it is necessary for a Prince to have good foundations laid;
otherwise it must needs be that he go to wrack. The principal foundations
that all States have, as well new, as old, or mixed, are good laws, and good
arms; and because there cannot be good laws, where there are not good arms,
and where there are good arms, there must needs be good laws, I will omit to
discourse of the laws, and speak of arms. I say then that the arms,
wherewithal a Prince defends his State, either are his own, or mercenary, or
auxiliary, or mixed. Those that are mercenary, and auxiliary, are unprofitable,
and dangerous; and if any one holds his State founded upon mercenary arms, he
shall never be quiet, nor secure: because they are never well united,
ambitious, and without discipline, treacherous, among their friends stout,
among their enemies cowardly, they have no fear of God, nor keep any faith
with men, and so long only defer they the doing of mischief, till the enemy
comes to assail thee, and in time of peace thou art dispoyld by them, in war
by thy ^lemies: the reason hereof is, because they have no other love, ^or
other cause to keep them in ^he field, but only a small stipend, which is not of
force to make ^^em willing to hazard their lives ^or thee: they are willing
indeed ^^be thy soldiers, til thou go to ^^ght, but then they fly, or run
^way: which thing would cost ^ee but small pains to persuade: ^r the ruin of
Italy has not had any other cause now adays, than ^or that it has these many
years ^ely'd upon mercenary arms; which a good while since perhaps ^ay have
done some man some ^^rvice, and among themselves ^^ey may have been thought
va^^ant: but so soon as any foreign ^nemy appeard, they quickly ^^ewd what
they were: Where^pon Charles the King of France, without opposition made
himself ^aster of all Italy: and he that ^^id, that the cause thereof were ^ur
faults, said true; but these were not those they beleevd, but wha^ I have told;
and because they were the Princes faults, they als^ have suffered the
punishment. I will fuller show the infelicity o^ these arms. The mercenary
Captains are either very able men, or not: if they be, thou can no^ repose
any trust in them: for they will always aspire unto their own proper
advancements, eitheir by suppressing of thee tha^ art their Lord, or by
suppressing of some one else quite out of thy purpose: but if the Captain be^
not valourous, he ordinarily ruins thee: and in case it be answered, that
whoever shall have arms in his hands, whether mercenary or not, will do so: I
would reply, that arms are to be imployd either by a Prince, or
commonwealth. The Prince ough^ to go in person, and perform^ the office of a
commander: the Republic is to send forth h^ Citizens: and when she send forth
one that proves not of abilities, she ought to change him ^hen, and when he
does prove ^alourous, to bridle him so by the ^aws, that he exceed not his
commissions. And by experience we ^ee, that Princes and Republics of
themselves alone, make very great conquests; but that merce^ary arms never do
other than ^arme: and more hardly falls a Republic armed with her own ^rmes
under the obedience of one of her own Citizens; than one that is armd by
foreign arms. Rome and Sparta subsisted many ^ges armd and free. The Swissers
are exceedingly well armd, and yet very free. Touching mercenary arms that
were of old, we have an example of the Carthagians, who near upon were
oppressd by their own mercenary soldiers, when the first war with the
Romans was finishd, however the Carthagians had their own Citizens for their
Captains. Philip of Macedon was made by the Thebans after Epaminondas his
death, General of their Armies; and after the victory, he took from them their
liberty. The Milaneses when Duke Philip was dead, entertaind Francis Sforza
into their pay against the Venetians, who having vanquished their enemies at
Caravaggio, afterward joined with them, whereby to usurp upon the Milaneses
his Masters. Sforza his father, being in Joane the Queen of Naples pay, left
her on a sudden disarmd; whereupon she, to save her Kingdom, was constraind to
cast her self into the King of Arragon's bosom. And in case the Venetians and
the Florentines have formerly augmented their State with these kind of Arms,
and their own Captains, and yet none of them have ever made themselves their
Princes, but rather defended them: I answer, that the Florentines in this case
have had Fortune much their friend: for of valorous Captains, which they might
any way fear, some have not been victors, some have had opposition, and others
have laid the aim of their ambitions another way. He who overcame not, was
John Aeuto, of whose faith there could no proof be made, being he vanquished
not; but every one will acknowledge, that, had he vanquished, the Florentines
were at his discretion. Sforza had always the Bracceschi for his adversaries,
so that they were as a guard one upon another. Francis converted all his
ambition against Lombardy. Braccio against the Church, and the Kingdom of
Naples. But let us come to that, which followed a while ago. The Florentines
made Paul Vitelli their General, a thoroughly advisd man, and who from a private
fortune had rose to very great reputation: had he taken Pisa, no man will deny
but that the Florentines must have held fast with him; for had he been
entertaind in their enemies pay, they had had no remedy, and they themselves
holding of him, of force were to obey him. The Venetians, if we consider their
proceedings, we shall see wrought both warily and gloriously, while they
themselves made war, which was before their undertakings by land where the
gentlemen with their own Commons in arms behaved themselves bravely: but when
they began to fight by land, they lost their valor, and followed the customs
of Italy; and in the beginning of their enlargement by land, because they had
not much territory, and yet were of great reputation, they had not much cause
to fear their Captains; but as they began to extend their bounds, which was
under their Commander Carminiola, they had a taste of this error: for
perceiving he was exceeding valourous, having under his conduct beaten the
Duke of Milan, and knowing on the other side, how he was cold in the war,
they judged that they could not make any great conquest with him; and because
they neither would, nor could not cashier him, that they might not lose what
they had gotten, they were forced for their own safeties to put him to death.
Since they have had for their General Bartholomew of Berganio, Robert of St.
Severin, ^he Count of Petilian, and such like: whereby they were to fear their
losses, as well as to hope for gain: as it fell out afterward at Vayla,
wherein one day they ^ost that, which with so much ^aines they had gotten in
eight ^undred years: for from these kind of arms grow slack and ^low and weak
gains; but sudden and wonderful losses. And because I am now come with these
^xamples into Italy, which now ^hese many years, has been go^ernd by
mercenary arms, I will ^earch deeper into them, to the end that their course
and progress being better discoverd, they may be the better amended. You have
to understand, that so soon as in these later times the yoke of the Italian
Empire began to be shaken off, and the Pope had gotten reputation in the
temporalty, Italy was divided into several States: for many of the great
cities took arms against their Nobility; who under the Emperors protection
had held them in oppression; and the Pope favored these, whereby he might get
himself reputation, in the temporalty; of many others, their Citizens became
Princes, so that hereupon Italy being come into the Churches hands as it were,
and some few Republics, those Priests and Citizens not accustomed to the use
of arms, began to take strangers to their pay. The first that gave reputation
to these soldiers was Alberick of Como in Romania. From his discipline among
others descended Brachio and Sforza, who in their time were the arbitres of
Italy. After these followd all the others, who even til our days have
commanded the arms of Italy: and the success of their valor has been, that
it was overrunne by Charles, pillagd by Lewis, forced by Fardinand, and
disgraced by the Swissers. The order which they have held, has been, first
whereby to give reputation to their own arms, to take away the credit of the
infantrey. This they did, because they having no State of their own, but
living upon their industry, their few foot gave them no reputation, and many
they were not able to maintain, whereupon they reduced themselves to cavalery,
and so with a supportable number they were intertaind and honored: and matters
were brought to such terms, that in an army of twenty thousand soldiers, you
should not find two thousand foot. They had moreover usd all industry to free
themselves and their soldiers of all pains and fear, in their skirmishes,
not killing, but taking one another prisoners, and without ransom for their
freedoms; they repaird not all to their tents by night, nor made palizado, or
trench thereabout, nor lay in the field in the summer: and all these things
were thus contrivd and agreed of among them in their military orders: whereby
(as is said) to avoid pains and dangers; insomuch as they have brought Italy
into slavery and disgrace.

CHAP. XIII. Of Auxiliary Soldiers, mixed, and natives.
THe Auxiliary forces, being the other kind of unprofitable arms, are, when
any puissant one is called in, who with his forces comes to assist and defend
thee; such as in these later times did Pope Julius use, who having seen the
evil proof of his mercenary soldiers in the enterprise of Ferrara, applied
himself to the Auxiliaries, and agreed with Ferdinand King of Spain, that with
his forces he should aid him. These arms may be profitable and advantageous
for themselves; but for him that calls them in, hurtful; because in losing,
thou art left defeated; and conquering, thou becomest their prisoner. And
however that of these examples the ancient stories are full fraught, yet will I
not part from this of Pope Julius the second, which is as yet fresh: whose
course could not have been more inconsiderate, for the desire he had to get
Ferrara, putting himself wholly into strangers hands: but his good fortune,
causd another third cause to arise, that hindered him from receiving the fruit
of his evil choice; for his Auxiliaries being broken at Ravenna, and the
Swissers thereupon arriving, who put the Conquerours to flight, beyond all
opinion even their own and others, he chanced not to remain his enemies
prisoner, they being put to flight; nor prisoner to his Auxiliaries, having
vanquishd by other forces, than theirs. The Florentines being wholly disarmd,
brought ten thousand French to Pisa for to take it: by which course they ran
more hazard, than in any time of their troubles. The Emperor of
Constantinople, to oppress his neighbors, brought into Greece ten thousond
Turks, who when the war was ended, could not be got out thence, which was
the beginning of Greeces servitude under the Infidels. He then that will in no
case be able to overcome, let him serve himself of these arms; for they are
much more dangerous than the mercenaries; for by those thy ruin is more
suddenly executed; for they are all united, and all bent to the obedience of
another. But for the mercenaries to hurt thee, when they have vanquishd, there
is no more need of time, and greater occasion, they not being all united in a
body, and being found out and paid by thee, wherein a third that thou make
their head, cannot suddenly gain so great authority, that he can endammage
thee. In sum, in the mercenaries their sloth and laziness to fight is more
dangerous: in the auxiliaries their valor. Wherefore a wise Prince has
always avoided these kind of arms, and betaken himself to his own, and
desird rather to lose with his own, than conquer with another, accounting
that not a true victory, which was gotten with others arms. I will not doubt
to allege Caesar Borgia, and his actions. This Duke entered into Romania with
auxiliarie arms, bringing with him all French soldiers: but afterward not
accounting those arms secure, bent himself to mercenaries, judging less
danger to be in those, and took in pay the Orsini and the Vetelli, which
afterward in the proof of them, finding wavering, unfaithful, and dangerous,
he extinguishd, and betook himself to his own; and it may easily be
perceived, what difference there is between the one and the other of these
arms, considering the difference that was between the Dukes reputation, when
he had the French men alone, and when he had the Orsini and Vetelli; but when
he remaind with his own, and stood of himself, we shall find it was much
augmented: nor ever was it of great esteem, but when every one saw, that he
wholly possesd his own arms. I thought not to have parted from the Italian
examples of late memory; but that I must not let pass that of Hiero the
Siracusan, being one of those I formerly named. This man (as I said before)
being made general of the Siracusans forces, knew presently that that
mercenary soldiery was nothing for their profit, in that they were hirelings,
as our Jtalians are; and finding no way either to hold, or cashier them, made
them all be cut to pieces, and afterward waged war with his own men, and
none others. I will also call to memory a figure of the old Testament serving
just to this purpose. When David presented himself before Saul to go to fight
with Goliath the Philistims Champion; Saul to encourage him, clad him with his
own arms, which David when he had them upon his back, refused, saying, he
was not able to make any proof of himself therein, and therefore would go
meet the enemy with his own sting and sword. In sum, others arms either fall
from thy shoulders, or cumber or streighten thee. Charles the seventh, Father
of Lewis the eleventh, having by his good fortune and valor set France at
liberty from the English, knew well this necessity of being armed with his own
arms, and settled in his Kingdom the ordinances of men at arms, and
infantry. Afterward King Lewis his son abolishd those of the infantry, and
began to take the Swissers to pay; which error followed by the others, is (as
now in deed it appears) the cause of that Kingdoms dangers. For having given
reputation to the Swissers, they have renderd all their own arms contemptible;
for this has wholly ruind their foot, and obliged their men at arms to
foreign arms: for being accustomed to serve with the Swissers, they think they
are not able to overcome without them. From whence it comes that the French are
not of force against the Swissers, and without them also against others they
use not to adventure. Therefore are the French armies mixed, part mercenaries,
and part natives, which arms are far better than the simple mercenaries or
simple auxiliaries, and much inferior to the natives; and let the said example
suffice for that: for the Kingdom of France would have been unconquerable, if
Charles his order had been augmented and maintaind: but men in their small
wisdom begin a thing, which then because it has some savor of good,
discovers not the poison, that lurkes there under, as I before said of the
hectic fevers. Wherefore that Prince which perceives not mischiefs, but as
they grow up, is not truly wise; and this is given but to few: and if we
consider the first ruin of the Roman Empire, we shall find it was, from
taking the Goths first into their pay; for from that beginning the forces of
the Roman Empire began to grow weak, and all the valor that was taken hence
was given to them. I conclude then that without having arms of their own, no
Principality can be secure, or rather is wholly obliged to fortune, not having
valor to shelter it in adversity. And it was always the opinion and saying of
wise men, that nothing is so weak and unsettled, as is the reputation of power
not founded upon ones own proper forces: which are those that are composd of
thy subjects, or Citizens, or servants; all the rest are mercenary or
auxiliary; and the manner how to order those well, is easy to find out, if
those orders above named by me, shall be but run over, and if it shall be but
considered, how Philip Alexander the Great his Father, and in what manner many
Republics and Princes have armd and appointed themselves, to which
appointments I refer my self wholly.

CHAP. XIV. What belongs to the Prince touching military Discipline.
A Prince then ought to have no other aim, nor other thought, nor take any
thing else for his proper art, but war, and the orders and discipline
thereof: for that is the sole art which belongs to him that commands, and is
of so great excellency, that not only those that are borne Princes, it
maintains so; but many times rayses men from a private fortune to that dignity.
And it is seen by the contrary, that when Princes have given themselves more
to their delights, than to the wars, they have lost their States; and the
first cause that makes thee lose it, is the neglect of that art; and the cause
that makes thee gain it, is that thou art experienced and approved in that
art. Francis Sforza by being a man at arms, of a private man became Duke of
Milan; and his sons by excusing themselves of the troubles and pains belonging
to those employments of Princes, became private men. For among other mischiefs
thy neglect of arms brings upon thee, it causes thee to be contemnd, which is
one of those disgraces, from which a Prince ought to keep himself, as
hereafter shall be said: for from one that is disarmd to one that is armd
there is no proportion; and reason will not, that he who is in arms, should
willingly yield obedience to him that is unfurnishd of them, and that he that
is disarmd should be in security among his armed vassalls; for there being
disdain in the one, and suspicion in the other it is impossible these should
ever well cooperate. And therefore a Prince who is quite unexperienced in
matter of war, besides the other infelicities belonging to him, as is said,
cannot be had in any esteem among his soldiers, nor yet trust in them.
Wherefore he ought never to neglect the practice of the art of war, and in
time of peace should he exercise it more than in the war; which he may be
able to do two ways, the one practically, and in his labors and recreations
of his body, the other theorically. And touching the practick part, he ought
besides the keeping of his own subjects well traind up in the discipline and
exercise of arms, give himself much to the chase, whereby to accustom his
body to pains, and partly to understand the manner of situations, and to know
how the mountains arise, which way the vallyes open themselves, and how the
plains are distended flat abroad, and to conceive well the nature of the
rivers, and marrish ground, and herein to bestow very much care, which
knowledge is profitable in two kinds: first he learnes thereby to know his own
country, and is the better enabled to understand the defense thereof, and
afterward by means of his knowledge and experience in these situations easily
comprehend any other situation, which a new he has need to view, for the
little hillocks, valleys, plains, rivers, and marrish places. For example,
they in Tuscany are like unto those of other countries: so that from the
knowledge of the site of one country, it is easy to attain to know that of
others. And that Prince that wants this skill, fails of the principal part a
Commander should be furnished with: for this shows the way, how to discover the
enemy, to pitch the camp, to lead their armies, to order their battles, and
also to besiege a town at thy best advantage. Philopomenes Prince of the
Achayans, among other praises writers give him, they say, that in time of
peace, he thought not upon any thing so much as the practice of war; and
whenever he was abroad in the field to disport himself with his friends,
would often stand still, and discourse with them, in case the enemies were upon
the top of that hill, and we here with our army, whether of us two should have
the advantage, and how might we safely go to find them, keeping still our
orders? and if we would retire our selves, what course should we take? if they
retired, how should we follow them? and thus on the way propounded them all
such accidents could befall in an army; would hear their opinions, and tell
his own, and confirm it by argument, so that by his continual thought
hereupon, when ever he led any army, no chance could happen, for which he had
not a remedy. But touching the exercise of the mind, a Prince ought to read
Histories, and in them consider the actions of the worthiest men, mark how
they have behaved themselves in the wars, examine the occasions of their
victories, and their losses; whereby they may be able to avoid these, and
obtain those; and above all, do as formerly some excellent man has done, who
has taken upon him to imitate, if any one that has gone before him, has left
his memory glorious; the course he took, and kept always near unto him the
remembrances of his actions and worthy deeds: as it is said, that Alexander the
great imitated Achilles; Caesar Alexander; and Scipio Cyrus. And whoever reads
the life of Cyrus, written by Xenophon, may easily perceive afterward in
Scipio's life, how much glory his imitation gaind him, and how much Scipio did
conform himself in his chastity, affability, humanity, and liberality with
those things, that are written by Xenophon of Cyrus. Such like ways ought a
wise Prince to take, nor ever be idle in quiet times: but by his pains then,
as it were provide himself of store, whereof he may make some use in his
adversity, to the end that when the times change, he may be able to resist the
storms of his hard fortune.

CHAP. XV. Of those things, in respect whereof, men, and especially Princes,
are praised, or dispraised.
IT now remains that we consider, what the conditions of a Prince ought to be,
and his terms of government over his subjects, and toward his friends. And
because I know that many have written hereupon; I doubt, lest I venturing also
to treat thereof, may be branded with presumption, especially seeing I am like
enough to deliver an opinion different from others. But my intent being to
write for the advantage of him that understands me, I thought it fitter to
follow the effectual truth of the matter, than the imagination thereof: And
many Principalities and Republiques, have been in imagination, which neither
have been seen nor known to be indeed: for there is such a distance between
how men do live, and how men ought to live; that he who leaves that which is
done, for that which ought to be done, learnes sooner his ruin, than his
preservation: for that man who will profess honesty in all his actions, must
needs go to ruin, among so many that are dishonest. Whereupon it is necessary
for a Prince, desiring to preserve himself, to be able to make use of that
honesty, and to lay it aside again, as need shall require. Passing by then
things that are only in imagination belonging to a Prince, to discourse upon
those that are really true; I say that all men, whenever mention is made of
them, and especially Princes, because they are placd aloft in the view of all,
are taken notice of, for some of these qualities, which procure them either
commendations, or blame: and this is, that some one is held liberal, some
miserable, (miserable I say, not covetous, for the covetous desire to have,
though it were by rapine, but a miserable man is he, that too much forbears to
make use of his own) some free givers, others extortioners; some cruel,
others pittious; the one a League breaker, another faithful; the one
effeminate and of small courage, the other fierce and courageous; the one
courteous, the other proud; the one lascivious, the other chaste; the one of
fair dealing, the other wily and crafty; the one hard, the other easy; the
one grave, the other light; the one religious, the other incredulous, and such
like. I know that every one will confess, it were exceedingly praiseworthy
for a Prince to be adorned with all these above named qualities that are good:
but because this is not possible, nor do humane conditions admit such
perfection in virtues, it is necessary for him to be so discreet, that he know
how to avoid the infamy of those vices, which would thrust him out of his
State; and if it be possible, beware of those also which are not able to remove
him thence; but where it cannot be, let them pass with less regard. And yet,
let him not stand much upon it, though he incur the infamy of those vices,
without which he can very hardly save his State: for if all be thoroughly
considerd, some things we shall find which will have the color and very face
of Virtue, and following them, they will lead thee to thy destruction; whereas
some others, that shall as much seem vice, if we take the course they lead us,
shall discover unto us the way to our safety and well-being.

The second blemish in this our Authors book J find in his fifteenth Chapter:
where he instructs his Prince to use such an ambidexterity as that he may serve
himself, either of virtue, or vice, according to his advantage, which in true
policy is neither good in attaining the Principality, nor in securing it when
it is attaind. For Politics presuppose Ethiques, which will never allow this
rule: as that a man might make this small difference between virtue, and vice,
that he may indifferently lay aside, or take up the one, or the other, and put
it in practice as best conduces to the end he propounds himself. I doubt our
Author would have blamd David's regard to Saul, when 1. Sam. 24. in the cave
he cut off the lap of Saul's garment, and spared his head, and afterward in
the 26. when he forbade Abishai to strike him as he lay sleeping. Worthy of a
Princes consideration is that saying of Abigal to David 1. Sam. 25.30. It shall
come to pass when the Lord shall have done to my Lord, according to all that
he has spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee Ruler over
Israel, that this shall be no grief to thee, nor offense of heart unto my
Lord, that thou have forborne to shed blood etc. For surely the conscience of
this evil ground whereupon they have either built, or underpropped their
tyranny, causes men as well metus as spes in longum projicere, which sets them
a work on further mischief.

CHAP. XVI. Of Liberality, and Miserableness.
BEginning then at the first of the above mentioned qualities, I say, that it
would be very well to be accounted liberal: nevertheless, liberality used in
such a manner, as to make thee be accounted so, wrongs thee: for in case it be
used virtuously, and as it ought to be, it shall never come to be taken notice
of, so as to free thee from the infamy of its contrary. And therefore for one
to hold the name of liberal among men, it were needful not to omit any
sumptuous quality, insomuch that a Prince always so disposd, shall waste all
his revenues, and at the end shall be forced, if he will still maintain that
reputation of liberality, heavily to burden his subjects, and become a great
exactour; and put in practice all those things, that can be done to get money.
Which begins to make him hateful to his subjects, and fall into every ones
contempt, growing necessitous: so that having with this his liberality wronged
many, and imparted of his bounty but to a few, he feels every first mischance,
and runs a hazard of every first danger. Which he knowing, and desiring to
withdraw himself from, incurrs presently the disgrace of being termd
miserable. A Prince therefore not being able to use this virtue of liberality,
without his own damage, in such a sort, that it may be taken notice of,
ought, if he be wise, not to regard the name of Miserable; for in time he shall
always be esteemed the more liberal, seeing that by his parsimony his own
revenues are sufficient for him, as also he can defend himself against whoever
makes war against him, and can do some exploits without grieving his
subjects: so that he comes to use his liberality to all those, from whom he
takes nothing, who are infinite in number; and his miserableness toward
those, to whom he gives nothing, who are but a few. In our days we have not
seen any, but those who have been held miserable, do any great matters, but
the others all quite ruind. Pope Julius the second, however he served himself
of the name of Liberal, to get the Papacy, yet never intended he to continue
it, to the end he might be able to make war against the King of France; and
he made so many wars without imposing any extraordinary tax; because his long
thrift supplyd his large expenses. This present King of Spain could never have
undertaken, nor gone through with so many exployts, had he been accounted
liberal. Wherefore a Prince ought little to regard (that he may not be driven
to pillage his subjects, that he may be able to defend himself, that he may
not fall into poverty and contempt, that he be not forcd to become an
extortioner) though he incur the name of Miserable; for this is one of those
vices, which does not pluck him from his throne. And if any one should say;
Caesar by his liberality obtaind the Empire, and many others (because they both
were, and were esteemd liberal) attaind to exceeding great dignities. I
answer, either thou art already come to be a Prince, or thou art in the way to
it: in the first case this liberality is hurtful; in the secone it is
necessary to be accounted so; and Caesar was one of those that aspird to the
Principality of Rome. But if after he had gotten it, he had survivd, and not
forborne those expenses, he would quite have ruind that Empire. And if any one
should reply; many have been Princes, and with their armies have done great
exployts, who have been held very liberal. I answer, either the Prince spends
of his own and his subjects, or that which belongs to others: in the first,
he ought to be sparing, in the second he should not omit any part of
liberality. And that Prince, that goes abroad wtth his army, and feeds upon
prey, and spoil, and tributes, and has the disposing of that which belongs to
others, necessarily should use this liberality; otherwise would his soldiers
never follow him; and of that which is neither thine, nor thy subjects, thou
may well be a free giver, as were Cyrus, Caesar, and Alexander; for the
spending of that which is another, takes not away thy reputation, but rather
adds to it, only the wasting of that which is thine own, hurts thee; nor is
there any thing consumes it self so much as liberality, which whilst thou
usest, thou losest the means to make use of it, and becom'st poor and abject,
or to avoid this poverty an extortioner and hateful person. And among all
those things which a Prince ought to beware of, is, to be dispisd, and odious;
to one and the other of which, liberality brings thee. Wherefore there is more
discretion to hold the style of Miserable, which begets an infamy without
hatred, than to desire that of Liberal, whereby to incur the necessity of
being thought an extortioner, which procures an infamy with hatred.

CHAP. XVII. Of Cruelty, and Clemency, and whether it is better to be beloved,
or feared.
DEscending afterward unto the other fore-alleadged qualities, I say, that
every Prince should desire to be held pitiful, and not cruel. Nevertheless
ought he beware that he ill uses not this pity. Caesar Borgia was accounted
cruel, yet had his cruelty redrest the disorders in Romania, settled it in
union, and restord it to peace, and fidelity: which, if it be well weighd, we
shall see was an act of more pity, than that of the people of Florence, who to
avoid the term of cruelty, sufferd Pistoya to fall to destruction. Wherefore a
Prince ought not to regard the infamy of cruelty, for to hold his subjects
united and faithful: for by giving a very few proofs of himself the other
way, he shall be held more pitiful than they, who through their too much
pity, suffer disorders to follow, from whence arise murders and rapines: for
these are wont to hurt an entire universality, whereas the executions practisd
by a Prince, hurt only some particular. And among all sorts of Princes, it is
impossible for a new Prince to avoid the name of cruel, because all new States
are full of dangers: Whereupon Virgil by the mouth of Dido excuses the
inhumanity of her Kingdom, saying, Res dura and Regni novitas me talia cogunt
Moliri et late ^nes custode tenere.
My hard plight and new State force me to guard
My confines all about with watch and ward.
Nevertheless ought he be judicious in his giving belief to any thing, or
moving himself thereat, nor make his people extremely afraid of him; but
proceed in a moderate way with wisdom, and humanity, that his too much
confidence make him not unwary, and his too much distrust intolerable, From
hence arises a dispute, whether it is better to be beloved or feared: I answer,
a man would wish he might be the one and the other: but because hardly can
they subsist both together, it is much safer to be feared, than be loved; being
that one of the two must needs fail; for touching men, we may say this in
general, they are unthankful, unconstant, dissemblers, they avoid dangers,
and are covetous of gain; and whilst thou do them good, they are wholly
thine their blood, their fortunes, lives and children are at thy service, as is
said before, when the danger is remote; but when it approaches, they revolt.
And that Prince; who wholly relyes upon their words, unfurnishd of all other
preparations, goes to wrack: for the friendships that are gotten with rewards,
and not by the magnificence and worth of the mind, are dearly bought indeed;
but they will neither keep long, nor serve well in time of need: and men do
less regard to offend one that is supported by love, than by fear. For love
is held by a certainty of obligation, which, because men are mischeivous, is
broken upon any occasion of their own profit. But fear restrains with a dread
of punishment which never forsaks a man. Yet ought a Prince cause himself to
be belovd in such a manner, that if he gains not love, he may avoid hatred:
for it may well stand together, that a man may be feared and not hated; which
shall never fail, if he abstain from his subjects goods, and their wives;
and whenever he should be forced to proceed against any of their lives, do
it when it is to be done upon a just cause, and apparent conviction; but above
all things forbear to lay his hands on other men's goods; for men forget sooner
the death of their father, than the loss of their patrimony. Moreover the
occasions of taking from men their goods, do never fail: and always he that
begins to live by rapine, finds occasion to lay hold upon other men's goods: but
against men's lives they are seldomer found, and sooner fail. But when a Prince
is abroad in the field with his army and has a multitude of soldiers under
his government, then is it necessary that he stands not much upon it, though
he be termd cruel: for unless he be so, he shall never have his soldiers
live in accord one with another, nor ever well disposd to any brave piece of
service. Among Hannibals actions of mervaile this is reckond for one, that
having a very huge army, gatherd out of several nations, and all led to serve
in a strange country, there was never any dissension neither amongst
themselves, nor against their General, as well in their bad fortune as their
good. Which could not proceed from any thing else, than from that barbarous
cruelty of his, which, together with his exceeding many virtues, renderd him to
his soldiers both venerable and terrible; without which, to that effect his
other virtues had servd him to little purpose: and some writers, though not of
the best advised, on one side admire these his worthy actions, and on the other
side, condemn the principal causes thereof. And that it is true, that his
other virtues would not have suffis'd him, we may consider in Scipio, the
rarest man not only in the days he lived, but even in the memory of man; from
whom his army rebelled in Spain: which grew only upon his too much clemency,
which had given way to his soldiers to become more licentious, that was well
tolerable by military discipline: for which he was reproved by Fabius Maximus
in the Senate, who termd him the corrupter of the Roman soldiery. The
Locrensians having been destroyed by a Lieftenant of Scipio's, were never
revenged by him, nor the insolence of that Lieftenant punished, all this arising
from his easy nature: so that one desiring to excuse him in the Senate, said,
that there were many men knew better how to keep themselves from faults, than
to correct the faults of other men: which disposition of his in time would have
wronged Scipio's reputation and glory, had he therewith continued in his
commands: but living under the government of the Senate, this quality of his
that would have disgraced him* not only was concealed, but proved to the
advancement of his glory. I conclude then, returning to the purpose of being
feared, and beloved; insomuch as men love at their own pleasure and to serve
their own turn, and their fear depends upon the Princes pleasure, every wise
Prince ought to ground upon that which is of himself, and not upon that which
is of another: only this, he ought to use his best wits to avoid hatred, as was
said.

CHAP, XVIII. In what manner Princes ought to keep their words.
HOw commendable in a Prince it is to keep his word, and live with integrity,
not making use of cunning and subtlety, every one knows well: yet we see by
experience in these our days, that those Princes have effected great matters,
who have made small reckoning of keeping their words, and have known by their
craft to turn and wind men about, and in the end have overcome those who have
grounded upon the truth. You must then know, there are two kinds of combating
or fighting; the one by right of the laws, the other merely by force. That
first way is proper to men, the other is also common to beasts: but because the
first many times suffices not, there is a necessity to make recourse to the
second; wherefore it behooves a Prince to know how to make good use of that
part which belongs to a beast, as well as that which is proper to a man. This
part has been covertly showed to Princes by ancient writers; who say that
Achilles and many others of those ancient Princes were entrusted to Chiron the
Centaure, to be brought up under his discipline: the moral of this, having
for their teacher one that was half a beast and half a man, was nothing else,
but that it was needful for a Prince, to understand how to make his advantage
of the one and the other nature, because neither could subsist without the
other. A Prince then being necessitated to know how to make use of that part
belonging to a beast, ought to serve himself of the conditions of the Fox and
the Lion; for the Lion cannot keep himself from snares, nor the Fox defend
himself against the Wolves. He had need then be a Fox, that he may beware
of the snares, and a Lion, that he may scarre the Wolves. Those that stand
wholly upon the Lion, understand not well themselves. And therefore a wise
Prince cannot, nor ought not keep his faith given, when the observance thereof
turns to disadvantage, and the occasions that made him promise, are past. For
if men were all good, this rule would not be allowable; but being they are full
of mischief, and would not make it good to thee, neither art thou tied to keep
it with them: nor shall a Prince ever want lawful occasions to give color to
this breach. Very many modern examples hereof might be alleged, wherein might
be showed how many peaces concluded, and how many promises made, have bin
violated and broken by the infidelity of Princes; and ordinarily things have
best succeeded with him that has been nearest the Fox in condition. But it is
necessary to understand how to set a good color upon this disposition, and to
be able to feign and dissemble thoroughly; and men are so simple and yield so
much to the present necessities, that he who has a mind to deceive, shall
always find another that will be deceivd. I will not conceal any one of the
examples that have been of late. Alexander the sixth, never did any thing else
than deceive men, and never meant otherwise, and always found whom to work
upon; yet never was there man would protest more effectually, nor aver any
thing with more solemn oaths, and observe them less than he; nevertheless,
his coosenages all thrived well with him; for he knew how to play this part
cunningly. Therefore is there no necessity for a Prince to be endued with all
these above written qualities, but it behooves well that he seem to be so; or
rather I will boldly say this, that having these qualities, and always
regulating himself by them, they are hurtful, but seeming to have them, they
are advantageous; as to seem pitiful, faithful, mild, religious, and of
integrity, and indeed to be so; provided withal thou be of such a
composition, that if need require thee to use the contrary, thou can, and
know how to apply thy self thereto. And it suffices to conceive this, that
a Prince, and especially a new Prince, cannot observe all those things, for
which men are held good; he being often forced, for the maintenance of his
State, to do contrary to his faith, charity, humanity, and religion: and
therefore it behooves him to have a mind so disposd as to turn and take the
advantage of all winds and fortunes; and as formerly I said, not forsake the
good; while he can; but to know how to make use of the evil upon necessity. A
Prince then ought to have a special care, that he never let fall any words,
but what are all seasoned with the five above-written qualities, and let him
seem to him that sees and hears him, all pity, all faith, all integrity, all
humanity, all religion; nor is there any thing more necessary for him to seem
to have, than this last quality: for all men in general judge thereof, rather
by the sight than by the touch; for every man may come to the sight of him, few
come to the touch and feeling of him; every man may come to see what thou
seem, few come to perceive and understand what thou art; and those few dare
not oppose the opinion of many, who have the majesty of State to protect them:
And in all men's actions, especially those of Princes, wherein there is no
judgment to appeal unto, men forbear to give their censures till the events,
and ends of things. Let a Prince therefore take the surest courses he can to
maintain his life and State: the means shall always be thought honorable,
and commended by every one: for the vulgar is over-taken with the appearance
and event of a thing: and for the most part of people, they are but the vulgar:
the others that are but few, take place where the vulgar have no subsistence. A
Prince there is in these days, whom I shall not do well to name, that preaches
nothing else but peace and faith; but had he keept the one and the other,
several times had they taken from him his State and reputation.

In the sixteenth, seaventeenth, and eighteenth Chap. our Author descends to
particulars, persuading his Prince in his sixteenth to such a suplenesse of
disposition, as that upon occasion he can make use either of liberality or
miserableness as need shall require. But that of liberality is to last no
longer, than while he is in the way to some design: which if we well weigh,
is not really a reward of virtue, how ere it seems; but a bait and lure to
bring birds to the net. In the seventeenth Chap. he treats of clemency and
cruelty; neither of which are to be exercisd by him as acts of mercy or
justice; but as they may serve to advantage his further purposes. And lest the
Prince should incline too much to clemency, our Author allows rather the
restraint by fear, than by love. The contrary to which all stories show us. I
will say this only, cruelty may cut of the power of some, but causes the hatred
of all, and gives a will to most to take the first occasion offered for
revenge. In the eighteenth Chap. our Author discourses how Princes ought to
govern themselves in keeping their promises made: whereof he says they ought
to make such small reckoning as that rather they should know by their craft how
to turn and wind men about, whereby to take advantage of all winds and
fortunes. To this J would oppose that in the fifteenth Psalm. v. 5. He that
swears to his neighbor, and disappointeth him not, though it were to his
own hindrance. It was a King that writ it: and me thinks the rule he gave,
should well befit both King and subject: and surely this persuades against all
taking of advantages. A man may reduce all the causes of faith-breaking to
three heads. One may be, because he that promisd, had no intention to keep his
word; and this is a wicked and malicious way of dealing. A second may be,
because he that promisd, repents of his promise made; and that is grounded on
unconstancy, and lightness in that he would not be well resolved before be
entered into covenant. The third may be, when it so falls out, that it lies not
in his power, that made the promise to perform it. In which case a man ought
to imitate the good debtor, who having not wherewithal to pay, hides not
himself, but presents his person to his creditour; willingly suffering
imprisonment. The first and second are very vicious and unworthy of a Prince:
in the third, men might well be directed by the examples of those two famous
Romans, Regulus and Posthumous. I shall close this with that answer of Charles
the fifth when he was pressd to break his word with Luther for his safe
return from Worms. Fides rerum promissarum etsi toto mundo exulet, Gulielmus
Xenocarus in vit. Car. Quinti.
tamen apud imperatorem eam consistere oportet. Though truth be banished out of
the whole world, yet should it always find harbor in an Emperors breast.

CHAP. XIX. That Princes should take a care, not to incur contempt or hatred.
BUt because among the qualities, whereof formerly mention is made, I have
spoken of those of most importance; I will treat of the others more briefly
under these qualities, that a Prince is to beware, as in part is above said,
and that he fly those things which cause him to be odious or vile: and when
ever he shall avoid this, he shall fully have played his part, and in the other
disgraces he shall find no danger at all. There is nothing makes him so odious,
as I said, as his extortion of his subjects goods, and abuse of their women,
from which he ought to forbear: and so long as he wrongs not his whole
people neither in their goods, nor honors, they live content, and he has only
to strive with the Ambition of some few: which many ways, and easily too, is
restrained. To be held various, light, effeminate, faint-harted, unresolved,
these make him be contemnd and thought base, which a Prince should shun like
rocks, and take a care that in all his actions there appear magnanimity,
courage, gravity, and valor; and that in all the private affairs of his
subjects, he orders it so, that his word stand irrevocable: and maintains
himself in such repute, that no man may think neither to deceive, nor wind and
turn him about; that Prince that gives such an opinion of himself, is much
esteemd: and against him, who is so well esteemd, hardly are any conspiracies
made by his subjects, or by forreiners any invasion, when once notice is taken
of his worth, and how much he is reverenced by his subjects. For a Prince
ought to have two fears, the one from within, in regard of his subjects; the
other from abroad, in regard of his mighty neighbors; from these he defends
himself by good arms and good friends, and always he shall have good friends
if he have good arms; and all things shall always stand sure at home, when
those abroad are firm; in case some conspiracy have not disturbed them, and
however the foreign matters stand but ticklishly; yet if he have taken such
courses at home, and lived as we have prescribed, he shall ever be able (in
case he forsake not himself) to resist all possible force and violence, as I
said, Nabis the Spartan did: but touching his subjects, even when his affairs
abroad are settled, it is to be feared, they may conspire privily; from which a
Prince sufficiently secures himself by shunning to be hated or contemnd, and
keeping himself in his peoples good opinion, which it is necessary for him to
compass, as formerly we treated at large. And one of the powerfullest remedies
a Prince can have against conspiracies, is, not to be hated nor despisd by the
universality; for always he that conspires, believes the Princes death is
acceptable to the subject: but when he thinks it displeases them, he has not
the heart to venture on such a matter; for the difficulties that are on the
conspirators side, are infinite. By experience it is plain, that many times
plots have been laid, but few of them have succeeded luckily; for he that
conspires, cannot be alone, nor can he take the company of any but of those,
who, he believes are malcontents; and so soon as thou have discovered thy self
to a malecontent, thou giv'st him means to work his own content: for by
revealing thy treason, he may well hope for all manner of favor: so that
seeing his gain certain of one side; and on the other, finding only doubt and
danger, either he had need be a rare friend, or that he be an exceeding
obstinate enemy to the Prince, if he keeps his word with thee. And to reduce
this matter into short terms: I say, there is nothing but jealousy, fear,
and suspect of punishment on the conspirators part to affright him; but on the
Princes part, there is the majesty of the principality, the laws, the defenses
of his friends and the State, which do so guard him; that to all these things
the peoples goods wills being added, it is unpossible, any one should be so
headstrong, as to conspire; for ordinarily where a traitor is to fear before
the execution of his mischief; in this case he is also to fear afterward,
having the people for his enemy, when the fact is committed; and therefore for
this cause, not being able to hope for any refuge. Touching this matter, many
examples might be brought, but I will content my self to name one which fell
out in the memory of our Fathers. Annibal Bentivolii, grandfather of this
Anniball who now lives, that was Prince in Bolonia, being slain by the
Canneschi, that conspired against him, none of his race being left, but this
John, who was then in swaddling clouts; presenty the people rose, upon this
murder, and slew all the Cannesch^; which proceeded from the popular affection,
which the family of the Bentivolii held then in Bolonia: which was so great,
that being there remained not any, now Anniball was dead, that was able to
manage the State; and having notice that in Florence there was one borne of the
Bentivolii, who till then was taken for a Smiths son: the citizens of Bolonia
went to Florence for him, and gave the government of their City to him, which
was ruled by him, until John was of fit years to govern. I conclude then
that a Prince ought to make small account of treasons, whiles he has the people
to friend: but if they be his enemies and hate him, he may well fear every
thing, and every one. And well orderd States, and discreet Princes have taken
care withal diligence, not to cause their great men to fall into desperation,
and to content the the people, and so to maintain them: for this is one of the
most important businesses belonging to a Prince. Among the Kingdoms that are
well orderd and governd in our days, is that of France, and therein are found
exceeding many good orders; whereupon the Kings liberty and security depends:
of which the chief is the Parliament, and the authority thereof: for he that
founded that Kingdom, knowing the great men's ambition and insolence; and
judgeing it necessary there should be a bridle to curb them; and on the other
side knowing the hatred of the Commonalty against the great ones, grounded upon
fear, intending to secure them, would not lay this care wholly upon the King;
but take this trouble from him, which he might have with the great men, in
case he favored the Commonalty, or with the Commonalty in case he favored the
great men: and thereupon set up a third judge, which was that, to the end it
should keep under the great ones, and favor the meaner sort, without any
imputation to the King. It was not possible to take a better, nor wiser course
than this, nor a surer way to secure the King, and the Kingdom. From whence we
may draw another conclusion worthy of note, that Princes ought to cause
others to take upon them the matters of blame and imputation; and upon
themselves to take only those of grace and favor. Here again I conclude, that
a Prince ought to make good esteem of his Nobility; but not thereby to incur
the Commons hatred: It would seem perhaps to many, considering the life and
death of many Roman Emperors, that they were examples contrary to my opinion,
finding that some have lived worthily, and showed many rare virtues of the
mind, and yet have lost the Empire, and been put to death by their own
subjects, conspiring against them. Intending then to answer these objections; I
shall discourse upon the qualities of some Emperors, declaring the occasions
of their ruin, not disagreeing from that which I have alleagd: and part
thereof I will bestow on the consideration of these things; which are worthy to
be noted by him that reads the actions of those times: and it shall suffice me
to take all those Emperors, that succeeded in the Empire from Marcus the
Philosopher to Maximinus, who were Marcus and Commodus his son, Pertinax,
Julian, Severus, Antonius, Caracalla his son, Macrinus, Heliogabalus,
Alexander, and Maximin. And first it is to be noted, that were in the other
Principalities, they are to contend only with the ambition of the Nobles, and
the insolence of the people; the Roman Emperors had a third difficulty,
having to support the cruelty and covetousness of the soldiers, which was so
hard a thing, that it causd the ruin of many, being hard to satisfy the
soldiers, and the people: for the people love their quiet, and therefore
affect modest Princes; and the soldiers love a Prince of a warlike courage,
that is insolent, cruel and plucking from every one: which things they would
have them exercise upon the people, whereby they might be able to double their
stipends, and satisfy their avarice and cruelty: whence it proceeded, that
those Emperors who either by Nature or by Art had not such a reputation, as
therewith they could curb the one and the other, were always ruind: and the
most of them, specially those, who as new men came to the principality, finding
the difficulty of those two different humors, applyd themselves to content the
soldiers, making small account of wronging the people: which was a course then
necessary; for the Princes not being able to escape the hatred of every one,
ought first endeavor that they incur not the hatred of any whole
universality; and when they cannot attain thereunto, they are to provide with
all industry, to avoid the hatred of those universalities, that are the most
mighty. And therefore those Emperors, who because they were but newly called
to the Empire, had need of extraordinary favors, more willing^y stuck to the
soldiers, than to the people; which nevertheless turned to their advantage, or
otherwise, according as that Prince knew how to maintain his repute with them.
From these causes aforesaid proceeded it, that Marcus, Pertinax, and Alexander,
though all living modestly, being lovers of justice, and enemies of cruelty,
courteous, and bountiful, had all from Marcus onward, miserable ends; Marcus
only lived and died exceedingly honored: for he came to the Empire by
inheritance, and was not to acknowledge it neither from the soldiers, nor from
the people: afterward being accompanied with many virtues, which made him
venerable, he held always whilst he lived, the one and the other order within
their limits, and was never either hated, or contemnd. But Pertinax was created
Emperor against the soldiers wills, who being accustomd to live licentiously
under Commodus, could not endure that honest course, that Pertinax sought to
reduce them to: Whereupon having gotten himself hatred, and to this hatred
added contempt, in that he was old, was ruind in the very beginning of his
government. Whence it ought to be observed, that hatred is gaind as well by
good deeds as bad; and therefore as I formerly said, when a Prince would
maintain the State, he is often forcd not to be good: for when that
generalty, whether it be the people, or soldiers, or Nobility, whereof thou
think thou standst in need to maintain thee, is corrupted, it behooves th^e
to follow their humor, and content them, and then all good deeds are thy
adversaries. But let us come to Alexander, who was of that goodness, that
among the praises given him, had this for one, that in fourteen years wherein
he held the Empire, he never put any man to death but by course of justice;
nevert^elesse being held effeminate, and a man that suffered himself to be
ruld by his mother, and thereupon fallen into contempt; the army conspird
against him. Now on the contrary discoursing upon the qualities of Commodus,
Severus, Antonius, Caracalla, and Maximinus, you shall find them exceeding
cruel, and ravinous, who to satisfy their soldiers, forbear no kind of
injury, that could be done upon the people; and all of them, except Severus,
came to evil ends: for in Severus there was such extraordinary valor, that
while he held the soldiers his friends, however the people were much burthend
by him, he might always reign happily: for his valor rendered him so
admirable in the soldiers and peoples sights; that these in a manner stood
amazd and astonishd, and those others reverencing, and honoring him. And
because the actions of this man were exceeding great being in a new Prince, I
will briefly show, how well he knew to act the Foxes and the Lions parts; the
conditions of which two, ^ say, as before, are very necessary for a Prince to
imitate. Severus having had experience of Julian the Emperors sloth, persuaded
his army (whereof he was commander in Sclavonia) that they should do well to
go to Rome, to revenge Pertinax his death, who was put to death by the
Imperial guard; and under this pretense, not making any show that he aspird
unto the Empire, set his army in march directly toward Rome, and was sooner
come into Italy, than it was known he had moved from his station. Being
arrived at Rome, he was by the Senate chosen Emperor for fear; and Julian
slain. After this beginning, two difficulties yet remaind to Severus, before
he could make himself Lord of the whole State; the one in Asia, where Niger
the General of those armies had gotten the title of Emperor, the other in the
West with Albinus, who also aspird to the Empire: and because he thought there
might be some danger to discover himself enemy to them both; he purposd to set
upon Niger, and cozen Albinus, to whom he writ, that being elected Emperor by
the Senate, he would willingly communicate it with him; and thereupon sent him
the title of Caesar, and by resolution of the Senate, took him to him for his
Colleague; which things were taken by Albinus in true meaning. But afterward
when Severus had overcome and slain Niger, and pacified the affairs in the
East, being returned to Rome, he complaind in the Senate of Albinus, how little
weighing the benefits received from him, he had sought to slay him by treason,
and therefore was he forced to go punish his ingratitude: afterward he went
into France, where he bereft him, both of his State, and life. Whoever then
shall in particular examine his actions, shall find he was a very cruel
Lion, and as crafty a Fox: and shall see that he was always feared and
reverenced by every one, and by the armies not hated; and shall nothing marvel
that he being a new man, was able to hold t^gether such a great Empire: for
his extraordinary reputation defended him always from that hatred, which the
people for his extortions might have conceived against him. But Antonius his
son, was also an exceeding brave man, and endued with most excellent
qualities, which causd him to be admird by the people, and acceptable to the
soldiers; because he was a warrlike man, enduring all kind of travel and
pains, despising all delicate food, and all kind of effeminacy; which gaind
him the love of all the armies: nevertheless his fierceness and cruelty were
such and so hideous, having upon many particular occasions put to death a great
part of the people of Rome, and all those of Alexandria, that he grew odious
to the world: and began to be feared by those also, that were near about him;
so that he was slain by a Centurion in the very midst of his army. Where it
is to be noted, that these kind of deaths, which follow upon the deliberation
of a resolved and obstinate mind, cannot by a Prince be avoided: for every one
that fears not to dye, is able to do it; but a Prince ought to be less
afraid of it; because it very seldom falls out. Only should he beware not to
do any extreme injury, to any of those of whom he serves himself, or that
he has near about him in any employment of his Principality; as Antonius did:
who had reproachfully slain a brother of that Centurion, also threatened him
every day, and nevertheless entertaind him still as one of the guards of his
body: which was a rash course taken, and the way to destruction, as befell him.
But let us come to Commodus, for whom it was very easy to hold the Empire, by
reason it descended upon him by inheritance, being Marcus his sonn^; and it had
been enough for him to follow his fathers footsteps, and then had he contented
both the people and the soldiers: but being of a cruel and savage
disposition, whereby to exercise his actions upon the people, he gave
himself to entertain armies, and those in all licentiousness. On the other
part not maintaining his dignity, but often descending upon the stages to
combat with fencers, and doing such other like base things, little worthy of
the Imperial majesty, he became contemptible in the soldiers sight, and
being hated of one part, and dispisd of the other, he was conspird against, and
slain. It remains now that we declare Maximinus his conditions: who was a
very warrlike man; and the armies loathing Alexanders effeminacy, whereof I
spoke before, when they had slain him, chose this man Emperor; who not long
continued so, because two things there were that brought him into hatred and
contempt; the one because he was very base, having kept cattle in Thrace,
which was well known to every one, and made them to scorn him; the other,
because in the beginning of his Principality having delayed to go to Rome, and
enter into possession of the Imperial throne, he had gaind the infamy of being
thought exceeding cruel, having by his Prefects in Rome, and in every place of
the Empire exercisd many cruelties, insomuch that the whole world being
provoked against him to contempt for the baseness of his blood, on the other
side upon the hatred conceived against him for fear of his cruelty; first
Africa, afterward the Senate with all the people of Rome, and all Italy
conspird against him, with whom his own army took part; which incamping before
Aquileya, and finding some difficulty to take the town, being weary of his
cruelties, and because they saw he had so many enemies, fearing him the less,
slew him. I purpose not to say any thing either of Heliogabalus, Macrinus, or
Julian, who because they were thoroughly base, were suudenly extinguishd; but I
will come to the conclusion of this discourse; and I say, that the Princes of
our times have less of this difficulty to satisfy the Soldiers
extraordinarily in their governments; for notwithstanding that there be some
consideration to be had of them; yet presently are those armies dissolved,
because none of these Princes do use to maintain any armies together, which
are annexed and inveterated with the governments of the provinces, as were the
armies of the Roman Empire. And therefore if then it was necessary rather to
content the soldiers than the people, it was because the soldiers were more
powerful than the people: now is it more necessary for all Princes, (except
the Turk and the Souldan) to satisfy their people than their soldiers:
because the people are more mighty than they; wherein I except the Turk, he
always maintaining about his person 12000 foot, and 15000 horse, upon which
depends the safety and strength of his Kingdom, and it is necessary that
laying aside all other regard of his people, he maintain these his friends.
The Souldans Kingdom is like hereunto, which being wholly in the soldiers
power, he must also without respect of his people keep them his friends. And
you are to consider, that this State of the Souldans differs much from all the
other Principalities: for it is very like the Papacy, which cannot be termd a
hereditary Principality, nor a new Principality: for the sonns of the deceasd
Prince are not heirs and Lords thereof; but he that is chosen, receives that
dignity from those, who have the authority in them. And this order being of
antiquity, cannot be termd a new Principality, because therein are none of
those difficulties, that are in the new ones: for though the Prince be new; yet
are the orders of that State ancient, and ordaind to receive him, as if he
were their hereditary Prince. But let us return to our matter; whosoever shall
consider our discourse before, shall perceive that either hatred, or contempt
have causd the ruin of the afore-namd Emperors; and shall know also, from it
came that part of them proceeding one way, and part a contrary; yet in any of
them the one had a happy success, and the others unhappy: for it was of no
avail, but rather hurtful, for Pertinax and Alexander, because they were new
Princes, to desire to imitate Marcus, who by inheritance came to the
Principality: and in like manner it was a wrong to Caracalla, Commodus, and
Maximinus to imitate Severus, because none of them were endued with so great
valor as to follow his stepps therein. Wherefore a new Prince in his
Principality cannot well imitate Marcus his actions; nor yet is it necessary to
follow those of Severus: but he ought make choice of those parts in Severus
which are necessary for the founding of a State; and to take from Marcus those
that are fit and glorious to preserve a State which is already establishd and
settled.

CHAP. XX. Whether the Citadels and many other things, which Princes often make
use of, are profitable or dammageable.
SOme Princes, whereby they might safely keep their State, have disarmd their
subjects; some others have held the towns under their dominion, divided into
factions; others have maintained enmities against themselves; others have
applied themselves to gain them, where they have suspected at their entrance
into the government; others have built Fortresses; and others again have ruind
and demolishd them: and however that upon all these things, a man cannot well
pass a determinate sentence, unless one comes to the particulars of these
States, where some such like determinations were to be taken; yet shall I
speak of them in so large a manner, as the matter of it self will bear. It
was never then that a new Prince would disarme his own subjects; but rather
when he has found them disarmd, he has always armd them. For being
beloved, those arms become thine; those become faithful, which thou had in
suspicion; and those which were faithful, are maitaind so; and thy subjects
are made thy partisans: and because all thy subjects cannot be put in arms,
when thou bestowst favors on those thou armest, with the others thou can
deal more for thy safety; and that difference of proceeding which they know
among them, obliges them to thee; those others excuse thee, judgeing it
necessary, that they have deservd more, who have undergon more danger, and so
have greater obligation: but when thou disarmst them, thou beginst to offend
them, that thou distrusts them, either for cowardice, or small faith; and the
one or the other of those two opinions provokes their hatred against thee: and
because thou can not stand disarmd, thou must then turn thy self to
mercenary Soldiery, whereof we have formerly spoken what it is: and when it
is good, it can never be so much as to defend thee from powerful enemies, and
suspected subjects; therefore as I have said, a new Prince in a new
Principality has always ordaind them arms. Of examples to this purpose,
Histories are full. But when a Prince gains a new State, which as a member he
adds to his ancient dominions; then it is necessary to disarme that State,
unless it be those whom thou have discoverd to have assisted thee in the
conquest thereof; and these also in time and upon occasions, it is necessary to
render delicate and effeminate, and so order them, that all the arms of thy
State be in the hands of thy own Soldiers, who live in thy ancient State near
unto thee. Our ancestors and they that were accounted sages, were wont to say,
that it was necessary to hold Pistoya in factions, and Pisa with Fortresses;
and for this cause maintaind some town subject to them in differences, whereby
to hold it more easily. This, at what time Italy was balanced in a certain
manner, might be well done; but me thinks it cannot now adays be well given
for a precept; for I do not believe, that divisions made can do any good;
rather it must needs be, that when the enemy approaches them, Cities divided
are presently lost; for always the weaker part will cleave to the foreign
power, and the other not be able to subsist. The Venetians (as I think) moved
by the aforesaid reasons, maintaind the factions of the Guelfes and Gibellius,
in their towns; and however they never suffered them to spill one another
blood, yet they nourishd these differences among them, to the end that the
citizens imployd in these quarrels, should not plot any thing against them:
which as it proved, never served them to any great purpose: for being defeated
at Vayla, presently one of those two factions took courage and seizd upon
their whole State. Therefore such like ways argue the Princes weakness; for
in a strong principality they never will suffer such divisions; for they show
them some kind of profit in time of peace, being they are able by means
thereof more easily to manage their subjects; but war coming, such like orders
discover their fallacy. Without doubt, Princes become great, when they overcome
the difficulties and oppositions that are made against them; and therefore
Fortune especially when she has to make any new Prince great, who has more
need to gain reputation, than a hereditary Prince, causes enemies to rise
against him, and him to undertake against them; to the end he may have occasion
to master them, and know that ladder, which his enemies have set him upon,
whereby to rise yet higher. And therefore many think, that a wise Prince, when
he has the occasion, ought cunningly to nourish some enmity, that by the
suppressing thereof, his greatness may grow thereupon. Princes, especially
those that are new, have found more faith and profit in those men, who in the
beginning of their State, have been held suspected, than in those who at their
entrance have been their confidents. Pandulphus Petrucei, Prince of Siena,
governd his State more with them that had bin suspected by him, than with the
others. But of this matter we cannot speak at large, because it varies
according to the subject; I will only say this, that those men, who in the
beginning of a principality were once enemies, if they be of quality, so that
to maintain themselves they have need of support, the Prince might always with
the greatest facility gain for his; and they are the rather forced to serve
him faithfully, insomuch as they know it is more necessary for them by their
deeds to cancel that sinister opinion, which was once held of them; and so the
Prince ever draws from these more advantage, than from those, who serving him
too supinely, neglect his affairs. And seeing the matter requires it, I will
not omit, to put a Prince in mind, who has anew made himself master of a
State, by means of the inward helps he had from thence, that he consider
well, the cause that moved them that favored him to favor him, if it be not a
natural affection toward him; for if it be only because they were not content
with their former government, with much pains and difficulties shall he be
able to keep them long his friends, because it will be impossible for him to
content them. By these examples then, which are drawn out of ancient and
modern affairs, searching into the cause hereof, we shall find it much more
easy to gain those men for friends, who formerly were contented with the
State, and therefore were his enemies: than those, who because they were not
contented therewith, became his friends, and favored him in getting the mastery
of it. It has been the custom of Princes, whereby to hold their States more
securely, to build Citadels, which might be bridles and curbs to those that
should purpose any thing against them, and so to have a secure retraite from
the first violences. I commend this course, because it has been usd of old;
notwithstanding Nicolas Vitelli in our days has been known to demolish two
Citadels in the town of Castello, the better to keep the State. Guidubaldo
Duke of Vrbin being to return into his State, out of which he was driven by
Caesar Borgia, razed all the Fortresses of that Country, and thought he should
hardlyer lose that State again without them. The Bentivolii returning into
Bolonia, usd the like courses. Citadels then are profitable, or not, according
to the times, and if they advantage thee in one part, they do thee harm in
another, and this part may be argued thus. That Prince, who stands more in
fear of his own people than of strangers, ought to build Fortresses: but he
that is more afraid of strangers than of his people, should let them alone.
Against the house of Sforza, the Castle of Milan, which Francis Sforza built,
has and will make more war, than any other disorder in that State: and
therefore the best Citadell that may be, is not to incur the peoples hatred;
for however thou holdst a Fortress, and the people hate thee, thou can
hardly escape them: for people, when once they have taken arms, never want the
help of strangers at their need, to take their parts. In our days we never
saw, that they ever profited any Prince, unless it were the Countess of
Furli, when Count Hieronimo of Furli her husband was slain; for by means
thereof she escaped the peoples rage, and attended aid from Milan, and so
recoverd her State: and then such were the times that the stranger could not
assist the people: but afterward they servd her to little purpose, when Caesar
Borgia assaild her, and that the people which was her enemy, sided with the
stranger. Therefore both then, and at first, it would have been more for her
safety, not to have been odious to the people, than to have held the
Fortresses. These things being well weighed then, I will commend those that
shall build up Fortresses, and him also that shall not; and I will blame him,
howsoever he be that relying upon those, shall make small account of being
hated by his people.

CHAP. XXI. How a Prince ought to behave himself to gain Reputation.
THere is nothing gains a Prince such repute, as great exployts, and rare
trialls of himself in Heroicke actions. We have now in our days Ferdinand
King of Arragon the present King of Spain: he in a manner may be termd a new
Prince, for from a very weak King, he is now become for fame and glory, the
first King of Christendom, and if you shall well consider his actions, you
shall find them all illustrious, and every one of them extraordinary. He in
the beginning of his reign assaild Granada, and that exployt was the ground of
his State. At first he made that war in security and without suspicion he
should be any ways hindered, and therein held the Barons of Castiglias minds
busied, who thinking upon that war, never minded any innovation; and in this
while he gaind credit and authority with them, they not being aware of it; was
able to maintain with the Church, and the peoples money all his soldiers, and
to lay a foundation for his military ordinances with that long war: which
afterward gaind him exceeding much honor. Besides this, to the end he might
be able here among to undertake greater matters, serving himself always of
the color of religion; he gave himself to a kind of religious cruelty,
chasing and dispoyling those Jews out of the Kingdom; nor can this example
be more admirable and rare: under the same cloak he invaded Afric and went
through with his exployt in Italy: and last of all has he assaild France, and
so always proceeded on forwards contriving of great matters; which always
have held his subjects minds in peace and admiration, and busied in attending
the event what it should be: and these his actions have thus grown, one upon
another, that they have nev^r given leisure to men so to rest, as that they
might ever plot any thing against them. Moreover it much availes a Prince to
give extraordinary proofs of himself touching the government within, such as
those we have heard of Bernard of Milan; whenever occasion is given by any
one, that may effectuate some great thing either of good or evil, in the
civil government; and to find out some way either to reward or punish it,
whereof in the world much notice may be taken. And above all things a Prince
ought to endeavor in all his actions to spread abroad ^ fame of his
magnificence and worthiness. A Prince also is well esteemd, when he is a true
friend, or a true enemy, when without any regard he discovers himself in
favor of one against another; which course shall be always more profit, than
to stand neuter: for if two mighty ones that are thy neighbors come to fall
out, or are of such quality, that one of them vanquishing, thou art like to be
in fear of the vanquisher; or not; in either of these two cases, it will ever
prove more for thy profit to discover thy self, and make a good war of it: for
in the first case, if thou discoverst not thy self, thou shall always be a
prey to him that overcomes, to the contentment and satisfaction of the
vanquished; neither shall thou have reason on thy side, nor any thing else to
defend or receive thee. For he that overcomes, will not have any suspected
friends, that give him no assistance in his necessity: and he that loses,
receives thee not, because thou would not with thy arms in hand run the
hazard of his fortune. Antiochus passd into Greece, thereunto induced by the
Etolians, to chase the Romans thence: and sent his Ambassadors to the Achayans,
who were the Romans friends, to persuade them to stand neuters; on the other
side the Romans moved them to join arms with theirs: this matter came to be
deliberated on in the counsel of the Achayans, where Antiochus his Ambassador
encouragd them to stand neuters, whereunto the Romans Ambassador answered.
Touching the course, that is commended to you, as best and profitablest for
your State, to wit, not to intermeddle in the war between us, nothing can be
more against you: because, not taking either part, you shall remain without
thanks, and without reputation a prey to the Conqueror. And it will always
come to pass that he who is not thy friend, will require thy neutrality, and
he that is thy friend, will urge thee, to discover thy self by taking arms
for him: and evil advisd Princes, to avoid the present dangers, follow often
times that way of neutrality, and most commonly go to ruin: but when a Prince
discovers himself strongly in favor of a party, if he to whom thou cleavest,
overcomes, however that he be puissant, and thou remainst at his disposing,
he is obliged to thee, and there is a contract of friendship made; and men are
never so openly dishonest, as with such a notorious example of dishonesty to
oppress thee. Besides victories are never so prosperous, that the conqueror
is like to neglect all respects, and especially of justice. But if he to whom
thou stickst, loses thou art receivd by him; and, while he is able, he aids
thee, and so thou becomst partner of a fortune that may arise again. In the
second case, when they that enter into the lists, together, are of such
quality, that thou needst not fear him that vanquisheth, so much the more is
it descretion in thee to stick to him; for thou go to ruin one with his
assistance, who ought to do the best he could to save him, if he were well
advisd; and he overcomming, is left at thy discretion, and it is unpossible
but with thy aid he must overcome. And here it is to be noted, that a Prince
should be well aware never to join with any one more powerful than himself,
to offend another, unless upon necessity, as formerly is said. For when he
overcomes, thou art left at his discretion; and Princes ought avoid as much as
they are able, to stand at another discretion. The Venetians took part with
France against the Duke of Milan, and yet could have avoided that partakeing,
from which proceeded their ruin. But when it cannot be avoided, as it befell
the Florentines, when the Pope and the King of Spain went both with their
armies to assail Lombardy, there the Prince ought to side with them for the
reasons aforesaid. Nor let any State think they are able to make such sure
parties; but rather that they are all doubtful; for in the order of things we
find it always, that whenever a man seeks to avoid one inconvenient; he
incurres another. But the principal point of judgment, is in discerning
between the qualities of inconvenients, and not taking the bad for the good.
Moreover a Prince ought to show himself a lover of virtue, and that he honors
those that excel in every Art. Afterward ought he encourage his Citizens,
whereby they may be enabled quickly to exercise their faculties as well in
merchandise, and husbandry, as in any other kind of traffic, to the end that
no man forbear to adorn and cultivate his possessions for fear, that he be
despoyld of them; or any other to open the commerce upon the danger of heavy
impositions: but rather to provide rewards for those that shall set these
matters a foot, or for any one else that shall any way amplify his City or
State. Besides he ought in the fit times of the year entertain the people
with Feasts and Maskes; and because every City is divided into Companyes, and
Arts, and Tribes; he ought to take special notice of those bodies, and some
times afford them a meeting, and give them some proof of his humanity, and
magnificence; yet withal holding firm the majesty of his State, for this
must never fail in any case.

CHAP. XXII. Touching Princes Secretaries.
IT is no small importance to a Prince, the choice he makes of servants, being
ordinarily good, or bad, as his wisdom is. And the first conjecture one gives
of a great man, and of his understanding, is upon the sight of his followers
and servants he has about him, when they prove able and faithful, and then
may he always be reputed wise; because he has known how to discern those
that are able, and to keep them true to him. But when they are otherwise,
there can be no good conjecture made of him, for the first error he commits,
is in this choice. There was no man, that had any knowledge of Antony of
Vanafro, the servant of Pandulfus Petrucci Prince of Siena, who did not esteem
Pandulfus for a very discreet man, having him for his servant. And because
there are three kinds of understandings, the one that is advisd by it self;
the other that understands when it is informd by another; the third that
neither is advisd by it self, nor by the demonstration of another; the first
is best, the second is good, and the last quite unprofitable. Therefore it was
of necessity, that if Pandulfus attaind not the first degree, yet he got to
the second; for whenever any one has the judgment to discern between the
good and the evil, that any one does and says, however that he has not this
invention from himself, yet still comes he to take notice of the good or
evil actions of that servant; and those he cherishes, and these he
suppresses; insomuch that the servant finding no means to deceive his master,
keeps himself upright and honest. But how a Prince may thoroughly understand
his servant, here is the way that never fails. When thou see, the servant
study more for his own advantage than thine, and that in all his actions, he
searches most after his own profit; this man thus qualified, shall never prove
good servant, nor can thou ever rely upon him: for he that holds the stern
of the State in hand, ought never call home his cares to his own particular,
but give himself wholly over to his Princes service, nor ever put him in mind
of any thing not appertaining to him. And on the other side the Prince to keep
him good to him, ought to take a care for his servant, honoring him,
enriching, and obliging him to him, giving him part both of dignities and
offices, to the end that the many honors and much wealth bestowd on him, may
restrain his desires from other honors, and other wealth, and that those many
charges cause him to fear changes that may fall, knowing he is not able to
stand without his master. And when both the Princes and the servants are thus
disposd, they may rely the one upon the other: when otherwise, the end will
ever prove hurtful for the one as well as for the other.

CHAP. XXIII. That Flatterers are to be avoided.
I Will not omit one principle of great importance, being an error from which
Princes with much difficulty defend themselves, unless they be very discreet,
and make a very good choice; and this is concerning flatterers, whereof all
writings are full: and that because men please themselves so much in their own
things, and therein cozen themselves, that very hardly can they escape this
pestilence; and desiring to escape it, there is danger of falling into
contempt; for there is no other way to be secure from flattery, but to let men
know, that they displease thee not in telling thee truth: but when every one
has this leave, thou losest thy reverence. Therefore ought a wise Prince take
a third course, making choice of some understanding men in his State, and give
only to them a free liberty of speaking to him the truth; and touching those
things only which he inquires of, and nothing else; but he ought to be
inquisitive of every thing, and hear their opinions, and then afterward
advise himself after his own manner, and in these deliberations, and with
every one of them so carry himself, that they all know, that the more freely
they shall speak, the better they shall be liked of: and besides those, not
give ear to any one, and thus pursue the thing resolvd on, and thence continue
obstinate in the resolution taken. He who does otherwise, either falls upon
flatterers, or often changes upon the varying of opinions, from whenc^ proceeds
it that men conceive but slightly of him. To this purpose I will allege you a
modern example. Peter Lucas a servant of Maximilians the present Emperor,
speaking of his Majesty, said that he never advisd with any body, nor never
did any thing after his own way: which was because he took a contrary course
to what we have now said: for the Emperor is a close man, who communicates
his secrets to none, nor takes counsel of any one: but as they come to be put
in practice, they begin to be discoverd and known, and so contradicted by
those that are near about him, and he as being an easy man, is quickly
wrought from them. Whence it comes, that what he does today, he undoes on the
morrow; and that he never understands himself what he would, nor what he
purposes, and that there is no grounding upon any of his resolutions. A Prince
therefore ought always to take counsel, but at his own pleasure, and not at
other men's; or rather should take away any man's courage to advise him of any
thing, but what he asks: but he ought well to ask at large; and then
touching the things inquird of, be a patient hearer of the truth, and
perceiving that for some respect the truth were conceald from him, be displeasd
thereat. And because some men have thought, that a Prince, that gains the
opinion to be wise, may be held so, not by his own natural indowments, but
by the good counsels he has about him; without question they are deceivd;
for this is a general rule and never fails, that a Prince who of himself is
not wise, can never be well advisd, unless he should light upon one alone,
wholly to direct and govern him, who himself were a very wise man. In this
case it is possible he may be well governd: but this would last but little:
for that governor in a short time would deprive him of his State; but a Pr nce
not having any parts of nature, being advisd of more than one, shall never be
able to unite these counsels: of himself shall he never know how to unite
them, and each one of the counselors, probably will follow that which is most
properly his own; and he shall never find the means to amend or discern
these things, nor can they fall out otherwise, because men always prove
mischievous, unless upon some necessity they be forced to become good: we
conclude therefore, that counsels from whencesoever they proceed, must needs
take their beginning from the Princes wisdom, and not the wisdom of the
Prince from good counsels.

In this Chapter our Author prescribes some rules how to avoid flattery, and
not to fall into contempt. The extent of these two extremes is so large on
both sides, that there is left but a very narrow path for the right temper to
walk between them both: and happy were that Prince, who could light on so good
a Pilote; as to bring him to Port between those rocks and these quicksands.
Where Majesty becomes familiar, unless endued with a supereminent virtue, it
loses all awful regards: as the light of the Sun, because so ordinary,
because so common, we should little value, were it not that all Creatures feel
themselves quickened by the rays thereof. On the other side, Omnis insipiens
arrogantia and plausibus capitur. Every fool is taken with his own pride and
others flatteryes: and this fool keeps company so much with all great wise men,
that hardly with a candle and lantern can they be discernd betwixt. The
greatest men are more subject to gross ar^ palpable flatteries; and especiall^
the greatest of men, who are King* and Princes: for many seek the Rulers
favor. Prove. 28.26 For there are diverse means where by private men are
instructed* Princes have not that good hap but they whose instruction is (...)
most importante, so soon as they have taken the government upon them, no
longer suffer any reproovers: for, but few have access unto them, and they who
familiarly converse with them, do and say all for favor. Isocrat. to
Nicocles. All are afraid to give him occasion of displeasure, though by telling
him truth. Plutarch. d^ adulatore and amico discernendo.
To this purpose therefore says one, a Prince excells in learning to ride the
great horse, rather than in any other exercise: because his horse being no
flatterer, will show him he makes no difference between him and another man,
and unless he keep his seate-well, will lay him on the ground. This is
plain dealing. Men are more subtle, more double heatred, they have a heart
and a heart, neither is their tongue their hearts true interpreter. Counsel in
the heart of man is like deep waters; but a man of understanding will draw it
out. Prove. 20.5. This understanding is most requisite in a Prince, inasmuch as
the whole Globe is in his hand, and the inferior Orbs are swayed by the
motion of the highest. And therefore surely it is the honor of a King to
search out such a secret: Prove. 25.2. His counselors are his eyes and ears;
as they ought to be dear to him, so they ought to be true to him, and make him
the true report of things without disguise. If they prove false eyes, let him
pluck them out, he may as they use glass eyes take them forth without pain,
and see never a whit the worse for it. The wisdom of a Princes Counselors is
a great argument of the Princes wisdom. And being the choice of them imports
the Princes credit and safety, our Author will make him amends for his other
errors by his good advice in his 22. Chap. whether I refer him.

CHAP. XXIV. Wherefore the Princes of Italy have lost their States.
When these things above said are well observed, they make a new Prince seem
as if he had been of old, and presently render him more secure and firm in the
State, than if he had already grown ancient therein: for a new Prince is much
more observd in his actions, than a Prince by inheritance, and when they are
known to be virtuous; men are much more gaind and obliged to them thereby,
than by the antiquity of their blood: for men are much more taken by things
present, than by things past; and when in the present they find good, they
content themselves therein, and seek no further, or rather they undertake the
defense of him to their utmost, when the Prince is not wanting in other matters
to himself; and so shall he gain double glory to have given a beginning to a
new Principality, adornd, and strengthnd it with good laws, good arms, good
friends, and good examples; as he shall have double shame, that is borne a
Prince, and by reason of his small discretion has lost it. And if we shall
consider those Lords, that in Italy have lost their States in our days, as the
King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and others; first we shall find in them a
common defect, touching their arms, for the reasons which have been above
discoursd, at length. Afterward we shall see some of them, that either shall
have had the people for their enemies; or be it they had the people to friend,
could never know how to assure themselves of the great ones: for without such
defects as these, States are not lost, which have so many nerves, that they are
able to maintain an army in the field. Philip of Macedon, not the father of
Alexander the Great, but he that was vanquishd by Titus Quintius, had not much
State in regard of the greatness of the Romans and of Greece that assailed
him; nevertheless in that he was a warlike man and knew how to entertain the
people and assure himself of the Nobles, for many years he made the war
good against them: and though at last some town perhaps were taken from him,
yet the Kingdom remaind in his hands still. Wherefore these our Princes who
for many years had continued in their Principalities, for having afterward
lost them, let them not blame Fortune, but their own sloth; because they never
having thought during the times of quiet, that they could suffer a change
(which is the common fault of men, while fair weather lasts, not to provide
for the tempest) when afterward mischiefs came upon them, thought rather upon
flying from them, than upon their defense, and hoped that the people, weary of
the vanquishers insolence, would recall them: which course when the others
fail, is good: but very ill is it to leave the other remedies for that: for a
man wou^d never go to sall, believing another would come to take him up: which
may either not come to pass, or if it does, it is not for thy security,
because that defense of his is vile, and depends not upon thee; but those
defenses only are good, certain, and durable, which depend upon thy own
self, and thy own virtues.

CHAP. XXV. How great power Fortune has in humane affairs, and what means
there is to resist it.
IT is not unknown unto me, how that many have held opinion, and still hold it,
that the affairs of the world are so governd by fortune, and by God, that men
by their wisdom cannot a mend or alter them; or rather that there is no remedy
for them: and hereupon they would think that it were of no avail to take much
pains in any thing, but leave all to be governd by chance. This opinion has
gained the more credit in our days, by reason of the great alteration of
things, which we have of late seen, and do every day see, beyond all humane
conjecture: upon which, I sometimes thinking, am in some part inclind to their
opinion: nevertheless not to extinguish quite our own free will, I think it
may be true, that Fortune is the mistress of one half of our actions; but yet
that she lets us have rule of the other half, or little less. And I liken her
to a precipitous torrent, which when it rages, over-flows the plains,
overthrowes the trees, and buildings, removes the earth from one side, and
lays it on another, every one flies before it, every one yields to the fury
thereof, as unable to withstand it; and yet however it be thus, when the times
are calmer, men are able to make provision against these excesses, with banks
and fences so, that afterward when it swells again, it shall all pass smoothly
along, within its channel, or else the violence thereof shall not prove so
licentious and hurtful. In like manner befalls it us with fortune, which there
shows her power where virtue is not ordeind to resist her, and thither turns
she all her forces, where she perceives that no provisions nor resistances are
made to uphold her. And if you shall consider Italy, which is the seat of these
changes, and that which has given them their motion, you shall see it to be a
plain field, without any trench or banck; which had it been fenced with
convenient virtue, as was Germany, Spain, or France; this inundation would
never have causd these great alterations it has, o^ else would it not have
reached to us: and this shall suffice to have said, touching the opposing of
fortune in general. But restraining my self more to particulars: I say, that
to day we see a Prince prosper and flourish, and to morrow utterly go to ruin;
not seeing that he has alterd any condition or quality; which I believe arises
first from the causes which we have long since run over, that is because that
Prince that relies wholly upon fortune, ruins, as her wheel turns. I believe
also, that he proves the fortunate man, whose manner of proceeding meets with
the quality of the times: and so likewise he unfortunate, from whose course of
proceeding the times differ: for we see that men, in the things that induce
them to the end, (which every one propounds to himself, as glory and riches)
proceed therein diversely; some with respects, others more bold, and rashly; one
with violence, and the other with cunning; the one with patience, the other with
its contrary; and every one by several ways may attain thereto. We see also
two very respective and wary men, the one come to his purpose, and the other
not; and in like manner two equally prosper taking diverse courses, the one being
wary, the other headstrong; which proceeds from nothing else, but from the
quality of the times, which agree, or not, with their proceedings. From hence
arises that which I said, that two working diversely, produce the same effect;
and two equally working, the one attaines his end, the other not. Hereupon also
depends the alteration of the good; for if to one that behaves himself with
wariness and patience, times and affairs turn so favorably, that the
carriage of his business prove well, he prospers; but if the times and
affairs change, he is ruind; because he changes not his manner of proceeding:
nor is there any man so wise, that can frame himself hereunto; as well because
he cannot go out of the way, from that whereunto Nature inclines him: as also,
for that one having always prosperd, walking such a way, cannot be persuaded
to leave it: and therefore the respective and wary man, when it is fit time for
him to use violence and force, knows not how to put it in practice, whereupon
he is ruind: but if he could change his disposition with the times and the
affairs, he should not change his fortune. Pope Julius the second, proceeded
in all his actions with very great violence, and found the times and things so
conformable to that his manner of proceeding, that in all of them he had happy
success. Consider the first exploit he did at Bolonia, even while John
Bentivolio lived: the Venetians were not well contented therewith; the King of
Spain likewise with the French, had treated of that enterprise; and
notwithstanding all this, he stirrd up by his own rage and fierceness,
personally undertook that expedition: which action of his put in suspense and
stopped Spain and the Venitians, those for fear, and the others for desire to
recover the Kingdom of Naples; and on the other part drew after him the King of
France: for that King seeing him already in motion, and desiring to hold him
his friend, whereby to humble the Venetians, thought he could no way deny him
his soldiers, without doing him an open injury. Julius then effected that with
his violent and heady motion, which no other Pope with all humane wisdom could
ever have done; for if he had expected to part from Rome with his conclusions
settled, and all his affairs ordered before hand, as any other Pope would have
done, he had never brought it to pass: For the King of France would have
devisd a thousand excuses, and others would have put him in as many fears. I
will let pass his other actions, for all of them were alike, and all of them
proved lucky to him; and the brevity of his life never sufferd him to feel the
contrary: for had he litt upon such times afterward, that it had been
necessary for him to proceed with respects, there had been his utter ruin; for
he would never have left those ways, to which he had been naturally inclind.
I conclude then, fortune varying, and men continuing still obstinate to their
own ways, prove happy, while these accord together: and as they disagree,
prove unhappy: and I think it true, that it is better to be heady, than wary:
because Fortune is a mistress; and it is necessary, to keep her in obedience,
to ruffle and force her: and we see, that she suffers her self rather to be
masterd by those, than by others that proceed coldly. And therefore, as a
mistress, she is a friend to young men, because they are less respective,
more rough, and command her with more boldness.

I have considered the 25 Chapter, as representing me a full view of humane
policy and cunning: yet me thinks it cannot satisfy a Christian in the causes
of the good and bad success of things. The life of man is like a game at
Tables; skill availes much I grant, but that is not all: play thy game well, but
that will not win: the chance thou throwest must accord with thy play.
Examine this; play never so surely, play never so probably; unless the chance
thou castest, lead thee forward to advantage, all hazards are losses, and thy
sure play leaves thee in the lurch. The sum of this is set down in Ecclesiastes
chap. 9. v. 11. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong;
neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet
favor to men of skill; but time and chance happens to them all. Our cunning
Author for all his exact rules he delivers in his books, could not fence
against the despite of Fortune, as he complains in his Epistle to this book.
Nor that great example of policy, Duke Valentine, whom our Author commends to
Princes for his crafts-master, could so ruffle or forcc his mistress Fortune,
that he could keep her in obedience. Man can contribute no more to his actions
than virtue and wisdom: but the success depends upon a power above. Surely
there is the finger of God: or as Prove. the 16. v. 33. The lot is cast into the
lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. It was not Joseph's wisdom
made all things thrive under his hand; but because the Lord was with him, and
that which he did, the Lord made it to prosper. Genesis 39. Surely this is a
blessing proceeding from the divine providence, which beyond humane capacity so
cooperateth with the causes, as that their effects prove answerable, and
sometimes (that we may know there is something above the ordinary causes) the
success returns with such a supereminency of worth, that it far exceeds the
virtue of the ordinary causes.

CHAP, XXVI. An Exhortation to free Italy from the Barbarians.
HAving then weighed all things above discoursd, and devising with my self,
whether at this present in Italy the times might serve to honor a new Prince,
and whether there were matter, that might minister occasion to a wise and
valourous Prince, to introduce such a form, that might do honor to him, and
good to the whole generalty of the people in the country: me thinks so many
things concur in favor of a new Prince, that I know not whether there were
ever any time more proper for this purpose. And if as I said, it was necessary,
desiring to see Moses his virtue, that the children of Israel should be
inthrald in Egypt; and to have experience of the magnanimity of Cyrus his
mind, that the Persians should be oppresd by the Medes; and to set forth the
excellency of Theseus, that the Athenians should be dispersd: so at this
present now we are desirous to know the valor of an Italian spirit, it were
necessary Italy should be reduced to the same terms it is now in, and were in
more slavery, than the Hebrews were; more subject than the Persians; more
scatterd than the Athenians; without head, without order, batterd, pillagd,
rent asunder, overrunne, and had undergone all kind of destruction. And however
even in these later days, we have had some kind of show of hope in some one,
whereby we might have conjectured, that he had been ordeind for the
deliverance hereof, yet it proved afterward, that in the very height of all
his actions he was curbed by fortune, insomuch that this poor country
remaining as it were without life, attends still for him that shall heal her
wounds, give an end to all those pillagings and sackings of Lombardy, to those
robberies and taxations of the Kingdom, and of Tuscany, and heal them of
their soars, now this long time gangrened. We see how she makes her prayers to
God, that he send some one to redeem her from these Barbarous cruelties and
insolences. We see her also wholly ready and disposd to follow any colors,
provided there be any one to take them up. Nor do we see at this present,
that she can look for other, than your Illustrious Family, to become
Cheiftaine of this deliverance, which has now by its own Virtue and Fortune
been so much exalted, and favored by God and the Church, whereof it now holds
the Principality: and this shall not be very hard for you to do, if you shall
call to mind the former actions, and lives of those that are above named. And
though those men were very rare and admirable, yet were they men, and every one
of them began upon less occasion than this; for neither was their enterprise
more just than this, nor more easy; nor was God more their friend, than yours.
Here is very great justice: for that war is just, that is necessary; and
those arms are religious, when there is no hope left otherwhere, but in them.
Here is an exceeding good disposition thereto: nor can there be, where there is
a good disposition, a great difficulty, provided that use be made of those
orders, which I propounded for aim and direction to you. Besides this, here we
see extraordinary things without example effected by God; the sea was opened, a
cloud guided the way, devotion powrd forth the waters, and it raind down
manna; all these things have concurrd in your greatness, the rest is left for
you to do. God will not do every thing himself, that he may not take from us
our free will, and part of that glory that belongs to us. Neither is it a
marvel, if any of the aforenamd Italians have not been able to compass that,
which we may hope your Illustrious family shall: though in so many revolutions
of Italy, and so many seats of war, it may seem that the whole military
virtue therein be quite extinguished; for this arises from that the ancient
orders thereof were not good; and there has since been none that has known
how to invent new ones. Nothing can so much honor a man rising anew, as new
laws and new ordinances devisd by him: these things when they have a good
foundation given them, and contain in them their due greatness, gain him
reverence and admiration; and in Italy their wants not the matter wherein to
introduce any form. Here is great virtue in the members, were it not wanting
in the heads. Consider in the single fights that have been, and duells, how
much the Jtalians have excelled in their strength, activity and adresse; but
when they come to armies, they appear not, and all proceeds from the weakness
of the Chieftaines; for they that understand the managing of these matters, are
not obeyed, and every one presumes to understand; hitherto there having not been
any one so highly raisd either by fortune or virtue, as that others would
submit unto him. From hence proceeds it, that in so long time, and in so many
battles fought for these last past 20 years, when there has been an army
wholly Italian, it always has had evil success; whereof the river Tarus
first was witness, afterward Alexandria, Capua, Genua, Vayla, Bolonia,
Mestri. Your Illustrious family then being desirous to tread the footsteps of
these Worthyes who redeemd their countries, must above all things as the very
foundation of the whole fabric, be furnishd with soldiers of your own
natives: because you cannot have more faithful, true, nor better soldiers;
and though everyone of them be good, all together they will become better when
they shall find themselves entertaind, commanded, and honored by their own
Prince. Wherefore it is necessary to provide for those arms, whereby to be
able with the Italian valor to make a defense against forreiners. And however
the Swisse infantery and Spanish be accounted terrible; yet is there defect in
both of them, by which a third order might not only oppose them, but may be
confident to vanquish them: for the Spaniards are not able to endure the Horse,
and the Swisse are to fear the Foot, when they encounter with them as resolute
in the fight as they. Whereupon it has been seen, and upon experience shall
be certain, tha^ the Spaniards are not able to bear up against the French
Cavalery, and the Swisses have been routed by the Spanish Foot. And though
touching this last, there has not been any entire experience had, yet was
there some proof thereof given in the battle of Ravenna, when the Spanish
Foot affronted the Dutch batallions, which keep the same rank the Swisses
do, where the Spaniards with their nimblenesse of body, and the help of their
targets entered in under their Pikes, and there stood safe to offend them; the
Dutch men having no remedy: and had it not been for the Cavalery that rushd in
upon them, they had quite defeated them. There may then (the defect of the one
and the other of these two infanteries being discoverd) another kind of them
be anew ordaind, which may be able to make resistance against the Horse, and
not fear the Foot, which shall not be a new sort of arms, but a change of
orders. And these are some of those things which ordaind anew, gain reputation
and greatness to a new Prince. Therefore this occasion should not be let
pass, to the end that Italy after so long a time may see some one redeemer of
hers appear. Nor can I express with what dearnesse of affection he would be
received in all those countries which have sufferd by those foreign scumms,
with what thirst of revenge, with what resolution of fidelity, with what piety,
with what tears. Would any gates be shut against him? Any people deny him
obedience? Any envy oppose him? Would not every Italian fully consent with him?
This government of the Barbarians stinks in every ones nostrills. Let your
Illustrious Family then undertake this worthy exployt with that courage and
those hopes wherewith such just actions are to be attempted; to the end that
under your colors, this country may be ennobled, and under the protection of
your Fortune that saying of Petrarch be verifyd.

Virtue contr' al furore
Prendera l'arme, and fia il combatter corto:
Che l'antico valor
Ne gli Italici cor non e anchor morto.
Virtue against fury shall advance the fight,
And it in the combat soon shall put to flight:
For the old Roman valor is not dead,
Nor in the Italians breasts extinguished.

FINIS.
The life of Castruccio Castracani of Lucca, composed by Nicholas Machiavelli,
and presented to Zanobi ^^ond^lmonti and Luigi Alomanni his very good friends.
ZANOBI and LUIGI, my very good friends, it seems a matter of great mervayle
to those that take it into consideration, how that all they, or the greater
part of them, who have effected great things in this World, and borne up their
heads above others their contemporaries, have taken their rises and births from
obscure and base beginnings; or such as have been by Fortune extraordinarily
afflicted. For all of them have been either exposed to the mercy of savage
creat^r^s, or had such base Sires, that as ashamed of them, they have feigned
themselves sons to Jupiter, or some other Deity; who these have been, every one
having knowledge of many of them, we shall omit to relate, as superfluous,
yielding rather distaste than delight to the Reader. I am indeed of opinion
that it proceeds from hence, viz. in that Fortune willing to demonstrate unto
the World, that she, and not Wisdom, gives men their greatness, therefore
begins to show her strength at such a time, when Wisdom can challenge no
interest, but all rather is to be attributed as due to her alone. Castruccio
Castracani of Lucca was then one of those, who in regard of the times he lived
in, and the City where he was borne, effected very great matters, and had, as
others in this kind, neither a very fortunate nor known birth, as in my further
discourse of his life it shall appear: which I thought fit to bring to memory,
as having found therein a subject of very great example, as well in regard of
valor, as fortune. And I thought I might the better direct this discourse unto
you two, who of all that I know most delight in such glorious achievements. I
say then, that the Family of the Castracani is reckoned among the noble
Families of the City of Lucca, however that in these days it be much decayed,
according to the course of all other worldly things. Of this there was one
Antony borne, who took upon him religious orders, and was a Canon of S.
Michaels at Lucca, and in honor thereof was entitled Master Antony. He had but
one sister, who was married to Buonaccorso Cennami; but Buonaccorso being dead,
and she remaining a widow, betook her self to live with her brother, with
intention not to marry any more. Master Antony had behind his house where he
dwelt, a vineyard, whereinto by reason of diverse gardens bordering thereupon on
several sides, the passage was very ordinary. It happened that one morning a
little after the Sun rise, Dame Dionora, for so was Master Antonies sister
called, walking out into the vineyard, as she was gathering some herbs, after the
manner of women, to make a sallet withal; she heard some kind of russeling
under a vine amongst the leaves, and casting her eye that way, she perceived
some little cry there: whereupon drawing near to the noise, she discovered the
hands and face of an infant, wrapped in the vine leaves, which seemed as if it
asked her assistance: so that she partly mervayling, partly frighted, full of
pity and amazement, took it up in her arms: and having carried it home, and
washed it, and swaddled it in clean clouts, as they use children; at her
return presented it to Master Antony: who considering the accident, and seeing
the child, was as much amazed and compassionate as was his sister: and advising
together what they should do in this case, resolved to bring it up, he being a
Priest, and she not having any children. Having then taken a nurse into the
house, they nourishd it with as much tenderness as if it had bin their own
child; and causing it to be baptized, named it Castruccio, after the name of
their own father. Castruccio as he increased in years, so he grew in person and
feature, and in every thing he showed wit and disretion: and quickly, according
to his age, he learnd whatsoever Master Antony taught him: who purposing to
make him a Priest, and to turn over unto him his Canonicate, and his other
Benefices, instructed him that way: but he found him not a subject fit for that
regular life: For so soon as Castruccio came to 14 years of age, and that he
began to grow a little masterfull toward Master Antony and Dame Dionora, so
that he stood no longer in fear of them, laying aside all Church books, he
began to handle arms, and took not delight in any thing more than to manage
them, or with others his equals to run, leap, or wrestle, and such other like
exercises: wherein he showed such courage and strength, that he far surpassd
all others of his age; and if any time he gave himself to reading, he took
pleasure in nothing else than discourses of wars, and the actions of most
famous men: for which cause Master Antony was much grieved at heart. In the
City of Lucca there happened to dwell a Gentleman of the Family of the Guinigi,
called Master Francis, who for fortunes, esteem, and valor, out-went all others
the citizens of Lucca: who was always trained up in bearing of arms, and who
had a long time served under the Viscounts of Milan: and because he was a
Gibelline, he was accounted of above all that followed that faction in Lucca.
This man being then in Lucca, and assembling morning and evening, with the rest
of the citizens under the Governors Palace, which is in the head of the place
of S. Michael, being the prime place of Lucca; oftentimes saw Castruccio using
of those exercises with other lads of the town, wherein I formerly said he
took delight; and perceiving that besides the mastering of them, he held over
them a kind of Princely authority, and that they again loved and reverenced
him, he became very desirous to know what he was: whereof being informed by
some there present, he became the more desirous to take him home to him; and
calling him one day to him, asked him, where he had rather live, either in a
Cavaliers house, when he might learn to ride and use his arms, or a^^^e in a
Priests house, where nothing else were to be heard but their Offices and
Masses? Master Francis perceived how much Castruccio was cheered upon the
mention of horses and arms; yet he standing a little out of countenance, Mr.
Francis again encouraging him to speak, he answered, that if his Patron would
therewith be content, he could not have a greater pleasure, than to quit this
calling of Priest, and betake himself to that of a Soldier. Master Francis
was much satisfied with this reply: and in a short time so negociated in this
matter, that Master Antony gave him up to his charge, whereunto he was the
rather moved by the lads inclination, judgeing thereby that he could not hold
him much longer in his former course. Castruccio then being preferred from
Master Antony Castracani the Priests house, to the Palace of Master Francis
Guinigi the Commander; it was a marvel to think in how short a time he
attained to those virtues and good qualities, which are required in a complete
Cavaliere. First he became an excellent horseman: for he was able to manage the
roughest horse at ease, and, though but a youth, in jousts and tournaments he
was of prime remarque; so that in any action of strength or activity, none
could exceed him. These perfections besides, were seasoned with such manners,
and good qualities, as that touching modesty, it was incredible how that either
in word or deed he gave no distaste to any; to his superiors he yielded
reverence; he was modest with his equals, and pleasant with his inferiors;
which gained him favor, not only in the whole Family of Guinigi, but also in
the whole City of Lucca. It chanced in those times, Castruccio being now
arrived to eighteen years of age, that the Gibellins were chasd by the Guelfes
from Pavia, in favor of whom Master Francis Guinigi was sent for by the
Viscounty of Milan, with whom went Castruccio, as he on whose shoulders lay
the charge of the whole troops: in which employment, Castruccio gave such
proofs of his judgment and courage, that not one in this expedition gained so
much esteem as he, and his name became honorable, not only in Pavia, but
throughout all Lombardy. Castruccio being then returned to Lucca of far greater
esteem, than before his departure he was; fayl'd not (to his power) to gain
himself friends, practicing means to win them. But Master Francis Guinigi now
chancing to dye, and having left behind him a son named Paul of 13 years of
age; appointed Castruccio his Tutor, and the Governor of his estate; having
first causd him to be called to him before his death, and entreated him, that he
would take upon him the care to bring up his son, with that faithfulness he
had found himself, and that what kindnesses he could not return to the
father, he would requite to the son. And now at length Master Francis Guinigi
being dead, Castruccio left Tutour and Governor to Paul, grew in such credit
and power, that the favor he was wont to find in Lucca, in some part was
turned into envy, and he was calumniated by many, as who they doubted had some
projects upon a tyranny. Among who^ the principal was M. George Opizi, head of
the Guelfes faction. This man hoping by the death of Mr. Francis, to remain
without competitour in Lucca, thought that Castruccio, being left with that
trust, by the grace and favor his discret carriage gained him, had bereaved
him of all means, to attain thereto; and hereupon sowed many seeds of
scandal against him, whereby to choke his well-grown credit. Which at first
Castruccio disdeign'd, but afterward grew jealous of it: for he thought that
Master George would never rest, till he had so far disgraced him with King
Robert of Naples his Lievftenant, as to cause him to chase him out of Lucca. At
that time there was one Vguccion of Fagginolo of Arezo, then Lord of Pisa, who
by the Pisans was first chosen for their Commander, and afterward made
himself their Lord. Diverse out-lawed Luccheses of the Gibellin faction abode
with Vguccion, whom Castruccio practiced to restore again with Vguccions aid;
and this design he communicated also with his friends at home, who could no
way endure the Opizies authority. Having therefore given order, as was
requisite, to this purpose, Castruccio fortified the tower of the Honesti, and
furnishd it with munition and store of vittayls, whereby upon occasion he might
be able to defend himself therein for some time: and the night being come,
which was agreed of with Vguccion: he gave the sign to him, who was gone down
into the plain with much people between the mountains and Lucca; and having
seen the signal he came close to Saint Peter's gate, and fired the antiport:
Castruccio on the other side raisd a great cry, calling the people ^o arms,
and forcd the gate on the other side within: so that Vguccion entering with his
men, forcd the town, and slew Mr. George with all those of his Family, and
many others his friends and partisans, and chasd out the governor, and changd
the State of the City, as Vguccion liked best, to the great damage thereof;
for it appeard then, that there were above a hundred families chasd out of
Lucca. Those that fled, part went to Florence, and part to Pistoya, which
Cities were then governd by the Guelfes faction; and hereupon they became
enemies to Vguccion and the Luccheses. And upon this the Florentines and the
rest of the Guelfes thinking the Gibellines faction grown too mighty in
Tuscany, accorded together to restore again these exild Luccheses, and having
levied a huge army, they came to the vale of Nievole, and seizng upon Mount
Catino, from hence they went to incampe at Mount Carlo, whereby to have the
passage open to Lucca. Whereupon Vguccio having gatherd a good army of Pisans
and Luccheses, besides many Dutch horse which he drew out of Lombardy, went to
find the Florentines camp: which perceiving the enemies approach, was removd
from Mount Carlo, and settled between Mount Catino and Pescia; and Vguccion
sat down under Mount Carlo about some two miles off the enemy, where for some
days between the Horse of the two Armies there passd some slight skirmishes:
for Vguccion being fallen sick, the Pisans and Luccheses refusd to come to
battle with the enemy. But Vguccions malady augmenting, he retird to Mount
Carlo for his recovery, and committed the charge of the army to Castruccio,
which was the Guelfes destruction: for hereupon they took courage; esteeming
the enemies armies as ^eft without a head: which Castruccio understood, and lay
still ^ome few days, the more to confirm this their opinion, making show of
fear, and not suffering any one to go out of the trenches: and on the other
side the Guelfes the more they saw this ^eare, the more insolent they became,
and every day being orderd for fight, they presented themselves before
Castruccio's army, who thinking he had now enough, emboldned them, and having
had full notice of what order they kept, resolved to come to the trial of a
day: and first with his speeches he confirmd his soldiers courage, and showed
them the victory certain, if they would follow his directions. Castruccio had
seen how the enemy had placed all his strength in the body of the army, and
the weaker sort in the wings thereof: whereupon he did the clean^ contrary;
for he put his be^^ soldiers in his wings, and hi^ flightest people in the
body: and issuing out of his trenches with this order, so soon as ever he^
came within view of the enemy which insolently, as before they had wont, came
to find them out, he commanded that thos^ squadrons in the middle should go
on leisurely, but that the res^ should move with speed, insomuch that when they
came to join battle with the enemy, only the wings of each army fought, and
the troops in the middle stood unimployd because the middle part of
Castruccio'^ army had lagguerd so much behind, that the enemies body had not
yet reached to them: and thus the ablest of Castruccio's army came to fight
with the weakest of the enemies, and the enemie^ strength lay idle, not able to
endammage those, they were to encounter with, nor could they ^ayd any of their
own party: so that without much difficulty, the enemies two wings were both
put to flight, and they in the middle seeing themselves left naked on each
flank, without having whereupon to show their valor, fled likewise. The rout
and the slaughter were great: for there were slain above ten thousand men,
with many Officers, and great Cavaliers of the Guelfes faction throughout all
Tuscany, and many Princes, who came thither in favor of them: to wit, Peter
King Roberts Brother, and Charles his nephew, and Philip Lord of Taranto: but
of Castruccio's side they came not to above three hundred: among which Francis
Vguccions son was slain: who being young and over venturous, was killd at
the first onset. This overthrow much augmented Castruccio's credit, so that
Vguccion grew so jealous and suspicious of his own State, that he continually
busied his brains how to bring him to destruction, thinking with himself, that
that victory had rather taken his power from him, than settled it: an^ being in
this thought, while he^ awaited some fair color to effect his designs, it
happned tha^ Pieragnolo Michaeli was slain^ in Lucca, a man of good worth and
esteem, and the Assassin^ fled into Castruccio s house where the Captains and
Sergeants going to apprehend him were affronted, and hindered by Cstaruccio, so
that the murderer by his aid escapd, which thing Vguccion, who was then at
Pisa, hearing, and deeming then he^ had just occasion to punish him* called unto
his own son Neri, to whom he had now given the command of Lucca and chargd
him, that under color of inviting Castruccio, he should lay hold on him, and
put him to death. Whereupon Castruccio going familiarly into the commander^
palaces, not fearing any injury, was first by Neri entertaind at supper, and
afterward seizd on. And Neri doubting, lest by putting him to death, without
any public justification, the people might be enraged, kept him alive, till
he were better informd by Vguccion what was farther to be done in that case:
who blaming his sons slownesse and cowardice, for the dispatching hereof went
out of Pisa with four hundred Horse toward Lucca: and hardly yet was he
arrived at the Baths, but the Pisans took arms, and slew Vguccions Lieutenant,
and the rest of his family, that remaind at Pisa, and made Count-Gaddo of
Gerardesca their Lord: Vguccion before he came to Lucca, had notice of this
accident befalne in Pisa, yet thought he it not fit to turn back, lest the
Luccheses, like as the Pisans, should also shut their gates against him. But
the Luccheses understanding the chance at Pisa, notwithstanding that Vguccion
was enterd Lucca, taking this occasion to free Castruccio, first began at their
meetings in the Piazze to speak slightly of him, afterward to make some
hub-bub, and from thence came to arms, demanding Castruccio to be set free;
insomuch that Vguccion for fear of worse, drew him out of prison: Whereupon
Castruccio suddenly rallying his friends, with the peoples favor made an
assault upon Vguccion who finding no other remedy, fled thence with his
friends, and so went into Lombardy to the Lords of Scala, where afterward he
died poorly. But Castruccio being of a prisoner become as Prince of Lucca,
prevaild so by his friends, and with this fresh gale of the peoples favor,
that he was made General of their Forces for a year, which being compassd,
to gain himself further credit in arms, he purposd to recover for the
Lucchefes several towns which rebelld after Vguccions departure, and went
also by the Pisans favor, with whom he had enterd into league at the camp, to
Serezana, and to win that, he had built over it a fort, which, being
afterward changed by the Florentines, is now called Serezanello, and in two
months space took the town, and afterward in strength of this credit, he
won Massa, Carrara, and Lavenza, and in short time all Lunigiana: and to stop
the passage that comes from Lombardy into Luginiana, he took Pontremoli, and
drew out thence Mr. Anastasia Palivicini, who was Lord thereof. Returning then
to Lucca with this victory, he was met by the whole people: whereupon
Castruccio resolving not to defer longer to make himself Prince, by means
of Pazzino of Poggio, Puccinello of Porcico, Francisco Boccansecchi, and Cecco
Guinigi at that time of great repute in Lucca, but corrupted by him, made
himself Lord thereof, and so solemnly and by resolution of the people was
elected their Prince. At this time Frederick of Baviere King of the Romans,
came into Italy to take the Imperial crown, whom Castruccio made his friend,
and went to him with five hundred Horse, having left for his Lieutenant at
Lucca Paulo Guinigi, whom in remembrance of his father, he made account of as
his own child. Castruccio was entertaind very honorably by Frederick, who
gave him many privileges, and made him his Deputy in Tuscany; and because the
Pisans had expelld Gaddo of Gerardesca, and for fear of him askd succors of
Frederick, he made Castruccio their Lord, whom the Pisans accepted for fear
of the Guelfes faction, and in particular because of the Florentines. Frederick
then being returned into Germany, and having left at Rome a governor for his
affairs in Italy, all the Gibellins, as well Tuscans as Lombarbs that followd
the Imperial faction, had their recourse to Castruccio, and each promisd him
the Principality of their native country; provided that by his means they
might be restord: among whom was Mattheo Guidi, Nardo Scolare, Lapo Vberti,
Gerozzi Nardi and Piero Buonacorsi, all Gibellins, and outlawd Florentines: and
Castruccio plotting by help of these, and with his own forces to become Lord
of all Tuscany, to gain himself credit the more, entered into amity with Mr.
Mattheo Visconti Prince of Milan: and traind up all the men of his own city
and country to arms: and because Lucca had five gates, he divided the country
into five parts, armd them, and distributed them under Captains and colors,
so that on a sudden he was able to bring together above twenty thousand men
into the field, besides the help he might have from Pisa. He then being
environd with these forces and friends, it fortuned that Mr. Mattheo Visconti
was assailed by the Guelfes of Piacuza; who had driven out the Gibellins, in
whose behalf the Florentines and King Robert had sent their troops. Whereupon
Mr. Mattheo entreated Castruccio to assail the Florentines, that they being
constraind to defend their own homes, should call back their men out of
Lombardy. So Castruccio with a good artny enterd the Vale Arno, took Fucachio,
and St. Miniato with great damage of the country; and upon this occasion the
Florentines were forced to call back their troops: who were hardly returned
into Tuscany, but Castruccio was compelld upon another necessity to haste back
to Lucca: And in that City the Family of Poggio being of such power and
authority as that it had made Castruccio not only great, but Prince also, and
not taking themselves to have been requited as they had deservd, agreed with
other Families of Luccato move the city to rebellion and to chase Castruccio
thence; whereupon taking occasion one morning they came armd upon the Deputy,
whom Castruccio had there ordaind over Justice, and slew him, and further
purposing to raise the people to commotion; Steven of Poggio an ancient and
peaceable man, who had no hand at all in this conspiracy, came before them,
constrained his friends by his authority amongst them, to lay aside their arms,
offering himself to mediate with Castruccio for them, that he should satisfy
their desires. Thus they laid down their arms, but not with greater discretion
than they had taken them up; for Castruccio having had notice of these
novelties befalne in Lucca, without making any delay, with part of his troops,
leaving Paul Guinigi Commander of the residue, came thence to Lucca, where
having found the tumult appeasd, beyond his expectation, deeming he might with
the more ease secure himself; disposed those of his party in several places,
as best was for his turn. Steven of Poggio thinking with himself, that
Castruccio was beholding to him, went to him, and entreated, not for himself,
because he thought it no way needful for him, but for the others of his
Family, praying that many things he would pardon, in respect of their youth,
and many things in regard of the ancient amity, and obligation he had to the
whole kindred. Whereunto Castruccio answered courteously, and bid him be of good
cheer, and told him that he received more content the tumult was appeased,
than he had had trouble that it was raised, and persuaded Steven to cause them
all to come to him, saying, that he thanked God he had given him opportunity to
make a show of his clemency, and bounty. They all then presenting themselves
upon Stevens word and Castruccios, were together with Steven imprisond and put
to death. In this mean while the Florentines had recoverd S. Miniato;
whereupon Castruccio thought fit to stay that war: considering that as yet he
was not secure of Lucca, being that he could not safely part from home; and
having causd the Florentines to be felt whether they would admit of a truce, he
found them easily yielding theret^; for they also were weary of the charge, and
desirous to stop the expense. Whereupon they made a truce of two years, and
that every one should keep what they had gotten. In the mean while Castruccio
being freed from the war, that he might not again incur those dangers and
hazards which formerly he had run, under diverse colors and pretenses, cut off
all those in Lucca, who could have any ambition to aspire to the Principality,
and pardoned not one of them, depriving them of their Country and Fortunes, and
those he could get in his clutches, of their lives: affirming that he had
found it by experience, that none of them would abide true; and for his better
safeguard, built a Fortress in Lucca, and made use of the materials of their
Towers, whom he had banished and murdered. While Castruccio was thus quiet with
the Florentines, and that he strengthened himself in Lucca, he failed not to
do all that he could, without entering into open hostility to increase his
greatness: and having a great desire to take Pistoya, thinking with himself
that by the possession of that City, he had gotten one foot into Florence,
gained himself by diverse ways the whole mountain to friend, and by the
factions he made in Pistoya, so behaved himself, that every one relied much
on him. At that time the City was divided (as always it was) into the Bianchi
and Neri; head of the Bianchi was Bastiano of Possente, and of the Neri, James
of Gia: each of which held straight correspondence with Castruccio, and one
desired to expel the other, so that the one and the other after many suspicions
came to blows. James made himself strong at the gate toward Florence.
Bastiano at that toward Lucca, and the one and the other of them relying more
upon Castruccio, than upon the Florentines, judging him more ready and quick of
dispatch in any thing touching the war, each of them sent to him secretly for
aid: which Castruccio promised to them both, letting James know that he would
come in person, and telling Bastiano, he would send Paul Guinigi his Foster
son: and appointing a set time, sent Paul by way of Pescia, and himself went
straight on to Pistoya, so that about midnight, for thus was it agreed between
Castruccio and Paul, they both arrived at Pistoya, and there received as
friends: being both entered; when Castruccio found his time, he gave the watch
word to Paul, whereupon he slew James of Gia, and the other Bastiano of
Possente; and all their partakers were partly taken, partly slain, whereupon
they forced Pistoya without resistance; and for the government of the town,
Castruccio constrained the people to yield him obedience, remitting to them
many old debts and duties, and thus did he to the whole Country thereabouts;
who all flock't together, partly to see the new Prince, so that every one
fraught with hopes, or admiring his valor, set his heart at rest. It happened
about this time, that the people of Rome mutinyed upon the extreme dearth of
provision there, which was caused by the Popes absence, who was then at Av^gnon
and they blamed the Germane government, insomuch that every day murders and
other disorders were committed: which Henry the Emperors Deputy could no way
remedy; whereupon he had a great suspicion that the Romans would call in King
Robert of Naples, and chase him Rome, and so restore it to the Pope: And having
no nearer Allie, whom he could make recourse unto, than Castruccio, he sent to
entreat him, that he would be pleased, not only to send him aid, but to come
himself also in person. Castruccio thought this voyage was no way to be put
off, as well to render some service of merit to the Emperor, as because now
the Emperor was absent from Rome, there was some necessity of it: leaving Paul
Guinigi at Lucca, he went thence with two hundred horse to Rome, where he was
entertained by Henry, with very much honor; and his presence in a short time
gave so much credit to the Imperials, that without blood or other violence, all
things were well quieted: for Castruccio having caused a good quantity of corn
to be brought by Sea out of the Country about Pisa, took away all occasion of
offense. Afterward, partly by admonishing, partly by chastising the chief
Officers of Rome, he reduced them freely under Henry's government; and
Castruccio was created a Roman Senator, besides many other honors he
received of the people; and that Order he took with very great pomp, putting
on a gown of cloth of tissue, with great letters before to this purpose: This
man is what it pleases God, and again behind, And shall be what God will. In
this mean while the Florentines, who were displeased that Castruccio during
the truce had made himself Lord of Pistoya, devised which way they might make
it rebel, which by reason of his absence, they thought might easily be
effected. Amongst the banished Pistoyeses, who were then at Florence, there was
Baldo Cecchi, and James Baldini, both men of authority, and ready for any
hazard. These men held correspondence with some friends they had within; so
that with the Florentines help, they entered by night into Pistoya, and chased
thence Castruccios friends and officers, and some of them they slew, and
restord the City her liberty, which news much displeasd Castruccio; so that
having taken leave of Henry, he came with his men by great days journyes to
Lucca. The Florentines when they had word of Castruccios return, thinking he
would not take much rest, resolved to prevent him, and with their forces to
enter first into the Vale of Nievole, before him: supposing, that if they first
made themselves masters of that valley, they should cut of from him all means
of possibility to recover Pistoya; and so having put in order a great army of
all the friends of the Guelfes faction, they come into the territory of
Pistoya. On the other side, Castruccio came with his troops to mount Carlo, and
having learned where the Florentines army was, determined not to meet them in
the plain of Pistoya, nor to attend them in the plain of Pascia, but if it
might be, to encounter them in the straight of Saravalla; deeming that by
bringing his design to pass, he should surely gain the victory; for he
understood the Florentines had got together some forty thousand men, and he had
made choice of some twelve thousand out of all his, and however he was
confident of his own industry, and their valor, yet doubted he, lest if he set
on them in a large place, he might be environed by the multitude of the
enemies. Saravalla is a Castle between Pescia and Pistoya, placed upon a hill,
that shuts in the Valle of Nievole, not upon the very passage, but above to
that some two bow shots of the place, by which a man passes, is more straight
than on the sudden; for of every side it rises gently, but in a straight
manner, especially upon the hill, where the waters are divided; so that twenty
men on the one side and the other would wholly possess it. In this place
Castruccio had a design to encounter with the enemy, as well because his small
troops should have the advantage, as not to discover the enemy, but just upon
the skirmish, fearing lest his men seeing the number of the enemies, should be
startled. Mr. Manfredi of the German nation, was then Lord of the Castle of
Seravalle, who before that Castruccio was Lord of Pistoya, had been left in
that Castle, as in a place that was neuter between the Luccheses and
Pistoyeses: nor afterward befell it either of them to offend him, he promising
to abide neuter, and not to apply himself to the one or other: So that for
this cause, and for that the situation was strong, he had kept himself thus:
but upon this accident Castruccio became desirous to possess this place. And
having very near acquaintance with one of the inhabitants of the place, he so
appointed his business with him, that the night before the skirmish was to
begin, he should take into the town 400 men of his, and slay the commander; and
abiding thus prepared, he stirred not his army from Mount Carlo, the more to
encourage the Florentines to pass, who, because they desired to carry the war
far off from Pistoya, and to bring it into the Vale of Nievole, encamped under
Serravalle, with intention the day following to pass the hill; but Castruccio
having without any noise taken the Castle in the night, parted from Mount Carlo
about midnight, and quietly arrived in the morning at the foot of Serravalle,
so that at the same instant both the Florentines and he began to ascend the
side of the hill. Castruccio had sent his infantery by the rode way, and a
troop of 400 Horse he had sent upon the left hand toward the Castle: on the
other side the Florentines had sent 400 Horse before them, and after those
their Foot moved, not any way thinking they should find Castruccio upon the top
of the hill; for they knew nothing of that he had made himself master of the
Castle. Thus at unawares the Florentine Horse having got to the top of the
hill, discoverd Castruccio's Foot, and were so near approachd them, that they
had hardly time to lace on their helmets. These men then that were unprovided,
being assaild by the others that were prepared, and in order, were fiercely set
upon, and with much ado made resistance, and indeed some few of them made head
a while: but so s^on as the noise hereof descended into the Florentines camp,
all was full of confusion. The Horse were oppressd by the Foot, the Foot by the
Horse, and their carriages; the Commanders because of the straightness of the
place could neither advance nor retire: so that no man in this confusion knew
what could or should be done: insomuch that the Horse which were at blows
with the enemies Foot, were cut to pieces, and they not able to defend
themselves, because the maligniry of the site did not suffer them, yet made
they resistance more of necessity than of valor: for being hemmed in by the
mountains on both sides, behind by their friends, and before by their enemies,
they had no way open for flight. Hereupon Castruccio having perceived that his
troops were not able to break the enemy, sent a thousand Foot by way of the
Castle, causing them to descend with the 400 Horse which he had sent before,
who struck them so rudely upon the flank, that the Florentines unable longer
to resist that violence, vanquished rather by the place than by the enemy, all
took them to flight; and the flight began from those who were behind toward
Pistoya, who dispersing themselves all along the plain, every one where he
best could, provided for his safeguard. This defait was very great and bloody;
many Commanders were taken, among which was Bandino of Rossi, Prancesco
Brunnelleschi, and John of Tosa, all noble Florentines, and many other Tuscans,
besides diverse of the Kingdom of Naples, who being sent by King Robert in
favor of the Guelfes served under the Florentines. The Pistoyeses hearing of
this rout, without delay chasing out the faction of the Guelfes, yielded
themselves to Castruccio. Who not contented herewith, took Piato, and all the
Castles of the plain, as well on this as on the other side of Arno, and set
himself down with his army in the plain of Perettola some two miles of from
Florence, where he abode many days to divide the spoil, and to feast for joy
of the victory gotten, causing moneys to be stamped in scorn of the
Florentines, and races to be run by horse, men, and queanes: neither faild
he to endeavor to corrupt some noble Citizens, to open to him in the night
the gates of Florence; but the conspiracy being discoverd, they were taken and
beheaded, among whom was Thomas Lupacco, and Lambertuccio Frescobaldi. Hereupon
the Florentines being affrighted upon this defeat, hardly knew any remedy to
preserve their liberty: and to the end they might be sure of aid, sent
Ambassadors to Robert King of Naples, to give him the City, and the dominion
thereof. Which that King accepted of, not so much for the honor the Florentines
had done him, as for that he knew well how much it imported his State that the
Guelfes faction should maintain the State of Tuscany: and having agreed with
the Florentines to have of them two hundred thousand Florins by the year, he
sent Charles his son with four thousand Horse to Florence: so that the
Florentines were somewhat easd of Castruccio's troops: for they were
constraind to leave their territories and to go to Pisa, there to repress a
conspiracy made against him by Benedicto Lanfranchi, one the chief of Pisa,
who not being able to endure that his native country should be enthralld to a
Lucchese, conspird against him, plotting to seize upon the Cittadell, and to
chase out the garrison, and to slay those of Castruccio's party. But because in
such matters, if the small number be fit to keep the secret, yet suffices it
not to put it in execution: while he went about to gain more men to his
purpose, some there was that bewrayd his plot to Castruccio: neither passd this
discovery without the infamy of Bonifacio Cerchi and John Guidi Florentines,
who were near neighbors to Pisa; whereupon Benedicto being laid hand on, was
put to death, and all the rest of that Family banished, and many other Noble
Citizens beheaded: and thinking with himself that Pistoya and Pisa were not
very faithful unto him, he took care both by his industry and forces to
secure himself thereof: which gave leisure to the Florentines to recover their
strength, and to be able to attend the return of Charles: who being arrived,
they determined to lose no longer time, and gatherd a great number of men; for
they called together to their aid in a manner all the Guelfes in Italy, and made
an exceeding great army of more than 30000 Foot, and 10000 Horse: and having
advisd, which were first to be assaild, either Pistoya, or Pisa, they resolved
it were better to set first upon Pisa, being a thing more likely to succeed, by
reason of the late conspiracy there, as also of more profit, deeming that if
Pisa were once gotten, Pistoya would soon render of it self. The Florentines
then going forth with this army in the beginning of May 1328, suddenly took
Lastra, Signia, Mount Lupo, and Empoli, and came with their army to St.
Miniato. Castruccio on the other part perceiving this great army, which the
Florentines had brought against him, was nothing startled, but rather thought
that this was the time, when Fortune was to give him in his hand the whole
dominion of Tuscany: believing they should have no better success in this of
Pisa, than formerly they had in that of Serravalle; and that now they could not
hope to repair themselves again, as then; whereupon assembling twenty
thousand Foot and 4000 Horse, he brought his army to Fucechio, and sent Paul
Guinigi with 5000 Foot to Pisa. Fucechio is seated in a stronger place than any
other Castle, upon the territory of Pisa, because it is in the midst between
the Gusciana and the Arno, and a little raisd from the plain; where he
abiding, the enemies were not able, unless they divided their army into two
parts, to hinder his provision either from Lucca, or Pisa; neither could they
but upon disadvantage either come upon him, or go toward Pisa: for in one
case they might be inclosd in the midst between Castruccios troops, and those
of Pisa; in the other case, having the Arno to pass, they could not do it
with the enemy on their backs, without very great danger. And Castruccio for
their encouragement to undertake the passage had not plac d himself with his
troops along the bank of Arno, but a little aside near unto the walls of
Fucechio, and had left distance enough between the River and him. The
Florentines having gotten St. Miniato, advisd whether were to be done, either
to go to Pisa, or to find out Castruccio; and having measured the difficulties
of both courses, they resolvd to go and invest him. The river Arno was so low
that a man might wade over it, but yet not so, but that the infantery was wet
to the shoulders, and the Horse even to the saddle. Upon the tenth day then of
June in the morning, the Florentines in battle array, causd part of their
Cavalery to begin to pass, and a body of ten thousand Foot. Castruccio who
stood ready and intent to what he had in his mind to do, with a battalion of
five thousand Foot and three thousand Horse fell upon them: neither give he
them any time to get out of the water but that he was at blows with them; he
sent a thousand light armd Foot up by the bank on that part under the Arno,
and a thousand above it. The Florentines Foot were mueh distressed with the
water and weight of their arms, nor had they all yet got over the channel of
the river. When some of the Horse had passd, by reason that they had moord the
bottom of the Arno, they made the passage the uneasier for them that came
after them; for the bottom proving rotten and miry, some of the Horse came
over and over on their riders, and many stuck so fast in the mud that they were
there stabled: whereupon the Florentine Commanders seeing the difficulty to
pass on that part, causd them to retire and make proof of a higher part of
the river, whereby to find a sounder bottom, and the channel more favorable
for their passage: against whom those whom Castruccio had sent under the bank,
made resistance, who slightly armd with targets and darts in their hands, with
huge outcryes, wounded them both in the face and breast, insomuch that the
horses affrighted both with the cries and strokes, would in no wise pass
forwards, but fell foul one upon another: the fight between Castruccio's men
and those that were already past, was sharp and terrible, and of each side
there fell many, and every one usd all his skill and strength to overcome his
adversary. Castruccio's men would force them back into the river; the
Florentines strived to put forwards to make place for others, that being come
forth of the water, they might be able to stand to the fight, to which
obstinacy there was added the Captains encouragements. Castruccio put his men
in mind, that these were the same enemies, which but a little while ago they
had beaten at Sarravalle. The Florentines reproachd theirs, that they being
many, should suffer a few to overcome them. But Castruccio perceiving that the
fight lasted, and that his own and his adversaries were well wearied, and that
on each side many were hurt and slain, he sent out another band of five
thousand Foot, and when he brought them up to the very back of his own that
fought, he gave order that they before should open, and wheel about, one on
the right hand, the other on the left, and so retire; which thing done gave
room to the Florentines to advance and gain some ground. But when once they
came to handy blows, the fresh men with those that were tired, they staid not
long ere they forced them back into the river, between the Horse of the one
side, and the other, yet there was not much advantage: whereupon Castruccio
knowing his own inferior, had given order to the leaders, that they should
only maintain fight, as he that hoped to overcome the Foot; which done, he
might be able with more ease to overcome the Horse; which fell out as he
purposd: for having seen the Foot forced back into the river, he sent the
rest of his infantery against the enemies Horse, who with lances and darts
wounding them, and the Cavalery also pressing them with greater fury, put them
to flight. The Florentine Commanders seeing the difficulty that their Horse had
to pass; strove to make their Foot pass on that part beneath the river, to
fight with the flank of Castruccio's troops. But the channel being deep, and
all above already possessed by his men, all this proved vain. Whereupon the
whole army was put to rout, to Castruccio's great glory and honor, and of so
great a multitude there escaped not a third. Many Chieftaines were taken, and
Charles son of King Robert, together with Michaelangelo Falconi, and Taddeo
of the Albizi Florentine Commissaries, fled thence to Empoli. The spoil taken
was great, the slaughter exeeeding great, as a man may imagine in such and so
great a conflict: for of the Florentine army 20231, and of Castruccio's part
1570 were left dead upon the place. But Fortune being enemy to his glory, when
as she should have given him life, took it from him, and interrupted those
designs which he a long time before had purposd to put in effect: neither
could any thing but death hinder him. Castruccio had toyld himself all that
day in the battle, when at the end thereof all weary and sweaty, he stayed
about the port of Fucechio, to attend the soldiers, as they should return
from the victory, and in person receive and thank them, and partly if
peradventure any thing should arise from the enemies, that they had made head
in any place, he might be ready to give order thereto: judgeing it the office
of a good Commander, to be the first to get a Horseback, and the last to light
off. Whereupon he standing exposd to a wind, which ordinarily about midday
rises upon the Arno, and uses to be pestiferous, he was all over chilled.
Which thing not being made account of by him, was the occasion of his death:
for the night following he was taken with a dangerous fever, which
continually augmenting, and the sickness being judged mortal by all the
Physicians, and Castruccio perceiving of it, called Paul Guinigi, and spoke to
him these words. Had I believed, my son, that Fortune would have cut off my
course in the midst of the way, to arrive unto that glory, which I by my so
many good successes had promisd my self, I should have less wearied my self,
and to thee as I should have left a smaller estate, so also fewer enemies, and
less envy: for I would have been content with the dominion of Lucca and Pisa,
and never subdued the Pistoyeses, nor with so many injuries provoked the
Florentines; but by making the one and the other of these people my friends, I
should have led a life, though not longer, yet surely more quiet; and to thee
should I have left an estate, though less, without doubt, more secure and
firm: but Fortune, who will dispose of all humane affairs, gave me not so
much judgment, that I was able first to know it, or so much time, that I was
able to overcome it. Thou have heard, for many have told thee, and I never
denyd it to thee, how I came into thy fathers house being yet a young lad, and
void of all those hopes, which every generous spirit ought to conceive, and how
I was by him brought up, and belov d by him as much as if I had been of his own
blood, whereupon under his government I became valourous, and grew capable of
that fortune, in which thou have and do see me: and because at his death,
he committed thee and all his fortunes to my fidelity, I have brought thee up
with that affection, and increasd them with that fidelity, that I was and am
bound to. And because not only whether that alone which was left thee by thy
father, but that also which my fortune and valor got, were thine, I never
would marry, to the end that the love of children should never take me off,
from showing in any part that thankfulness toward thy fathers blood, which I
thought I was obliged to show. I leave thee therefore a very fair State,
whereat I am much pleased: but for that I leave it thee weak and unsettled, I
am exceedingly grieved: there remains to thee the City of Lucca, which will
never be content to live under thy government: Pisa is also thine: wherein
there are men naturally inconstant, and full of treachery: which, however it
be diverse times accustomed to serve, yet will it always disdain to have a
Lucchese for its Lord. Pistoya likewise is left to thee, very little faithful
to thee, because it is divided, and by fresh injuries provoked against our
Family. Thou have the Florentines for thy neighbors, and those offended, and
diverse ways injuryed by us, and not extinguished, to whom the news of my death
would be more welcome than the Conquest of all Tuscany. Thou can not rely
upon the Princes of Milan, nor upon the Emperor, because they are far hence,
lazy, and very slow with their succors: wherefore thou oughtst not to hope in
any thing, but in thy own industry, and the remembrance of my valor, and in
the reputation which this present victory gains thee: which if thou shall know
with discretion how to make use of, will aid thee to make an accord with the
Florentines, who being affrighted at this present defeat, ought with desire to
condescend thereto: whom though I sought to make them mine enemies, and thought
it would procure me both power and glory, yet thou art by all means to seek
to gain for thy friends; for their friendship will prove thy security and
advantage. It is a thing of very much importance in this world for a man to
understand his own self, and to know how to measure the forces of his own
courage and State; and he that finds himself unfit for war, should endeavor
to settle his government by the rules of peace, whereunto thou shall do well
if by my advice thou address thy self, and strive by this way to enjoy my
pains, and dangers, which shall easily prove successful to thee, when thou
shall account these my advertisements true: and herewithall thou shall be
doubly obliged to me, first that I have left thee this State, and secondly
that I have taught thee how to keep it. Afterward having causd those citizens
to come to him, who of Lucca, Pisa, and Pistoya, served in the wars under
him, and recommended Paul Guinigi to them, and made them to swear obedience to
him, he dyed; leaving to all those, that ever knew him, a happy remembrancc of
him; and to those that had been his friends, so great a desire of him, that
never any Prince, that died at any time, left more. His funerals were most
honorably solemnizd, and he was buried at St. Francesco in Lucca. But neither
valor, nor fortune were so favorable to Paul Guinigi, as to Cas^ruccio; for
not long after, he lost Pistoya, and after Pisa, and with much ado held he
the government of Lucca: which continued in his Family till Paul the
grandchild. Castruccio then was, by what is here showed, a man of rare note,
not only for those times he lived in, but for many ages that had past long
before. He was of a stature higher than ordinary, and his limbs were well
answerable each to other, and of such a grace he was in his aspect, and
entertained all men with that humanity, that he never spoke with any, that he
sent from him discontent; his hair inclined to a reddish color, and he wore
it always cut above his ears; and always and in all seasons, whether it rained
or snew, he went with his head uncovered; he was very pleasing to his friends,
and terrible to his enemies; just among his subjects, treacherous with
forreiners: nor where he could vanquish by fraud did he ever strive to do it
by force: for he said the victory, and not the manner how it was got, gained a
man glory; no man entered more boldly into dangers, nor was more wary to get
out of them: and he was wont to say, that men ought to prove every thing, but
to be astonished at nothing, and that God favors valiant men, who always
chastises the feeble with the mighty. He was also very admirable in replying
or biting sharply or gentilely; and as in this kind he spared not any, so
likewise he was nothing moved, when himself was not spared: So that we have
many things he said wittily, and heard patiently, as these: Having causd a duck
at to be given for a starling, and a friend of his reproving him for it, said
Castruccio, thou would not have given above a penny for it; and his friend
saying it was true, he replied, a duck at is less to me. Having a flatterer
about him, and in scorn having spat upon him, the flatterer said, that
Fishermen to take a little Fish suffer themselves to be all moyl'd in the Sea;
I will let my self be daubed by a little spettle, to catch a Whale: which
Castruccio not only heard patiently, but rewarded. When one told him, that he
livd too sumptuously; said Castruccio, if this were a vice, there would not be
so splendide entertainments at the Saints Feasts. Passing through a street, and
seeing a young man coming out of a whore-house all blushing, because he had
been seen by him; he said to him, be not ashamed when thou go out, but when
thou enterst in. A friend of his giving him a knot to loose, that was curiously
tied, said, O fool, do thou think I will loosen such a thing, which being
tied gives me so much trouble? Castruccio saying to one that professed himself a
Philosopher, you are of the condition of dogs, that always go about those who
can best give them meat; no says the party, we are like Physicians, who visit
their houses that have most need of them. Going from Pisa to Ligorne by water,
and a dangerous storm there arising, and thereupon being much perplexed, was
reprehended by one of his company as pusillanimous, saying himself was not
afraid of any thing; to whom Castruccio replied, that he nothing marvayl'd
thereat, for every one valued his life, according to its worth. Being asked by
one, what he should do to gain a good esteem? answered him; see when thou
go to a Feast, that a block sit not upon a block. When one boasted that
he had read many things; said Castruccio, it were better thou could brag
thou had remembered much. Another bragging though he had tippled much, he was
not drunk; replied, an Ox does the same. Castruccio kept a young less, which
he lay with ordinarily, and thereupon being reproved by a friend, telling him,
that it was a great wrong to him that he had suffered himself to be so taken
by a Wench; thou art mistaken, quoth Castruccio, I took her, not she me. Also
when one blamed him that he was too delicious in his diet; he said to him, I
warrant thou would not spend herein so much as I do; that is true quoth the
other; then replied he, thou art more covetous, than I am gluttonous. Being
invited to supper by Tadeo Bernardi a Lucchese, a rich and magnificent citizen;
and in the house Tadeo showing him a chamber all furnished with cloth of gold,
and that it was all paved with curious stones, which were diversely wrought with
sundry colors, and represented flowers, leaves, and such like green things:
Castruccio having got together a great deal of spettle in his mouth, spat it
full in Tadeos face; at which he showing himself much troubled, says
Castruccio, I knew not where to spet that I might offend thee less. Being
asked how Caesar died? says he, would to God I might dye like him. Being one
night in a house of one of his Gentlemen, where there were diverse Ladies
invited to a feast, and he dancing, and sporting with them, more than befitted
his condition, was reprovd by a friend, answered, he that is held a wise man in
the day time, will never be thought a fool in the night. One coming to ask a
favor at his hands, and Castruccio seeming as if he heard not, fell down upon
his knees before him, whereat Castruccio chiding him, he answered, thou art the
cause thereof, who carryest thine ears in thy feet: and thereby he gaind
double the favor he asked. He used to say, that the way to Hell was easy,
because men went thither downwards, and blindfold. When one askd him a favor
with many and superfluous words, Castruccio said to him, hereafter when thou
would any thing with me, send another. Such another man having wearied him
with a tedious speech, and telling him in the latter end, perhaps I may have
tired you with my long speaking; no, thou have not, said he, for I heard not
one word of all that thou have spoken. He was wont to say of one, who had been
a handsome boy, and afterward became a comely man, that he was too injurious,
having first distracted the husbands from their wives, and afterward the wives
from their husbands. To an envious man that laughd, he said, laughst thou
because thou art well, or because another suffers evil? When he was also under
the rule of Master Francis Guinigi, one of his play-fellows, saying to him,
what will thou that I shall give thee, for a blow on the mouth? Castruccio
answered him, a Helmet. Having causd a citizen of Lucca to dye, who had helpd
him in his rising to his greatness, when it was said to him, he had ill done
to put to death one of his old friends; he replied, you are deceivd, I have put
to death a new enemy. Castruccio commended much those that betrothd wives, but
never married them, like men that say they will go to Sea, but never do. He
said he wondered much at men, that when they bought any vessel of earth or
glass, they sound it first whether it be good; but in taking a wife they are
content only to see her. When he was near death, one asking him, how he would
be buried? he answered, with my face downwards: for I know, that as soon as I
am dead, this Country shall go upside down. Being asked, whether he never
thought to become a Friar to save his Soul? he said no, for it was strange to
him, that Lazarus should go to Paradise, and Vguccion of Faggivola to Hell.
Being asked, when it was best to eat, to preserve the health? he answered, if
a man be rich, when he is hungry; if he be poor, when he may. Seeing a
gentleman a friend of his, that made his servant trusse his points, he said, I
hope one day too thou will make him feed thee. Seeing that one had written upon
his house in Latin, God keep the wicked hence; said, the master then must not
enter here. Passing by a way where there was a little house with a great gate,
he said, this house will run out of doors. Treating with an Ambassador of the
King of Naples touching some goods of the borderers, whereat he was somewhat
angry, when the Ambassador said, fear you not the King then? Castruccio said,
is this your King good or bad? and he answering that he was good, Castruccio
replied, wherefore then should I be afraid of those that are good? We might
relate many others of his sayings, wherein he showed both acuteness of wit, and
gravity; but these shall suffice in testimony of his worthy qualities. He lived
forty four years, and behavd himself like a Prince in all his fortunes: and
as of his good fortunes there are enough monuments left, so likewise would he
there should be seen some of his evil fortunes; for the manacles wherewith
he was chained in prison, are yet to be seen fastened in the tower of his
dwelling house, where they were put by him, that they might bear witness of
his adversity. And because he was no way inferior to Philip of Macedon,
Alexanders father; nor to Scipio of Rome: he died in the same age they two
did; and doubtless he would have exceeded the one and the other, if in
exchange of Lucca he had had Macedon, or Rome for his Country.

FINIS.
A Relation of the course taken by Duke Valentine, in the murdering of
Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto of Fermo, Paul, and the Duke of Gravina, all of
them of the Family of the Orisini; composd by Nicholas Machiavelli.
DUke Valentine was returned from Lombardy, whither he had gone to excuse
himself to King Lewys of France, touching those many calumnies, which the
Florentines charged him with, for the rebellion of Arezo, and the other Towns
of the Vale of Clicana, and was thence come to Jmola; where he plotted his
enterprise against John Bentivogh tyrant of Bolenia: for he had a mind to
reduce that City into his subjection, and make it head of his Duchy of Romania:
which thing being known to the Vitelli and Orsini, and their other accomplices,
they thought the Duke would grow too powerful, and that it was to be feared,
lest that taking Bolonia, he should seek their utter ruin, that he might
remain the only Champion of Italy* and hereupon they made a diete at the
Magione, in the territories of Perusia: where there met Cardinal Paulo, and
the Duke of Gravina of the Family of the Orsini, Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto
of Fermo, John Paulo Baglioni tyrant of Perusia, and Master Antonio of Ven^fro,
sent by Pandulfo Petrucci head of Siena: where it was argued amongst them
touching the Dukes greatness, and touching what his further intentions were:
and that it was necessary to bridle his appetite: otherwise they ran hazard
together with others, all to go to ruin: and they determined not to abandon
the Bentivolii, and to seek to gain the Florentines; to one and the other of
which places they dispatched men, promising aid to the one; and encouraging the
other to unite with them, against the common enemy. This diete was suddenly
known throughout all Italy, and those people that under the Dukes government
were discontented, among whom were the Vrbinates, began to hope they might be
able to innovate some things; from whence it proceeded, that their minds being
thus held in suspense by some of Vrbino, it was plotted to take the Rock of
Leo, which held for the Duke, and these took occasion from hence. The Governor
forti^y'd the Castle, and causing timber to be carried thither: they of the
conspiracy contrived that some great pieces of timber, which they were drawing
into the Castle, should be brought upon the bridge, to the end that being thus
cloggd, it could not be lift up by them within: which occasion being taken,
they leapd upon the bridge, and thence into the Rock, by which surprisall, so
soon as it was understood, all that State rebelld, and called home again their
old Duke. Hope now being laid hold on, not so much by the taking of the Rock,
as for the diet held at the Magione, by means whereof they thought to be
assisted: who having heard the rebellion of Vrbin, imagind it not fit to lose
the occasion: and getting their men together, they put forward, intending if
there were any town of all that State remaining in the Dukes hands, to assail
it: and they sent a fresh again to Florence to solicit that Commonwealth to
join with them in extinguishing this common calamity: showing the party
already gained, and such an occasion offered as the like was not to be
expected. But the Florentines for the hate they bare to the Vitelli and the
Orsini upon diverse occasions, not only cleav'd not to them, but sent Nicholas
Machiavelli their Secretary, to offer receipt to the Duke, and aid against
these his new enimyes, who was then in Imola full of fear: because of a
sudden, and beyond his opinion, his soldiers being become his enemies, he
unarmd met with a war at hand: but having taken heart upon the Florentines
profers, he purposd to temporise, and hold off the war with those few people
which he had, and with treaties of agreement, and partly to prepare aids,
which he provided two ways, by sending to the King of France for men, and
partly by taking into his pay all men at arms, and what others else made
profession to serve a Horseback, and to all he gave money. Notwithstanding all
this the enemies advanced, and thence came toward Fossombrone; where some of
the Dukes troops had made head: which by the Vitelli and Orsini were broken:
which thing causd the Duke to turn himself wholly to see if he with treaties
of accord could stop this humor: and being an exceeding great dissembler, he
faild not of any means to give them to understand who had taken arms against
him, that what he had gotten he was willing should be theirs: and that it
sufficed him to enjoy the title of Prince, but he was content the Principality
should be theirs: and so effectually persuaded he them, that they sent Paul
to the Duke to treat of peace, and so stayed their arms: but now the Duke
stayed not his preparations, and with a great deal of care increasd both his
Horse and Foot, and to the end these provisions should not appear, he went
and scattered all his soldiers in several places throughout Romania. In this
while also came there to him five hundred French lances: and however he was
now so strong, that with open force he was able to right himself upon his
enemies; yet thought he it the more safe and profitable way to beguile them,
and for all this not to stop the treaty for peace: and this matter was so far
labourd in, that he made a peace with them, and assurd to them their old pays;
gave them four thousand ducats in hand: promisd not to molest the Bentivolii,
and made alliance with John, and moreover that he could not constrain any of
them to come in person to him, more than he thought good himself. On the
other side they promisd to restore unto him the Duchy of Vrbin, and all the
other places taken by them, and to serve him in any expedition he should
undertake, nor without his permission to war with any one, or take pay of any
one. This accord being made, Guidubaldo Duke of Vrbin fled again to Venice,
having first causd all the fortresses of that State to be demolishd: for
relying upon the people, he would not that those forts, which he thought he
could not defend, should fall into the enemies hands, whereby to bridle his
friends. But Duke Valentine having made this agreement, and divided all his
troops throughout all Romania, with the French men at arms, at the end of
November departed from Imola, and thence went to Cesena, where he abode many
days to contrive with those that were sent by the Vitelli and the Orisni, who
were ready then with their forces in the Duchy of Vrbin, what action they
should then anew enter in, but not concluding any thing, Oliverotto of Fermo
was sent to offer him that if he would adventure an expedition against
Tuscany, they were at his service: in case he would not, they would be ready
to serve him against Sinigallia; to whom the Duke answered, that in Tuscany he
would not make any war, because the Florentines were his friends: but he was
well content they should go to Sinigallia: whence it came to pass that not
long after, advice was brought, that the town was yielded to them, but the
Fort would not: for the Governor would render it to the Duke in person, and to
none else; and thereupon they persuaded him to come before it. The Duke thought
this occasion very good, and that it would not any way skarre them, being he
was called by them, and not going of himself: and the more to secure them, he
dismisd all his Frenc^ forces, which returned thence into Lombardy, save only a
hundred lances of Monsieur Candales his kinsman, and parting about the middle
of December from Cesena, he went thence to Fano; wherewithal his wiles and
craft he could, he persuaded the Vitelli and the Orsini, to expect him at
Sinigallia; showing them that such strangeness would make their accord to be
neither faithful nor durable; and that he was a man, that desird he might
avail himself both of the forces and advice of his friends: and however
Vitellozzo was very unwilling, and that his brothers death had taught him, that
he should not offend a Prince, and afterward trust him; nevertheless, being
wrought to it by Paulo Orsino who had been corrupted by the Duke with gifts and
fair promises, he agreed to attend him: whereupon the Duke before the 30 day
of December, 1502, that he was to go from Fano, communicated his purpose to
eight of his chief confidents, among whom were Don Michael, and the Lord of
Enna, who was afterward Cardinal: and gave them charge, that presently as
soon as V^iiellozzo, Paulo Orsino, the Duke of Gravina, and Oliverotto had met
them, each two of them should get one of them between them: consigning each one
by name to certain two, who should train them along even into Sinigallia, nor
suffer them to part, till they had brought them to the Dukes lodging, and that
they were there taken. He afterward took order that all his Horse and Foot,
which were better than two thousand Horse and ten thousand Foot, should be in
the morning at break of day upon the Metaure, a River some five miles from
Fano, where they should attend him: being then the last day of December, upon
the Metaure with those troops, he causd some two hundred Horse to go before
him, afterward the Foot moved, and after them himself in person, with the
rest of his men at arms. Fano and Sinigallia are two Cities of the Marches,
situate upon the bank of the Adriatike Sea fifteen miles distant the one from
the other: So that he who goes toward Sinigallia, has the Mountains on his
right hand, the feet whereof sometimes are so bounded by the Sea, that between
them and the water there remains but a very small distance, and where they are
most extended, there is not above two miles distance. The City of Sinigallia
from the foot of these Mountains is not much further than a bow-shot, and from
the Sea not above a mile distant: along the side hereof runs a little river,
which washes that part of the walls, which is toward Fano, looking toward the
high way, so that till it come near unto Sinigallia, it runs for a good part
of the way along the Mountains: and being come near up to the river that
passes along by Sinigallia, it turns upon the left hand along the bank
thereof: So that running on for the space of a-bow-shot, it reaches to a
bridge, which passes that river, and stands in front with the gate, that enters
into Sinigallia; not by a right line, but athwart: before the gate there is a
bourg of houses, with a broad place before them, which the bank of the river
shoulders upon one side. So that the Vitelli and Orsini having given order to
attend the Duke, and personally to honor him, the better to give way to his
men, they retired their own into certain Castles, some six miles from
Sinigallia, and had left only Oliverotto in Sinigallia, with his band, which
was some thousand Foot, and a hundred and fifty Horse, which were lodged in the
bourg beforenam'd. Things being thus orderd, Duke Valentine came thence toward
Sinigallia, and when the first head of the Horse troops came up to the bridge,
they passed it not, but making stand, they turned their horse, the one part
toward the river, the other to the open field, and so left a way in the midst,
whereby the infantery pas'd, which without stop entered the Town. Vitellozzo,
Paulo, and the Duke of Gravina upon their mules, accompanied with a few Horse,
went to meet the Duke: and Vitellozzo disarmd having a cloak all lind with
green, being exceeding melancholy, as presaging his own death near at hand,
causd a certain admiration of himself in all, the valor of the man being
well known, and the fortune he had pas'd: and it is said, that when he left
his soldiers to come to Sinigallia, there to meet the Duke, that he did in a
manner take his last leave of them; to his Captains he recommended his house,
and the welfare thereof, and admonished his Nephews, that they should not so
much mind the great fortunes of their Family, as the valor of their Ancestors.
These three then being come up to the Duke, and done their obeissance, were
receivd by him with a cheerful countenance, and presently by those, who had
charge to look to them, taken between them. But when the Duke saw that
Oliverotto was wanting, who had stayed with his men at Sinigallia, and attended
before at the broad place by his lodging, above the river, to keep them in
order, and exercise them: he winked upon Don Michael, to whom the care of
Olivero^to was committed, that he should take such order, that Oliverotto
should not escape him. Whereupon Don Michael rode before, and being come to
Oliverotto, told him, that now it was not a time to hold his men together out
of their lodgings; because then they would be taken from them by the Dukes
Soldiers: and therefore persuaded him to send them to their lodgings, and go
with him to meet the Duke: which when Oliverotto had done, the Duke came, and
having seen him, called him; to whom Oliverotto having made reverence, he joined
in troop with the rest, and entered into Sinigallia, where all dismounting at
the Dukes lodging, and enterd with him into a private chamber, they were held
prisoners to the Duke, who presently got a horseback, and commanded that
Oliverotto and the Orsinies Soldiers should be all rifled. Oliverotto's were
all pillaged, by reason they were near at hand; those that belonged to the
Orsini and Vitelli, being more remote, having before heard of the ruin of
their Masters, had time to get together; where calling to mind the valor and
discipline of the Families of the Orsini and Vitelli, jointly all in one body,
in despite of the country and their enemies power, they saved themselves. But
the Dukes Soldiers not satisfied with the pillage of Oliverotto's Soldiers,
began to sack Sinigallia. And had not the Duke by the death of many, stopd
their insolence, they would utterly have sack it. But night being come, and
all stirs quiet, the Duke thought fit to put Vitellozzo and Oliverotto to
death, and having brought them together, causd them to be strangled. Where
neither of them spoke any thing worthy of their life past: For Vitellozzo
prayed, that supplication should be made to the Pope, to grant him a plenary
Indulgence of all his sins; Oliverotto much lamenting himself, cast all the
fault of the injuries against the Duke on Vitellozzo's back. Paul, and the Duke
of Gravina were kept alive, till the Duke had word, that at Rome the Pope had
laid hold on the Cardinal Orsino, the Archbishop of Florence, and Master
James of the Holy Cross. After which news upon the 18 of January, at the
Castle of Pieve, they also were strangled in the like manner.

FINIS.
The Table of the Chapters in the PRINCE.
Chap. 1. HOw many sorts of Principalities there are, and how many ways they
are attaind to. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of hereditary Principalities. p. 2 Chap. 3. Of
mixed Principalities. p. 4 Chap. 4. Wherefore Darius his Kingdom, taken by
Alexander, rebelled not against his Successors after Alexanders death. p. 23
Chap. 5. In what manner Cities and Principalities are to be governed, which
before they were conquered lived under their own laws. p 30 Chap. 6. Of new
Principalities that are conquered by ones own arms and valor. p. 33 Chap. 7.
Of new Principalities gotten by fortune and other men's forces. p. 41 Chap. 8.
Concerning those who by wicked means have attained to a Principality. p. 61
Chap. 9. Of the Civil Principality. p. 72 Chap. 10. In what manner the forces
of all Principalities ought to be measured. p. 80 Chap. 11. Concerning
Ecclesiastical Principalities. p. 85 Chap. 12. How many sorts of Military
dicipline there be; and touching mercenary ^ouldiers. p. 91 Chap. 13. Of
Auxiliary Soldiers, mixed and natives. p. 102 Chap. 14. What belongs to the
Prince touching military discipline. p. 111 Chap. 15. Of those things in
respect whereof men, and especially Princes are praised or disprays'd. p. 117
Chap. 16. Of Liberality, and Miserableness. p. 122 Chap. 17. Of Cruelty and
Clemency, and whether it is better to be beloved or feared. p. 128 Chap. 18. In
what manner Princes ought to keep their words. p. 135 Chap. 19. That Princes
should take a care not to incur contempt or hatred. p. 145 Chap. 20. Whether
the Citadels and many other things, which Princes make use of, are profitable
or dammageable. p. 169 Chap. 21. How a Prince ought to behave himself to gain
reputation. p. 179 Chap. 22. Touching Princes Secretaries. p. 187 Chap. 23.
That Flatterers are to be avoided. p. 191 Chap. 24. Wherefore the Princes of
Italy have lost their ^tates. p. 198 Chap. 25. How great power Fortune has in
humane affairs, and what means there is to resist it. p. 202 Chap. 26. An
exhortation to free Italy from the Barbarians. p. 212 The life of Castruccio
Castracani of Lucca. p. 223 A Relation of the course taken by the Duke
Valentine, in the murdering of Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto of Fermo, Paul,
and the Duke of Gravita, all of the Family of the Orsini. p. 289
FINIS.

