A CENSVRE ABOUT THE RVLE OF BELIEF PRACTICED BY THE PROTESTANTS Written in
Latin by the most Reverend Father VALERIAN MAGNI OF MILAN of the order of the
Minors, of the Seraphical S. Francis, named Capucins.

And translated into English by R. Q. Gentleman.

Matthew cap. 18. If he hear not the Church as let him be to thee as the
heathen and the Publican.

printer's or publisher's device of Laurence Kellam (?)

Printed at Doway, By LAVRENCE KELLAM, at the sign of the holy Lamb. 1634.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
ALBEIT that all Christians who now inhabit the world believe in God, believe
in Jesus Christ, believe the holy scriptures, yet they be severed into two
parts. The one doubts not to receive the sense of the sacred text as the
Church does propound and teach, and heereto they conform their faith: And
these be calde Catholics. The other part supposing the authority of the
Church to be fallible and obnoxious to errors, teaches that each Christian may,
yea ought in matter concerning faith censure the doctrine of the whole church
by the sacred scriptures, and so either receive or refuse the same: and these,
ever were and are now at this present, branded with the name of heretics.

which error in regard that many learned divines have clearlie confuted and
confounded both by the authority of sacred Scriptures as also by that of
councels, fathers and other arguments tending to the purpose; I intend not in
such a sense to debate this question, but only to note and set down what
absurdities do necessarily ensew the said rule of belief which misbeleeuing
Christians as Lutherans Protestants Puritans etc. have forged to them selves in
the shopp of their self conceit to found their faith there-vpon; which howbeit
many have performed before me, yet (if I be not mistaken) no one, has on set
purpose treated of the same; Therefore I deem not my labor ill spent (though
otherwise busied in affairs of imporrance) to imparte time to this work which
I will do in as few words as may be; And this (as all things else) for the
honor and glory of our Savior Christ and his most holy mother, to whom (not
unmindful of their benefitts) I have vowed, whatsoever I set down in
writing, though near someane and small. Fare well freindly reader and
recommend me in thy prayres to God.

APPROBATIO.
TRactatus iste, de regula fidei, scriptus primo Latin a venerabili viro, P.
Valeriano Magni Mediolanensi, Ordinis Sancti, Capucinorum, and in idioma
Anglicanum fideliter translatus, nihil habet a fide, bonisque moribus dissonum,
sed dignissimus est qui typis edatur ad institutionem eorum, qui diligunt viam
veritatis. Ita saluo semper superiorum iudicio censebam.

10. Iunij. 1634. F. Leander de S. Martino Sacrae Theologiae Doctor,
Congregationis Angliae Benedictinorum Prases Generalis, and linguae Sanctae in
Academia Duacena Regius Professor.

THE FIRST CHAPTER. The question is propounded about the rule of belief.
A RVLE is an instrument according to which those that draw lines do
necessarily draw the^ straighte, which translated to Religion, yt is termed
the rule of belief, which christians following can not err in Matters of
belief. And from this controversy about the rule of belief all other
controversies concerning matter of faith, which are between catholics and not
catholics, seem to be deriuede, which if it were but once well agreed upon,
all christians might be reconciled together, and united in one true faith, for
all Christians as well catholics as not Catholics, though in many points
they disagree from each other, yet in some they also agree, even in this matter
it self about the rule of belief, which I will by order set down.

First, all do jointly affirm that the written word of God is true and
infallible.

2. That who so propounds any doctrine contrary to the sacred scriptures, is
in no wise to be credited, be he man or Angel, S. Paul, or S. Gabriel.

3. That all and each one, is undoubtedly to be believed in matter of faith, if
his doctrine disagree not from the word of God.

4. That no man (be he who he will) can attain to the true sense of sacred
writ, except he be inwardly enlightened and taught by the holy ghost.

5. No man can disagree from the word of God if he be inwardly enlightened and
taught by the holy Ghost.

Seeing then, that not only Catholics but also all sorts of Christians of
those that be no Catholics, conspire in the verity of these. 5.
propositions, nor is there any one of so self an opinion that can call the same
in doubt: It rests we discuss whom among all these the holy ghost does
certainly and infallibly assist, that they err not in the expounding of the
true sense of the sacred scripture.

There be two opinions of Christians now adays that strive about this question.

The one is of those who certainly and without doubt do believe that the
church does propound unto the Christian world the true sense of the sacred
scripture: and these that do thus believe, be caled Catholics. The other is
of those sects of Christians each one of which does a part and separatly by
himself consult the holy ghost out of the scriptures, and so censure what
doctrine does in matter of faith consent to the word of God, and what does
dissent from it: and these are and ever were termed and held of Catholics for
heretics, And of these sorts of Christians there are at this present sundry
sorts whereof the chief are Lutherans, Caluenists, Protestants, Anabaptists
etc. All which be again subdivided and minced into many petty sects whose
names for brevity sake I omit; But for as much as all these forenamed
Christians consent in this opinion that they make it the rule of their faith to
consult the holy ghost out of the bible consisting of the old and the new
testament we will hereafter to include them all, grace them with the title of
Biblists.

The Catholics distinguish the church into two parts, whereof the one,
contains pastors, and the other sheep, They, be termed Bishops, these, al
other faithful believers.

The jurisdictions of Bishops in the Catholic church, are subordinated, for
many Bishops be under one Archbishop, many Archbishops under one patriarch,
among whom the Bishop of Room bears the primacie, and al these may be
considered either each one apart, or altogether as they be lawfully assembled in
a general council, But a general council is considered as confirmed or not
confirmed by the Bishop of Room.

This then is the sentence of al Catholics, That the Bishop of Room together
with a general council, or a general council confirmed by the Bishop of
Room, has two prerogatives. The first is, that the holy ghost does infallibly
assist the same, in so much that it is impossible that it dissent from the
sacred scriptures in deciding and propounding doctrine of belief. The other
is, that the said general council have received a supreme authority from
Jesus Christ to teach in his church, and consequently to excommunicate and
anathematize as heretics, all and each of those, who in matters aperteining to
faith shall dare to deny or call in doubt any of the decrees of the said
general council which concern faith.

But, is it to be noted, that when a general council consulteth the holy
ghost about the true sense of sacred scripture, it does not only cite to the
said council, all Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarcks, but also the Embassadores
of Christian Princes and many times even kings and Emperors themselves, also
they call thertoe the learned Divines that be extant at that time in the
Christian world: and if any masters of heresy be living, they have free
permission to come: And When al these be thus assembled in the name of Christ,
they proclaim public fasts and praires to be held, not only in the general
council it self, but also throughout all the Christian world, to the end that
the whole church jointly together may implore the assistance of the holy ghost
in a matter so important. Then they begin to propound the difficulties which be
in debate about the sense of the sacred text; each one has free liberty to
speak and dispute, not only Bishops but also divines of inferior quality, and
not only Catholics, but also heretics may propound their opinion and freely
controuert the same: All which diversity of sentences be thoroughly discussed,
not in a confused manner, but at leisure and in many sessions, and no small
space of time, while all the whole senate of Christian princes or their legates
be present behoulding all, and consenting to what passes. Lastly after a long
inquisition made when the fathers of the council and the Bishop of Room do
uniformly consent and subscribe to such and such articles in matter of faith,
the said decrees be presently intimated to the universal church and the whole
Christian world; and all and each of those who dare to deny or call in doubt
the same be anathematized, be they kings or Emperors: which being once done
even those fathers of the council be obliged under the pain of an anatheme to
admit those decrees concerning faith, neither is it lawful for any man to
call in question the same, no not the pope himself. And this authority of the
church, as it is set down, all Catholics do certainly believe to be
infallible and the true rule of belief; whence it comes that this is a
common proposition among Catholics believe all that which the holy mother
church believes. But now let us see how Biblists square their rule of belief.

They grant indeed that there were never wanting in any age of the church some
few among Christians who by the assistance of the holy ghost did gather out of
the scriptures the true and sinceare doctrine of Christ, and these made the
church, (say they) in every age, hence they deduce and acknowledge that the true
church of Christ cannot err in faith: nevertheless it never was or will be, that
this true church of the biblists ever made or will make any decree concerning
matter of faith, and therefore the church was never assembled in any general
council to which it apperteined to discern infalliby and decide without
error, which is the true doctrine of Christ, which all other Christians are
undoubtedly to hold and profess without any farther inquisition: And upon this
maxim of theirs, they do most constantly avouch that all Christians, whether
considered asunder or as assembled in a general council, may be forsaken of
the holy ghost and disagree from the scripture in doctrine of faith, and so
consequently err in faith, yet this withal, they aledg that none can be
abandoned of the holy ghost in examining and judging of doctrines of faith out
of their Bible, if he as he ought to do, devoutly inuoke the grace of the holy
ghost.

Now they (say the Biblists) who be inwardly enlightened and taught by the holy
ghost, do certainly and infallibly gather and know the same, by certain
inward peculiar motions, by which their minds be stirred up by the holy ghost,
in respect that he witnesses to their spirit that they be the children of God,
whose annointment does teach them all truth; yet herein the Biblists do deal
somewhat modestly; in that, though illuminate and taught by God they think
themselves to have no right nor jurisdiction to oblige other Christians to
accept that there doctrine which out of the bible each one of them judges to be
true by inspiration of the holy ghost, albeit in his heart he damneth and
condemns al other doctrines which does disagree from that doctrine of his,
which he surmiseth to be only conform to holy writ. The reason he assigns
is this; That no man is to be trusted in matter of faith, seeing that every man
may err, but if some one chance not to err, this proceeds of an inward
assistance of the holy ghost, and is not conspicuous to any one save to him
that has it, neither can any man certainly affirm this or that man to be
inwardly illuminated and taught by the holy ghost save he only who receives
that grace Therefore if a Biblist be demanded wherefore he believes that IHESVS
OF NAZARETH is the son of God? He will answer. Because that God has revealed
it; Whence have thou this? He will answer? out of the bible. How know thou
that this is the sense of the bible? He will answer. The holy ghost taught me
so. How know thou that he who taught the, was the holy ghost? He will
answer. My conscience witnesses so much. I know very well that the annointmens
and illustration which I inwardly perceive in my mind is a supernatural
operation of the holy ghost. Thus reply those biblists who as yet retain some
glimps and shadow of faith. Yet there be very many especialy Lutherans and
Protestants that dare condemn no belief, though they constantly believe that
there is no Purgatory and that saints be not to be prayed unto etc. And know
the same by the holy ghost witnessing it unto their consciences out of the
bible, yet they dare not attach those of error who certainly affirm that
their is a Purgatory and that saints be to be praid unto etc. These the sounder
sort of biblists repute as woodcocks and block-heddish asses, and so I pass
them.

The question then which we are to discuss is in this manner to be propounded,
whether the holy ghost does rather infallibly decide the true doctrine of
faith from that which is false by general counsels lawfully assembled
expounding the scriptures, or else by each Christian a part, caling upon and
consultinge the holy ghost out of his bible.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. The opinion of the Biblists is propounded and severed into
certain propositions.
MY meaning is not in this treatise to define this question about the rule of
belief, but only to deduce certain consequences necessarily ensewing on the
opinion of the Biblists, whose absurdity and insufficiency being perceived we
may judge what manner of religion they have so weakly founded: and to what
impossibilities they be bound by the belief of their sect, for as touching the
Catholic rule of belief, I will make no mention of the same, it being held
of no valuation by the biblists.

But to the end the consequences I am to deduce out of the antecedents of the
biblists, may be more evident; I will set down those antecedents divided into
these subsequent propositions, that it may manifestly appear to the view of
every biblists eye, how sincearlie and purely I treat the question.

Propositions.
1. ALl Christians in general and particular may err in faith.

2. All counsels yea the pastors of the whole church of Christ assembled in a
general council and approved by the bishop of Room may err in their decrees
about faith.

3. Each Christian if he call upon the holy ghost as he ought to do, m^^ examine
the doctrine of all men whom soever without error, confronteing the same with
the scriptures, and so censure of himself whether the said doctrine of what
soever men, even of general counsels do agree with the bible or disagre from
it, and then accept or reject the feign.

4. There is no other way to know for certain which is the truth in matter of
faith then by the means of praire to consult the holy ghost out of the bible.

But in all the subsequent consequences which are to be deduced out of these
propositions of the biblists, we require that they grant us this one assertion
to wit.

5. That Christian faith excludes all doubts and is certain and infallible.

But we are here to note by the way, that the biblists are wont to moderate
the first propositions, for they affirm, that none cann err in faith if he
agree with the sacred scripture: also, that none can disagree from the sacred
scripture, if the holy ghost do assist him; they auerr moreover that none can
be forsaken by the holy ghost, if he call upon him as he ought to do, but for
as much as they avouch that it may fall out, that some one may not call upon the
holy ghost as he ought to do, consequently it may follow that all and each one
may be abandoned of the holy ghost and so also consequently disagree from the
bible, and err in faith.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Necessary consequences deduced out of the precedent
propositions, out of which it is evident what a task each biblist is tied unto.
Seeing then that this is a biblist task to consult the holy ghost out of the
scriptures, for censuring of doctrines which apperteine to faith, yt makes much
to the purpose to set down how great a charge this is which they take upon
them and how far it extends, lest in so weighty a business as is this of
eternal salvation, inconsideration plunge them into perdition.

The first consequence.
ALl Christians and general councels may err in faith. Therefore no Christian
ought in matter of faith to believe any man or council.

Proof.
THe consequence I prove thus. Because true and certain faith ought to leave
it self on an infallible authority, but the authority of all men and
counsels is supposed by the biblists to be subject to errors. Therefore in this
case no men ought to be believed. Nor does it cut the sinews of the
consequence to reply, That men and generals council be to be believed so far
as their doctrine does concord to the scriptures, for seeing that they may also
disagree from the same, the case becomes doubtful and then the holy ghost is
to be consulted out of the Bible to the end we may certainly know, whether
they agree to the word of God or disagre from the same; for, that this doctrine
consents to the bible or dissenteth from it, apperteineth not to the credence
of men bur to the holy ghost inwardly teaching us out of the bible what we are
to believe.

The Second consequence.
THere is no other means for certainly to know which is the truth in matter
of faith, then by way of devout prayres to consult the holy ghost out of the
bible. Therefore no Christian can believe the articles of faith except by a
special praire he first consult the holy ghost out of the bible, whether those
articles of faith be conform to the same or no?

Proof.
THe consequence is clear, because the doctrine of all Christians about
matters of faith, be they considered several or assembled, can not be iudiged
to be either true or false if praire be not first made to consult the holy
ghost out of the bible, neither does the holy ghost otherwise teach Christians
the truth, save out of the bible, and therefore it is to be concluded according
to this biblist rule, that no Christian can believe the articles of faith if he
do not first consult the holy ghost about the same, out of the scripture by a
preuiall praire made to that effect.

Nor does it in ualidate the consequence to reply, that they credit their
ministers propounding unto them the word of God or doctrine glossed out of the
bible, for that minister may err in faith, and there fore he that hears his
doctrine is bound in conscience ere he believe the same to consult the holy
ghost by praire out of the scripture to know wether it agree with the word of
God or not.

The Third consequence.
NO Christian can believe the articles of faith, except by a preuial praire he
council the holy ghost out of the scripture. Therefore those Biblists who be
under age or want leisure or means to reed the bible, or can not read at
all, or can get no bible to reed and consult the holy ghost there out, can
not have any true faith.

Proof.
THis consequence can not be improued because a biblist admits, no other
rule of belief save this of consulting the holy ghost out of his bible. Nor is
it to the purpose to reply that they have their parsons whose charge is to
expound them the word of God, for these may be deceived and deceive; wherefore
there doctrine is first to be examined by euere Christian whether it agree to
the word of God or not, ere he consent to the same which is to be done in
consulting the holy ghost out of the bible by prayres first made as biblists
say.

The Fourth consequence.
ALl Christian and general counsels may err in faith (Say the Biblists.)
Therefore all Christians and general councels might also have erred in there
decrees about the Canon of the sacred books of the Bible, which granted it
may be doubted whether that the biblist have the true scriptures or no.

Proof.
THe consequence is aparant, for the decree about the Canon of sacred books
concerns matter of faith, yea the waightiest among all the matters of faith.
Therefore the church might have erred when in the year of our lord 494. she
made a decree in the council held at Room of 70 Bishops under Pope Gelasius
the first, touching the canon of canonical books of both testaments, and those
that the said council censured for Apocrifa were expelled from the number of
the books of the bible, the catalogue of which is as follows.

Books censured for Apocrifa in the council of Room.
THe journey of S. Petter the Apostle in 8. books, said to be written by S.
Clement. Apocrifa. The acs of S. Andrew the Apostle. Apocrifa. The acs written
in the name of S. Thomas. Apocrifa. The acs written in the name of S. Peeter.
Apocrifa. The acs written in the name of S. Philip. Apocrifa. The gospel
written in the name of Taddeus the Apostle. Apoc. The gospel written in the
name of S. Peter. Apocrifa. The gospel written in the name of S Matthias
Apocrifa. The gospel writ. in the name of Barnabas. Apocrifa. The gospel
written in the name of James the less. Apocrifa. The gospel written in the name
of S. Andrew. Apocrifa. The gospel written in the name of S. Thomas which the
Manicheans use. Apocrifa. The gospel written in the name of S. Bartholomew the
Apostle. Apocrifa. The gospel which Lucian falsified. Apocrifa. The infancy of
our Savior. Apocrifa. The gospel which Hesychius falsified. Apocrifa. The
book entitled Pastor. Apocrifa. The book of the birth of our Savior; of his
mother and her midwife. Apocrifa. All those books which were set out by
Leucius the disciple of the devil. Apocrifa. The book caled the foundation;
and an other caled the treasure, both. Apocrifa. The book of the Genesis of
the daughters of Adam, and an other named the nephew, both. Apocrifa. The
centimetrum of Christ compiled of Virgill verses. Apocri. The Book of Proverbs
written by heretics and set out under the name of S. Sixtus. Apocrifa. The
acs of S. Paul the Apostle and Tecla. Apocrifa. The revelation named of S.
Paul. Apocrifa. An other revelation under the name of S. Thomas, and a third
under the name of S. Steven, and a book named the Assumption of our Lady, and
an other caled the Testament, al. Apocrifa. The book named the penance of
Adam, and an other caled the penance of Origin, and a third caled the penance
of S. Cyprian. Apocrifa. The book under the name ogia the giant, whom the
heretics feign to have fought with a dragon after the flood. Apocr. The book
caled the Apostles lotts. Apocrifa. The book caled the penance of Iannes and
Mambres. Apocri. The book caled the praise of the Apostles. Apocrifa.
And this decree about the canon of the holy scriptures, was not only received
by particular men, but even all subsequent general counsels did approve and
accept the same, all which if they could err in matter of faith, could also err
in this their decree about canonical scripture, and so it were to be doubted
whether they condemned for Apocrifa any ghospel that were sacred, or admitted
those that were false for books of God; which reason if the biblists did well
weigh they Would find themselves marueloussie pussed about their rule of faith,
and in doubt whether that those scriptures Which they now at this present have,
be true or false, sacred or profane, canonical or Apocrifa.

The fifth consequence.
THe fathers and councels could err in their decree about canonical scriptures
as the biblists will have it. Therefore no biblist can certainly knoW, whether
that those books contained in their bibles be made by the holy ghost or not:
except they first consult the holy ghost out of the bible touching this
question, and so each one determine by his private spirit, which books in the
scripture were made by God, and which were not.

Proof.
BEcause for as much as this question is about the word of God it does most of
all apperteine to faith, and therefore can not be decided, except by a preuial
praire the holy ghost be first consulted out of the bible about the same; Nor
is it enough to answer as many bibilsts do, That some books of scripture are
held to have been dictated by the holy ghost in the opinion of all men, for
all men may err as biblists say; besides all christians do not consent in one
opinion about canonical scriptures; for the catholics receive many books of
scripture for canonical which the protestans repute for Apocrifa; many also
the protestants receive which Luther and his compannions improve, raze and
deny to be sacred scripture; the like is of other christians, moreover the
versions and editions of bibles are diverse and have diffrent senses whereon
great difficulties and contentions do arise even in matter of faith.

The sixth consequence.
NO Biblists can certainly know whether that those books contained in their
bibles be dictated by the holy ghost, except by a preuiall praire he first
consult the holy ghost touching this question, which consulting must be
fetched from the bible, wherefore according to their own rule each biblist is
obliged under the pain of eternal damnation to determine this great and
difficile question by pray^ng and consulting the holy ghost, and not rely on
their ministers, or their churches.

Proof.
FOr they admitting no other rule of belief save this of consulting the holy
ghost out of the written word of God, seeing that faith is necessary to shunn
eternal damnation, it most evidently follows that each biblist is bound under
pain of eternal damnation to consult the holy ghost out of the bible to know
whether those books contained in the same were dictated by the holy ghost or
not, else he cannot under stand out of the said scriptures what he is bound to
believe, if he doubt whether those books contained in the bible be canonical
or not.

The seventh consequence.
Each biblist is bound under the pain of eternal damnation, to consult the
holy ghost out of scripture by a preuiall praire whether all and each of those
books contained in the bible be dictated by the holy ghost. Therefore each
biblist is bound under pain of eternal damnation to reed over all the books
of the bible and to thoroughly examine them together with the diverse editions of
the said bibles and manifold versions out of the hebrew, greek, latin, and
english, and to conferr them together with great diligence and pains, and
after all this to give sentence their upon which are canonical books and
which are Apocrifa, which versions be true, and which corrupt to the end he may
gather there out all the true articles of his faith without error; and he who
among the bests of Biblists omitteth to do all this, is in a continual state
of damnation.

Proof.
FOr all these be necessary to determine this great question; except the holy
ghost do teach them by some other means then out of the bible, in what and
how many books the written word of God is contained, and which versions and
editions be true and authentical, and which not. But we have already seen
that the sentence of the Biblists is, That the holy ghost is so far forth the
judge of the controversies of faith, that he does not judge of the same nor teach
the Biblists otherwise then out of the written word of God, which according to
the doctrine of the Biblists, is the sole rule of the judge of controversies
about faith and religion.

The eight consequence.
NO Biblists can believe the articles of faith, except he do first by praire
consult the holy ghost out of the bible. Therefore every protestant is obliged
under the pain of eternal death, to consult the holy ghost by prair out of
the bible concerning all those things, which appertain to the in integrity of
faith.

Proof.
BEcause Biblists will have no other rule of belief then this. To consult the
holy hhost out of the bible: in regard they hold that all men and general
counsels may err, wherefore seeing that true faith is absolutely necessary to
obtain eternal life, and shunn eternal death; it evidently follows, that
all Biblists according to their own rule are oblidged under the pain of
eternal death, to consult the holy ghost out of the scripture, touching all
things which appertein to the integrity of their faith, else they can not be
saved.

The Ninth consequence.
EVery Biblists according to his rule of faith, is obliged under the pain of
eternal damnation to council the holy ghost out of the bible, touching all
those articles which apperteine to the integrity of faith. Therefore each
Biblist is bound under the pain of eternal damnation haueing first prayed and
councelled the holy ghost out of his Bible to decide all controversies of
religion which be in dispute; as touching the notes of the true church,
ecclesisticall jurisdiction, The primacie of the Roman Bishop, traditions, the
number of sacraments, The possibility of Keeping the law, justification, and
innumerable others which were over long to rehearse.

Proof.
FOr all these (as is evident) do apperteine to the integrity of faith.
Neither does it help the Biblists cause to say, That they be taught the same
by their ministers, or reed them in their Cathechismies, or learn them out of
the doctrine of their churches, or have them set down in the institutions of
Calvin or in the treatises of Luther and his compannions. For Luther, Calvin,
doctors, ministers, churches, may disagree from the sacred scriptures and err
in faith, and therefore are not certainly to be believed, but only so far
forth to be credited, as their doctrine agrees with the scriptures. And
therefore each Biblist, is bound to council the holy ghost out of the
scriptures, to know whether or no such doctrine as they here to be preached
and taught or read in Cathechismies, or is delivered them by their churches be
agreeable to the written word of God, or disagreable the-reto and so decide the
same by their private spirit ere they believe, else it is impossible for a
biblist to have any true faith.

The tenth consequence.
ALl Biblists be bound under the pain of eternal damnation having first
prayed, to consult the holy ghost out of their bible, about the number,
version, and edition of the sacred books of both testaments; Also about all
controversies which concern the integrity of faith. Therefore all in general,
men and weomen, doctors and idiots of what condition soever they be, if they
be come to the adg of discretion and have sufficient sense and reason, are
bound (conform to this Biblists doctrine) under the pain of eternal
damnation, To consult the holy ghost out of their bible, touching the number,
versions, editions, and integrity of the sacred books of either testament, as
also touching all controversies, which apperteine to the integrity of faith
all which how impossible it is to perform, each judicious biblist may perceive,
and by consequenc what an absurd rule they have chosen for to prove true faith
by.

Proof.
BEcause both men and women of what condition soever, if they be come to the
years of discretion, are bound under the pain of eternal damnation to have
true faith, which true faith for to have, their is no other rule as Biblists
say, then by a preuial praire to consult the holy ghost out of the Bible.
Neither does it help the Biblists to say, that every Christian, may conceive
true faith by hearing of a minister preach, or in reeding of their catechism,
for these may err as biblists say, and therefore the holy ghost is to be
consulted out of the scripture, to the end they may undoubtedly know, whether
that the doctrine of their ministers, cathecismies and churches, do agree to
the written word of God, or disagree from the same.

The eleventh consequence.
ALl Biblists of What sex and condition soever, if they be arrived to the use of
discretion, or have their wits, are bound under the pain of eternal
damnation, to council the holy ghost out of the bible, touching the number,
integrity, version, and edition, of the sacred books of both testame^ts, as
also concerning all controversies which apperteine to the integrity of faith.
Therefore all Christians of what sex and condition soever they be, if come to
the use of discretion, and are sound in their wits are bound (conform to this
biblists rule) under the pain of eternal damnation to decide no less, a list
of controversies apperteining to religion, then the whole church of Christ,
has decided, in so many general councels these 1500. years, from the Apostes
time till this age of ours.

Proof.
FOr it has hethertoe been disputed upon controversies of religion more then
these 1500. years, and decided in general council, which articles were
catholic and which heretical, what doctrine apperteined to faith and what
not, All which, the Biblists auouching that the church can err and general
councels can err, do manifestly call into doubt, and therefore all and each of
them are oblidged to peruse the said doctrine and conferr it with their bibles,
that they may by the consultation of the holy ghost in the scriptures, sever
truth from falsitie, to embrace that and reject this, as their private spirit
suggesteth unto them.

And out of these consequences, each Biblist may perceive what a burhen he
lays on his back, and to what impossibilities he windeth himself, in leaving
the authority of the church, and reliing on his own private spirit in
expounding of the scriptures, though the scripture contrariewise does tell us
in the epistle of S. Peeter, that no scripture is to be declared by private
interpretation.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. Other consequences be deduced where by it may evidently
appear what means and helps each Biblist may have to ease him of this
burden and dischardge his duties.
I Will here omit to consider what wit, judgment, learning, laisure, and
other humane helps each Biblist may have to dischardge this task taken upon
him of what sex, age, or condition soever he may be, without which helps it is
not possible to consult the holy ghost out of the bible, nor decide all those
controversies which apperteine to the integrity of faith, which have been
disputed upon these 1500. years, and decided by the church; Let each of them
judge a part by himself what wit, judgment laisure, learning, etc. he may have
to fulfill this task and dischardge his duty, in the mean time I will
suppose that each biblist has wit learning leisure and books sufficient for
this purpose: only noW I intend to inquire, what certain and infallible
foundation of faith the Biblists may have out of this their rule of belief.

The first consequence.
NO Biblist has any other rule of belief save his private spirit consultinge
the holy ghost out of the scripture what he is bound to believe in matter of
faith. Therefore the faith of the Biblists leans on three foundations, to
wit,, on praire, on the holy ghost, and on the sacred text of the bible; In so
much that the holy ghost is the judge of all the controversies of faith. The
bible is the rule with out which that judge does not teach us, in matter of
faith; And praire is the condition with out which the holy ghost does not
certainly instruct us out of the bible. This consequence needs no proof
being evident of it self by grant of the very Protestants themselves and al
other Biblists Lutherans, Puritans, Anabaptists etc.

The Second consequence.
THe rule of belief is no other (say the Biblists) then by praire to consult
the holy ghost out of the bible. Therefore those supernatural motions which
the holy ghost stirs up in the minds of the Biblists consultinge him by
praire out of the scriptures, are a sure argument whence they certainly gather
that they be taught by the holy ghost the true sense of the bible.

Proof.
FOr albeit the certainty of faith be founded on the authority of God
revealing the same, neuerttheles that this bible conteines the pure word of
God, and that this be the pure and true interpretation of the said bible no man
can certainly and infallibly know, except that the holy ghost give testimony
unto him out of the said bible, concerning the same, which testimony (as
biblists will) is either a supernatural illumination or some such like divine
motion of our minds, by which each one may certainly and infallibly know that
the holy ghost does inwardly teach him out of the holy scripture. Neither does
it infringe this consequence, what some Biblists say, That the text is clear
enough of it self, and needs no gloss nor interpretation, or, that one text
does interprett the other; for if this were so, then the presupposed and
granted necessity of an inward annointement of the holy ghost in the minds
of the biblists, which does necessarily include a supernatural and divine
motion in their souls, whereby the spirit of God does witness unto their spirit,
that such a sense of the text, which their spirit so conceaueth is most true,
certain, and infallible, is quite taken away and annulled. It is moreover most
ridiculous and senceles to say, the holy scriptures have a sense so clear that
each biblist may of himself conceive and understand the same, when as more then
these 1500. years the whole world has been busied about nothing so much, as
in disputing about and debating which is the true sense of the sacred
scriptures, and even yet the same is in dispute among Christians, and will be
disputed of, till the day of doom. yea even amoung the Biblists themselves,
there be deep and deadly debates about the sense of the scripture, which have
minced them into many sects each contradicting the other that they resemble the
foxes of Sampson, who tied all by the talles of their private spirit have their
heads of opinions in matters of faith looking contrary ways, which Surely
could not happen to them, if the text of the bible were so clear that it
needed no interpretation, or that the holy ghost taught them out of the
scripture, which is the true sense of the same in regard, that the holy ghost
is not a spirit of dissension, but of concord and peace; so that this is but a
vain excuse to say, that the scripture is so easy that each idiott may
understand the meaning of it; neither does it further the Biblists cause.

The Third consequence.
THat supernatural motion of the holy ghost, enlightening the minds of the
Biblists consultinge by praire the holy ghost out of the scripture, is an
argument, whence they do certainly and infallibly draw, that the holy ghost
does inwardly teach them the true sense of the sacred scriptures. Therefore
those motions ought to be certain, doubtless, and altogether divine and so free
from error, that each idiott woman or man may dare, yea is bound in conscience
to believe, under pain of eternal damnation that he is more certainly taught
out of sacred writ by the holy ghost to discern true doctrine from that which
is false, then were all the Pastors of the whole church of Christ the space of
a 1500. years, though gathered together in a general council approved by the
Bishop of Room.

Proof.
BEcause each Biblist (as I said) of what age sex, or condition soever, (save
those that are not come to the use of discretion or Want judgment) is bound
under pain of eternal damnation, to consult the holy ghost out of the bible,
whether the decrees of the whole church gathered together in so many general
councels, do agree to the written word of God, or disagree from the same.

Neither is it enough to answer (as many biblists do) that a general council
can not err if it agree with the written word of God; for the Biblists say,
that it may also disagree from the same, and therefore each Christian ought to
consult the holy ghost out of the bible, whether that doctrine of council or
church, does agree thereto, or disagree there from, ere he believe the same.

Nor makes it to the purpose that many Biblists approve the first 4. general
counsels, though many do not approve them, as Puritans Anabaptists etc. For
the reason why they approve these counsels is because they (as they say)
haueing consulted the holy ghost out of the bible, censure them not to disagree
from the written word of God, neither is it of less authority to approve
counsels out of the word of God, then to reprove and reject the same. For the
cause why Biblists approve the first 4. general councels, is not for any
respect which they have to the said general counsels as if they could not err
in faith, but for the testimony of the holy ghost whose wonder full and divine
motions each biblist does so feel in his soul, that he does infallibly confess
himself to be taught by the holy ghost when out of the book of the bible, he
judges that the said 4. general counsels concord with the scriptures.

The Fourth consequence.
THe motion which God makes in the hearts of the biblists consultinge the holy
ghost out of the scriptures, is certainly and undoubtedly divine, say they, so
that each biblist is bound under pain of eternal damnation to believe most
constantly that he is more surely and truly taught by the holy ghost, then all the pastors of the whole church assembled together in a general council,
approved by the Bishop of Room. Therefore the Biblists do over much presume on
the holy ghost.

Proof.
I Prove my consequence by a comparison and antithesis which may be made
between a Biblist and a general council, which I suppose to be celebrated in
the manner before rehearsed by me. When a controversy is moved amoung
Catholics about any weighty matter concerning faith and that they perilously
begin to divide themselves into sects; forthwith a general council is caled
of all bishops, archbishops and patriarchs of the whole church; princes also
do send thither the most learned divines that be in all their dominions; and
Princes, kings and Emperors, do either come in person or send their
Ambassadors, and all these be gathered together in the name of Christ.

Moreover each Bishop in his diocese and the Pope throughout the Christian
world-doe give order that public prayres and supplications together with
fasts be made, to the end that the holy ghost thus consulted would assist the
fathers thus assembled in a general council, that they may certainly and
infallibly decide the truth; The fathers also of the council do labor all
they cann by prayres, fasts, and holy conversation, to obtein the same
assistance of the holy ghost. And so did the fathers of the holy Synod of
Trente as appears in their decree made and to be read in the second section
of that council.

And all that great preparation wherein the whole Christian world was then
busied tendes to no other end, then that the Catholic faith might be keept
pure, spotles, and sure, and that no error might creep in about the exposition
of any sacred text of scripture; and in these examinations of doctrines, the
said council of Trente did not spend an hour a day and so end, but they
prolonged the same many months, and this by most ordinated sessions,
disputations, conferences, and continual invocation of the holy ghost, by
which means the fathers of the council did at length obtain their wisshed
desire, and happily concluding, each one set his hand and subscribed to the
decrees made in matter of faith, pronouncing an anatheme against all those who
were so bold to gain say their decrees established by them and confirmed by
the authority of the Bishop of Room.

Now then, having well considered the manner in which general councels do
proceed in deciding controversies of faith, let us compare a Biblist poring
upon his Bible, to a general council of the church, to discern the
difference.

This Biblist is one single man, but the fathers of the council be many in
number.

This Biblist is a sheep, that is not a Bishop; the fathers of the council
Bishops and Pastors.

This Biblist prays all alone, all that be at the council, yea the whole
Christian world pray for it.

This Biblist prays priuatlie; for the fathers of the council, the whole
Christian world make public prayers, fasts, and supplications.

This Biblist may be some idiott, clown, oysterwife or coster mongers maid,
they of the council are the most learned divines that be in all the Christian
world.

This Biblist turns over his bible and conferreth some one or two texts of
scripture together with other text of scripture. These fathers of the council,
after a long exercise in study of the holy scriptures, after a number of
public and private disputatio^s about religion where in they have been
busied; after many sessions held concerning matters of faith, after many
devout prayres made to obtain the grace of the holy ghost, may seem to have
used al diligence possible to obtain the true sense and meaning of the holy
ghost in the scripture.

Lastly this biblist does only decide out of the bible what he ought to
believe; but the fathers of the council as judges pronounce an anatheme
against all those who believe otherwise then they have decreed.

And this comparison is only made between one Biblist and one general
council but what might be deemed if we should oppose one Biblist, to wit a
cobbler or country fellow (to omit ministers) to all the general counsels
that have been celebrated in the church of Christ, or to those only which have
been held from the year 456. after the council of Calcedon which was the
forth oecumenicall council, and this in behalf of those Biblists that received
the first 4. counsels, when I say we shall have compared one silly Biblist to
all these counsels, who dares to condemn them all of errors, and auouche
withal that the holy ghost has given him more light then to al those
multitudes of holy fathers, and that he more truly conceiueth the mind of the
holy ghost in the Bible then all those general counsels did, may we not say
(to speak most modestly) that this Biblist is impudent, arrogant and proud
and that he does toe much presume on the assistance of the holy ghost. Nor does
it weaken the conscquence, that not one alone but an innumerable many of
Biblist do reject all general counsels as contrary to the sacred scripture;
for no Biblist foundeth his faith on any man's auouchment, They indeed hear
what they teach, but believe not till they have consulted the holy ghost out
of the scripture whether that doctrine agree with the same or not. And there
fore each Biblist conform to his rule of faith, does not judge of doctrine for
the authotitie and number of his companions, but of the presumption he has
that the holy ghost does infallibly assist him, and for this reason is moved
to condemn all general counsels held since the year of our Lord 456. even
to this day, yea the purer sort of Biblists improoue, reject, condemn, all
councels celebrated in the Catholic church since the Apostles age, and each of
them is not asshamed every moment to judge and condemn the whole Christian
world in all ages of errors in matter of doctrine apperteining to faith,
because it squareth not, to their fantasy, and can a greater presumption then
this be imagined?

To conclude then, we may perceive out of these consequences, that the sole
fundation where upon the Biblists ground the certainty of their faith: to be
certain motions which they say the holy ghost makes in their minds, which
causes them infallibly to believe that they be taught by the holy ghost out of
the scripture; But what a manner of motion or annointment this is, which the
Biblists presume to proceed of the holy ghost, we may in some sort have
coniectured out of the foregoing consequences.

Seeing then that each Biblist has taken upon him such a heavy burden and
weighty charge as to be bound upon pain of eternal damnation to decide all
controversies apperteining to the integrity of faith; They have only two
helps for the discharging of their duties, to wit the Bible and praire,
whence they feign to fetch the holy ghost who sitting in each Biblists mind as
on a bench, does judge of all doctrines and Bibles whose sentence the Biblists
do most certainly and infallibly feel in their souls so clearly
pronounced, that they had rather believe that the holy ghost forsook al
counsels, and fathers, all doctors and pastors, yea the whole church for a
1500. years then that they be forsaken of the holy ghost in censuring of
doctrines. And can a greater arrogancy, or more hautie pride and abominable
presumption be devised or imagined then this? and yet even heerto the Biblists
be amounted, if they pass not the line.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Other necessary consequences deduced, whence it may
appear, what manner of church that of Christians is assembled together, if it
be compacted as the Biblists rule of beelefe would have it.
NOw it behowueth us to show out of the Biblists rule of belief, what a manner
of church the church of Christ is, if it observe the rule of belief set down
by the Biblist, which I will do by consequences drawn out of their rule of
belief, that each one may perceive the absurdity of the same and Biblists
recant their folly.

The First consequence.
NO Christian (say the Biblists) is bound to credit any man in matters of
faith, whether he be considered single or assembled in a general council,
except he having first consulted the holy ghost out of the Bible does well
understand, that the said propounded doctrine of faith does very well agree
with the written word of God. Therefore each Biblist does believe, that they
alone make the true church of Christ; who profess, that doctrine of faith,
which each one a part, having first consulted the holy ghost out of the Bible,
does judge to be most conform to the texts of his Bible.

Proof.
THe consequence I prove, for if any man's doctrine afrer that the holy ghost
is consulted out of the scripture, be found to disagree from the word of God,
his doctrine is necessarilye to be improoued, and he to be condemned for an
heretic, who would stubbornly mantaine such a doctrine dissenting from the
Bible.

The Second consequence.
Each Biblist does believe that only those Christians make up the true church of
Christ, who profess that doctrine as doctrine of faith,, which each one after
that he has prayed and consulted the holy ghost out of his Bible, does judge to
be most conform to the said Bible. Therefore there must needs be so many
putatiue churches of Christ, as there be diversities of brains amou^g
Christians, who after that they have prayed and consulted the holy ghost, do
gather out of the Bible contradictorie articles of belief even in doctrine of
faith. The consequence is clear and needs no proof, only this is to be
supposed, that, that is said to be one church, in which there is one faith.

The Third consequence.
THere be so many putatiue churches of Christ as there be diversity of brains
amou^g Christians, who after that they have prayed and co^sulted the holy ghost
out of ye Bible do nevertheless fetch from the said Bible co^tradictorie
opinions in doctrine of faith As is evident in the Biblists of these our days,
for a Lutheran he prays and consulteth the holy ghost out of his Bible, and
affirms that the holy ghost teaches him that this text of the bible This is
my body is meant of the real presence of the boddie of Christ in the Sacrement,
which he terms the lords supper, which is there present in person (as he
says) jointly with the bread. But a puritan prays and consult eth the same
holy ghost out of his Bible about the true meaning of the rehearsed words This
is my body. And swears against the Lutheran, that Christ is only in the
Sacrament as in a sign, and a figure, and that there is naught else there save
bare bread, and wine, and that the holy ghost taught him so much. A gain the
Anabaptist he consulteth the holy ghost out of the scripture, and after a
prolix praire made to that effect, finds that the holy ghost teaches him
out of the scripture, that Children be in no wise to be baptized, because they
want belief and therefore must be rebaptized when they come to years of
discretion; But the protestant contrariewise looks into his Bible and after
praire and consultation made with the holy ghost, protests the Anabaptist to
be an heretik for the holy ghost tells him out of the Bible that even infants
may receive Baptism and that they thus baptized are never to be rebaptised.
Therefore according to this rule of the Biblists, there be so many putatiue
churches of Christ, as there be diversities of brains amoung Christians, and
that there is no public sign in all the whole Christian world, by which the
only true church of Christ, which is but one, may be discerned from an
innumerable company of others which are falsely thought to be the churches of
Christ, when indeed they be but the Synagogs of Satan, the denns of heresies
and babses of confusion.

Proof.
BEcause no other rule of belief is extant amoung the Biblist, save the
private and hidden testimony of the holy ghost in in each Biblist soul
censuring the sense of the Bible where with each one being anointed, be he
Lutheran, Protestant, Puritan, Arrian, Anabaptist, Trinitarian etc. does most
certainly persuade himself that he is taught by the holy ghost.

The Fourth consequence.
NO Christian is bound to believe any men in matter of faith be they considered
seueraley or assembled in a general counsel, except having first prayed and
consutled the holy ghost out of the scripture, he understand very well, that
the said doctrine propounded, does agree with the sacred text. Therefore no
Christian nor assembly of Christians is extant in the world (according to this
Biblist rule) which has such a jurisdiction of teaching that all other
Christians are oblidged to believe what they say and decide in matter of faith.
This consequence is so manifest that it needs no proof; for it is not to the
purpose to answer that they be bound to believe those doctors which disagree
not from the Bible; for no man is to be believed in matters of faith upon his
own affirmation that his doctrine is true and disagreeth not from the
scripture, else Puritans, Anabaptists, Lutherans, Arrians, Trinitarians, Jews,
were to be beleeueed. For as these avouch yea swear that there doctrine in
matters or faith is most conform to the Bible, but each Christian (as the
Biblists opinion is) must consult the holy ghost out of the scripture touching
that point, and so judge as he inwardly teaches, whose doctrine does agree and
whose disagree from the scripture. And therefore there is no Christian nor
assembly of Christians in the world, who has such an absolute jurisdiction of
teaching, that all other Christians are bound in conscience to yeald belief to
what they say and decide about matters of faith: perhaps they may be bound to
here others and after examine their doctrine, and so consult the holy ghost out
of the Bible, whether it be true or false and that is all.

The Fifth consequence.
NO Christian nor company of Christians is extant in the world (as enseweth on
the Biblists proposition) that has such a jurisdiction to teach matters of
faith that all other Christians are bound in conscience to believe what they
teach and conform there faith to their decrees. Therefore there is no
ecclesiastical jurisdiction at all extant in the world, to wit, jurisdiction
of preaching the word of God, of administering Sacraments, of publishing
ecclesiastical laws, of exercising ecclesiastical judgments, of inflicting
punishments upon transgressors of ecclesiastical laws ctc. which each
Christian ere he submitt himself to such a jurisdiction is not first bound to
pray and consult the holy ghost out of scripture to know, censure, and judge
whether such a jurisdiction be just or unjust conform to the word of God or
not, and so either submitt himself to the same if he like if, or shake of that
yoke as unjustly imposed if his private spirit repine and judge it not to agree
to the text of his bible.

Proof.
BEcause, jurisdiction to preach, to administer Sacraments, to make
ecclesiastical laws etc. does manifestly concern faith, and to practice
ecclesiastical judgments do the suppose that the judge be not an heretic. But
according to the Biblists rule, al questions concerning faith ought to be
decided of each Christian out of his Bible he having first prayed and consulted
the holy ghost, and consequently if any one preach, administer Sacraments,
enacst ecclesiastical laws, or be an ecclesiastical judge; each Biblist is to
consult the holy ghost out of the Bible, and so judge of these men's doctrine, of
their Sacraments, of their laws, of their judgments, and if his private
spitit find them to disagree from his texts of Bible, then he is bound in
conscience not to obey, nor believe them, yea rather to burn them, then give
his consent unto them.

The Sixth consequence.
THere is no ecclesiastical jurisdiction extant in the world neither of
preaching, administering of Sacraments, making of ecclesiastical laws,
practicing of ecclesiastical judgments etc. which each Christian ere he submitt
himself to that jurisdiction is not first bound (having consulted the holy
ghost out of the bible) to judge whether it be just or unjust and so either
accept or reject the same. Therefore (conform to this maxim of the Biblists)
all ecclesiastical jurisdiction, yea the whole church of Christ becomes
subject to the boisterous and bridles lust and ignorance of all Christians how
wicked soever they be, who under pretense of an inward annointment whereby each
one boasts himself to be taught by the holy ghost out of the scriptures, have
liberty to sow the world with heresies and distemper all realms and common
wealths with debates, strifes, factions and civil wars.

Proof.
FIrst, because there is no Biblist in the world, which does not attach of
heresy innumerable other Biblists who vary from him. So one Lutheran
avouches al Purita^s, Hussites, Anobaptists, Arrians, and Protestants, to err
in faith: and detesteth them for heretics, neither do the Lutherans consent
amoung themselves in matters of faith but these differ from those, so that
there is welnigh as many opinions of faith amoung them, as their be brains to
conceive them, and yet each Biblist be he Hussite, Lutheran, Puritan,
Anabaptist, Protestant, Arrian etc. does verily persuade himself that the is
taught by the holy ghost out of the Bible.

Secondly, because it many times faleth out that many of these Biblists who
often do call upon and consult the holy ghost out of the scripture at diverse
times gather contradictorie articles of faith out of the said scripture and
swear that they were so taught by the holy ghost: How many Biblist ministers
have they, who a year before, praying and consulting the holy ghost out of the
scripture have publicly taught, and writ, that Bishops were the limms of
Antichrist but this year having a fatt bishop-prick offered them, they praing
and consulting the holy ghost out of the scripture, find that the holy ghost
inspireth them to accept that dignity with the revenues and that Bishops are
conform to the texts of his bible? Others praying and consulting the holy
ghost out of his Bible, have dared to preach and write, that to wear a
syrpliss, were to conform one self to the beast, and put on a remnant of
Antichrist, as also to receive the communion kneeling were to committ idolatry;
and this as from the holy ghost: but some months, or a year after, frighted
either with the law, or aluted with reward consultinge the said holy ghost out
of his Bible, he makes no scruple both to wear a syrpliss, and receive the
communion kneeling and this by inspiration of the holy ghost whom he auowed a
while a go, to have forbidden the same, as monstrous idolatry. Therefore he
who subiecteth all ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to this annointment and
inspiration of the spirit, wherewith each Biblist does boast himself that he is
taught by the holy ghost, does expose the said eeclesiasticall jurisdiction and
also the whole church of Christ, to the boisterous lust and ignorance of all
leude and miscreant Christians, to stain the same with heresies as they
please. The like may be aledged of Political jurisdiction which by this
principal of Biblists doctrine is exposed to all the ieopardie of tumultuous
broils and civil wars.

The Seventh consequence.
ALl ecclesiastical jurisdiction, yea the whole church of Christ becomes
subject to the rageing lust and ignorance of all miscreant Christians, who
under the pretext of an inward annointment, wherewith each one boasts himself
to be taught by the holy ghost out of the scripture, may introduce into the
church of God, what perverse heresies and broils he pleases. Therefore by
such a rule of belief as the Biblists have devised, the whole church of Christ
assembled together is necessarily a confused route of mad bedlame fellows,
amoung whom there is no order at all, but an everlasting horror inhabiteth.

Proof.
THe effect proves what is said, for that company of Christians which is
only thronged together and compacted into one boddie through this inward
annointment of the holy ghost only, which each B^blist presumes of himself to
have, has no unity of faith, in it self, no constancy of faith in his
members, no jurisdiction, nor vocation nor succession of ecclesiastical
ministers, but only in all and each of them this inward annointment domineereth
by which every one vaunteth himself to have the holy ghost for his tutor.

Co^sidere well the true spirit of all the Biblists and thou will find the^
minced into many differente iarring sects of Lutherans, Caluinists,
Anabaptists, etc, each of which are again shreded into more sects the^ there be
days in the years, yea welnigh they have amoung them as many belefes as men,
and as the times and seasons change so they change their faiths, as if religion
were but a sport and pastime. See if they can spy out amoung the^ a supreme
jurisdiction of teaching the word of God, of administering Sacraments of
ordering ecclesiastical ministers, of judging ecclesiastical causes, and you
will scarce find any shadow there of, but all things amoung them are exposed to
this internal annointment of the holy ghost, which each of them boasts for to
have. Nor does it prejudice this consequence, that in many places we behold
the companies of these Biblists very quiet and in some order amoung
themselves, as Lutherans in Saxony, and Protestants in England, for this
proceeds, because that the promiscuous multitude of Biblists in these places,
give credit to their ministers, or be constrained to keep quarter by the
Augustane Confession, or by the statutes of a parliament, which none for fear
of punishment dare openly call in doubt, and for this cause, there be very
few, who consulting the holy ghost out of the scripture, have courage to
censure whether the doctrines propounded them to believe by ministers, or by
the Augustane Confession, or by the statutes of a parliament, do cohere with
the word of God, or disagree from the same, They had rather incurr guiltienes
of conscience, then a proemunire. But indeed to be plain, while these
Biblists, not first consulting the holy ghost out of their Bible, do out of
negligence or fear, give credit to their parsons, or to parliament edicts or
such like statutes, concerning matters of faithtt is impossible for them to
have any true faith, in regard they found their faith upon them, who may err in
faith, for ministers, Bishops Parliaments, congregations, general councels all
may err in faith all, be deceived and deceive according to the Biblists rule,
yet in those place, where this inward annointment has free vttrance, and the
private spirit domineereth, all things in religion be turned vpside down all
disquieted and quite put out of order, and so much the more as the wits of
those Biblists, which consult the holy ghost out of the scripture, are more
subtle and eminent, which is so apparent by daily practice, that to god about
to prove the same were to light a candell at mid day.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. Other necessary consequences be deduced, whence we may
gather what a manner of church the church of Christ was from the Apostles
times to our days, if it be censured as the Biblists rule of belief does
set down.
SVCH (certes as I have deciplered) must the congregation of Christians be, who
make one body of a church as the Biblists rule of belief does set down. Now
it rests to deduce other consequences out of the same rule of belief, werby
it may appear what a fasshioned church (according to their rule) was the
church of Christ, from the Apostles age downwards even to Luthers revolt, for
if following the rule of succession, so many ages even to our days are spread
all the world over, surely we must be compelled to deduce therout most horrible
and fearful consequenees, and such as would fright a man to read them.

The first consequence.
ALl counsels as well generale as national, yea approved and confirmed by the
Bishop of Room may err in faith; and each Christian is bound under the pain of
eternal damnation before such time as he give credit to any of those general
councels, to consult the holy ghost out of the scriptures and so to judge
whether that they do agree to the word of God or disagree from the same.
Therefore all general councels in what manner soever they have been celebrated
in the church of God, have usurped and practiced most detestable tyranie over
the whole church of Christ contrary to the word of God. Because these general
councels did not only excommunicate, but also by the help of secular power did
condemn and put to death those Biblists, who consulting the holy ghost out of
the scriptures dared to deny or call in doubt the decrees of the said council
which concerned matters of faith; Also they moved cruel and bloody wars
against those princes, kings, and Emperors, who dared to gain say the doctrine
of those councels in matters of faith. See the cuncell of Nice ann. 325. in
which Arrius was condemned, who out of the holy scriptures as he said denied
the divinity of Christ.

See the council of Constantinople an. 383 in which Macedonius was condemned,
who out of the Bible denied the divinity of the holy ghost.

See the first council of Ephesus an. 434. in which Nestorius of Constantinople
was condemned, who out of the Bible did affirm that there was 2. persons in
Christ.

See the first council of Calcedon an. 454. in which Eutyches the
Archimandrite, was condemned of heresy, who out of the scriptures said that
the images of Christ and his Saints, were not to be honored. Neither did they
condemn one or two, but an innumerable number of Christians, who followed
those heresiarchs, nor were they of the vulgar sort, but a many of them were
Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, yea Princes, kings, Emperors, all which those
fathers of the council did without any dread condemn for heretics in the name
of Christ, and pronouncing an Anathema upon them cut them, quite of from the
church of Christ.

Both time and leisure would fail me, if I should go about to reckne up, all
general counsels, and to show yt a perpetual practice and rule of the church
of Christ, that General counsels should decide matters of faith, and declare
to all Christians what they were bound to believe, and what not to believe,
condemning all and each that durst be so bold as to gainsay them or with
stand their decrees.

Now if those fathers of general counsels had non such right to do this;
first at general counsels hither to celebrated in the church of Christ erred
in faith, then they always practiced a most violent and exectable tyranny
ever all the flock of Christ in usurping an unjust jurisdiction by force and
might; and in condemning and scoffing at this annointment of the spirit of God,
which each Biblist presumes for to have and to be inwardly taught by the said
spirit out of the scriptures.

The Second consequence.
ALl general councels in what manner soever they were celebrated in the church
of God exercised a detestable tyranie over all the whole church of God contrary
to the Bible (according to the Biblists rule. Therefore all heresies that ever
were condemned by general councels be heerby caled into doubt whether that
they were justly condemned or not.

Proof.
BEcause that those general councels had no right to condemn any doctrine,
but that office apparteined to each Christian, as also (consulting the holy
ghost out of the bible) to examine even the decrees of general councels
themselves. And therefore the sentence of those councels which condemned
heretics in this respect, was unjust because it was vtred by those who had no
right nor jurisdiction to do it, for that sentence, did by divine right
apperteine to the censure of the holy ghost, who resyding in the mind of each
Biblists, as a judge sitting on a bench does by means of the Bible give
sentence out of there mouths about the doctrines of men. But to the end that
the Biblists may by some small conjecture perceive how many monstrous heresies
would revive again in this church if this there rule of belief were
auaylable, I will only mention at this time a certain decree made in the year
494. In the first Roman council under Pope Gela^asius the first.

These and all such like heresies we condemn, which were taught by Simon
Magus, Nicolaus, Gerinthus, Marcion, Basilides, Ebion, Paulus Samosatenus,
Protinus, Bonosus, with others who infected with such like errors fell from the
church, we also condemn Montanus with his impure followers, Apolinard,
Valentinus or Manicheus, Faustus, Africanus, Sabellius, Arrius Macedonius,
Eunominus, Nouatus, Sabbatius, Caelestius, Donatus, Eustakius, Iouinianus,
Iulianus, Gelane^sis, Celestinus, Maximus, Priscilianus of Spain, Nestorius of
Constantinople, Lampetius, Dioscorus, Eutyches; Both the Peeters whereof one
defiled the church of Antioch with heresies, the other the church of
Alexandria, Acatius of Constantinople with his consorts, and all other
heretics and there disciples together with scismaticks, with whatsoever they
have taught and writ, as also those heretics whose names be not registered,
which we command to be not only rejected but also rased out for ever by every
Catholic Apostolic and Roman church, whom with all their followers we
acknowledge to be everlastingly condemned under the band of an anatheme never to
be loosed. Thus Pope Gelasius with the fathers of that council.

The Third consequence.
NO ecclesiastical jurisdiction is extant weither of Preaching the word of
God, nor of administering Sacraments, which each Christian (ere he submitt
himself to that jurisdiction) is not bound in conscience first to consult the
holy ghost out of the scripture, and so judge whether the said jurisdiction be
just to which they may submitt themselves, or else unjust whose yoacke they may
shake of. Therefore even from the Apostles times to our days, no true public
worship of God was extant and practiced in the church of God.

Proof.
FOr that worship of God which has hitherto been publicly practiced in the
church of God as well concerning the preaching of the word, as the
administration of Sacraments and other public ecclesiastical rites
apperteining to religion, or the piety of the faithful toward God, was
always decided and governed by the Bishops and Pastors of the church, but
especialy and principaly by the fathers that were assembled in general co^cels
with an usurpation of a supreme power over all Christian believers, which (if
conform to the rule of the Biblists) it be a most detestable tyranny
contrary to the word of God, no doubt also but such a manner of worshipp
wherewith God was served was execrable and detestable. Nor is it enough to
oppose this consequence, to auerr, that many Biblists lived in every age who
detested that tyrannical dominion, for I grant this; These men I say, were
they, whom (as I above mentioned) so many general counsels condemned for
heretics, which if the Biblists would have to apperteine to there church, let
them look, with what conscience or color they can approve their heresies,
when as it is most certain, that in doctrine of faith, they did extremely
disagree from the beleefes which the Biblists that be now a days do hold and
profess.

The Fourth consequence.
ALl general councels in what manner soever they were celebrated in the church
of Christ, exercised a tyrannical dominion over the whole church of Christ,
contrary to the word of God, neither was there ever exta^t in the world since
the Apostles days any true public worship and service of God. Therefore the
true church of Christ, even from the Apostles times, to these of ours, lay hid,
lurking in inuisiblenes being unknown both to herself and the world.

Proof.
FOr that assembly of Christians which from the Apostles days downwards to our
time, was most conspicuous to the world worshipped and served God (either
deceived or compelled to do so) with a detestable tyranny of Bishops that
the^ ouerswaied the church (as Biblists say) and those only which refused this
their tyranny were divided into innumerable sects, dissenting from each others
in essential matters of faith, and which by lilte and lilte were reduced to
nothing; Therefore lest we be compelled to say. That Chist for so long time had
no church at all in the world either we must be forced to say, that the same
was the church of Christ, or else for want of better reason, avouch an
absurdity and say, that the church, was all that while unknown both to it
self and the world, and lay hid lurking in inuisiblenes; as many Biblists do
not stick to avouch and impudently blabber.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. The conclusion of the Author.
ANd thus far, (Biblist my friend) I have go on to set down those
absurdities, which spring out of thy rule of belief, and which each one may
with ease deduce at leisure; albeit I have past by many more difficile, but no
less true; Now I would have thee for thy credit and conscience sake, to free
this thy rule, from that frightfull impiety, and frenzy, with which it
seems to be bra^ded and this by a more learned answer if thou can, Which I
think will be no small pains to do; and which I do deem can be done by no
other means, then either by a flatt denial of thine own antecedents, or of my
consequences, both which will be foul enough. But lest thou deteine thy self
in thine answer, It is not a miss, I admonish thee, that I have labored whole
26. years about the study of the bible, and have ever sought to find and
spy out the truth with a most sinceare and spotles intention of mind, and to
this end even from my childhood forsook my father, my mother and all the
snares, and allurements of my temporal commodities which I might have enjoyed
in the world, and loading on my shoulders a sore heavy cross have thus
followed Christ; and yet neuerheles I have hitherto esteemed and judged out of
holy writ, that the authority of the holy church concerning matters of faith
is infallible. But now; should I admit a diffrent rule of belief, to wit,
that of thine, I perceive full well, what difficulties Would ensew there upon,
which are the same mentioned by me, to which I demand of thee a satisfactorie
reply, though I scarce can imagine what means thou have to perform the same,
except thou wilt persuade me to turn about like a mil-hors from the spirit, to
the Bible, and from the Bible, to the spirit, in a perpetual circle; for if
thou remitt me to praire and the inward annointment of the holy ghost, or to
some sacred scriptures, or glosses which thou or thy compannions make upon the
Bibles text; friend Biblist I would have thee not to forget, that thou
beleeuest both thy self, and al thy comarades to be prone to errors in matters
of faith, and may flatly err, and therefore in this important business of faith,
I neither ought nor can in conscience give credit unto thee or thine; Nor can
thou gather, (if after that I have examined and cyfted thy sentence about
matters of faith ever out of the bible) that the eyes of my mind be dimmed and
can not see so clear as thine, because I have not prayed and implored the
assistance of the holy ghost, for I would have thee know, that for the space of
these 26. years, the 36. part and more of each natural day has been by me,
spent in watchings and prayres, seruinge God night and day. But should I give,
which can not be granted, that the church may fail, and defile it self with
errors, and therefore the authority of the same were to be renounced:
nevertheless I see no reason wherefore I should presently submit to your opinion,
and subscribe to that private spirit by which you boast your selves to be
inwardly inspired and taught: yea rather in this case I should doubt whether
that the seripture you follow were sacred or not, for hitherto (with S.
Augustine) I had not believed the scriptures, had not the authority of the
church moved me. But to feign, that the holy ghost forsook the whole church
of Christ so many ages, and is only assistant to me a vile sinner that I only
may not stray from the truth where all cuncels and fathers, and Churches erred
not rashly as you surmise, fredne Biblist, but prudently abhor and denyt,
and esteem it a more then Luciferian arroga^ce in a man, to sou aunt him self
yet should I let this pass as thou would have it, that is that thy rule of
belief is both co^sona^t to the scriptured and the inward annoinmen of the
spirit, what think thou may be urged in this case? This at least, that
unless thou freest the same from the infamy which it has incurred for the
above deduced co^sequences, I must be forced to affirm, that the Bible is not
sacred but profane, your spirit not holy, but hollow, your Christ not a
Savior, but a seducer nor any man of a sound judgment can censure otherwise.
Wherefore except you in such sort stint my consequences, that they can not be
able to follow the antecedents at the heels, etther (friend Biblist) you must
again return to the authority of the Church whence you are departed, or
(quod ahsit) quite turn from Christ. Fare you well, and see whereto this your
spirit aims with you Consult so carefully.

FINIS.

