THE DISPLAYING of the Popish Mass: wherein thou shall see, what a wicked
Idol the Mass is, and what great difference there is between the Lords Supper
and the Popes Mass: Again, what Popes brought in every part of the Mass, and
counted it together in such monstrous sort, as it is now used in the Popes
Kingdom.

Written by THOMAS BECON; and published in the days of Queen MARY.

Psalm 73. They that forsake thee (O Lord) shall perish: and all them, that
commit whoredom against thee, thou shall utterly destroy. Ier. 15. Fly away
from Babylon, let every man save his life, that ye be not rooted out with her
wickedness. For the time of the Lords vengeance is come. Apocalypse 18. I heard
a voice from heaven saying: Come away, etc. Matthew. 15. Every plant that my
heavenly Father has not planted, shall be plucked up by the roots. LONDON,
Printed by A. G. for the Company of Stationers. 1637.

Cum privilegio.

R. P. D. D. IOANNES PARKHURSTUS Episcopus Noruvicensis ad Thomam Baeconum.
Vidi and perlegi doctos Baecone libellos,
Quo tua nonpridem sancta Minerva dedito
Dispercam siquid legi unquam sanctius, aut si
Quid potuit populo tradier ut liu^.
Auspice perge Deo tales vulgar libellos,
Variloquax sed nec lingua timenda tibi est.
Sic Christum possis avido iaculare popello,
Sic possis nomen condecorare tuum.
The displaying of the Popish Mass.
IF I were not led (O ye MASSING Priests) with a natural and fervent
affection toward this our common country, which as a most tender mother, has
tenderly brought me forth, and as a most loving nurse, has hitherto sweetly
embraced, kindly fostered and carefully kept me up, whose destruction and utter
desolation (if provision betimes be not made) I see unfainedly to be at hand:
again, if I were not moved with very pity and tender compassion toward you
my countrymen, greatly lamenting and even from the very heart bewailing the
miserable and wretched state wherein at this present ye stand, perceiving also
your dreadful damnation, besides the corporal plagues, which with other ye
shall suffer, not to be far off, except ye shortly repent, turn unto the
Lord our God, and leave your abominable Idol service: I would choose rather
quietly to go forth in giving my mind to the study of the holy Scriptures
according to my profession, and in calling on the Name of God by fervent prayer
for the redress of the great abominations, which now of late days as most
fierce and outrageous floods have violently burst in, overflowed and utterly
deformed the Christian Commonweal of this our Realm of England, than
breaking off my present studies to take upon me at this time to write unto you,
and especially of such a matter as some brainsicke persons straightwayes will
condemn as heretical, but all will judge it superfluous, seeing the matter
whereof I entend to write, does but a little agree with the common opinion of
religion, yea rather superstition, that is now received among us against the
which to strive, who will not count it a thing of great folly, being so
defenced not only with Laws and Statutes, but also with the power of the head
rulers, with the wily subtilties of the fleshly hypocrites, and with the
consent of the gross multitude: as I may speak nothing of the untowardnesse,
yea, rather frowardness and malicious madness of a number of you
Masse-mongers, to whom these my Letters be directed, which have been so rooted
from the beginning of your greasy Priesthood in this wicked kind of massing,
taking it for most perfect, pure, true, sound, godly and Christian Religion,
and have found so great ease, quietness, lucre, gain and advantage in it,
that it shall be more easy, except God sets to his helping hand, to make a
man of Inde white, than to pluck many of you from your old accustomed and
cankered trade, so hard a thing is it to use an old dog to the reine, or to
cure that disease that is bred in the bone. But notwithstanding, having a good
opinion, although not of all, yet of some of you, which sin not of obstinate
malice against the truth, but of simplicity, ignorance and blindness, offend
for lack of better knowledge, whom also peradventure God hitherto has
suffered to remain in error, that he now at the last through the riches of his
mercy, might bring you into the glorious light of his blessed Gospel, and make
you of Saul's, Paul's; of ravening wolves, faithful Shepherds; of cruel
persecutors; Christian Preachers, of abominable Idolaters, true worshippers of
God: that by this means ye may believe and be saved: I will attempt even for
your sakes, even to the uttermost of my power, as time shall serve, to declare
unto you my mind concerning the great abuse, yea, the abominable Idolatry,
which ye commit in the most wicked and Divellish Mass, The Abomination of the
Popish Mass.
while ye take upon you contrary to the Word of God, to defile the blessed
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, to minister it in your Masses unto your
self alone; contrary to Christ's institution, to offer it for a sacrifice unto
God for the sins of the quick and dead, to avouch it to be of no less
excellency, price, dignity, efficacy, might, virtue and power, than the
sacrifice, which our Savior Christ offered on the altar of the Cross, and to
make a show of it to the people, that they may fall down and worship it as a
god, yea, God himself Creator and maker of all things, that ye having the
knowledge of these your errors may from henceforth cease to offend the Lord our
God, give over your Idolatrous massing, repent you of your former life, and
become godly Ministers in the Church of Christ unto the glory of God, and the
profit of his holy Congregation. And that we may the better discern the truth
from the falsehood and the profanation of the Sacrament from the true
ministration thereof, I will compare Christ's doing in this behalf and yours
together, that when ye shall perceive how far ye dissent and swarve from the
truth, ye may forsake your error, and follow no more the trifling traditions
of Antichrist, the Bishop of Rome, and of his adherents, but rather embrace
that Godly and faithful order, which our Savior Christ has set and appointed
in his holy Word for the due Ministration of his blessed Communion.

It is not unknown to you, What Christ did when he ordained his holy Supper.
that the Lord Jesus after he had eaten the Paschall Lamb, with his Disciples,
according to the Law of Moses, that same night wherein he was betrayed,
knowing that the time appointed of his heavenly Father from everlasting,
wherein he should offer himself a sweet smelling sacrifice to God for the
sins of the world, was at hand, and willing to leave behind him a memorial
of his glorious Passion and precious death to his holy Congregation, that the
fruits, commodities and benefits, which the faithful penitent sinners have by
the offering up of his blessed body, should not be forgotten, but had in an
everlasting remembrance, first of all preached a most fruitful and comfortable
Matthew 26.
Sermon to his Matthew. 14.
Disciples, Luke 22.
and afterward 1 Cor. 11.
as he sat at the table with them, he took bread into his hands, and after
he had given thanks to his heavenly Father (as his manner was) for his
corporal gifts, but specially for the dear love, that he of his own mere
mercy and free hearty good will bare toward mankind, he brake bread, and gave
bread unto his disciples, saying: Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, which is
betrayed for you. Do this in remembrance of me. And as he took the bread and
made it a Sacrament, that is to say, an holy sign, figure, token, and
Memorial of his Body breaking, so likewise he took the wine, and made that a
Sacrament, holy sign, figure, token, and Memorial of his blood shedding, and
after thankesgiving to his heavenly Father for the benefits aforesaid, he
delivered the Cup unto his Disciples, saying: Drink of this all ye. This Cup
is a new Testament in my blood, which is shed for many for the remission of
sins. Do this so often as ye shall drink it, in the remembrance of me. And
this heavenly banquet once done, they said grace, that is to say, they praised
God, by saying either certain Psalms of David, or some other thankesgivings,
and so departed. Here is the whole institution of the Lords Supper. Now let us
compare Christ's Supper with your Popish and Idolatrous Mass, and see how well
Christ's doings and yours agree together. If ye be the Ministers of Christ, and
not of Antichtist, the servants of God, and not of the Devil, then will you
follow your Master Christ, which says, John 13.
I have given you an example, that as I have done, so likewise ye should do.
Let us now then go in hand with the matter.

First, we read, that Christ before he fed his Disciples, with the mystical
food of his body and blood, made a Sermon unto them, Christ preached before his
Supper.
wherewith, as with a certain most wholesome preparative, he made meet the
minds of his Disciples, unto so worthy a banquet, giving all faithful Ministers
an example, that whenever they with the congregation do come together to
celebrate the Lords Supper, there should be some Sermon or exhortation made
unto the people, that they might the better examine themselves, and the more
deeply consider the thing that they go about. And according to the example of
Christ, not only the Apostle, but all the holy Fathers also of the Primitive
church used the trade, and so did it continue in the Church of Christ, till
Antichrist, the Bishop of Rome, had driven Christ out of place, and set up
himself as God: Again, till he had expulsed the Supper of the Lord, and set
up his own peevish, yea theevish Idolatrous Mass, as we may see in the
monuments of the ancient Writers. They continued, says blessed Luke, Acts 2.
in the Apostles doctrine and fellowshippe, and in breaking of bread, and in
prayers. And Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 11.
As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of the cup, show, set forth,
declare and preach the Lords death till he come. A practice hereof have we in
the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 20.
where we read; That upon one of the Sabbath days, when the Disciples, came
together for to break bread (so terms S. Luke the receiving of the Sacrament
of Christ's body and blood) blessed Paul preached unto them, and continued the
preaching unto midnight. And the Sermon ended, they brake bread, ate, thanked
God and departed. Note.
For if the Sacrament of Christ be never so comfortable, yet if they be not
known what they are, to what use they were instituted, what joyful promises
are annexed unto them; what they signify and preach unto the faithful
receivers, etc. What other things are they to us, tha^ the precious stone was
to Aesops Cock? A Sacrament ministered without preaching of the word is but a
dumb ceremony, a glass offered to a blind man, and a tale told to one that is
deaf. Ma^^ 3.
The Apostles before the ministration of any Sacrament preached, and so did the
holy Fathers of the primitive Church. Saint John Baptist the son of the
Priest Zachary, preached unto the people before he baptized them. Our Savior
Christ a little before his ascension, Mat. 28.
said to his Apostles; John 13. 14. 15. 16.
^oe and teach all nations, 1 Cor. 11.
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Here is Baptism and the preaching of the word joined together. And as
concerning the blessed Sacrament of Christ's body and blood did not our Savior
Christ preach at the institution and ministration of it? Are we not also
commanded by the holy Apostle, that whenever we come to receive the blessed
Communion, the death of the Lord should be preached, declared, and set forth?
Ministration of the Sacraments without preaching, profits little.
Did not the Apostles of Christ, and all the godly Bishops of the primitive
Church, observe the same order? They considered right well how little the
ministration of the Sacraments avails, without the preaching of the Word: For
as S. Paul says, how shall they believe without a Preacher? Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing comes by the Word of God. None therefore of the Lords
Sacraments ought publickely to be administered without preaching of the word;
yea, and that not in a strange tongue, In Joan tract. 80.
but in such a speech as the people understand or else it were as good to
speak the words unto a s^rt of sheep or geese as unto them that are gathered
together at the ministration of any Sacrament. And this meant Saint Augustine,
when he said, Take away the Word, and what is Water but water? But let the
word be added to the Eleme^t, and it is made a Sacrament. Whence has the
water such a power that it should touch body, and wash the heart? but by the
virtue of working of the word, not because it is spoken, but because it is
believed. The word signifies here not only the speaking of Ego baptizote, etc.
or Hoc est corpus meum, etc. pronounced by the Priest in a strange tongue, but
the preaching of the word of God uttered by the mouth of the Ministers in such
a language as the people understand, or else how shall they believe? It is not
the utterance of Gods word in an unknown speech that brings faith, but when
it is so spoken, that it is understood of them that hear it, and that faith
through the operation of the holy Ghost ensues, which otherwise is cold, lies
idle, and works nothing in the heart of the hearer: for as S. Augustine
says, Take away the Word, and what is Water but water? that is to say, take
away the preaching of Gods word from the Sacrament of Baptism, which declares
what Baptism is, who instituted it, to what use it was ordained, what fruits
and commodities we receive by it, etc. And what does the water of Baptism
profit, I speak concerning such as are come to the use of reason, or such as
are present at the ministration of Baptism. And so likewise may we say of the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. Take away the word, and what is Bread but
Bread? What is wine but wine? that is to say, Take away the preaching of the
Lords death from the holy Communion, and what does it profit to eat and drink
the Sacramental bread and wine? seeing the mystery is not known nor
understood. But put the preaching of the word to the Elements, water, bread,
and wine, and so are they made holy and honorable Sacraments, full of singular
joy and great comfort, as Saint Augustine says, Let the word be added to the
Element, and it is made a Sacrament. Therefore where the Lords Supper is
rightly ministered, What things ought to be preached at the ministration of the
Lords Supper.
there is declared the death and passion of Christ, there is showed forth the
misery of man, from the which he could have been no otherwise released, but
only by the death of Christ; there is taught what the Sacrament is, what it
signifies, and to what use Christ our Savior did institute it, there are the
people exhorted not rashly, nor with unwashed feet, as they use to say, to come
unto the Lords Table, but to prove, try, and examine themselves, whether they
come with such faith and love unto that most worthy mystery, as they ought,
least they eat and drink their own damnation, there are they stored up unto
the works of mercy toward the poor, and unto hearty thankesgiving to God the
Father for the death of his Son Christ, there also are they put in remembrance
that after they have tasted those heavenly mysteries, and have spiritually fed
upon the body and blood of Christ, which through faith are present, and truly
received in spirit of faithful Co^municants, and are become one body with
Christ, they ought no more to return unto their old sinful and wicked
conversation, but from henceforth to serve their Lord God in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their life. Luke 1.
Is there any such thing done in the popish Mass? The popish Mass has no
preaching.
Who preaches? No goodness is learned at the popish Mass.
Who makes the exhortation? Who moves the people to repentance, faith, love,
and amendment of life, mutual reco^ciliation, works of mercy, or unto
thankesgiving to God the Father for the death of his Son Christ? Who plays
the Schoolmaster, and gives the people such exhortations, that they go home
from your Masses The Mass is the nurse of all vice.
better learned than they came thither? What these ever lest his theft? What
false lawyer gave over his bribing? what whore forsook her whordome? what
wicked man at any time repented him of his wickedness, by coming unto your
Mass? Yea, rather they go from your Mass so well instructed, that they
think that now they have heard a Mass, they may do all the day after what
they will. Amends is made beforehand If they bribe, poll, pill, steal, lie,
slander, blaspheme, kill, murder, run on whoring, play the harlot, fall to
drunkenness, to dicing, to carding, and do all other unlawful things; it
makes no matter, for they have heard Mass. They have satisfied Esaias. 58.
Mark 16.
for the sin, before it be committed. The hearing of mass has dispatched all the matter aforehand. And what marvel is it, though such abomination
follows of your massing, seeing the people hears no goodness at it, but
rather are confirmed in all kind of ungodliness? The chiefest jewel of all, I
mean the preaching of Gods word, is utterly exiled from your Mass, as all
goodness is besides. There is none of you all, that stand up in the pulpit,
that lift up your voice to declare unto the people either their wickedness, or
preach unto them the most joyful, pleasant, and comfortable Gospel of our
Savior Christ. If there be any preaching at all, the Bells make it, The Bells
are better preachers than the Massers.
when the popish Clark ringeth to Mass. The Bells being hanged up tell the
people somewhat which they understand, namely, that there is a popish mass
ready at hand, come hear it who list, and be never the better when ye have
done. But ye speak nothing at all that the people understand, and so are ye
worse than the Bells. What goodness followed the ministration of the holy
Communion
Oh how often have I seen here in England at the ministration of the holy
Communion, people sitting at the Lords table, after they have heard the sermon,
or the godly exhortation set forth in the Book of Common prayer, read unto
them by the minister, bitterly weep, heartily repent, and sorrowfully lament
their too much unkindnesse and unthankfulness toward the Lord God for the
death of his Son Christ, and for his other benefits; again, their negligence
in doing their duty toward their poor neighbors? what free and large gifts
also have I seen given to the poor men's box? what laying aside of al enmity,
and renewing of unfeigned mutual reconciliation? what loving embracing and holy
kissing of one another? What assurance of heartytty friendship for ever to
continue, where immortal hatred was before? what godliness also of life have
I seen afterward practiced by them, that were the Communicants? what alteration
of manners? What newness of conversation? The covetous man to abhor his
covetousness, the Adulterer to leave his adultery, the Whore to defy her
whoredom, the Proud man to detest his pride, the Usurer to give over his usury,
and so forth, by hearing the word of God preached, and by the worthy receiving
of the holy Communion, has full often bin seen in England, when the doctrine of
the Gospel flourished among us. No man better for hearing Mass.
Never saw I one point of like godliness practiced of any man by hearing your
popish Masses, but as they have come thither wicked and ungodly, so have they
departed again with the same ungodlines, and wickedness, rather being the worse
than the better by hearing that your Idolatrous mass, and yet (Oh God be
merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins) the glorious and blessed
Communion is now through the craft and subtilty of the devil, and through the
wiliness of his sturdy and stout champions, that filthy Synagogue of Satan,
utterly banished out of this Realm, unto the great dishonor of God, and
unspeakable sorrow of all true Christians, and that most vile, most stinking,
most pestiferous, most abominable, most wicked, most devilish and most
idolatrous popish private Mass received again, set up, and magnifyed above the
stars, yea, and above God and his holy ordinance, when indeed of all Idols,
The Mass is to be abhorred of all good men.
the Mass is most to be abhorred of such as fear and love God. But though
your Mass were never so good, as indeed it is stark naught without
comparison, yet forasmuch as it is done without the preaching of the word, and
in a strange it is altogether unprofitable, yea, and abominable.
Notwithstanding, behold the hypocrisy and counterfeit holiness, yea, rather
your double dissimulation and devilish deceiving of the simple people: when
ye have stood awhile pattering, like a sort of asses, ye know not what at the
lower end of the Altar, saying the Introite or office of the Mass, as they
call it the Kyrrys, the Gloria in Excelsis the Collects; the Epistle, the
Graduall the Allelujah, the Tract, or the Sequence, and all in Latin, because
such as are there present should keep counsel, and not bewray your subtle
secrets; ye remove, as men soon weary of a place, from the one end of the
Altar to the other, and like pretty fellows, you take up the Masse-booke in
your hands, making the people believe that now ye will speak somewhat whereby
they shall greatly be edified, and well grounded in the knowledge of Christ.
And because like politic and wise men, ye will not stumble in your doings but
the better see what ye shall speak, ye have a candle lighted, though the day
be never so fair, and the Sun shine never so bright. Besides this, that ye
may be in the better readiness to do some great nothing, ye pray to God or
I know not to whom, in this manner: I (...) Domine benedicere. O Lord command
me to speak well. A prayer very necessary for your selves, which very seldom
speak well, but nothing meet for the purpose that you go about. For ye intend
to speak nothing to the people, whereby they shall take any profit. Neither
purpose ye, for all your bragging, any more to preach to your Masse-hunters,
than ye intend with your bird bolt to shoot down the weather-cocke of Paul's
steeple. And because God is not at hand, but far enough from vour elbow, and
very s^ldom comes at such men's callings, ye your selves take the pains to
answer on this manner: Dominus sit in cord meo, and in ^re meo, ad
annunciandum populo sanctum Evangelium De^. That is to say, the Lord might be
in my heart and in my mouth, to set forth, preach, and declare to the people
the holy Gospel of God. Oh most vain prayer. O wicked dissemblers both with
God and man. The Masse-mongers are double dissemblers.
Ye wished that the Lord God might be both in your heart, and in your mouth to
set forth, preach and declare to the people the holy Gospel of God, and ye
intend nothing less. For as God is neither in your heart, nor in your mouth;
so do ye not preach the holy Gospel of God to the people, but only ye
rehearse a few Latin sentences out of the Gospel, which neither ye your
selves, for the most part, nor yet the simple people understand. The people are
mocked at the popish Mass.
And notwithstanding, the silly sheepish simple souls solemnly stand up and
give good ear, as though they should hear some notable thing, and go home
the better instructed, but all in vain: For they learn nothing. Only when
ye rehearse the Name of Jesus, they learn to make solemn courtesy, and so a
piece of the Gospel being once read, they stroke themselves on the head, and
kiss the nail of their right thumb, and sit down again as wife as they were
before. And ye your selves, in the ste^d of your Petronilla, kiss the book,
and turn ye to the people and say, Dominus vobiscum, God be with you, as
though you could tarry no longer, but had some great journey to go, and yet
do vee tarry there still till all good people be weary both of you, and of
your popish Mass. Here is all your preaching. Here is the whole sum of your
exhortations. Are not the people well taught? Have ye not played the good
Schoolmasters? Have ye not well deserved your Dirge groat and your dinner?
Have ye not followed Christ aright? Tell me of goodfellowship, whose disciples
are ye masse-mongers? Christ's that preached, or Antichrists that preach not?
Look whose order ye follow, his disciples are ye. But Christ's order follow
ye not, therefore are ye not the disciples of Christ, but the vile slaves of
Antichrist. Here see ye then one foul fault, which you Masse-mongers commit
in your wicked Masses. The best part ye utterly leave out, I mean the
preaching of the Gospel, which our Savior Christ his Apostles, and all true
Ministers in all ages, chiefly practiced at the ministration of the holy
Communion. And in this behalf ye agree not with Christ, neither is your Mass
any thing like the LORDS Supper.

After the Sermon Christ ministered his Supper at a Table.
Christ came to the Table, where he ministered the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood to his Disciples. Now compare your doings with Christ's. Christ came to a
Table to minister his holy Supper. You come to an Altar for to say your popish
and Idolatrous Mass. Christ tabled the matter, and ye alter it. Oh, how
well-favouredly ye agree? even as Christ and Belial. God and the Devil, light
and darkness, or as the use to say, Like Haroe and Harrow. Christ ministered
his Supper at a Table, and so did it continue certain The Primative Church
used no Altars, but Tables at the Lords Supper.
hundred years after in the Church of Christ, who used no Altar at all, Why
Christ ministered at a Table rather than at an Altar.
but at a Table at the ministration of the Lords Supper, following the example
of Christ, which is the self truth, and example giver of all perfection and
righteousness. But if you, following the example of Antichrist, like bloody
sacrificers, fall in hand with Altars, as though ye had sheep and oxen to kill.
Christ willing to declare that all bloody offerings and sacrifices were come
to an end, which were but signs, figures, and shadows of him, being the true
and alone acceptable sacrifice for the sins of the world, came not unto an
Altar, but unto a Table, and there ordained and ministed his holy Supper,
showing thereby, that not only the bloody sacrifices, but also all Altars
which were built for bloody sacrifices sake, do now cease, and are utterly
abolished. But ye whose desire always is to come as near unto Christ, or
unto his holy ordinance, as the Hare covets to come nigh unto a Tabret, refuse
Christ's order, and despise the table, spitefully calling it an Oyster-board,
and like heathenish and Jewish Priests, ye build Altars, and upon them you
offer your vile and stinking sacrifice, not unto God, but unto the Devil, and
unto Antichrist. Christ and his Apostles, with all the holy Bishops and
reverend Fathers of the Primitive Church ministered the Lords Supper at a Table,
and dare ye, O ye Massemongers, contrary to Christ's order, whose example in
this behalf is, as it were, a commandment, and contrary to the practice of
Christ's Apostles, and of the Primative Church, minister it at an Altar? The
holy Scripture makes mention 1 Cor. 10. Christ alone is our Altar.
of eating the Lords Supper at the Lords Table, Heb. 13.
but at an Altar to have it ministered, Romans 8.
not one word. 1 T^m 2.
We have none Altar but one, 1 John 2.
which is Jesus Christ the Lord, and he is in heaven only concerning his
humamanitie, and not here in earth (as the idle brained Papists dream) upon
whom, and by whom we do offer sacrifice of praise always to God, that is to
say, the fruit of those lips, which confess his Name. For he is our alone
Intercessour, our alone Mediator, and our alone Advocate. Besides this Altar
(CHRIST) the faithful congregation knows none, neither in heaven nor in
earth. All other Altars, therefore, which ye have in your Churches, Chapels
and Oratories, are Idolatrous and abominable, and by no means to be suffered,
where God is truly honored, and his holy Name faithfully called upon. And
what other thing do ye by maintaining your Altars, than show your selves very
Antichrists, and adversaries to GODS holy ordinance, and as much as in you is,
declare that CHRIST is not yet come, or at the least have not offered himself
a sacrifice to God the Father for the sins of the people? All bloody sacrifice
for sin, cease now in the New Testament, for the which Altars served,
therefore Christ ministered unto his Disciples the Sacrament of his body and
blood, not at an Altar, but at a Table. But you, Abomination.
as though all bloody sacrifices for sin were not yet gone, have still your
Altars, and offer sacrifice upon them, as the Heathenish and Jewish Priests
did. They killed and sacrificed bruit beasts upon their Altars, and you take
upon you to sacrifice the Son of God, and to make him me^t when it pleases
you, If ye be persuaded, The communion of the body and blood of Christ ought
to be ministered at a Table.
that whatsoever Christ did at the ministration of the holy Communion, is best
and most perfect, why then do ye not follow him, and minister at a Table as
he did, are ye wiser than Christ? Are ye better learned than the Wisdom of
God? Have ye gone so long to School with that Romish Antichrist, that you dare
take upon you to teach Christ the Master of all perfection? And to find fault
in his work, as the Cobbler played with Apelles picture? I would have you to
remember Apelles answer. Ne suitor ultra crepidam. Again, if ye believe that
all bloody sacrifices be ceased, and that the LORD CHRIST by the once offering
up of his body, has paid a full, suffic^ent and perfect ransom for the
sins of all them that repent and believe, why then do ye stand at the Altars
like Baals Priests, and take upon you to offer sacrifice for the sins of the
people, as though all such things were not perfectly ended in the passion and
death of Christ? If your Altars be of God, show it by the holy Scriptures. But
this can you not do, therefore are your Altars not of God, but of the Devil;
not of Christ, but of Antichrist. Is this to walk as Christ has walked? Is
this to do as Christ has given example? Is this to be Christ's Minister, or
rather Christ's controller? God amend you, and once again destroy those your
Idolatrous and bominable altars.

When Christ came Christ ministered without Copt or Vestment.
to the Table to minister the holy Communion, he came in such comely apparel,
as he used daily to wear. But how come ye in the name of God, that we may see
how well ye follow Christ in this behalf also? Ye come unto your altars, as
a game-player unto his stage. And as though your own apparel, A Surplesse
tolerable without the rest of massing apparel.
or else a fair white Surplesse were not seemly enough for the due
administration of the Sacrament, ye first put upon your head, an headpeece,
called an Amice, to keep your brains in temper, as I think, then put ye on
also a linen Albe in stead of a smock, to declare how well ye love women,
specially other men's wives, and that Albe you gird unto you for catching of
cold, though it be in the midst of Summer. After this you cast a Stoale
about your neck in stead of an halter, which signifies that ye will persecute
and strangle with an halter, or else burn with fire so many as speak against
your abominable apish Mass, and such other wicked traditions. Again, upon
your left arm ye put on a Fannell, much like to a manacle, or a fetter. And
this has also a solemn mystery. For it preaches, Fannell.
that so many as ye can come by, that unfainedly favor the truth of Christ's
Gospel, ye will man^cle, fetter, lock, stock, imprison, chain, and do them
all the mischief you can. Last of all, Fools coat, otherwise called a vestment.
come on your fools coat, which is called a Vestment, lacking nothing but a
coxcombe. this is diversely daubed. Some have Angels, some the blasphemous Image
of the Trinity, some flowers, some Pecockes, some Owls, some cats, some dogs,
some hares, some one thing, some another, and some nothing at all^ but a cross
upon the back to (...) away spirits. This your fools coat gayly gawded*
signifies your pleasant finenesse and womanly niceness, and your delectation
in the variety, or change of Venus pastimes, because ye will not be cumbred
with one lawful wife. Thus as men well harnessed for an Interlude, ye come
forth to play Hickesc^rners part with your shameless, smooth, smi^ling faces,
and with your lusty broad, bald, shaven crowns, Shaven crown.
Antichrists brood of Rome, to signify unto such nice Nymphs as know your
secret subtilties, and jolly juglings, that ye are beasts of that mark that
will never fail Lady Venus, Never none evil of that mark for Lady Venus
pastime.
nor none of her kind kitlings; but above all other, both for your idleness
and bellycheere, are most meet at all times, like stout, sturdie, stowre,
strong stalents to play Priapu^ part, and to furnish the place, Per alium, when
Perse is out of the way, such is your unchaste chastity, O ye filthy haters of
godly matr^monie.

But whence have ye your game-players garments? What the garments of the
Priests in the old Law signified.
Of the heathen and idolatrous Priests? But with such have the Christians
nothing to do? Of the Jewish Ministers? But that law is abrogated by Christ's
coming, of whose virtues the garments of the Priests were figures and signs,
whereof ye have none at all. Had ye them of the Devil, and of Antichrist of
Rome? Send them thither again betimes, lest ye go to the Devil with them for
company. Wheresoever ye had them, certain am I that ye have them not of the
authority of the holy Scripture. Christ and his Apostles used no such ^ond
Coats at the administration of the Sacrament, Christ allows no pomp nor
pride, but all simplicity and plainness* Therefore plainly and simply,
without any such Hickescorners apparel, did Christ deliver the Sacramental
bread and wine to his Disciples. The more simply, so that it be comely, the
Sacrament is ministered, the nearer is it unto Christ's institution. But I know
not whether your gay, gawdie, gallant, gorgious gameplayers garments, which ye
wear at the Mass, are more to be disallowed, tha^ your blind and corrupt
judgeme^t is to be lamented in the wearing of them. For the most part of you
have such spiced Spiced consciences.
and nice consciences in the use of them, that if ye lack but the least of
these fools bables, ye dare not presume to say Mass for a thousand pound. The
laudable order of our mother holy Church is broken. Ye cannot consecrate
aright. Ye have not al your tools. Therefore can ye not play Cole under
candlestick cleanely, nor whip Master Winchard above the board, as ye should
do. And graciously considered. For what is a worke-man without his tools? God
have mercy on you, and give you grace to be better minded, and to lay aside
such apish toys, and to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye may know him to
be your alone Savior, Romans 13.
and garnish your life with his most godly virtues, practicing that in your
ministration, whereof ye have him a president in his conversation.

And this is also to be noted, that when CHRIST came in his own usual
apparel unto the Table, he did not kneel as the Papists do, nor yet stand as
the Jews did in the old Law, Christ sat at his Supper.
but he sat down at the Table. How do ye agree with Christ at your Mass in
this behalf? Christ sat, ye sometime stand upright, sometime lean upon your
elbowes, sometime crouch downward, sometime kneel, but sit do ye never,
because ye will still contrary Christ, and be one ace above him. And although
gestures in this behalf in some men's judgments seem to be indifferent;
Gestures.
yet the nearer we come to Christ's order, the better it is. For who can
prescribe a more perfect trade for all things to be done at and about the
ministration of the Lords Supper, than the which Christ used himself? Indeed,
Why the Jews stood at the eating of the Paschal Lamb.
the Jews when they received their Sacrament, I mean the Paschal Lamb, which
was also a figure of Christ to come and to be slain, as ours is a sign and
token that he is already come, slain and gone, stood upon their feet, with
their loins girded, and staves in their hands, to signify not only that they
were strangers and pilgrims in this world, Psalm. 39.
and had here no dwelling City, Heb. 13.
but also that there was a further journey yet to go in the religion of God, 1
Pet. 3.
and that other Sacraments were to be looked for. Why Christ with his Disciples
sat at his Supper.
But Christ and his Disciples did sit at their Supper to declare that all
things before figured Apoc. 13.
in the Law, are now perfectly fulfilled in Christ, that Lamb of God, which
was slain from the beginning of the world, and there are no more Sacraments to
be looked for, nor none other doctrine to be enquired for, neither the Jews
Talmuth, nor Mahomets Alkaron, nor the Popes Decretals, nor yet the Emperors
Interim, but the doctrine only, which Christ has already taught, and left in
writing by the hands of his Apostles. The Christian religion both concerning
Sacraments and Doctrine, The doctrine of Christ is perfect and sufficient for
our salvation.
is now by Christ brought to such a consummate perfection and perfect
consummation, that nothing ought to be added as necessary also for our
salvation. Therefore does Christ with his Apostles sit at the receiving of the
Sacrament, and not stand; after the manner of the Jews, even as they, which
traveling by the way, are come unto their journeyes end, are wont to sit down
and to take their rest. Here have we an example of Christ to sit at the Lords
Table, when we receive the holy Communion, and not to kneel. But this do ye
Papists neither observe your selves, nor suffer other so to do. Ye are like
those lewd Lawyers, subtle Scribes, boisterous Bishops, saucy Sadduces, fine
Pharisees, prattling Priests, and hollow Hypocrites, against whom our Savior
Christ thundereth on this manner. Woe unto ye Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew 23.
ye Hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of heaven before men, ye neither
go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that come, to enter in. There may
be no sitting at your ministration, though we have Christ for a president
never so much. The servant may not follow his Lord, nor the Disciple his
Master. Whatsoever Christ practiced, we may not do, but what Antichrist
devises, that must we needs do. Therefore do ye Papists, which be always
enemies to Christ and to his holy ordinances, bind all your captives to kneel
at the receiving of the Sacrament, and so makes them plain Idolaters in
worshipping the bread for a god. O wicked soule-slayers! But why bind ye the
people rather to kneel at the ministration of the Lords S^pper, than at the
ministration of Baptism, seeing Christ is no less present at the one, Christ
is no less present at Baptism than at the Supper.
than at the other, and by his holy Spirit works no less effectually in
Baptism, than he does in the Supper? Why do ye not also compel the people
to kneel at the preaching of Gods Word seeing it is of no less authority,
than the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. But I know your subtilties right
well. Ye will say, the Sacrament of the Altar (I use your own terms) is God
and man in form of bread, An error of the Papists.
and therefore it cannot have too much reverence, worship and honor given unto
it. I answer: It is sooner said, A comparison between the old Idolatrous
Priests and ours.
than proved. As the old Idolaters in times past had gods of their own making,
and worshipped them, so have ye a god of your own devising, which ye your
selves worship, and compel other so to do likewise. And as the old
Idolatrous Priests by boasting the dignity of their feigned gods, whom they
served, lived an idle and voluptuous life, and were fed of the painful labors
of other men's hands, so likewise ye new Idolaters and Priests of Baal advance,
set forth, and blow out at Paul^ Cross, and in all other places, the majesty,
excellency, dignity and worthiness of your new baken little great god, The
God of the Papists.
that by this means ye may be had in admiration among the foolish simple
Idiots, and be nourished of the sweat of other men's brows, you your selves
like idle, lazy, loytering lubbers, and very pestilences of the Commonwealth,
only borne to consume the good fruits of the earth, going idly up and down
swinging with your long gowns, sarsnet tippets, and shaven crowns, like very
caterpillars of Egypt. A wonderful God it is that ye set forth to the people
to be worshipped. Not many days past, it was corn in the plough-mans barn,
afterward the Miller ground it to meal, then the Baker mingling a little water
with it, made dough of it, and with a pair of hot printing irons, baked it.
Now at the last come you blustering and blowing, and with a few words spoken
over it, ye charm the bread in such sort that either it ^rudgeth
straightwayes away beyond the moon, and a fair young child above fifteen^
hundred years old come in the place of the bread, or else, as the most part of
you papists teach, of the little thin cake, ye make the very same body of
Christ that was borne of Marie the Virgin, and dyed for us upon the Altar of
the cross, the bread being turned into the natural flesh of Christ, and the
accidents of the bread only remaining, according to the doctrine of Pope
Nicholas, and Pope Innocent. O wonderful Creators and makers! O marveilous
fathers, which beget a child elder than the father! and after ye have made
him, ye tear him in pieces, ye eat him, ye digest him, and send him down
by a very homely place. O cruel and unmercifull fathers, so to handle your
poor young old child! And this is the goodly God whom the people may not
receive sitting nor standing, but kneeling upon their marrowbones. O false and
subtle hypocrites, right cousens to the Idolatrous priests of Babylon; For as
they made the King believe, and his Nobility, with all the Commons, that Bell
was a living god, and that there must be prepared for him every day twelve
cakes, Dan. 14.
forty sheep, and six great pots of wine, to eat and drink; so do ye make
the Queen, her Counsel, the Nobility and commons of this Realm for the most
part believe that the little thin round white cake, which ye hold up above your
head, at your abominable Mass, after ye once said these five words over it,
Hoc est corpus meum, and have blowed, blasted, and breathed over it, is
straightwayes both a living God, and a very living man, even Christ God and
man, as he was borne of Marie the Virgin. But full falsely do ye lie, and
dissemble with the Queen, with her Couunsell, and with the commons of this
Realm, even as those Idolatrous priests of Babylon did with the King, and with
hi^ subjects. For as that Idol Bell was not a living god, but an Image made of
clay within, and of metal without, so likewise for all your consecrating,
blowing, blasting and breathing, your little Cake is neither a living God, nor
a living man, but as it was bread before ye brought it to your Idolatrous
Altar, so is it, when ye both hold it up and eat it. But as the Idolatrous
priests of Babylon taught the people plainly, that Bell was a living God, that
they by that means might live in wealth and idleness, so do ye likewise
stoutly both at Paul's Cross, and else where preach unto the people, that the
Sacrament of the Altar is the true, natural, real, corporal, carnal, and
substantial body of Christ, God and man, even he was borne of Virgin Marie,
and hung on the Altar of the cross, flesh, blood and bone, that ye by this
means may maintain your popish kingdom, and live idly and pleasantly of the
labors of other men's hands. But if a Daniel might sit at the Queens Table,
talk with the Nobility, and preach to the Commons of England, the juggling of
the Papists should soon be espied. God for his mercies sake and for the dear
heart-bloud of his most dear Son, send us a Daniel, and open the eyes of the
Queen, of her Council, and of all the Inhabitants of this Realm, that they
perceiving your subtle iugling and crafty daubing, may know you to be, as ye
are, even very Antichrists, hiss you out of all honest company, and for ever
after beware of your pestilent and damnable doctrine. Amen, Amen.

After that our Savior Christ was set down at the Table with his Disciples,
and had eaten the Paschall Lamb, willing to institute an holy memorial of his
passion and death, he took bread and gave thanks, says the Scripture. Now let
us see what ye do. What the Papists do at their Mass.
First ye come solemnly forth in your gay, galant and game players garments,
which as Isidore and Polidore write, was the invention of pope Steph^nus about
the year of our Lord two hundred fifty and six, borrowed, as it may seem of
the Jewish Priests. Priests massing vestments.
Ye come to the Altar Altars.
with your Masse-book Corporasse* Chalice, and Bread, with such other trinkets.
Your altars brought into the Church first of all Pope Sixtus the second, about
the year of our Lord two hundred threescore and five. And Pope Felix the first
adjoined the hallowing Hallowing of altars.
of altars commanding that no mass should be sung upon any altar, except it
were first hallowed. In the year of our Lord two hundred seventy and six. And
P. Boniface appointed white linen clothes Altar clothes.
to be laid upon the altars about the year of our Lord 610. The Corporasse
Corporasse.
was the devise of Pope Sixtus (as Platina and Sabellicus write, about the
year of our Lord an hundred and twenty and five. The Cup wherein the Sacrament
of Christ's blood was ministered, which we now commonly call the Chalice, was in
the time of the Apostles and the primitive Church made of wood; Cups of wood.
but Pope Zepheri^us commanded chalices of glass Chalices of glass.
to be used in the year of our Lord 202. And afterward Pope Vrbanus enjoined,
that the chalices should be made either of silver, chalices of Silver and gold.
or of gold, in the year of our Lord 227. The bread appointed for the
Communion was indifferent, whether it were leavened or unlea vened, till Pope
Alexander came, which a^ they write, in the year of our Lord III. commanded
that only unleavened bread Bread
should be used at the Lords Supper. Notwithstanding the Greeks from the
Apostles time unto this day, have ever used leavened bread in the ministration
of the holy Communion, as they use also wine only in their cup, whereas the
Latin Church customably mingle water with the wine, which was also Pope
Alexanders device.

Now standing before the Altar, after ye have crossed your selves upon your
forheads and breasts for fear of wicked spirits, ye say the Confiteor,
Confi^eor.
and make your confession, which was the ordinance of Pope Dam^sus about the
year of our Lord 370. But to whom do you make your confession? To God alone?
none of that. But to blessed Mary, and all the Saints of heaven, and and v^bis,
ye might say, and bobus, well enough. For many times besides the boy and Parish
clerk that wait upon you, there be in the Church as many white bulls and fat
oxen, as there be men and women. But where have ye learned to confess An
error of the Papists concerning confession.
your sins to the blessed Mary, and to all the company of heaven, which hear
not one word that ye speak? Ye have sinned against God, and you confess your
faults to Mary, Peter, (...), Th^mas, A^an, Abel, Ni^^, Abrah^m, John Baptist,
And I know not to whom, not to how many. This is new Catholic Divinity, found
in Portasse and M^ss^ll, but in no part of Gods blessed Boo^e. Divinity meet
for such Divines. Again, whom do you desire to pray for you? Our S^viour
Christ which alone is our Intercessour, Mediatou^, and Advocate? Nothing less.
Ye make no mention of him. He is utterly forgotten. Ye desire holy Mary An
error of the Papists concerning the intercession of Saints^
and all the Saints of God to pray for you. But where learned ^ou this
tyrologie? For Theology it is not. Even of your father Antichrist of Rome. But
as Mary and the other heavenly citizens hear your confession, so pray they for
you. But they hear not your confession, neither do they pray for you. O vain
bablers and talkers of trifles! your Mass having so good a beginning, must
have a glorious ending. It beginngth with lies, The Mass is a monster of lies.
we shall find it also to proceed with lies, yea, and to end with lies, that
it may be prooved a monster of lies.

After that you have made your confession to God and to our Lady, and to all
the holy company of heaven, and have given your self absolution for lack of a
ghostly father, ye approach to the Altar, and making a cross upon it, ye
kiss it in stead of some other, whom you love better. Then fall ye in hand
with your Massing, and ye begin the Introite, The I^troite or office of the
Mass.
or office of the Mass, which Pope Celestinus brought in about the year of
our Lord 430 That done, ye say the Kyry, The Kyry.
which, as some report, Pope Gregorius the first put to the Mass about the
year of our Lord 600. Some ascribe it to Pope Silvester, which lived about the
year of our Lord 330. But it seems to be borrowed of the Greek Church,
forasmuch as the words are Greek, and sound in English, Lord have mercy on
us. After these things ye go unto the midst of the Altar, and look up to the
pixe, where you think your God to be, and making solemn courtesy, like
womanly Ioane, ye say the Gloria in excelsis, Gloria in excelsis.
a godly both thankesgiving and prayer, and very fruitful and comfortable, if
it were spoken in the English tongue. The Author hereof some affirm Pope
Stephanus to be, who lived in the year of our Lord seven hundred and seventy.
Some ascribe it to Pope Telesph^rus, which was in the year of our Lord one
hundred and thirty. The Papists cannot agree.
Some to Pope Symachus, who lived in the year of our Lord five hundred. Some
to Saint Hilarie Bishop of Pict^ve, about the year of our Lord three hundred
forty and five. These things dispatched out of the way, ye have a pleasure to
see who is in the Church, and how well your Mass is frequented, and therefore
ye turn ye to the people, if any be there, and bid them God speed in
Latin, with Dominus vobiscum, because they understand nothing but English.
Turning again to the Altar, ye say certain Collects, Collects.
whereof although some of them be good, yet many of them be very superstitious
and stark staring naught. For in them ye set forth before God the
intercessions and merits of Saints, and ye desire for the nity and worthiness
of them to be heard, to have forgiveness of sins, and everlasting life. O
blasphemous Idolaters! what is it to rob Christ of his Priesthood, if this be
not? What spoileth Christ of his merits, if this do not? What treads under
foot the precious blood of our Savior Christ, if the saying of such abominable
blasphemous Collects do it not? The Author of the Collects some make Pope
Gelasius, which lived in the year of our Lord three hundred and ninety. Some
P. Gregory, of whom ye heard before. The Collects once done, ye read the
Epistle, The Epistle.
but in such a tongue as the people understand nothing, as ye do all other
things. Some say that Pope Telesphorus, of whom we spoke before, added the
Epistle to the Mass. Some make Hierome the Author of it, which lived about
the year of our Lord three hundred eighty seven. Then do ye say the Grayle,
The Grayle.
whereof they make Pope Gelasius the Author, of whom we spoke before.
Immediately follows the Allelujah, The Allelujah.
which they say, pope Gregory brought in, of whom also we spoke before. Some
say, it was borrowed of the Church of Jerusalem, and so brought into the Church
of Rome in the time of pope D^masus. It sounds in English, O praise the Lord.
Here is Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, in your popish Mass, whereof the people
understand nothing, but as for English, which the people understand ye meddle
nothing with-all, because you will make them your riding fools, and keep them
still in blindness. Then follows the Tract, The Tract or Sequence.
or the Sequence, one brought in by pope Telesphorus the other by Abbot
Nothg^rus, who lived in the year of our Lord 845. After that ye have mumbled
over all these things, ye take up your Massebooke, and away ye go to the
other end of the Altar to read the Gospel. The Gospel.
But first of all ye uncover the chalice, and look whether your drink be
there or no, least you should chance to be deceived, when the time of your
repast come. If it be there you make solemn courtesy to your little Idol,
that hangs over the Altar, and so go in hand with the Gospel. And all in
Latin, because it shall do no man good. The Author of adding the Gospel to
the Mass, some make pope Telesphorus, some Saint Hierome, of whom we spoke
before. Pope Anastasius, who lived in the year of our Lord 404. ordained that
the people Why the people stand up at the Gospel.
should stand up when the Gospel is read, that they might hear and understand
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and frame their lives according to the same. This
use is observed at this day in the popish Masses, I mean the people st^^d up
and make courtesy, when they hear the name of Jesus, but they understand not
one word. It were as good in such sort to be read to Swine and Dogs, as to
the Christian people, seeing they understand it not. The Gospel ended, with
another kiss upon the Book, The Creed.
ye say the Creed, which as they write, Pope Marcus made, about the year of
our Lord 335 and commanded that the Clergy and the people should sing it
together for the confirmation of their faith. After the Creed upon solemn
Feasts ye use to Cense the Altar, Censing of the Altars.
which was first brought in by Pope Leo, about the year of our Lord 876. These
things done with all solemnity, ye turn you again into the Church, to see
whether your customers be come or no, and so bidding them God-speed, ye turn
again to the Altar, and go forth with your business. The Offertory.
Then do you say your Offertory, which Pope Eutichi^^^ brought in, who lived
about the year of our LORD 285. After the Offertory is said, ye take the
Chalice up in your hands with the little round cake, lying upon the p^tine or
cover of the Chalice, and lifting up your eyes, ye pray on this manner:
Suscipe sancta Trinit^s, etc. A blasphemous prayer at the offertory.
Take O holy Trinity this oblation, which I unworthy sinner offer in the
honor of thee, of blessed Mary the Virgin, and of all thy Salu^s, for the
salvation of the living, and for the rest and quietness of all the faithful
that are dead. The Author of this prayer I cannot find. It is so good, that I
think he was ashamed to tell his Name. But what think ye of this prayer?
Be judges your selves, whether any thing may be uttered more unto the
dishonor of GOD, and the utter defacing of CHRIST'S blood, than this your
popish, and blasphemous orison. First of all, what offer ye? Ye must answer,
either the little round cake, or else the Chalice, or the wine and water that
is in it. Idolatry.
To whom do ye offer it? To Mary the Virgin, and to all the Saints of heaven,
because ye will lack no company, but gratify a multitude with a thing of
naught. Wherefore do ye offer that oblation? For the salvation of the living,
and for the rest or quietness of all the faithful that are dead. Ah, who ever
heard of such a sacrifice or oblation? A wafer cake, which is yet but mere
bread, and no Sacrament, and a Chalice with a spoonefull of wine mingled with
two or three drops of water to be offered for the salvation of the living, and
for the rest or quietness of all the faithful that are dead? O abomination! O
intolerable blasphemy! If Adams Posterity might have been saved by such
trifling oblations, what needed the Son of God to have died for us? If a
morsel of bread and a full of wine offered up of an idolatrous Priest be of
such virtue, that it may obtain salvation for the quick and the dead: was not
Christ greatly overseene to suffer so great pains for the redemption of man?
If thousands of great oxen, bulls, kine, calves, goats, sheep, lambs, doves,
etc. in the old Law could not take away the sins of the people, although they
were offered at the commandment of God, is it to be thought, that a wafer cake
and a spoonefull of wine mingled with water, and appointed to be offered by
Antichrist, is a sufficient oblation to purchase salvation for the living and
rest and quietness for the dead? O Damnable Idolatry! There is no Sacrifice
that can save us, The death of Christ is the alone sacrifice for sin.
but the glorious Passion, and precious Death of our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus alone, as Saint Paul says: God forbid, that I should rejoice in anything
but in the Cross, that is to say, in the passion and death of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And to whom do ye offer your new solemn Sacrifice. To God alone?
Nay, but to blessed Mary also, and to all the company of heaven. In this also,
if your oblation and sacrifice were good, Sacrifice ought to be offered to God
alone.
do ye grievously offend. For ye may offer Sacrifice to none but to God
alone. Therefore you making your oblation to Mary, to Peter, to Paul, to
Magdalen, to John, to James, to Erke^^ald, to Grymbald, and I cannot tell to
how many thousands more, are abominable Idolaters, seeing that as much as lies
in you, ye make of the Saints gods, and so do ye rob God of his glory. God
says by the Prophet, Esaias 42.
I am the Lord, this is my Name, I will give my glory to none other. And the
Saints themselves cry in this manner: Psalm. 114.
Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thy Name give the glory. After that your
prayer, ye set your Chalice down again, saying these words: Acceptu^s sit
omnipotenti Deo hoc sacrificium novuns. That is to say, O that this new
Sacrifice might be thankfully taken of almighty God! Why, dee ye doubt of the
matter? Is your prayer so good, and your faith so strong, that ye doubt,
whether God will hear you, and receive your sacrifice or no? Indeed you may
right well call it a new Sacrifice, for it was never heard of before; A new
Sacrifice.
that a wafer* cake and a spoonefull of wine mingled with water, should be an
oblation and Sacrifice for the salvation of the living, and for the rest and
quietness of all the faithful that are dead. But notable is your doing
afterward. When ye have thus sacrificed and offered, ye trudge straight-wayes
to the Altars end, Washing of hands.
and wash your hands. To what end I know not, except it be, that you have
defiled your selves with your new stinking Sacrifice, Which you even now offered
unto God, to blessed Mary, and to all the company of heaven, for the salvation
of the quick, and for the rest and quietness of all the faithful that are
dead, and think by the washing of your hands, to be cleansed from the
abominable spiritual whoredom, which ye have committed against God. I
suppose ye learned this washing of your hands of Pilate, Matthew. 27.
which when for favor of the Jews, and for fear of Caesar, he had unjustly
condemned CHRIST unto death, called for a basin of water to wash his hands, and
said, I am clean from the blood of this righteous man. But as he for all his
washing escaped not the vengeance of God, but dyed a most miserable death, even
so may ye be sure, though ye wash your hands never so often, not to escape the
heavy hand of God, for speaking such blasphemies against the Lord and his
anointed, except ye out of hand cease from your abominable Massing, which is
nothing else but very Idolatry, mere blasphemy, great dishonor to God, and
extreme injury to the precious blood of Christ, while ye ascribe that unto
bread, wine, and water, which only appertains unto the passon and death of
our Savior Christ.

After ye have washed your hands, ye return again to the Altar, holding your
hands before you, like maidenly Priests, and manerly bowing your selves to your
little great god that shall be, Crossing.
ye make a cross upon the Altar, and kiss Kissing.
it in stead of your pretty Petronilla, and then having peradve^ture a good
mind to behold some she Saint in the Church, ye turn your selves, looking
down to the people, and saying, Turn and
Orate pro me Fratres and Sorores. O pray for me ye Brethren and Sisters, when
many times there is no body in the Church, but the Boy that helps you to say
Mass, and so making solemn courtesy like womanly Jove, Return.
ye return unto your accustomed pattering. What ye say, no man can tell. For
now comes in your subtle secrets. And they may right well be called Secrets,
for they are so Secret, and so secretly spoken, that no man is the wiser for
them. But whatsoever they are, The Secrets.
good stuff I warrant you they are. And for as much as they be certain
Collects, they father them upon Pope Gelasius, and Pope Gregory, of whom we
spoke before.

When ye have once done with your subtle, solemn, sleepy secrets, ye burst
out into open words, and exhort the people to lift up their hearts unto God,
and to consider the mysteries that are now in hand, and to be thankful to God
for the benefits of their redemption. Ah, would God, ye so spoke the words,
that the people might be edified by them. But ye speak in such sort, that it
were much better for you to hold your peace, and the people to be at home
asleep. For ye do nothing else than beat the air with your breath. The
people understand nothing at all, neither do they consider any thing, but only
are there present as vain gasers. These admonitions to the people, of lifting
up their hearts unto God, and to be thankful to him for his benefits, set
forth in the death of his Son Christ, were used in the Primative Church as we
may see in Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustine. The Author of these godly
exhortations is not known. Immediately follows the Preface, The Preface
and because there be diverse, they father them upon Pope Gelasius, and Pope
Gregory, as they do all other things, whereof they can find no certain
Author. But this is most certain that the ancient Church used but one
Preface, which is called the quotidian or daily Preface. These things passed
over, ye fall in hand with the Sanctus, Which lifting up your hands, ye speak
with a loud voice, and that ended, ye kiss the Masse-booke, Kissing the Canon
of the Mas^.
because some other is not at hand. The S^^ctus, as they say, was brought in by
Pope Sixtus, The Sanctu.
which was about the year of our Lord 125. and commanded to be sung in the
Church. Now comes in your holy Mass Canon, whereof be diverse Authors. For
it is an hotchpotch devised and made by a number of Popes, and by others also.
It is a very beggars cloak, cobled, clouted and patched with a multitude of
popish rags. And yet the Papists affirm it to be the holiest part of your
Mass. And it may soon be. For there is not one part of the Mass, that can
worthily be called good, as it is used at this present. All things are so far
out of order without edifying, and contrary to Gods holy ordinance. The authors
of this their goodly and godly Canon they make Pope Ale^ander, The Authors of
the Canon.
Pope Gelasius, Pope Gregory, Pope Sixtus, Pope Leo, and a certain man called
Scholasticus, with other. Crossing.
And here begin ye wonderfully to cross, and to pray for the Universal
Church, first for our LORD Pope, secondly for the Bishop of the Diocese
wherein ye dwell, thirdly, for your King and Queen, last of all, for all those
that be of the Catholic faith. And now come ye to your first Memento, The
first Memento.
which serves for the living, where ye stand nodding like a sort of
drunkards, and praying, ye say for all your good friends and benefactors, for
all that uphold and maintain the kingdom of the Clergy, and defend our
mother holy Church against the assaults of the Gospellers, and here ye allege
a sort of Saints, and ye desire that for their merits and prayers sake, ye may
be saved and preserved from all evil. O abominable blasphemers! This done,
ye fall to crouching and beholding the little cake and chalice, and speaking a
few little good words in Latin, ye bless and cross wonderfully the cake and
Chalice, as though they were haunted with some ill spirits. While ye are thus
blessing, the boy or Parish Clerk rings the little Sacry bell, which bids
the people lay all things aside now, and lift up their heads, behold their
maker, kneel down and worship their Lord God, which Sir John shall
straight-wayes make with as much speed as may be, and show him unto them above
his head. Before it was Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts unto the Lord, but
now is sursum capita, come in, lift up your heads, and look upon your maker
between the priests hands, Why the Priest at Mass turns his back to the
people.
with his arse turned toward you, because no woman at that present shall be
inamored with his sweet and loving face. Come off, kneel down, look up,
knock your breast, behold the apple-maker of Kent, and mark well him that
killed thy father. This is the Lord thy God. Let us fall down and worship him.
O unsufferable Idolatry. Idolatry.
Notable is the doctrine of the Nicene Counsel, The Council of Nice.
which commands that we shall not direct our minds downward to the bread
and cup, but lift them up to Christ by faith, whith is ascended up into heaven
really and corporally, and not present carnally in the Sacramental bread, as
the papists teach. An error of the Papists.
Christ, while we live in this world, is not to be seen with the eyes of this
body, but of the spirit by faith. If we will see and worship Christ aright, we
must see and worship him in spirit, sitting in his glory and majesty above in
heaven at the right hand of God his father, and not behold him in the
Sacramental bread with the corporal eyes, where nothing is to be seen, felt,
tasted, or received with the mouth, but bread only. But before we come to
your consecration, to your Sacring, and to the lifting up of your little great
young old God, we will first see what Christ did, afterward compare your doings
with his. Christ What Christ did.
sitting at the table, took bread, and after he had given thanks, he brake
the bread, and gave it to his Disciples for to eat. Christ sat at the table,
ye stand at an Altar. Comparison between Christ and the Massemongers.
Christ took bread to make it a Sacrament of his body, ye take a little
thin round Cake, or rather a thin piece of starch to make it the natural
body of Christ, God and man, and to offer it for a Sacrifice for the sins of
the quick and the dead. Christ delivered the bread to his Disciples, to eat
it in the remembrance of his death, ye take the bread, and hold it up above
your head, and make a show of it to the people, and when ye have once so done,
ye alone devour and eat it up. Christ brake the bread, signifying thereby the
breaking of his body on the Altar of the Cross for the Salvation of the world,
according to this his promise in the Gospel of Saint John John 6.
I am that living bread which came down from heaven. If any man eats of this
bread, he shall live for ever. And the bread that I will give is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world. Ye break the bread also, which
ye say is the natural body of Christ, flesh, blood, and bone. Breaking of the
Host in three parts.
But very fondly ye break it. For ye break your Host (I use your own
terms) in three parts, holding it over the chalice, while you break it, I
think because ye would lose none of the blood, that should issue out of the
body, which ye newly have made, and now suddenly ye break and destroy
again. When ye have broken your new formed God in three parts, two pieces you
keep still in your hands for flying away, and the third ye let fall down
into the chalice, to lie there awhile a sleeping, or to put you in remembrance
of your nappy Ale and Tossed, which your pretty Parnell has full lovingly
prepared for you against your Mass be done, lest you should chance to faint
for taking so great pains at your butcherly altar. Many significations have
the Papists invented for those 3. broken What the breaking of the Host
signifies, and is.
pieces of the cake, which all here to rehearse were too long. I will rehearse
one, and if ye desire to know more, enquire of your brethren the Papists, and
they shall easily teach you. Note.
The first part say they, which is both the longest and the greatest, does not
only signify, but also is a Sacrifice of thanksgiving to God the Father for
his benefits declared to mankind in the death of Christ his son. The second
is a Sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of the people, that ^ee living in
this world, but specially for the sins of such as have bought the Mass for
their money, that they may be delivered a poena and culpa toties quoties. The
third piece, which is let down into the chalice, is a satisfactory Sacrifice
for the souls that lie miserably puling in the hot fire of Purgatory, to
deliver them from the grievous pains and bitter torments that they there
suffer, and through the virtue and merits of that Sacrifice to bring them unto
everlasting glory. O intolerable abomination. Here is the breaking of your
Host, with the goodly mysteries thereof.

Christ, say the Evangelists, took bread, brake it, and gave it to his
Disciples, saying, Take, Matthew. 25. (...). 14. Luke 22. I Cor. 11. A point of
little good-fellowship,
eat, this is my body, which is broken for you. Do this in remembrance of me.
Ye also take bread and break it, but ye give it to your selves. But as Christ
gave the bread to his Disciples, willing them to eat it in remembrance of his
passion and death, so ought ye to do to the faithful congregation that are
present, and not like swinish beasts to eat and drink up all alone your
selves, and afterward to bless the people wi^h an empty cup, as ye do at your
high and solemn feasts. But this do ye not, therefore are ye plain
Antichrists. Take this bread, says our Savior Christ. Take it in your hands.
Handling of the Sacramental bread.
Hand off, say ye Papists. Gape, and we will put it in your mouths, and feed
ye as children use to feed their Iack-dawes. Handle so precious a relic?
Marry Sir, God forbid. The woman peradventure has lien with her husband all
night, or the husband with the wife, and shall such touch the precious body of
our Lord with their hands? Marry Sir, God forbid. That were a piteous case.
But ye abominable Whoremasters, ye filthy fornicators, ye stinking Sodomites,
ye deceitful Deflowrers of mayds, ye devilish defilers of men's wives ye
cankred corrupters of widows, and ye lecherous locusts, may lie with your
whores and harlots all night, and the next day after go to Mass, consecrate,
make, touch, handle, break and devour your God, and yet ye defile the
Sacrament nothing at all. O abominable Whorehunters. O monstrous Massmongers.
Honest Matrimony, after your corrupt judgments defiles the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, but filthy fornication, abominable adultery, wicked
whoredom, and stinking Sodomitrie advances the dignity thereof. O right
Chaplins of that filthy Idol Priapus. But come off I pray you, Of the hand and
mouth.
what has the hand more offended than the mouth that it may not touch the
Sacrament? Are they not both the good creatures of God? are they not made both
of one substance? and to say the truth, there comes not so much evil from the
hand, as there does out of the mouth For out of the mouth come Blasphemies,
cursed speakings, evil reports, bannings, slanders, lies, malicious words,
filthy tales, idle talk, singing of bawdy ballads, etc. But from the hand
comes virtuous occupation, honest labor, painful travail, getting of thy
living, helping of our neighbors, and almesgiving to the poor. But ye are
always like your selves, that is to say, very Antichrists. For ye are
evermore contrary to Christ. Christ delivered the Sacrament into his Disciples
hands, and you put it into the Communicants mouths, as though the people were
not so wise, as to put a morsel of bread in their own mouths. The people are
much bound to you, that have so good opinion of them. Ye make them momes
indeed, asses, louts, and your very riding fools God once open their eyes, that
they may perceive your juggling. Ye are well worthy to have your tithes and
offerings truly paid, Beware ye that ma^ntaine Massemongers.
ye do your duty so well. Verily, they that give ought to find you
Masse-mongers withal, and to maintain you in your abominable massing, do
nothing else but offend God, dishonor Christ, tread under foot the precious
blood of Christ, make Christ's death of no price* maintain Idolatry, defy the
holy Communion, destroy the Christian commonweal, uphold Antichrists brood,
cherish Satan's Chaplains, pamper Priapus pildepates, make fat Venus stout
stallions, enrich Bacchus Sacrificers, Note.
and nourish such monsters as do nothing else than murder, kill and slay the
souls of so many as follow your damnable Doctrine, and hant your Idolatrous
Masses. Let the Christians therefore beware, how and upon whom they bestow
their goods, lest by giving to Massing priests, they get to themselves
everlasting damnation. The doer and maintainer shall receive like punishment.
He that reads the practices of the ancient Church, shall evidently see, that
the manner of the godly Ministers at that time was not to put the Sacramental
bread into the peoples mouths, as ye do at this present, but to give it them
into their hands. For it was not then taken and honored for a God, as it is
now, but it was reverently used and taken as an holy and worthy Sacrament of
Christ. But what marvel is it though ye will not suffer the people to handle
the Sacramental bread, seeing ye will not suffer the Touching of the chalice.
co^municants to touch your Popes holy chalice, wherein notwithstanding is not
the Sacrament of Christ's blood, but only mere wine dedicated and appointed to
no godly use. Ye are contrary to Christ in all things. God amend you.

Take, eat, says our Savior Christ. Nay, say ye Masse-mongers, neither take
ye, nor eat, but come and hear Mass devoutly, and see us take and eat up
altogether, and it is enough for you. Fall down, kneel and worship your Maker,
that we show unto you. Honor your God that is hanged up in the pixe over the
Altar, and so shall ye be good Catholics, and dear children of our mother
holy Church. Idolatry. ^^^iding at Easter.
If ye come at Easter according to P. Zepherinus A point of little good
fellowship.
commandment, and then receive your maker devoutly, it is enough for you. At
all other times we will receive the Sacrament for you, and it shall do you as
much good, as though you had eaten it your self. O false and subtle
hypocrites, O wicked corrupters of the Lords blessed Testament. Antichrists.
If other men should eat up your dinners and suppers in your stead, as ye eat up
the Sacrament from the people, ye should not have so fat panches as ye have,
nor yet so fry in your grease as you do. Christ delivered the Sacramental
bread to his Disciples, and bade them eat, but ye eat up all your selves, and
will give no man part with you. O cankred carles, O churlish chuffes! And here
may we, note by the way, to what end the Sacramental bread is ordained, Why the
Lords Supper was instituted.
not that it should be kneeled to, nor honored as a God, nor gazed on, nor
carried about in popish pompous processions, nor offered up for a sacrifice for
the sins of the quick and the dead, nor yet to reserve it, and to hang it up in
the pixe over the Altar, as ye Papists do, but that it should be received,
and eaten of the faithful Communicants, at the Lords Supper, in remembrance of
CHRIST'S death, Take eat, says our Savior Christ. Hitherto have we heard,
that your peevish, popish, private, pedlary, pelting mass, agrees with the
Lords blessed Supper and holy Communion nothing at all. Let us now see, how
well ye behave your selves in the words of Consecration, as ye call them,
wherein after your opinion hangs all the matter. Christ said, This is my
body, which is betrayed for you. Do this in the remembrance of me. Now let us
behold your consecration. Consecration.
Taking the little Cake in your hands, ye say these words. The day before he
suffered, he took bread into his holy and worshipful hands, and lifting up
his eyes unto heaven, to the God his Father Almighty, and giving the thanks,
he blessed, brake and gave to his Disciples, saying, Take and eat of this all
ye. For this is my body. The Author of these words as they be here recited,
was Pope Alexander, about the year of our Lord 112. Here do ye not rehearse
the words truly, as our Savior CHRIST spoke them. Iug^^ng.
Some words ye added, and some ye have taken away. But I much marvel at your
gross ignorance Ignorance.
in this one thing. Ye put a difference between Blessing and Thankesgiving.
For when ye rehearse this word Be^edixit, he blessed, Blessing signi^ieth
thankesgiving.
you cross and bless the bread with your greasy fingers, as though Christ's
blessing in that place were the wagging of his fingers, and not rather
thankesgiving. For where Saint Mark has, Cum Benedixisset, When he had
blessed. Saint Matthew, Luke and Paul has, Cum Gratias egisset, When he had
given thanks. So that to bless, after Marks phrase, is nothing else than to
give thanks, to praise and to magnify. And so is it taken in diverse places of
the holy Scriptures, both in the old and new Testament. Again, ye put to these
four words of Christ, Hoc est corpus meum, this word Enim, Enim.
and ye say, Hoc est enim carpus (...), one word more than ever Christ put in,
because ye may be found still as ye are, even abominable liars. But for putting
in this one word Enim (which is of so great virtue, say ye, that without it
there can be no perfect Consecration, and then what is to be thought,
Corrupters of Christ's Testament.
I pray you, of Christ, and of his Apostles, of the Primative Church, and of
the Greeks at this day, which never used that word) being your own
superfluous addition, ye most wickedly leave out these most necessary words,
that CHRIST spoke, which is betrayed for you, Do this in the remembrance of
me. This joyful promise, that Christ's body was betrayed, given and broken for
us, with the residue, ye leave out, as a thing pertaining nothing to the
purpose. And yet are they so necessary, that without the knowledge of them, the
Sacrament profits nothing at all. Note well.
If I receive the Sacrament a thousand times, and yet if I know not to what use
it was instituted of Christ, what profits and benefits I have by the worthy
receiving of it. If I do not set before the eyes of my mind the death of
Christ, and faithfully believe to have remission and forgiveness of al my sins
by the breaking of Christ's body, and by the sheadding of his most precious
blood, etc. it profits me no more, tha^ the precious stone did profit. Aesops
Cock.

Again, Antichrists.
those words, which Christ spoke openly to his Disciples, unto their great joy
and comfort, you partly leave out, and partly whisper in hocker mocker to your
selves, that no man may be the better for your doings, and that the people may
be kept still in blindness. Our Savior CHRIST says, What I tell you in
darkness, Matthew. 10.
that speak ye in light. And what ye hear in the ear, that preachye on the
house tops. But ye do clean contrary. For that which Christ spoke openly to
his Disciples, ye mutter it softly to your selves. O cruel soule-slayers, and
bloody murderers. But is this your dexterity, uprightnes, and true dealing
with the Word of God? Corrupters.
So to corrupt and mangle the words of the glorious Testament of the Son of
God? It is not lawful to alter a mortal man's Testament, and dare ye presume
(O ye Antichrists) to alter and change the blessed Testament and heavenly will
of the King of Glory? Are ye faithful Ministers, which deal so unfaithfully
with your Lord and Master? Ye that deal so wickedly with God, how will ye deal
with man? God keep all faithful people out of your claws.

After ye have once spoken these five words, ^dolatry.
Hoc est enim corpus meum, over the bread, and have blasted, breathed, and
blowed upon it, ye kneel down to it, and worship it like abominable
Idolaters, and afterward ye hold it up above your pestilent, pilde, shaven,
shameless heads, that the people by looking upon it, and worshipping it, may
be partakers also of your abominable Idolatry, not being contented with your
own damnable estate, except ye bring other also into the same danger. Sakering
or Levation.
The Author of your levation and lifting the bread above your head, was Pope
Honori* the third about the year of our LORD 1: 10. which commanded that the
Host should be lifted up above the Priests head at Mass, and that all the
people should fall down and worship it. O Antichrist. Here may all men see,
how ancient a thing your holy sakering is, which is counted the best and
chiefest part of your Mass when notwithstanding it is the most wicked and most
abominable part of your idolatrous Mass. Verily it is not much more than
three hundred years old. The Sakering is the most abominable part of the Mass
Let the lying Papists therefore be ashamed to brag, that their divellish Mass
came from the Apostles, seeing it is proved to be a new and late invention of
Antichrist. And although the whole Mass of the Papists be utterly wicked and
abominable, yet this part, which they call the Sakering, is most wicked and
abominable, for as much as it provokes the people that are present, to commit
most detestable Idolatries. For the people take it to be their god. They
believe that bread, which the Priest heaveth above his head, to be Christ,
perfect God, and perfect man. Therefore kneel they down unto it, knock their
breasts, lift up their heads, worship and honor it. When the Bell once rings
(if they cannot conveniently see) they forsake their seats, and run from
Altar to Altar, from Sakering to Sakering, peeping here, and tooting there, and
gazing at that thing, which the pilde-pate Priest holds up in his hands. And
if the Priest be weak in the arms, and heave not up high enough, the rude
people of the Country, in diverse parts of England, will cry out to the
Priest, hold up Sir John, hold up. Heave it a little higher. And one will say
to another: Stoop down thou fellow before, that I may see my Maker. For I
cannot be merry except I see my LORD GOD once in a day. O abomination. Ah, Woe
worth you, ye Masse-mongers, that are the authors of this abominable
Idolatry, and through your wicked massing send thousands to the Devil, except
the mercy of God be the greater. Better were ^e Masse-mongers to leave your
fat Benefices, your rich Prebeuds, your wealthy Deanries, your honorable
Chaplainships, your long Gowns, your Sarsene^ Tiopets and your shaven crowns,
and become watertankard-bearers in London, or to cobble a shoo, or go to
plough and cart, yea, to have a millstone tied about your neck, and be cast into
the bottom of the sea, than your most stinking, wicked and vile massing to
provoke so many people unto Idolatry, and to bring the wrath of God and
everlasting damnation upon them, except they repent and amend. Matthew. 18.
Verily I say unto you, Matthew. 10.
it shall be easier for the Land of So dome at the day of Judgment, than for
you. But I know what ye will say: That we hold up is the very natural body of
Christ, God and man, The objections of the Papists concerning Christ's corporal
presence in the Sacrament.
therefore may we all justly worship it. I ask you, how prove ye it to be the
natural body of Christ? Ye answer, By the virtue of these words, An
abs^rditie.
Hoc est enim corpus meum. I reply, CHRIST spoke these words of the bread, as
the holy Scriptures and all ancient Writers do witness, John 15. 10.
and so then follows it, that bread is Christ's body, and Christ's body is
bread. And by this means it must needs be granted, that Christ has two
bodies, one made of bread, and another of flesh, which he received of Mary the
Virgin. But ye answer, Christ's calling is making. Christ called the bread his
body, therefore is it made his body. I answer again, Christ called himself a
Vine, a Door, a Shepherd, and called his Heavenly Father a Plough-man, is
Christ therefore made a natural vine, a material door, a rusticall
shepherd, and his Father an husbandman of the country? Christ called John
Baptist Elias. Mat. 11. 17
Is John therefore made that Elias the Thesbite, which preached in the time of
wicked King Achab? 3 King. 13.
Christ called John the Evangelist Mary's son, John 19.
and called Mary his mother: is John therefore made the natural son of Mary
the Virgin, Christ's mother? And is Mary made the very true and natural mother
of John Evangelist? I am sure ye will not so say. No more is the Sacramental
Bread Christ's natural body, although Christ called it his body, but his body
in a mystery, and in a figure, as the old writers testify. Libr 4.
Tertullian that most ancient Doctor says: Cont. Marc.
Jesus taking bread, and distributing it among his disciples, made it his
body, saying: This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body. Hereto
agrees the saying of Saint Augustine, Co^tra.
Christ did not Adi^ant. (...) Mat. 26.
stick to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. And Saint
Hierome says, that Christ did represent the truth of his body and blood by the
bread and wine. An infinite number of like sentences concerning this matter,
are found in the ancient Authors, which prove evidently, that this saying of
Christ, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body, is a figurative speech. Signs or
Sacraments in the holy Scripture are called by the names of the things, whereof
they be Sacraments and signs, as we read of the Arc, of Circumcision, Titus
3.
of the Paschal Lamb, of the Sacrifices of the old Law, of Baptism, which
Saint Paul calls the Laver or fountain of regeneration, and the receiving of
the Holy Ghost. And after this sort is the sacramental bread called by the name
of Christ's body, because it is the Sacrament, sign and figure of his body.
Those things which do signify, says Saint Cyprian, and those things which be
signified by them, Sermon. de Chrism.
may be both called by one name. And Saint Augustine rehearsing diverse
sentences which were spoken figuratively, Contr. Adiman^um.
numbreth among the^ these words of Christ, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my
body, whereby he declares plainly, that Christ spoke these words figuratively,
not meaning that the bread was his body by substance, but by signification.
Moreover it is directly against the verity and truth of Christ's natural body,
to be at more places at once than in one, Christ's natural body cannot be but
in one place at once.
as he must be in an hundred thousand places at once, if your doctrine be
true. A stinking Sodomite, or a wicked whoremonger being dressed in his fools
coat, and standing at an altar with a little thin round cake in his hand,
shall with these five words, Hoc est corpus meum, and with blowing and
breathing upon the bread, make Christ the king of glory to come from the right
hand of his father, and to touch himself in the Accidents of the little cake,
until ye have eaten him, and then trudge up again to heaven, till Hoc est
enim corpus meum fetch him down again if your doctrine be true. O proud
Lucifers! And oh poor wretched Christ, who at every filthy Masse-mongers
commandment art compelled to come down from the glorious throne of thy
Majesty, and to be handled as the Papish please, either to be torn asunder
with their teeth, or else to be hanged up with an halter in their popish Pixe.
But know ye, O ye vile and blasphemous Papists, that though ye whisper your
five words never so often at your Idolatrous altars, and breath blast and blow,
till ye be windlesse, ye shall never pluck the Son of God from the right
hand of his Father, nor make that thin cake of yours Christ's natural Body.
The article of our faith is that Christ is gone up into heaven, and sits on
the right hand of God the Father Almighty, and from thence he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead. Our Savior Christ told his Disciples full often,
a little before his passion, that he should leave the world, John 14. 16.
and go up again unto his Father. Saint Mark Mark. 16.
says that Christ was taken up into heaven, and sits on the right hand of
God. Saint Luke says, Luke 24.
that Christ went away from his Disciples, and was carried up into heaven. The
Angel of God said to the Apostles, Acts 1.
when Christ did ascend up into heaven: ye men of Galile, why stand ye gazing
up into heaven. This Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, so shall
he come, as ye have seen him going into heaven. Of these words of the Angels
we learn, that as Christ went up visibly, and was seen with the corporal
eyes of men, but never man saw him yet coming down with his corporal eyes,
therefore never came he down corporally since his ascension. S. Stephen indeed
saw Christ even with his bodily eyes as we read in the Acts of the Apostles.
But where? Here on the earth between the Priests hands? Nay, but in heaven
standing on the right hand of God. Saint Paul heard Christ speak, but from
whence? from the popish pixe? yea rather from heaven. Saint Peter says, as
blessed Luke testifyeth, Act. 2.
that Jesus Christ must receive heaven, till the time that all things which God
has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the world began, be
restored again. This time is till the day of judgment. If ye will have Christ
therefore bodily at your Masses, ye must tarry till the day of Judgment. For
till that time, says blessed Peter, he must keep heaven. Alas, where is
your Hoc est enim corpus meum after your gross understanding become? Romans 8.
Moreover, Ephesians. 4.
S. Paul in diverse places of his Epistles declares, Cel. 3.
that Christ is ascended into heaven, 1 These. 14.
and sits on the right hand of God, 1 Timothy 3.
and makes intercession for us to God his father. Heb. 10.
So likewise do the other Apostles in their writings. Jesus Christ, says
Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.
is on the right hand of God, and is gone into heaven. We have an Advocate with
the Father: Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.
says Saint John. All these Authorities of the holy Scripture with many other,
do testify that Christ as concerning his corporal presence is no more in the
earth, but in heaven only. Christ has in him two natures, the nature of God,
and the nature of man. As concerning his divine nature, he is in heaven, in
earth, and in every place. But as touching his humane nature, he is in heaven
only, and there shall remain until the Day of Judgment, as Saint Augustine
says, Tract. 50. in Johan.
as concerning the presence of his Majesty we have Christ always, but as
touching the presence of his flesh, it was truly said to his Disciples. Me
shall ye not always have with you. For the Church had him a few days after
the presence of his flesh, but now it holds him by faith, and sees him not
with the eyes. Again, Hd. Dard^n.
he says, God and man is one person, and both is one Christ Jesus, in every
place, in that he is God, De fide and Syn. ^. 6
but in heaven in that he is man. Also in another place, Where and in what
manner Christ is in heaven, it is a vain and superfluous thing to ask or
demand, but we must surely believe, that he is only in heaven. If he be
only in heaven, as concerning his corporal presence, as both the Scriptures
and Saint Augustine affirm, how then is he either in your round cake at
Mass, or else hanging up in your popish Pixe over the Altar with an halter?
But let us hear what the ancient Doctor Virgilius writes concerning this
matter. Lib. 1. cont. E^tich.
The Son of God, says he, as concerning his Humanity, is gone away from us,
but as touching his Divinity, he says unto us: Behold I am with you always
unto the end of the world. Again, forasmuch as the word is every where, and
his flesh is not every where, it appears that one and the same CHRIST is of
both natures, and that he is in every place as concerning the nature of his
Godhead. Again, that he is contained in a place as touching the nature of his
manhood. Of these Authorities does it manifestly appear, that Christ, inasmuch
as he is God, is in every place, but having respect to that he is a man, he is
only in one place, that is to say* in heaven. If he be only in heaven inasmuch
as he is man, then consider ye, what is to be thought of the doctrine of the
Papists, which teach that Christ's natural body is in every place wheresoever
his Godhead is. O Antichrists! If this be not to play the Heretic Marcions
part, and utterly to destroy the verity of Christ's humane nature, or of his
natural body, what is it? But Saint Augustine says very well in this behalf,
Ad Dardan.
we must take heed (says he) that we do not so set forth, maintain or
affirm the Godhead of the Man (Christ) that we take away or destroy the truth
of his body. For it does not follow, that that which is in God, should be every
where as God. Christ, inasmuch as he is God, is every where, but being man, he
is only in heaven. Note well the omnipotency or almighty power of God.
But ye will object, according to your old wont, the omnipotency or almighty
power of God and say, that forasmuch as he is omnipotent and almighty, he may
both make the bread his body, and also be in as many places concerning the
corporal presence, as he list, that is to say, in infinite places at once. I
answer, God is not called Almighty because he can do all things, Why God is
called Almighty.
but because he is able to do whatsoever his Godly pleasure is to do. For
there are certain things which God cannot do, as for example, he cannot
deny himself, he cannot lie, he cannot save such as die in infidelity, he
cannot make another of like power with himself, he cannot save the reprobate,
nor condemn the Elect, which have their names written in the Book of life,
etc.

Whatsoever is contrary to his Word, that cannot God do; But it is contrary to
the Word of God for Christ's body to be in more places at once, than in one,
yea, to be both in heaven sitting at the right hand of God the Father, and
here also in earth at your popish Masses in a thousand places at once,
therefore is not God able to make his body to be in so many places at once, as
ye feign, forasmuch as the nature of God only is infinite, and the nature of
all creatures is contained in some certain one place at once. But here again
ye will bring forth these promises of CHRIST. The promises of Christ
concerning concerning his presence.
Wheresoever two or three be gathered together in my Name, Mar. 18.
there am I in the midst of them. Matthew. 28.
Again, I am with you always unto the end of the world. These promises, and
such like are to be understood not of the corporal presence here on earth,
but of his Grace, as the Doctors themselves do declare. In Ioh. l. c. 16.
It is to be noted, marked and considered says Cyril, that although Christ
has taken away the presence of his body from hence, yet by the Majesty of his
Godhead he is always present, as he at his departure promised his
Disciples. Behold says he, I am with you always unto the very end of the
world. The like saying of Saint Augustine heard we before. Of all these things
heretofore spoken it is evident, that the natural body of Christ is not here
in earth, as ye Masse-mongers would gladly make us believe, but in heaven
only, and there shall remain until the day of Judgment. Christ in the mean
season being here present with us by his Spirit and Grace. Seeing then that the
Sacramental bread is not the natural body of Christ, God and man, but a
figure, Sacrament, and holy sign of his body, with what forehead dare you
either affirm that your little thin round cake, after five words pronounced
over it, and you breathing, blasting and blowing upon it, to be the true,
natural, real, corporeal, and substantial body of Christ, God and Man, as
he was borne of the Virgin Marie, and suffered for us on the Altar of the
cross, or worship it your selves, or yet provoke others so to do, according
to Pope Honorius decree, and not after Christ's institution? What is Idolatry,
if this be not Idolatry? To worship a piece of bread for God, Idolatry.
what heathen Idolater ever so doted? If good king Ezekias lived in these our
days, he would rather play with the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, as
he did with the Brazen Serpent, 2 King. 1^.
than he would suffer such abomiable Idolatry to be committed at the
ministration of it, to the great dishonor of God, the utter defacing of
Christ's passion, and blood, and death, and to the dreadful damnation of
innumerable souls. O England England tears, yea tears of blood may thou
well weep, which in the prosperous time of that most godly King Edward the
Sixth were blessedly purged of all superstition, Idolatry, and popish doctrine,
and had restored unto thee the true Gospel of thy salvation, and the right
ministration of the Lords Sacraments, But now for thine unthankfulness toward
the Lord thy God, all these heavenly treasures are taken away from thee, and
the stinking dung of the Pope most miserable cast upon thee. Lament thy sins
O England, lament, lament, Return to the Lord thy God, and most humbly beseech
him once again to look upon thee with his merciful countenance, to take away
these popish dregs, to restore unto thee his lively Word, and to bless thee
again with the true ministration of his holy Sacraments, that thou may serve
the L O R D thy God in holiness and righteousness all the days of thy life.

This doctrine, The Doctrine of the Papists concerning the presence of Christ
in the Sacrament, is new.
that the Sacrament of the Altar, as you term it, is the true, natural,
real, carnal, corporal, and substantial body of Christ, is the dream of
Antichrist the Bishop of Rome, and was never received in the Church till Pope
Leo, Pope Nicholas, Pope Innocent, Pope Honorius, and Pope Urban, through their
tyranny brought it in and compelled the Christians with fire and faggot (as the
manner of the tyrannical Papists is) to receive their abomihable doctrine, and
yet in all ages God stored up some to confess the true doctrine of the
Sacrament against Antichrist even unto the death. Neither is this popish
doctrine so ancient as the Papists brag. For it is not much more than five
hundred years since their g^osse opinion of the Sa^rament began first to be
attempted. And although Pope Nicholas the second di^ much in the matter, yet
was it not thoroughly received nor agreed upon, until Pope Innocent the third
came, which about the year of our Lord 1215. kept a Council at Rome, called
Latronense, I would say, Lateranense concilium: where were gathered together a
swarm of Papists, about the number of thirteen hundred pild pates, of the
which number eight hundred and odd were Monks, Canons, and Friars, chickens
of the Popes own brood. Last of all came Pope Urban the Monk, in the year of
our Lord, 1264. and he made up all the market. For he ordained a Feast called
Corpus Christi, The Feast of Corpus Christi.
in the honor of the Sacrament, so that ever after that time, the Sacrament
was no more taken for a sign, figure, and token of Christ's body, but for
Christ himself God and man, and therefore was it reverenced, worshipped,
censed, and kneeled unto, as ye teach the people to do at your unsacred
Sakerings, and so are ye their schoolmasters to learn them to commit Idolatry
against their Lord God, but let us go forth with our matter.

After our Savior CHRIST had delivered the Sacramental bread to his Disciples
for to eat, he took the Cup, and thanked, and gave it them, saying, Drink
ye all of this. Matthew. 26.
For this is my blood (which is of the new Testament) that is shed for many for
the remission of sins. This do, as often as ye drink it, in the remembrance
of me. Here CHRIST delivered to his Disciples holy wine (I call it holy,
because it was dedicated and appointed to an holy use) which he made the
Sacrament of his blood. And they all drank of it. And here is to be marked by
the way, The Sacrament ought to be received of the people in both kinds.
that our Savior CHRIST before seeing that there should arise false anointed,
that would take away from the people the Sacrament of his blood, bade them all
drink of it. All, all without exception, even so many as believe on him,
spiritual or temporal, as they call them. Are not ye Popish shavelings these
false anointed? Have you not taken away the Cup of the LORDS blood from the
Lay people, and reserved it to your selves alone? Sacrilege.
Do not ye minister the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood to the Lay people
under one kind only, clean contrary to Christ's institution? O GOD-robbers. O
spoilers of Christian men's souls. Neither can ye abide, that the people should
touch your Pope-holy Chalice, when they drink the wine, but ye your selves
holding the chalice in your own hands give them drink, as though they were
babes of three days old, and could not put the Cup to their mouth. O tender
and jealous nurses! In the primative Church and many hundred years after, as
we may see in the monuments of learned men, the Sacrament according to Christ's
institution, was received of the people under both kinds, until Antichrist,
the Biship of Rome, by his divellish decree, determined the contrary at the
Council of Constance, The Council of Constance.
not much more than an hundred years past. Pope Gelasius made a godly Decree,
Gel^sius Decree.
that those people, that would not receive the Sacrament under both kinds,
should receive none at all, but be put away from the Lords Table. The Greeks
and Bohemes, The Greeks and Bohems.
with all that be not under the tyranny of the Pope of Rome, and of his wicked
Laws receive the Sacrament under both kinds at this day, according to Christ's
institution. Where the contrary is used, there reigns the Devil and the
Pope, and not Christ and his holy Word. But now let us behold your doings.

After that ye have committed Idolatry Idolatry.
with the sacramental bread (if it be worthy of that name) ye fall in hand to
consecrate (I use still your own terms) the wine with these words: In like
manner after Supper was done, he took this noble chalice (that is a lie, for
Christ never handled that chalice) into his holy and worshipful hands, A Lie.
and after he had given thanks to the Father, he blessed (here fall ye to
crossing Crossing.
again) and gave it to his Disciples, saying: Take ye, and drink ye all of
this* For this is the cup of my blood, a new and everlasting Testament, a
mystery of faith, which shall be shed for you, and for many, for the remission of
sins. So often as ye shall do these things, ye shall do them in the
remembrance of me. How many words have ye put in here of your own brain, ye
shall easily perceive, if ye compare them with the words which our Savior
CHRIST spoke. But for as much as they do not greatly disagree from the truth of
Gods word, I will not strive with you in this behalf, though I would wish you
once to deal faithfully and truly in all your doings, but specially when you
have to do with God, seeing it is written. Prove. 30.
Put nothing to the words of God, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a
liar. After the aforesaid words spoken in hocker mocker, ye breathe and blow,
and shake your head over the Chalice, and then ye kneel down, lift up your
hands, Idolatry.
and honor it like most abominable Idolaters. After that ye stand up again
like pretty fellows, and well appointed, and taking the Chalice in your hands,
ye hold it up with heave and how above your heathenish heads, that the people
also may worship it, and be fellow Idolaters with you, and fall into the like
danger of everlasting damnation. This done, ye set the Chalice down again
upon the Altar, and ye cover it with your Corporasse cloth for catching of
cold. Then once again kneel ye down, and up again like dive doppers, and
kiss the Altar, Kissing.
and spread your arms abroad, as though you would embrace some she saint.
After al these things (as I may let pass your crossings and blessings, your
crouchings and noddings with many other apish toys) ye fall again to your
solemn prayers, and among all other ye stand nodding and praying in your
Memento for the souls departed, The second Memento.
which was put to the Mass by Pope Pelagius about the year of our Lord 560.

And here in your mind and thought (for now ye play mum-budget, and silence
glumme) ye pray for Philip and Cheny, more than a good many, Praying for the
souls departed.
for the souls of your great grand Sire, and of your old Beldame Hurre, for
the souls of father Princhard, and of mother Puddingwright, for the souls of
goodman Rinsepitcher, and goodwife Pi^tepot, for the souls of Sir John
Husgoose, and Sir Simon Sweetlips, and for the souls of all your Benefactors.
Founders, Patrones, Friends and well-willers, which have given you either
dirige groates, confessionall pence, trentals, year services, dinners, suppers,
or any thing else, that may maintain you our Ladies Knights. But I pray you,
how can you with an assured conscience and true faith, The holy Scripture
teaches not prayer for the dead.
pray for such as are departed out of this world? If these your prayers be of
faith, then do your faith hang on Gods word. If you have the Word of God for
you so praying, bring it forth of good fellowship, and we will hear you. Have
ye none? Alas silly souls! Then put up your pipes, and lay ye down to
sleep. Trudge with your Dirges, and pack up your Masses of Requiem. Do ye
allege Pope Pelagius, and old Fathers or ancient customs? We have nothing to
do with them, except they bring the Word of GOD in their mouth. Prayer Prayer.
is a matter of faith, and faith always leans upon the Word of GOD solely
and fully. If ye have not the Word of God for your prayer, then can ye not pray
of faith. If ye pray not of faith, then are your prayers abominable in the
sight of God, so far it is off, that they be heard, as the Apostle says:
Romans 14.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Saint John says, 1 John 5.
This is the trust that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will, he hears us. But how do you ask according to the will of God,
when ye have not one title of the holy Scripture to declare that ye ought to
pray for the dead? Think ye to be heard of God? Even as Baals Priests were,
when they cried O Baal, 1 King. 18.
hear us, O Baal, hear us. If ye would leap upon your Altars, yea, and cut
your selves with knives till ye be all on a gore-blo^d, as their manner was,
yet shall ye never be heard of God. For ye pray without faith, seeing ye have
not the Word of God for you. Do ye allege Charity? And say, It is a
charitable deed to pray for them that are departed? I answer, ye are very
Antichrists, that turn the roots of trees upward. Will ye have Charity
before Faith? Is not Faith the mother of all virtues? Is not Charity the
daughter of Faith? How dare the daughter move you to do that whereof the
mother knows nothing at all? It is not charity that moves you to pray for
the departed, but blind affection, corrupt zeal, and cankered custom, and
hope of gain. After the departure from this life, all go straight ways either
unto eternal glory, or else unto everlasting pain, as the history of the rich
Glutton, and of the poor man Lazarus evidently declares. Luke 16.
Our Savior Christ says, He that believes on the Son, has everlasting
life. But he that believes not on the Son shall not see life, John 3.
but the wrath of GOD abid^th on him. Here also are rekoned but two kinds of
persons, faithful and unfaithful, the one sort after their departure go
immediately unto everlasting life, the other unto eternal dam^ation. And the
Preacher says, E^cces 11.
When the tree falls whether it be toward the South or North, in what place
soever it ^all, there it heth. As we depart, so shall we have our place. If we
depart in faith, heaven is appointed for us, but if we dye in infidelity,
unfaithfulness, or misbeleefe, hell is ready at hand. Therefore your prayers
for the dead are in every condition frustrate and vain, superfluous and
unprofitable, Heaven needs no prayer, Hell refuses all prayer. Notable is
this sentence of Saint Augustine; Know ye, says Saint Augustine, Adfratres i^
Eremo. Sermon. 57.
that so soon as the soul is departed from the body, it is straightwaies
either for the good merits placed in Paradise, or else for the sins thrown
headlong into the deep dungeon of hell. Again, Ser. d^temp
in another place he says; Di^. 17.
Brethren, let no man deceive himself; For there are but two places, and there
is no third place for any. He that has not deserved to reign with Christ (in
this world) shall without doubt (in the world to come) be damned with the
devil. And Saint Cyprian says, Co^tr. Demes.
when we depart hence, there is no place of repentance. Life is either lost or
gotten.

But I marvel much of this one thing concerning this matter, that ye pray God
the Father that he will mercifully give to all such as rest in Christ a place
of refreshing, of light and peace. As though those that rest in Christ could
want any of them all. Can any man that rests in Christ be tormented in pains,
darkness, and disquietnes, trouble, or grief? To rest in Christ after this
life, is not to be payned in Purgatory (if there were such a place as the
Papists feigned, but to reign with Christ in glory, to possess everlasting
joy, What it is to rest with Christ after this life.
and to have the fruition of Gods glorious Majesty with the heavenly Angels
and blessed Spirits, as it is written, Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord. Apoc. 14
For the Spirit says, that from henceforth they rest from their labors. And
David calls the death of the Saints precious in the sight of the Lord. Psalm.
116.
Does not the Wise man also say, Sapi^nt. 3.
that the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and that no grief,
pain, nor torment shall touch them. They are in peace, says he. If these
things be true, as nothing is more true, what need ye then to stand nodding in
your Memento, praying for the dead? Ye might as well pray for dead swine. For
ye have as good authority of the holy Scriptures for the one, as for the
other. But this praying for the dead has made your Kitchins warm, your pots
to sees, and your spits to turn merrily. It has fed your idle bellies with
the fattest of the flock, and caused you to live in all joy, pleasure, and
quietness, without any labor, pain, or travail. Therefore no marevell
though such things be placed in your Mass. Take away the praying for the
dead, and ye Purgatory-rakers may pick your meat upon Newmarket heath. For
your Dirige groats your Trentalls, your Month minds, your Anniversaries, your
Bead-rowls, your soul Masse-pence, and all such other pelf falls to the ground
straightwayes. And then welcome again hard fare, greasy cap, threadbare gown,
broken shoe, torn hose, empty purse, and all that beggarly is. Make much
therefore of praying for the dead, and wish that your Mass, which of late ye
have to your great joy recovered again, may long continue in her great
prosperty, or else your cake is dough, and all your fat lie in the fire.

What shall I speak The second Sakerin^, otherwise called Gods hopping about
the chalice.
of dancing of your little great God about the Chalice with Per Ip, and cum Ip,
and In Ip, Sum, which follows the praying for the dead? That is so holy a
thing, that it is called the second Sakering, and may by no means be left
undone. Your Child must needs be dandled and played withal a little while,
least he chance to sleep too long. After that ye have laid your young God to
rest again, you say your Pater noster The Pater noster. c. 1.
like good devout men: That done, ye take up the patine of the chalice, and
afterward ye cross your selves withal both upon your breasts, and upon your
bald crowns, and lay it down again. I think ye do this either to fray
away spirits, or else to enarme your selves with the sign of the croose, that
they may be the more able to bring to pass your butchery, that is now at
hand. For straightwayes ye strike up your sleves, ye uncover the chalice, ye
lay down the Corporasse cloth, ye take up your little God, ye hold him up
over the chalice, and ye cruelly tear, pluck, and break him in three pieces,
The breaking of the Host in three parts.
according to Pope Sergi^s commandment, about the year of our Lord 700. When
ye have so done, ye keep two parts of your Christ's body, which ye your
selves made, and have now destroyed again, in your hands holding them over the
chalice, and the third part ye let down into the wine, that it may be the
tenderer, when ye eat it. The my^ticall mysteries hereof I declared a little
before.

Then do ye say the Agnus, Agnus.
which Pope Sergius also commanded that it should be said at Mass a little
before the receiving of the host. And here again ye play the abominable
Idolaters. Idolatry.
For looking upon the bread, ye look your selves and worship it, saying in
Latin, Agnus Dei qui tollis, etc. O Lamb of God that take away the sins
of the world have mercy upon us. Thrice do ye call that Bread which ye hold
in your hands, the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. O
intolerable blasphemy! Was there ever Idolater, Idolatry.
that worshipped a piece of broken bread for God? What marvel is it, though
the Jews, the Turks, and all other Infidels be so loath to come to the
Christian religion, when they see so manifest Idolatry committed? when they
behold a piece of a thin wafer Cake honored for God? Certainly, this
abominable Idolatry which ye Masse-mongers maintain, and commit at your
Mass, has been, and is the occasion, that innumerable thousands have been,
and are daily damned. Yea, these your wicked doings, are the cause, why so many
do abhor the Christian religion, and defy the Name of Christ, as we read
of a certain Emperor of Turkey, An history of a certain Emperor of Turkey.
which when he was demanded why he and his people did so greatly abhor the
Religion of Christ, answered that he coead by no mulnes approove or allow the
religion, service, and honor of that God, whom men at their pleasure do make,
and straightwayes eat him when they have done. Better were it for you, O ye
Masse-mongers, to have a Mil-stone tied about your necks, and to be cast into
the sea, than thus with your abominable massing and God-making to drive so many
from Christ, and provoke so great multitudes unto Idolatry, and finally unto
everlasting damnation: and with what a conscience can ye say to the bread,
which is a dumb and insensible creature without all life or spirit. O Lamb of
God which take away the sins of the world, have ^^ercie upon us. Is that
bread, which a little before was corn in the Plough-mans barn, meal in the
Millers trough, flower in the Bakers boulting tubbe, The petty degree of the
Papists God
and afterward tempered with a little water, and baked of the waferman
between a pair of hot printing irons, come now suddenly through your
charming unto such dignity, that it is the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world? and that men must pray unto that to have mercy and
forgivenes of sins? O Lord thou living God have mercy upon us, and destroy
this abominable Idol of the mass. In the worshipping of Baal, Astaroth,
Moloch, Bel-Peor, Melchom, Dagon, Chames, the Queen of heaven, Saturnus,
Jupiter, Priapus, Juno, Venus, and such other Idols, was never so great a
blasphemy and dishonor to God, as is the setting up of this broken bread to
be worshipped for God. And the matter is so much the more to be abhorred,
because ye color your abominable Idolatry with Gods word. Feigned holiness,
says Saint Gregory, is double iniquity. Ah, is that polluted and defiled
bread, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world? Then was that
your bread also borne of Mary the Virgin, and nourished with the milk of her
breasts. Then did that bread live upon the earth, speak, eat, drink, sleep,
preach, wo^ke miracles, etc. Then was that bread betrayed, accused, beaten,
buffeted, spitted on, No^^*
crowned with a crown of thorns, clad wt^h a garment of purple, crucified,
and nailed to the Cross. Yea, then did that bread offer himself on the Altar
of the Cross a Sacrifice to God the Father for the sins of the world, dyed,
and rose again for our Justification. Romans 4.
Has your broken bread done all these things? Christ the Lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world has done all these things alone, alone.
Be ashamed once Oye wicked Papists, thus to blaspheme God, and to deceive the
people, through your abominable Massing. Again, is grace, mercy, favor, and
remission of sins to be craved of these fragments of bread, which ye hold in
your hands? So is it that true, living, immortal, and everlasting God, which
has bin without beginning, which made heaven and earth, and all things
contained in them. For none can forgive us our sins but God alone. Has your
broken bread bin without beginning? has it made al things? Yea, it is a
creature it self vile and devilish as ye use, or rather abuse it. Be ashamed
O ye shameless hypocrites, thus to deface the glory of God, and to lead the
people in damnable blindness.

Shortly after the Agnus, ye kiss the Pax, The Pax.
whch was the ordinance of Pope Innocentius in the year of our Lord 310. And
while the boy or Parish Clerk carries the Pax The Pax.
about, ye your selves alone eat up all, and drink up all. Ah, what riding
fools and very dolts make ye the people? ye send them a piece of wood, or of
glass, or of some metal to kiss, and in the mean season ye eat and drink
up all together? Is not this a pageant of Hick-scorner? Is not this a toy to
mock an ape withal? Is this Christ's Accipite and Edite? Take ye and eat ye,
speaking to many, and not to one alone. Is this Christ's Bibite ex eo omnes?
Drink of this all ye? Did Christ eat the Sacrament alone? Did he not rather
give it to his Disciples, and commanded all faithful Ministers so to do? Why
then do ye (O ye Antichrists) eat and drink up all alone, contrary to Christ's
institution and commandment? And yet behold, how ye shun not to lie even to
Gods face: Ye say at your Post^Communion, these words, Quod ore sumpsimus
Domine, etc. A Lie, three for failing.
That which we have taken with our mouth grant that we may receive it with a
pure mind, and that it may be made unto us of a temporal gift an everlasting
remedy. Again, H^c nos summo purget a crimine, etc. This Communion might
purge us from Sin, and make us partakers of the Heavenly Remedy. And in
another place ye desire God, that so many as shall receive the body and blood
of Christ, may be filled with all heavenly blessing and grace. Ye tell God,
that you with the rest of the congregation have received even with your own
mouths the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and ye lie most abominably.
For ye your selves have eaten and drunken up altogether alone, and like
churlish carles ye have given no man part with you. Again, ye call it a
Communion, which is a partaking of many together, but ye might right well call
it an Union. For no man eats and drinks of the bread and wine, but you
alone. Item, ye desire God, that so many as shall be communicants, may be
filled with the heavenly blessings and grace, and no man do receive but you
alone. What a mocking is this of God, and a deceiving of the people? God have
mercy on us, and once again deliver us from this most lying, wicked,
abominable and divellish Idol the Mass, and restore unto us the holy and
blessed Communion.

Christ's ordinance is not, Christ's ordinance is that the congregation should
receive the Sacrament together.
that one standing at an Altar should eat, devour, and mouch up altogether
alone, but that a multitude should receive the Sacramental bread and wine
together. Take ye, says our Savior Christ, eat ye, and drink ye all of
this. He says not, Take thou Sir John, eat thou, and drink thou alone. In
the Acts of the Apostles, we see, Act. 2. 20.
that a multitude of the Christians came together to break the bread, and not
that one alone did eat all alone, turning his arse to the people, as ye
Massemongers do. Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.
The bread which ye break, is it not the partaking of the body of Christ? He
says not, the bread which I break, but which we break, speaking of many, and
not of one. Again, we all be partakers of one bread, and of one Cup. Indeed
we be, or we ought to be. But we be not, therefore ye Masse-mongers do us
the more wrong. Where the blessed Apostle entreats of the Lords Supper, he
says, 1 Cor. 11.
My brethren when ye come together to eat, (he means the holy Communion, or
the Lords Supper) tarry one for another. He says not, when ye come together
to see the Priest say Mass, and to eat and drink up altogether alone,
standing at an Altar and turning his back toward you, as one full of little
good manners. He says also. Tarry one for another. But ye tarry for no man,
The Papists at their Mass in receiving the Sacrament tarry for the people, as
the Abbot tarrieth for his Covent.
but having a Boy to help you to say Mass, ye go to your mingle mangle, and
never call purre to you. For ye eat and drink up altogether alone, being
much worse than the swine-heards. We read in the ancient Canons, that such as
would not communicate, should be excommunicate, and driven out of Christ's
congregation, and not to be reputed or taken as members of CHRIST'S body.
Whereof we may easily and truly gather, that this private Massing, The
private Mass is of the Devil, and not of God.
which ye Masse-mongers use at this present, is not of God, but of the Devil,
and was not practiced of the holy ancient Fathers in their Churches, but of
late years brought in by Antichrist, and his shameless shavelings, which in
their private Masses do nothing else than prophanate, defile and corrupt the
LORDS Supper, and make merchandise of it. While they take upon them to receive
the Sacrament for other, and to make it a Sacrifice for the sins of such as
hire them for their money, that they of the labor of other men's hands, and the
sweat of other men's brows may live an idle and voluptuous life, as Epicures
and belly beasts, borne only to consume the good fruits of the earth. But as
ye Masse-mongers cannot be baptized, nor believe for other, Every man ought
to receive the Sacrament for himself.
no more can ye receive the Sacrament for other. As every man is baptized for
himself, so must he eat and drin^e the mystery of the LORDS body and blood
for himself. Can my eating slake your hunger? No more can your eating of the
Sacrament do me good. The righteous man, Abac^k 2. Romans 1.
says the Prophet, shall live by his own faith. The Priests eating therefore
of the Sacramental bread for other is abominable, and in all points contrary
to Christ's holy institution; which ordained his blessed Supper not to be
received of one alone for all the congregation, but that every one should
receive it for himself, that by the worthy receiving thereof, his troubled
conscience might be quieted, and his faith confirmed.

We read that when Saint Anthony, The Vision of Saint Anthony.
which lived about the year of our Lord 350. was in the wilderness, he saw a
vision, which was this. He beheld a number of Altars suddenly built up, and
covered with white Linen cloths, with bread and wine set upon them, and a
great sort of unclean and filthy swine standing at them, and slovenly
devouring all that ever was set upon the Altars. Saint Anthony being
wonderfully amaz^d at this strange sight, cried unto God and said: O Lord God,
what mean these foul ill favored sights? God said unto him, Note well.
These filthy swine which thou see standing at the Altars are the leacherous
Priests, which after thy days shall arise, and driving away the holy Communion
out of Churches, which I instituted to be received of many, shall eat and
drink all the Sacramental bread and wine alone, giving no part thereof to the
residue of my people, whom I redeemed with my precious blood, and for whose
sake I ordained my holy Supper to be received of them also. Are not ye
leacherous Priests these filthy swine? Have ye not cast away the LORDS Table,
and set up Idolatrous Altars? Do not ye at your Mass eat and drink up all
alone, like hungry hogs, and give no part to Gods faithful people? Ye may
right well be compared to filthy swine. For as these brutish beasts cannot
abide any other to eat with them, but would ^aine eat up all alone themselves,
even so play ye. At your Idolatrous Masses like a sort of beastly hogs ye
eat and drink up all alone, giving no man part with you, clean contrary to
Christ's institution. And ye may justly be called lecherous priests. For ye
abhor godly and lawful matrimony, and ye defile your selves with all ki^d
of stinking whoredom and abominable Sodomitry. Maids ye deflowre, men's wives
ye defile, and widows do ye corrupt, besides much other abomination, which
chaste ears abhor to hear. Men meet to consecrate such a God, and fit
champions to say such divellish Masses. GOD give you grace once to leave this
most detestable wickedness.

Moreover, The Lords Supper is a Sacrament o^ love and concord.
was not the Sacrament of CHRIST'S body and blood ordained to move and stir all
men to friendship, love and concord, and to put away all hatred, varia^ce and
discord, and to testify a brotherly and unfeigned love between them, that be
the members of Christ. But what friendship or love can be maintained at that
ministration of the Sacrament, where one eats and drinks all alone, as ye
do at your Masses? If it be a Sacrament of Charity and Love, then ought the
members of Christ charitably and lovingly to eat and drink the Lords Supper
together, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.
We are all partakers of one bread, and of one cup, and not one to devour
all alone. For charity consists not in one alone, but in many. And the Lords
Supper is called a Communion and not an Union. Therefore ye Masse-mongers
grievously offend, which contrary both to the commandment of CHRIST, and the
order of Charity, at your Masses eat and drink up all alone, and by this
means ye make the the Lords Supper a Sacrament rather of hate and dissension,
than of love and unity. And here comes into my remembrance an History of a
Christian and of a Jew. An history of a Christian and a Jew.
The Christian perceiving the Jew to be an honest civil man, faithful in his
promise and upright in his dealing toward all men sorrowed greatly in his
heart, that he was not also of the Christian belief. The christian thinking
that the most ready way to bring the Jew unto Christ, was to lead him to
church, that he might there hear and see how well God was served among them,
desired the Jew upon a certain Sabbath day to go with him unto the temple of
the Christians, nothing doubting, but if he would so do, he should be
allured to give over his Jewish opinions, and to become a christian man. The
Jew consented and went with him to church where he quietly saw and beheld all
things. He heard jolly ringing, pleasant singing, and merry organs playing. He
beheld a sort of gay gaudy mawmets, and a number of merry fellows in the quire
singing sometime high, sometime low, sometime in a mean, and sometime nothing
at all. He saw also a fellow with a shaven crown going up and down in the
church, and casting water in the peoples teeth, and afterward having a jolly
coat upon his back he saw him go about the churchyard, after an Image, all
the people following him. After all these things he saw that shaveling cast
off the gay-coat again, and put on other game plaiers garments, and so to
addres himself unto an altar covered with white linen clothes, whereupon was
set, as he thought, meat, and drink, for he saw the cup there. After much
singing and piping, he saw the sacrificer that stood at the altar, lift up a
little thin round cake, and a cup of drink above his head. Here will be good
cheer thought the Jew anon, for here are jolly signs and proffers. But when
he saw the people fall down and worship the bread and cup he marvailed
greatly at their madness. Mass ended, he looked always when the people should
have been called to eat and drink with Hicke-scorner that heaved the bread and
cup over his head, but no man had part with him. He devourd all alone like Sim
slap sauce: when they were departed out of the church going home ward, the
christian willing to prove how the Jew was affected toward the christian
religion, said unto him, Sir, how like you our religion and serving of God? To
whom the Jew answered: ye have in the temple many things that would make a sad
man glad, and one that is sorrowful, cheerful. I mean your thundering of
bells, your playing on the organs, your merry singing, the casting of water in
the peoples teeth, and your running one after another about the churchyard,
like the Prior of Pricklingham and his covent. All these things seem to be
matters of mirth used among you, as I think only to make you merry. But the
having of Idols in your temples I do not allow. I see you also fall down and
worship a piece of bread and a silver cup, which I judge high abomination and
damnable Idolatry. And another thing there is used in your temples, which I
also do nothing like. What is that quoth the christian. I will tell you said
the Jew. Ye talk, crack and boast much of charity but I say right well that
there is little used among you. For there was an Altar spread with fine white
cloths, and meat and drink as I suppose, set upon it, I always looked, when
ye should have been called to eat and drink together according to the order
of charity, but that shaveling that stood at the altar in the gay coat did both
eat and drink all alone, giving you no part with him, which is a token of small
charity and friendship among you. Certs you shall redress these great vices,
and have more charity among you before I become one of your order. And so the
Jew refused to be made a christian. God have mercy on us. Among many other
notable faults, which the Jew perceived in our Temples, this was not the least,
that one standing with his back toward the people at an altar, did eat and
drink al alone, giving no man part with him, which is a token of small charity
and friendship as the Jew said Verily the private mass, wherein the sacrament
of Christ's body and blood is too much abused, has been and is the cause that
many at this day do abhor the name of Christ and utterly condemn the
christian religion. God for his mercy drive this Idolatrous mass out of this
realm once again, and restore unto us the true use of his holy Supper, Amen,
Amen. But let us see, what follows in your Popish mass, and make an end.

When the Boy or Parish Clarke comes again with the Pax, ye hold forth your
chalice like Sir Ralph Rinspitcher for a little more drink. And when ye have
once drunken up that, Drink and still drink.
ye hold forth your Goddard yet once again to have a little more swill. No
marvel. Rinsing of the Chalice.
For peradventure ye fell the night before into a great heat, while you kept
company with your toying Thais, and therefore no marvel, silly souls, though
you drink solemnly. But O good Lord, what wiping of the mouth, and licking of
the fingers is there then? It would do a woman good to see how cleanly Sir
John Sweet-lips is. And yet not so contented, ye go to the Altars end, and
there once again, ye wash your hands, Washing of the hands.
to show how ^^minion trim, fine neat, and white-fingered Gentlemen, ye are
in all your doings, but especially in matters pertaining to Lady Venus Court.
After this ye return to the Altar, and take another lick or two of the
dropping of the Chalice, Licking of the Chalice.
because ye would be loath to lose any thing, and taking up your cake in your
hand, ye come again to the Altars end, where ye began your popish and
idolatrous Mass, What the coming again to the Altars end signifies.
to declare that as good never a whit, as never the better, and to show that
the matter for the which ye said Mass, is as far forward now, as though ye
had said none at all. After a few Collects mumbled over, ye turn you to the
people, and say, Dominus vobiscum, bidding them adieu, and with Ite Missa est,
ye bid them go, and tell them Mass is done. And all in Latin, because the
people understand nothing but English. Then fall ye once again to kneeling
down at the altar, and because ye are our Ladies knights, ye salute her most
humbly with some devout Orison. An Orison for our Lady.
That done, ye rise up again, like tall fellows, and saying the beginning of
S. John's Gospel, Saint John's Gospel.
ye bless you Secrosse you as though a thousand Devils were about ye. After
all these things, ye trusse up your trinkets, ye shut your book, ye fold up
your corporasse cloth, ye wind up your chalice ye put off your fools coat,
your vestment, your stole, your Fannell, your girdle, your Albe, and your
Amice, ye put out the candle, and solemnly making courtesy to your God, that
hangs over the altar, God give you good night at Algate.
ye trudg out of the Church, either home, or else to the alehouse, being now at
liberty all the whole day after to do what ye list with a safe conscience, to
^dise, to card, to hunt, to hawke* to bowl, to bib, How the Priests spend the
day after they have said Mass.
to make good cheer, to play, revell rout, to drink them all out, to set
cock on the hoope, let the devil pay the Maltman, to fish in Venus pond* to
sacrifice to Bacchus, and what not? And here is your goodly godly massing,
wherewith ye bewitch the ignorant, and make the simple people to doat. I pass
over your monstrous and apish toys, your inclinations, and prostrations, your
complications and explications, your elevations and extensions, your
incurvations and genuflexions, Good stuff, work for the Tinker.
your inspirations and exosculations, your benedictions and humiliations, your
pulsations and pausations, with your consignations, and all other abominations.
What Christian heart can abide either to say hear, or see, such a divellish
and abominable kind of massing as ye use at this day? ye do nothing at all in
your mass, that agreeeth with Christ's institution. The Lords Supper and your
peevish, popish private mass do agree together like God and the devil,
Christ and Beliall, light and darkness, A comparison between the Lords supper
and the popish Mass.
truth and falsehood, and as the common proverb is, like harp and harrow, or
like the hare and the hound. Sour and sweet are not so contrary one to
another, as your Mass is contrary to Christ's holy Communion, as ye have
abundantly heard heretofore. For whereas Christ preached at the institution of
his holy Supper, ye preach nothing at all at your Mass. Whereas Christ
ministered his blessed Supper at a table, ye say your popish Mass at an Altar.
Whereas Christ did sit while he have the Sacrament of his body and blood to his
Disciples, ye stand, and by no means will sit when ye receive it. Whereas
Christ did use none other apparel but his ^suall garments, ye disguise your
selves with such gear, as is more meet for a game^ player, than for a sober
minister. Whereas Christ at his supper both prayed and gave thanks to his
heavenly Father in that tongue, which those that were present did understand,
ye at your Mass speak all things in such a tongue as ye your selves, for the
most part, understand not, and so are they that are present unedified. Whereas
Christ in his holy supper gave the sacrament of his body and blood to all his
Disciples, ye in your abominable masses give it to none, but ye your selves
eat and drink up altogether alone. Whereas Christ at his mawndy gave to his
Discipler holy Bread and holy Wine, to be figures, signs, and memorialls of
his blessed body breaking and of his precious blood shedding, ye at your
Masses take upon you to eat and drink not spiritually, but corporally and
naturally the corporal and natural body and blood of our Savior Christ, as
he was borne of the Virgin, and hung on the cross. Whereas Christ ministered
with true and perfect brea^, ye minister with starch, or with a thin wa^er
Cake. Whereas CHRIST delivered the Cup containing Wine only in it, ye in
your Chalice put both Wine and Water mingled together. Whereas Christ gave the
Sacrament of his body and blood to his Disciples sitting at the Table, ye give
the Sacrament to such as kneel before the Altar. Whereas Christ gave his
Disciples the Sacramental bread and the cup into their hands, ye put the
bread into the mouths of the Communicants, and by no means will you suffer
them to touch your Popes holy chalice* whereas Christ delivered the Sacrament of
his body and blood under both kinds to his disciples, and so commanded it to be
observed in his holy congregation, ye contrary to Christ's institution and
ordinance, minister it to the common people under one kind only; whereas Christ
did institute his holy Supper to be eaten and drunk in the remembrance of his
blessed passion and precious death, ye reserve the Sacramental bread, and
hang it up in your pixes, and carry it about for a pageant at your pompous
popish processions; whereas Christ ordained his blessed Supper to be a
Sacrament of thanksgiving, you make your Mass to be a Sacrifice propitiatory,
satisfactory, and expiatory for the sins both of the quick and the dead.
Whereas Christ at his Supper gave the Sacrament of his body and blood freely to
his Disciples, you sell your Masses, and make merchandise of the Sacrament, as
the Costard-monger does of his costards, and of his other fruits.

To conclude, whereas Christ appointed the Sacrament of his body and blood to
put us in remembrance of his blessed body breaking, and precious bloudshedding,
and to stir us up unto mutual love, and unto thankesgiving to his heavenly
Father for the benefits received by the death of his Son Christ, ye apply
your Masses The virtues of the Mass
to a thousand several purposes, clean contrary, as to the getting of fair
weather, rain, health, long life, riches, victory in battle, overhand of
enemies, etc. To driving away of devils, chasing away of agues, putting away
of pestilences, curing of measled swine, healing of sick horses, helping of
chickens of the pip, making hot of a Winchester goose, restoring of a good
name, procuring of friends, preserving of evil chances, bringing of good
luck, pacifying of Gods wrath, obtaining of remission of sins, delivering of
souls out of Purgatory, yea out of Hell, and placing them in everlasting
Glory. What thing is either in heaven earth, or hell, for the which the Mass
is not profitable, and serves for the purpose, The Mass serves for all
purposes.
if it please you to apply it? It is a sauce for all meats, a salve for all
sores, a remedy for all diseases, a maintenance of all prosperity, and a
defense against all adversity. Protens never turned himself into so many
forms, shapes, and fashions, as your Mass has virtues. O blessed Mass, O
holy Mass, O virtuous Mass, yea, O most vile, stinking, and abominable Idol.
Now judge ye, O ye Masse-mongers, what is to be thought of the peevish,
popish, prattling, private Mass, which the Papists, and the most part of you
that are massemongers do so highly praise, commend, advance, extol, magnify,
and set forth, not as God only, but in a manner above God. For what thing is
it that we desire to have, for which we do not rather resort unto the Mass,
than unto God? And is this any other thing than mere Idolatry, and stealing
away of his Glory?

Which thing whosoever does, Note in how damnable a state the Masse-monger is.
is he not Gods enemy? Is he not an adversary to the true Christian
religion. Does he not defile the precious blood of our Savior Christ under
his foot? Does he not defile the holy mysteries of God, and blaspheme the Name
of the Lord? Does he not give himself from God to the devil, and become the
child of wrath, a vessel of vengeance, a firebrand of hell, and heir of
everlasting damnation? God have mercy upon us. Behold now the miserable state
wherein ye stand, and so many as cleave to your abominable Massing! Cease
therefore, cease betimes, to be haters of God, hlasphemers of his holy Name,
Enemies of Christ's blood, polluters of the Christian religion, defilers of God^
most holy Sacraments, corrupters of his blessed mysteries, seducers of the
people, destroyers of men's souls, pestilences of the Christian commonweal,
and ministers of Satan. Forsake your abominable kind of Massing, forsake it,
forsake it, and defile your selves no more with Idol service, lest ye provoke
the fierce wrath* and hot vengeance of God to fall both upon you the
Masse-mongers, and upon all them also that are the Masse-hunters, and finally,
for your wickedness upon the whole Realm. For God cannot always abide his
holy Sacraments thus to be abused and defiled. If If they escaped not
unpunished, Exodus 12.
that did eat leavened bread while the Feast of the Lords Passover did endure;
^ King. 6.
if Vziah went not away unplagued, but was struck with sudden death, because
he touched the Ark of the LORD; if he that came to the Marriage, because he
had not the wedding garment was taken from the table, Mat. 22.
bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, where weeping and
ghasting of tee^h shall be (...) the devil entered into I^das after Ioh. 13.
that he had received the Lords bread unworthily; 1 Cor. 11
if the Corinthians were grievously p^agued, yea, and that many unto the death,
because they did abuse the Lords Supper, and unreverently behave themselves at
the Ministration of it: if those with many other escaped not unplagu'd for
abusing the Lords mysteries, think not ye, which daily defile the honorable
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood in your most wicked, damnable, devilish,
idolatrous, heathenish vile, stinking, blasphemous, detestable, and abominable
Massing, shall escape free from punishment, neither ye your selves, nor the
consenters to your Idolatry. Therefore if there be any love in you toward God,
any hearty good will toward CHRIST our Savior, any fervent affections toward
Gods most holy word, any godly zeal toward the Christian commonweal, any
desire of goodness toward this our native Country, any spark of
well-willing toward the salvation either of your own souls, or of others: I
exhort you all by the tender mercies of God and by the precious blood of our
Savior Christ Jesus, that ye without tariance give over your abominable
Massing, which without doubt is not the acceptable service of God (as the blind
sort of people judge) but the very vile blasphemous bondage of Satan, invented
by the devil, Rev. 20.
brought in by Antichrist, confirmed and established by such as have received
the Beasts mark, whose inheritance shall be in that Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone. Neither lot any thing move you that the Idolatrous Mass,
which before was worthily banished out of the Realm, is now again restored by
act of Parliament, but rather hear what the Apostles say, we must obey God
more than men. In all matters of religion, Note well
the will of God is to be considered before the commandment or act of any
mortal Prince. Act. 5.
Pharaoh was a King, Exodus 1.
yet the godly Midwives obeyed not his ungodly commandment in killing the male
child^en of the Israelites. Dan. 3.
Nebu^hadonezer was a King, yet the three young men would not obey his wicked
proclamation in worshipping his golden Idol. 1 Mac. 1.
Antiochus was a King, yet the faithful Jews would not observe his abominable
laws in sacrificing to Idols, and in eating unclean flesh. Maacha was a
Queen, and made an abominable Idol of Priapus, 2 Cron. 15.
and offered sacrifice unto it, and exhorted others without doubt to do so
likewise, but so many as feared God abhorred her doings, and defied her
Idolatry, insomuch that King Asa her son put her down, because she had made
images in Groves, and brake down her Idols, and stamped them, and burnt them to
ashes at the brook Cedron. 1 King 18.
Iesabel was a Queen, and an abominable Idolatresse, promoting and making much
of Baals Priests, and feeding them even at her own table, but imprisoning and
murdering the Prophets of God, she worshipped Baal, and caused many other so to
do. But those that loved God abhorred her idolatry, and by no means would
follow her wicked steps, but chused rather to worship God according to his
word. The Prophet Elias slew all her Prophets that did service to Baal, and
Queen Iesabel her self came to a most miserable end. She was thrown down
to the ground from an high window, ^ King 9.
inso* that the wall was sprinkled with her blood, and the horses trod her
under their feet, and the dogs came and eat up her flesh, so that there was
nothing left of her, but her skull, her feet, and the palms of her hands.
Athalia was a Queen, and a great Idolatresse, she worshipped Baal, 2 King 11.
and enticed her son Ahazia to do so likewise. Notwithstanding such as
feared God, obeyed in this behalf neither the King nor his Mother, but walked
after the Commandments of God. Both the mother and the son were slain
miserably. The Bishops, the Priests the Lawyers, the Scribes, the Pharisees,
the Sadduces, and such others, were great Rulers in Iewrie, and they commanded
the Apostles, that they should no more preach in the name of Jesus, but they
obeyed them not, but stoutly answered, (...)
Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you, more than unto
God, Judge ye. For we cannot but speak that which we have seen and heard.
Rulers are so far to be obeyed, How far Civil Mastistrates are to be obeyed.
as the limits of Gods Word do suffer. I^ their Laws and Acts agree with the
Word of God, they are to be obeyed, if they be contrary to the commandment of
God, it is to be answered with the Apostles. We must ^bey God more than men.
Act. 5.
Furthermore, if ^ee be afraid of losing your livings* an^ by that means of
falli^g into beggary, Poverty.
remember that he, for whose sake ye forsake your Idolatrous Massing, that ye
may serve him with a pure conscience according to his word, will never forsake
you, nor leave you succourlesse and unprovided for. Sooner shall God deal with
you, Exodus 16.
as he did with the Children of Israel i^ the wilderness with Eli as with the
Widow of of Sarepta, 3 King. 17.
with Daniel, Dan 14.
with the people whom CHRIST fed in the desert, as we read in the History of
the Gospel, Mark 14.
and with such other, as unfainedly feared God, than ye shall want any good
thing. Hear what David says, Psalm. 34.
They which seek after the Lord shall want no manner of thing that is good.
Again, Psalm. 37.
I have been young, and now I am old, and yet saw I the righteous never
forsaken, nor their seed begging their bread on the earth. Our Savior Christ
also says, Mark 10.
There is no man that has forsaken house, or brethren, or sisters, or father
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake and the Gospels* but he
shall receive an hundred fold: Now in this life, houses, and brethren, and
sisters, and mothers and children, and lands with persecution, and in the world
to come everlasting life. And God himself says, I will not leave thee, Ios. 1.
nor forsake thee. Having these loving promises of God, fear ye not the loss
of your livings, nor the hatred of the wicked worldlings. If God provideth for
you (as undoubtedly he does) what can ye want? If God be your friend, your
buckler and shield, who can hurt you? As Saint Paul says, Romans 8.
If God be on our side, who can be against us? Now have ye heard, how far the
Mass dissenteth from the Lords Supper. Ye have heard, what manifest
blasphemies and intolerable untruthes be contained in the Mass. Ye have
heard that the Mass is the invention of the Devil, the Nurse-childe of
Antichrist, and the welbeloved darling of all them that have received the
Beasts mark. Ye have heard that no Christian man can either say Mass or hear
Mass with a good conscience. To end, ye have heard, that the Mass is the
fountain, well, head-spring and original of all Idolatry, superstition,
wickedness, sin and abomination, and that it is not Gods worship, but Idol
service. Considering therefore these things, if ye tender the glory of God, your
own salvation, and the peace, quietness and safeguard of our country, flee
Idolatry, forsake your abominable Massing, and serve the LORD our God according
to his holy Word. So shall God bless you with all good things, both in this
world, and in the world to come. Fare ye well. The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor, 13.
and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with you all.
Amen.

Man, How long, Psalm. 13.
O Lord.


Christ, I come quickly. Apoc. 12.



Man, O come Lord Jesus. Apoc. 22.



Give the glory to God alone.


