Micro-cynicon. SIX SNARling Satyrs. Insatiat Cron. Prodigal Zodon. Insolent
Superbia. Cheating Droone. Ingling Pyander. Wise Innocent.


Adsis pulcher homo canis hic tibi pulcher emendo.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Creed, for Thomas Bushel, and are to be sold
at his shop at the North door of Paul's Church. 1599.

His defiance to Envy.
Envy, which makst thy self in common guise,
To haunt deseruers, and to hunt deserts,
Hard-soft, cold-hot, well-euill, foolish-wise,
Miss contrarities agreeing parts.
Auant I say, i will anger thee enough,
And fold thy firy-eyes in thy smazkie snufe,
Defiance, resolution and neglects,
True trine of bars against thy false assault,
Defies, resolves defiance and reiects
Thy interest to claim the smallest fault.
Thou lawless landlady, poor Prodigal,
Sour solace, Credits Crack,
Fears Festival.
More angry Satyr-dayes i will muster up,
Then thou can challenge letters in thy name:
My Negrum true borne inck no more shall sup,
Thy stained blemish, charracterd in blame.
My pens two nebs shall turn unto a forke,
Chasing old Envy from so young a work:
I but the Authors mouth bid thee auaunt,
He more defies thy Hate, thy hu^t, thy haunt.
T. M. Gent.

The Authors Prologue. 1. Book.
DIsmounted from the hie aspiring hills,
Which the all empty airie Kingdom fills,
Leaving the scorched mou^tains threatening heaven
From whence fell fiery rage my soul has driven:
Passing the down steep valleys all in have,
Have tript it through the woods: and now at last
Am vaild with a stony sanctuary,
To save my Ire stuffed soul least it miscarie:
From threating storms ore'turning verity,
That shames to see truths refined purity:
Those open plains, those hie sky kissing mou^ts,
Where huffing winds cast up their airy accounts
Were too too open, shelter yielding none,
So that the blasts did tyrannize upon
The naked Carcass of my heavy soul,
And with their fury all my all control,
But now enuiron'd with a brazen Tower,
I little dread their stormy raging power:
Witness this black defying Embassy,
That wanders them beforne in majesty:
Undaunted of their bugbare threatening words,
Whose proud aspiring vaunts, time past records.
Now windy Parasites or the the slaves of wine,
That wind from al things save the truth divine,
Wind turn and toss into the depth of spite,
Your devilish venom cannot me affright:
It is a Cordial of a Candie taste,
I Will drink it up, and then let't run at waste.
Whose drugie Lees mixed with the liquid flood,
Of muddy fell defiance as it stood,
I Will belch into your throats all open wide,
Whose gaping swallow nothing runs beside:
And if it venom, take it as you list:
He spights himself, that spights a Satyrist.
THE FIRST BOOK. Insatiat Cron.
Satyr 1. Cur eget indignus quisquam, te diuite.
TIme was, when down declining toothlesse age,
Was of a holy and divine presage:
Divining prudent and foretelling truth,
In sacred points, instructing wandering youth.
But oh detraction of our latter days,
How much from verity this age estraies?
Raunging the bryerie deserts of black sin,
Seeking a dismal cave to revel in.
This latter age or member of that time,
Of whom my snarling muse now thu^dreth rhyme
Wandered the brackes until a hidden Cell,
He found at length, and still therein does dwell:
The house of gain insatiat it is,
Which this hoar aged pesant deemes his blis:
Oh that desire might hunt amongst that fur,
It should go hard but he would loose a cur:
To rowse the fox, hid in a bramble bush,
Who frighteth conscience with a wrimouth'd push:
But what need I to wish or would it thus,
When I may find him starting at the burs:
Where he infecteth other pregnant wits,
Making them Coheires to his damned fits.
There may you see this writhen faced mass,
Of rotten mouldring clay, that prating ass:
That riddles wonders mere compact of lies,
Of heaven, of hell, of earth and of the skies:
Of heaven thus he reasons: heaven there is none,
Unless it be within his mantion.
Oh there is heaven: why? because there is gold,
That from the late to this last age controld,
The massy scepter of Earthes hauenly round,
Exiling forth her silver paued bound,
The Leaders, brethren, brazen counterfets,
That in this golden age contempt begets:
Vaunt then I mortal I, I only King,
And golden God of this eternal being.
Of Hell Cymerian thus Auarus reasons:
Though hell be hot, yet it observes seasons:
Having within his Kingdom residence,
Ore which his godhead has pre-eminence:
An obscure angel of his Heaven it is,
Wherein's containd that Hell devouring blis:
Into this Hell sometimes an Angel falls,
Whose white aspect black forlorn souls appalls
And that is when a Saint believing gold,
Old in that heaven, young in being old.
Falls headlong down into that pit of woe,
Fit for such damned creatures overthrow.
To make this public that obscured lies,
And more apparent vulgar secrecies:
To make this plain, harsh unto common wits,
Simplicity in common judgment sits.
This down-cast angel, or declining saint,
Is greedy Croone, when Cron makes his count:
For his poor creditors fallen to decay,
Being bankerouts, take heels and run away.
Then frantic Cron, gald to the very heart,
In some by corner plays a devils part:
Repining at the loss of so much pelf,
And in a humor goes and hangs himself.
So of a saint, a devil Cron is made,
The devil loved Cron, and Cron the devils trade.
Thus may you see such angels often fall,
Making a working day a festival.
Now to the third point of his deity,
And that is the earth, thus reasons credulity:
Credulous Cron, Cron credulous in all,
Swears that his kingdom is in general.
As he is Regent of this Heaven and Hell,
So of the Earth, all others he will expel:
The Skies at his dispose, the Earth his own,
And if Cron please, all must be overthrown.
Cron, Cro^, advise thee Cro^ with the copper nose,
And be not ruled so much by false suppose:
Least Crons professing holiness turn evil,
And of a false god, prove a perfect diuil.
I prithee Cron find out some other talk,
Make not the Burse a place for spirits to walk:
For doubtless if thy damned lies take place,
Destruction follows, farewell sacred grace.
Th'Excha^ge for goodly Mercha^ts is appointed
Why not for me says Cron, and mine anointed?
Can Merchants thrive and not the Vse'r nie?
Can Merchants live without my company?
No Cron helps all, and Cron has help from none,
What others have is Crons, and Crons his own.
And Cron will hold his own, or't shall go hard,
The devil will help him for a small reward:
The devils help, oh it is a mighty thing,
If he but say the word, Cron is a King.
Oh then the devil is greater yet then he,
I thought as much, the devil would master be.
And reason too (says Cron) for what care I,
So I may live as God, and never die.
Yea golden Cron, death will make thee away,
And each dog Cron, must have a dying day.
And with this resolution I bequeath thee,
To God or to the devil, and so I leave thee.
Satyr 2. Prodigal Zodon
WHo knows not Zodon; Zodon, what is he?
The true borne child of insatietie.
If true borne, when? if borne at all, say where?
Where conscience begged in worst time of the year,
His name young Prodigal, son to greedy gain:
Let blood by folly, in a contrary vain.
For scraping Cron, seeing he needs must die,
Bequeathed all to prodigallitie.
The will once proved, and he possessed of all,
Who then so gallant as young Prodigal?
Mounted aloft on flattering Fortunes wings,
Where like an Nightingale secure he sings:
Floating on Seas of scarce prosperity,
In girt with pleasures sweet tranquillity.
Suit upon suit, satin too too base,
Velvet laid on with gold or silver lace:
A mean man does become, but ye must ride
In cloth of fined gold, and by his side
Two footmen at the least, with choice of steeds,
Attired when she rides in gorgeous weeds.
Zodon must have his Charrot gilded ore,
And when he triumphs, four bare before,
In pure white Satin to usher out his way,
To make him glorious on his progress day,
Veil bonnet he that does not passing by,
Admiring on that Sun enriching sky,
Two days incag'd at least in strongest hold,
Storm he that list, he scorns to be controld.
What is it lawful that a mounted beggar,
May vnco^trolled thus bear sway and swagger?
A base borne issue of a baser syer:
Bred in a cottage, wandering in the myer,
With nailed shoes, and whipstaffe in his hand,
Who with a hey and ree the beasts command:
And being seven years practizde in that trade,
At seven years end by Tom a iournyes made,
Unto the City of fair Troynouant,
Where through extremity of need and want,
He Is forced to trot with fardle at his back.
From house to house, demanding if they lack
A poor young man that is willing to take pain,
And mickle labor, though for little gain.
Well, some kind Troyan thinking he has grace,
Keeps him himself, or gets some other place.
The world now god be thanked's well amended
Want that erewhile did want, is now befrended.
And scraping Cron has got a world of wealth,
Now what of that, Cron's dead, where is al his pelf?
Bequeathed to young prodigal: That Is well,
His God has left him, and he is fled to hell:
See goulden souls, the end of ill got gain,
Read and mark well, to do the like refrain.
This youthful gallant like the prince of pleasure,
Floting on golden seas of earthly treasure:
Treasure ill got by ministering of wrong.
Made a fair show, but endured not long.
Ill got, worse spent, gotten by deceit:
Spent on lasciuions wantons which await,
And hourly expect such prodigallitie,
Lust breathing leachers given to venerie.
No day expired but Zodon has his trull,
He has his tyt, and she likewise her gull.
Gull he, Trull she, oh it is a gallant age,
Men may have hacknyes of good carriage:
Provided that their rain a golden shower,
Then come whose will, at the appointed hour.
Hour me no hours, hours break no square,
Where gold does rai^^, (...) to find the^ there.
Well: Zodon has his pleasure, he has gold,
Young in his golden age, in sin too old:
Now he wants gold, all his treasures done,
He Is banished the Stews, pity finds none.
Rich yesterday in wealth, this day as poor,
To morrow like to beg from door to door.
See youthful spendthrifts all your bravery,
Even in a moment turned to misery.
Satyr 3. Insolent Superbia.
LIst ye profane fair painted images,
Predestined by the destenies,
At your first being to fall eternally
Into Cymerian black obscurity.
Ill-favored Idols, Pride anatomy,
Foul colored puppets, balls of infamy:
Whom zealous souls do racket too and fro,
Sometimes aloft ye fly, otherwhiles below:
Banded into the airs loose continent:
Where hard vpbearing winds hold parliament.
For such is the force of down declining sin,
Where our short feathered peacocks wallow in.
That when sweet motions urge them to aspire,
They are so bathed ore by sweet desire
In the odiferous fountain of sweet pleasure,
Wherein delight has all embalmd her treasure.
I mean where Sin the mistress of disgrace,
Has residence, and her abiding place.
And sin though it be foul, yet fair in this,
In being painted with a show of blis.
For what more happy creature to the eye,
Then is Superbia in her bravery?
Yet who more foul disrobed of attire?
Perld with the botch as children burnt with fire,
That for their outward cloak upon the skin,
Worser enormities abound within.
Look they to that, truth tells them there amiss,
And in this glass, all telling truth it is.
When welcome Spring had clad the hills in green,
And pretty whistling birds were heard and seen,
Superbia abroad began take her walk:
With other peacocks for to find her talk.
Kyron that in a bush lay closely couched,
Heard all their chat, and how it was avouched:
Sister says one, and softly packt away,
In what fair company did you dine to day?
Among galla^t dames, and then she wipes her lips,
Placing both hands upon her whalebone hips,
Puffed up with a round circling farthingale,
That done: she gins go forward with her tale:
Sitting at table carved of walnut tree,
All covered with damaskt naperie,
Garnisht with saults of pure beaten gould,
Whose silver plated edge of rarest mould,
Moved admiration in my searching eye,
To see the goldsmiths rich artificie.
The Butlers placing of his manchets white,
The plated cupbord for our more delight.
Whose goulden bewty glauncing from on hie,
Illuminated other chambers nie.
The slowly pacing of the serving men,
Which were appointed to attend us then,
Holding in either hand a silver dish,
Of costly cates of farfetcht dainty fish,
Until they do approach the table nigh,
Where the appointed caruer carefully
Discharges them of their full freighted hands,
Which instantly upon the table stands.
The music sweet which all that while did sound,
Ravish the hearers, and their sense confound.
This done, the master of that sumptuous feast,
In order gins to place his welcome gest.
Beauty first seated in a throne of state,
Unmatchable disdaining other mate
Shone like the sun, whereon mine eyes still gazed,
Feeding on her perfections that amazed:
But oh, her silver framed Coronet
With low down dangling spangles all beset,
Her sumptuous perewig, her curious curles,
Her hie prizde necklace of entrailed perles:
Her precious Jewels wondrous to behold,
Her basest I em framde of the purest gold.
Oh I could kill my self for very spite,
That my dim stars give not so clear a light.
Hartburning ire new kindled, bids despair,
Since Beauty lives in her, and I want fair.
Oh had I did in youth, or not bin borne,
Rather then live in hate, and dye forlorn.
And dye I will, therewith she drew a knife
To kill her self, but Kyron saved her life.
See here proud puppets hie aspiring evils,
Scarce any good, most of you worse then devils.
Excellent in ill, ill in aduising well,
Well in that's worst, worse then the worst in hell.
Hell is stark blind, so blind most women be:
Blind and yet not blind when they should not see.
Fine Madam Tiptoes in her velvet gown,
That quotes her paces in Characters down:
Valuing each step that she had made that day,
Worth twenty shillings in her best array.
And why forsooth some little durty spot
Has fell upon her gown or petticote.
Perhaps that nothing much, or something little,
Nothing in manies view, in hers a mickle:
Does thereon surfeit, and some day or two
She Is passing sick, and knows not what to do.
The poor handmaid seeing her mistres wed*
To frantic sickness, wishes she were dead:
Or that her devilish tyranizing fits
May mend, and she enjoy her former wits.
For whilst that Health thus counterfets not well,
Poor here at hand, lives in the depth of hell.
Where is this baggadge, where is this girl, what ho
(Quoth she) was ever woman troubled so?
What huswife Nan, and then she gins to brall,
Then in comes Nan, sooth mistress did you call?
Out on thee queen, now by the living God,
And then she strikes and on the wench lays load.
Poor silly maid with finger in the eye,
Sighing and sobbing takes all patiently.
Nimble Affection stung to the very heart,
To see her fellow mate sustain such smart,
Flies to the Burse gate for a match or two,
And salues th'amis, there is no more to do.
Quickfooted kindness, quick as it self thought
With that well pleasing news but lately bought
By loves assiduat care and industry,
Into the Chamber runs immediately.
Where she vnlades the freight of sweet content,
The hagler pleased does rise incontinent.
Then thought of sickness is not thought upon,
Care has no being in her mantion.
But former peacock pride, grand insolence,
Even in the highest thought has residence.
But it on tiptoe stands, well: what of that?
It is more prompt to fall and ruinate:
And fall it will when deaths shrill clamorous bell
Shall summon you unto the depth of hell:
Repent proud Princocks, cease for to aspire,
Or dye to live, with Pride in burning fire.
Satyr 4. Cheating Droone.
THere is a Cheater by profession,
That takes more shapes then the Camelion.
Sometimes he iets it in a black furd gown,
And that is, when he harbors in the town.
Sometimes a cloak to mantle hoary age,
Ill-favored like an ape in spightfull rage:
And then he walks in Paul's a turn or two,
To see by Cheating what his wit can do.
Perhaps heel tell a Gentleman a tale,
Will cost him twenty angels in the sale:
But if he know his purse well linde within,
And by that means he cannot finger him,
He Will proffer him such far set courtesy,
That shortly in a Tavern neighbring by,
He has encag'd the silly Gentleman,
To whom he proffers service all he can.
Sir, I perceive you are of gentle blood,
Therefore I will, our Cates be new and good:
For well I wot, the Country yields plenty,
And as they diverse be, so are they dainty.
May it please you then a while to rest you merry.
Some Cates I will make choice of and not tarry.
The silly Cunny blithe and merrily,
Does for his kindness thank him heartily.
Then hies the Cheater very hastily,
And with some Pesant where he is in fee
Iugles, that dinner being almost ended,
He in a matter of weight may then be frended.
The Pesant for an angel then in hand,
Will do what ere his worship shall command:
And yields, that when a reckoning they call in,
To make reply there is one to speak with him.
The plot is laid, now comes the Cheater back,
And calls in have for such things as they lack.
The table fraighted with all dainty cates,
Having well fed, they fall to pleasant chates:
Discoursing of the mickle difference,
Twixt perfect truth and painted eloquence.
Plain troth that harbors in the country swain
The Cunny stands defendant, the Cheaters vain
Is to uphold an eloquent smooth tongue
To be truths Orator righting every wrong:
Before the cause concluded took effect,
In comes a crew of fidling knaves abject,
The very refuse of that rabble rout,
Half shoes upon their feet torn round about,
Save little Dicke the dapper singing knave,
He had a threadbare coat to make him brave:
God knows scarce worth a tester, if it were
Vallewed at most, of seven it was too dear.
Well take it as they list, shakerag came in,
Making no doubt but they would like of him:
And twere but for his person a pretty lad
Well quallified, having a singing trade.
Well so it was the Cheater must be merry,
And he a song must have, called hey down derry.
So Dick begins to sing, the fiddler play,
The melancholy Cunny replies, nay, nay:
No more of this: the the other bids play on,
It Is good our spirits should something work upon.
Tut gentle sir, be pleasant man (quoth he)
Yours be the pleasure, mine the charge shall be.
This do I for the love of gentlemen,
Hereafter happily if we meet again,
I shall of you expect like courtesy,
Finding fit time and opportunity:
Or else I were ungrateful quoth the cunny,
It shall go hard, but we will find some money.
For some we have, that some well vsd gets more,
And so in time we shall increase our store.
Mean time said he, employ it to good use,
For time ill spent, does purchase times abuse.
With that more wine he calls for and intends
That either of them carouse to all their friends.
The cunny nods the head, yet says not nay,
Because the other would the charge defray:
The end tryes all, and here begins the jest,
My gentleman betook him to his rest.
Wine took possession of his drowsy head,
And Cheating Droone has brought the fool to bed.
The fiddlers were dischargd, and al things whist,
Then pilfring Droone began use him as he list.
Ten pound he finds, the reckoning he does pay:
And with the residue passes sheere away.
Anon the Conny wakes, his coin being gone,
He exclaymes against dissimulation.
But it was too late, the Cheater had his pray,
Be wise young heads, care for an afterday.
Satyr 5. Ingling Pyander.
AGe has his infant youth, old trees their sprigs,
Orespreading branches their inferior twigs:
Old beldam has a daughter or a son
True borne, or illegitimate alls one:
Issue she has: the father? ask you me?
The house wide open stands, her lodgings free.
Admit my self for recreation
Sometimes did enter her possession,
It argues not that I have bin the man,
That first kept revels in that mantian,
No no, the hagling common place is old,
The Tenement has often bin bought and sold:
It Is rotten now, earth to earth, dust to dust,
Sodoms on fire, and consume it must:
And wanting second reparations,
Pluto has ceasd the poor reuertions.
But that hereafter worlds may truly know,
What hemlocks and what rue there erst did grow:
As it is Satan's usual policy,
He left an issue of like quallitie:
The still memorial if I aim aright,
Is a pale Chequered black Hermophrodite.
Sometimes he ^ets it like a Gentleman,
Otherwhiles much like a wanton Curtesan:
But truth to tell a man or woman whether,
I cannot say she is excellent in either.
But if Report may certify a truth,
She Is nether of either, but a Cheating youth.
Yet Troynouant that all admired town,
Where thousands still do travel up and down,
Of Bewties counterfets affoords not one,
So like a lovely smiling parragon,
As is Pyander in a Nymphs attire,
Whose rolling eye sets gazers hearts on fire:
Whose cherry lip, black brow and smiles procure
Lust burning buzzards to the tempting lure.
What shall I cloak sin with a coward fear,
And suffer not Pyanders sin appear?
I will I will: your reason? why, I Will tell,
Because time was, I loved Pyander well:
True love in deed, will hate loves black defame,
So loathes my soul to seek Pyanders shame.
Oh but I feel the worm of conscience sting,
And summons me upon my soul to bring
Sinful Pyander into open view,
There to receive the shame that will ensue.
Oh this sad passion of my heavy soul,
Torments my heart, and senses do control:
Shame thou Pyander, for I can but shame,
The means of my amiss, by thy means came:
And shall I then procure eternal blame,
By secret cloaking of Pyanders shame,
And he not blush?
By heaven I will not, I Will not burn in hell,
For false Pyander though I loved him well:
No no, the world shall know thy villainy,
Least they be cheated with like rogery:
Walking the City as my wonted use,
There was I subject to this foul abuse,
Troubled with many thoughts pacing along,
It was my chance to shoulder in a throng,
Thrust to the Channel I was, but crowding her,
I spide Piander in a Nymphs attire:
No Nymph more fair, then did Pyander seem,
Had not Pyander, then Pyander been:
No Lady with a fairer face more graced,
But that Pyanders self, himself defaced
Never was boy so pleasing to the heart,
As was Pyander for a woman's part:
Never did woman foster such an other,
As was Pyander, but Pyanders mother:
Fool that I was in my affection,
More happy I, had it been a vision.
So far entangled was my soul by love,
That force perforce, I must Pyander prove:
The issue of which proof did testify,
Ingling Pyanders damned villainy:
I loved indeed, and to my mickle cost,
I loved Pyander, so my labor lost.
Fair words I had for store of coin I gave,
But not enioyde the fruit I thought to have.
Oh so I was besotted with her words,
His words that no part of a she affords:
For had he been a she injurious boy,
I had not been so subject to annoy.
A plague upon such filthy gullery,
The world was nere so drunk with mockery:
Rash headed Caualeires learn to be wise,
And if you needs will do, do with advise,
Tie not affection to each wanton smile,
Least doting Fancy truest love beguile:
Trust not a painted puppet as I have done,
Who far more doted then Pigmalion:
The streets are full of iugling parasites,
With the true shape of Virgins counterfets:
But if of force you must a hackney hire,
Be curious in your choice, the best will tire:
The best is bad, therefore hire none at all,
Better to go on foot, then ride and fall.
Satyr 6. Wise Innocent.
Why for an Innocent ho: what a pure fool?
Not so (pure ass) ass, where went you to school?
With Innocents, that makes the fool to prate:
Fool will you any? yes the fool shall hate.
Wisdom what shall he have? the fool at least:
Prouinder for the Ass ho: stalk up the beast,
What shall we have a railing Innocent?
No gentle gull, a wise man's president.
Then forward wisdom, not without I list,
Twenty to one, this foole's some Satirist,
Still does the fool haunt me, fond fool be gone,
No I will stay, the fool to gaze upon.
Well fool stay still, still shall the fool stay? no:
Then pack simplicity, good Innocent, why so?
Nor go nor stay, what will the fool do then?
Vex him that seems to vex all other men.
It is impossible, streams yt are bard their course,
Swel with more rage, and far more greater force:
Until there full stuffed gorge a passage makes
Into the wide mawes of more scopious lakes:
Spite me: not spite it self can discontent,
My steeled thoughts, or breed disparagement:
Had palefac't coward fear been resident
Within the bosom of me Innocent:
I would have housde me from the eyes of ire,
Whose bitter spleen vomits forth flames of fire
A resolute Ass, oh for a spurring Rider,
A brace of Angels: what is the fool a briber?
Is not the Ass yet weary of his load?
What with once bearing of the fool abroad?
Mount again Fool: then the Ass will tire
And leave the Fool to wallow in the mire.
Do thou think otherwise? good Ass the^ be go^
I stay but till the Innocent get on.
What will thou needs of the fool bereave me*
Then pack good foolish Ass, and so I leave thee.
FINIS.
Epilouge to the last Satyr of the first book.
THus may we see by folly of the wise,
Stumble and fall into fools paradise:
For iocand wit of force must iangling be,
Wit must have his will and so had he.
Wit must have his will, yet parting of the fray,
Wit was enioynd to carry the fool away.
Qui Color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo.
FINIS.

