AN ANATOMI, THAT IS TO SAY A PARTING IN PIECES ^f the Mass. Which discovers
the horrible er^ors, and the infinite abuses unknown to the people, as well of
the Mass as of the Mass Book, very profitable, yea most necessary for all
Christian people.

WITH A SERMON OF THE SACRAment of thanks gyuyng in the end, which decla^eth
whether Christ be bodyly in the Sacrament ^r not.

By Christ's humble servant Anthoni de Adamo.

The word of the lord is quick and mighty, and ^erceth faster then any two
edgid sword. Heb. 4. A. D. 1556.

Anthony de Adamo to the Christian readers desires health.
Do exhort you (o Christians) to read and consider well this short book, which
treats of the Mass and of the Mass book, for without ^t readinge and well
considering it, you shall ^ow what the one and the other is, and it is
con^ient, seeing this Mass is so greatly haunted, and (...) in such honor and
price almost of all men, (...), esteemed as the chief and principal way to
ho^ur god in the Christian religion. (It is fit I say) ^at it be well known
what it is, wheather it be ^ofitable or hurtful, good or evil, pleasinge or
if pleasing to god. Many, yea the more part of ^en without any manner of
knowledge in mat^rs of Christian religion, not considering the im^rtaunce
thereof, follow the multitude, Custom ^d the common sort of men, thinkinge
that they ^end not but that they do well, and an acceptab^e work to god,
doing as other men do, but they (...) disceaued, for in the honouringe of god
and doing to him a tha^kefull deed, 2. Petr. 1.
It is necessary tha^ we follow his word as a light that may guide us (...) it
were trauelars that journey by night, we ough^ not to be ruled nor governed, in
a matter pertaininge to our salvation, either by our oune fantasi^ and
seming, or else by any other men's. For if we d^ so we shall leave the light and
walk in darkness, a^ in the end fall into a headolngnes and everlasting
downfall. Who is that good servant that seruith his lord or master as likes
himself? surely none: but the good serves as his lord wills and ^maundeth,
otherwise he should not be good but wicked and stubborn. God would above althings
hau^ obedience according to this saing, 1. Reg. 15. Eccles. 4. Esa. 29.
Melior es obedie^tia qua^ uictima that is to say obe^ence is better the^
sacrifice. And Eccles. says, Obe^ence is better then fools sacrifices, who
know no^ the euel they do. God threateneth that heavy sentence written in
Esaie, and alleged by Christ i^ S. Matthew, Matthew. 15.
This people (says he) does honor m^ with there lips, but there hearts are
far from m^ they honor me vainly teaching the doctrine an^ commandments of
men. Lo I will work a gre^ wonder toward this people for the wisdom of there
wise men shall perish, and the vnderstanding^ of the wittye shall be darkened,
the which sentenc^ ^y the just judgment of god, from a certain time ^e her to
is come upon us: Because that (leaving ^^e word of god) we have embraced the
teachings and fantasies of men, estiminge them more then ^he holy scripture,
and therefore our accounted ^yse and witty me^, have greatly erred, and as
blin^e men have led the rest of us (being also blind in that time) into the
pit of innumerable and most ^eadly errors. And I protest here before god and
^sus Christ before whose throne we must all appe^ and render account of our
doings at the last ^ay that no private affection has moved me to ta^e this
enterprise in hand, but only an ernestnes ^owards gods glory and Jesus
Christ's, and for the ^roffit of the Christian people, and I desire every ^e
that shall find any fault in this our writing, ^at he will openly in writing
confute it and de^are it. But let him do this by the word of god, ^^en as
hitherto I have endeavored my self (accor^ng to my understanding and ability)
to make ^ainly appear by the same word of god the great ^rrours and the
infinite abuses that be in this Mass and Mass book: I mistrust not, but there
will be ^me and undoubtedly many, who live not only (...) ease by this there
accustomed marchandyse of ^e Mass but also do fleshly triumph on poor men's
costs that will condemn this our labor and will cry with a loud voice,
down with him, down with him, but without any auaylable reason and with out
gods word, alleging only the custom and authority of me^, saing, how is
it possible that the church with so great a nombre of learned me^, should have
erred so long time, as though any certain multitude which is commonly holden
and taken for the true church were Christ's church in deed, whose cry I little
care for, if they bring no other matter then the customs and words of men* But
if they can with the holy scripture and with lively reasons grounded on the
same confute this and defend there Mass and there Mass book (the which I
think yea I believe verili they shall not) I sha^ rest most bound unto them and
yield the^ my hearty thanks. And because that this our judgment to some of
small understanding, may seem strange and a new matter, ye they shall judge it
rather a wicked rashenes, I therefore do warn and give every Christian man to
understand, that none ought to be moved, either by the long custom or
authority of any manner of man, whether he be holy or learned, for in gods
matters, we ought to take heed not to Customs, not to the continuance of time,
not to the multitude, nor the authority of our elders, bu^ to the only word
of god, Ezech. 20.
as Ezechiell the prophet says, Walk not in the commandments of your
fathers nor keep not there judgments, with ^here Idols defyle not your selfs,
I am the lord your god, walk in my commaundeme^ts and keep any judgments and
do them, Leuit. 13.
And in Leuiticus it is written. Keep my commandments, be not desirous to do
those things that they have done which have been before you, nor defyle not
your self in them: I am the lord your god. Ciprian in his second book of his
epistels the 3. chaptre.
And S. Cyprian to Cecilius in his second book of Epistels, the third chapter
says, that Christ ought only to be herd, the father also from heaven has
testified the same, (saing) this is my welbelowed son, in whom I am well
pleased, here him. Whereby if only Christ be to be herd, we ought not to
regard, what any man before has thought mete for us to do, but what first
Christ has done who is before all. Wherefore we ought not to follow men but the
truth of god. And he says in diverse other places that we ought to follow the
word of god and not the opinious of me^, and likewise to Pompey against
Steuens Epistle he says: That the Custom which was entered among many ought
not to make that the truth, should not prevail and overcome, for Custom
without truth is an oldnes of errors. Wherefore, leauinge the error, let us
follow the truth. I will let pass a nombre of the ancient fathers, as
Auste^, Hierom, Ambrose, and other, who would we should stick to the only word
of god and not to custom nor to any other authority of man. It has been
always that the more part of men have been in error, yea, and eue^ of the^
that were called the people of god. Let the prophets be red and it shall apere
that I say the truth: for, why were the prophets persecuted, euel handeled
and in the en^ put to death, if not, for because they reproved the errors and
abuses of there time, which were among the people? why has Christ and his
Apostles suffered persecution, and in the end death, y^ not, for that they
reproved the false faith, the untrue worshippings, and the counterfeit religion
of there time? And for what cause the^ shall we now marvel, that the Christian
people should be myred and drowned in so many abuses corruptions, Idolatries
and other infinite errors? 2. Pet. 2. et 3.
has not Pete^ fore told us, in his second epistle, that there should come
false teachers that would bring in deadly sects, and that in the latter days
there sholud come begylers and deceauers? 2 Thessalonians. 2.
And Paul in his second to the Thessalonians, does, not he declare that there
should come a forsaking (as I understand it o^ the faith) that is to say that
men should goo from the faith, and that god would send forth a mightines of gyle
and deceyte, so that men should believe lies, and that because they have not
loved the truth? And to Timothi in his first Epistle does not he say that in
the latter times some should depart from the faith, 1. Tim. 4.
giving heed to the spirits of error and doctrines of deuels? 2. Timo. 3.
And in the second also he says that in the latter days should be perilous
times and men full of vices: and among other things ^he says that they should
have shows of religion but in deed they should deny the might thereof. What
has been preached to the people of a long time hitherto, but only the
teachings of men? some preached the Poets, some Aristotle, Auerroes, Plato, and
other heathen philosophers, some preached the laws some unprofitable
questions of Scotus, Alexander of Hales, of Bonauentura of Thomas of Aquine,
the which as it is manifest in there doctrine and opinions: the one of then
gaynsayd the other in open pulpit, the black against the graie the gray against
the black, the Augustine friar against them both, and so we may say of the
rest, some held one opinion some an other: and and what assurednes of true
doctrine could the poor people have in so great a diversity and confusion?
who was he that preached the holy scripture and the gospel purely? And shall
we then marvel, that errors are entered in among the Christian people? shall we
then say, how can it be possible that god would have left his church so long
time in error? Nay if we had but a spark of wit and reason, we should say
quyte contrary, that is, how is it possible to be otherwise, but that the more
part of me^ have been and yet are in most gross blindness covered with the
dark mist of innumerable errors? and it could not be otherwise.

There is among the rest one very great disorder, a cause of innumerable euels,
that none of them to whom it belonged to teach and preach to the people has
done his office. It is well known that the office of preaching the word of
god belongs to the busshoppes, and who was he, yea we may now say, who is
that bishop that does preach and feed the flock of Christ with the word of
god? yea who is he, that disdaineth not to preach and do that office which
the Prophets the Apostles, ye and the son of god himself Christ Jesus god and
man, has done, and the godliest dewtie of all, that is to say the greatest and
highest, which is to teach the word of god to the people, these our great
lords do not vouchafe it, but have left it and yet do leave it for other to
do. It suffiseth them to have the title, the rents and the honor of a
busshop, as in effect they would declare that they be no busshoppes (as in deed
they be not) except only in name, and in deed if they were true busshoppes,
they would not be ashamed to do their office, as Austine, Ambrose, Ciprian,
Chrisostom, Basile, Gregory, and other holy fathers were not ashamed, the which
taught and preached the word of god. This is the true fedinge which Christ
commanded Peter in S. Ihon the last chapter, Joan. 15.21. 1. Pet. 5.
and the same Peter also in his first Epistle the 5. chapter says, feed so
much as in you is (that is to say) so much as you can and according to your
ability, the flock of Christ, or else as the other text says, feed the flock
of Christ which is in you, that is to say, which is committed and given to you
in charge. Of this disorder it comes to pass that the clean, pure and true
doctrine of the gospel and of the word of god does want among the people, and
as through a wide and large gate, be entered abuses, superstitions and errors
among the Christian flock. There is none the^ that has wit or reason that
will say any more, how is it possible that our elders (or let it be the
church) and so many teachers, have erred, God has suffered by his just
judgment this horrible decay in his church, and it is a most singular grace
of god, that yet in a few (albeit evil handeled of the world) who be in deed
the true church the faith does remain, Yea, I say that if the world in
temporal gouernements had not had better rule and order then the estate called
Ecclesiastical, it should have run^ into an utter confusion and decay.
Sew^rly it is true that there be many disorders in worldly princes doings, but
yet they do in some part there duty: they minister justice after a certain
manner, they chastise the fauters, they punisch theft, murder, blaspemie and
other faults, they cause by there officer every man's own to be restored him,
they give themselves to do right as there calling is. But in the
Ecclesiastical state, who has done, or yet does his office? beginning at the
highest degree, which is a busshopship, and see how that is handeled, and
therebie let the rest be judged. The bissoppes attend to every other thing,
except preaching, yea they hinder by all means they can whom so ever would do
this office trewly (that is) would declare the gospel and the word of god
purely, And they will not suffer it to be done but raginglye persecute the
teachers of the truth, they condemn them, they imprison them, they torment
them, and in the end they kill the^. And what is this, but, to show plainly
to the whole world, that they be raueninge wolves and not shepherdes of
Christ's flock? yea that they be very antichrists? And the worshipful
inquisitours, what else be they but antichrists Catchpoules creweller the^
Neroes, so that it were better to fall into the hands of Turks and Mores
without comparison then into there is. Beside that they are utterly ignorant of
the holy scripture, they are skilled in none other learning but in the skotish
and sophistical mouldines. And these (as you see) are appointed to order the
matters of our faith, and in there hands, are the goods, the honor and the
lives of poor souls, whom miserably they put to death, by pretense of the
faith, although they be enemies of it and of all godliness. I am desirous to
make this discourse to open there eyes, Which fault not by ma^ice, but by
ignorance, and to make them understand that they should not marvel, that I
reprove the Mass and the Mass book, saing that they be full of falshod
abuses and many other errors, as it may plainly be seen in this present book.
Wherefore I de^yre (for the dear love of Jesus Christ) all the lovers of the
truth, and those that tender godliness, to read and well consider this my
labor, for without ^oubt they shall find true that I say. Pray to ^od for
me, God be with you.

THE TABLE.
The Table of the matters contained in this present book which we have divided
in IIII. parts.
1. The first part examineth the Mass, from the beginning, that is from these
words, Introibo ad altar Dei, unto that part which they call the Cannon when
the Sanctus is said. 2. The second examineth the Cannon it self, the which they
make the most holy and principal part of the Mass, and is said altogether in
secret. 3. The third examineth all the rest, from the end of the Cannon,
beginning at these words Per omnia saecula saeculorum, which goes before the
Pater noster, unto the end of the Mass. 4. The fourth examineth the abuses and
the superstitions that be in the same Mass, co^cluding after in the end, that
no Christian ought to be present at it, but that it ought to be eschewed of all
men as the plage.
The first part is divided into four chapters.
1. The first says that the introibo, is false and a superstition. 2. That the
Confiteor is not Christian, because it makes no mention of Jesus Christ. 3.
The two prayers that are said softly when he goes to the altar, the one is
false and the other is very wicked, and lesseneth the honor of Jesus Christ
The second Chapter.
1. Examineth the Kyrie eleison and the Gloria in excelsis Deo. 2. It declares
that many prayers said after the Gloria in excelsis Deo, are wicked and against
the plain word of God. 3. It declares that the epistle and the gospel and
^enerally all Gods word are unworthily and evil ^auoredly handled in the
Mass.
The third chapter.
1. Declares that the prayer which is said in the ^ffering of the bread, or as
they say of the host is 2. That the mixting of water with wine (wicked. (...)
an inue^tion of me^, which ought not to have pla^^ among holly things. 3. That
the prayer at the offering of the Cupp is ^icked as that is of thost.
The fourth Chapter.
1. That many prayers which they call secreats, and are said before the
preface, hold in them these wickednesses, that is to say. 2. That fasting does
purge sins and make (...) Worthy of the grace of god, and leads us to the
heavenly glory. 3. That by the bread and Wine not yet consecr^ted God is
apeased toward us.
Te second part vuhich is divided into four chapters.
1. The first axamineth the three first parts of the Cannon That is, Te igitur
the meme^to of the living and the Communica^te^
The second chapter.
1. Examineth the fourth and first part of the sa^ Cannon that is, Hanc igitur
oblationem and Quam oblationem. 2. It examineth the sixth and seventh part,
that Qui pridie quam pateretur, and t^^ Simili modo postquam coenatu^ est which
be parts of the Consecration.
The third chapter.
1. Examineth the eight part of the Cannon a^ ^heweth that he who says the
Mass usurps that office which is only Christ's. 2. That he says a most
wicked prayer the which wrongeth Christ.
The fourth chapter.
1. It examineth the nynth part which is most wicked and prays that the
Angels may bear ^he body and blud of Christ into heaven before the ^ace of
god. 2. It examineth the tenht part of the Cannon, ^he which is folish and
gain says itself. 3. It examineth the eleauenth and last part of the
Cannon.
The third part which is divided in to four chapters.
1. The first shows that the saing of the prayers in secret and the desire
that amen should be answered by him that understands not the prayer as it is
in the Mass is a foolish thing and without any reason, and against S. Paul's
saing. 2. That the prayers which they say after the Pater noster that is to say
the libera nos quaesumus is with out reason said in secret. 3. That the
breaking of the host and making three parts of it, and the mingling one of those
parts with the wine is unfit.
The second chapter.
1. Declares how devout and holy the three praie^ said, Inmediatly after Agnus
Dei be, and the Domine non sum dignus, which is sa^ thryse, and the prayer
concerning the host and t^ cup, and the two prayers that follow. 2. That the
last prayers which are said in the e^ of the Mass, be most wicked, because
they given to the sacrament, that office which is only Christ* 3. And certain
other prayers do gainsay the pr^uat Mass.
1. The third chapter. of the Mass for the dead.
2. Declares that the first prayer is folish, and to (...) purpose because, it
asks that it ought not to as^ 3. That the Epistle taken out of the Apocalip^
gainsaith the strst prayer and the whole Mass the prays for the dead. 4. The
words of the books of the Machabees ar^ examined. That the offertory is fo^d
and an inco^uenie^t reque^
Te fourth chapter of the blessings.
1. Declares that the blessing of the ashes is blasphemy, because it gives to
ashes the raunsom of sin, and likewise all the other blessings, as of Candels,
of palms, of fire, of frankincense, of the pascall, of chese, of eggs of,
bread of, water, and to be ^hort of the popes Agnus Dei, they are all wicked
and full of superstition, because they give ^o much to the bodyly things.
The fourth part of the book is of the abuses of the Mass, and is divided
into 6. chapters.
1. In the first, that it is a great error that the Mass should forgive
sins, or satisfy for them, or else that it should apply such things to man. 2.
In the second, that the Mass is no sacrifice nor ^emembraunce of sacrifice,
and to say otherwise is (...) very great error. 3. In the third, that the
Mass is inue^tid by men and not ordened by Christ nor his Apostles. 4. In the
fourth that the Mass is a hotchpotch, a heap, yea a sea of endless abuses
wickednesses, and superstitions. 5. In the fifth, that the Mass is the greatest
sacrilege, and the greatest abomination that ever was in any time from the
beginning of the world, and is the great secret point of Antichrist. 6. In the
last that one ought not in any case nor in any manner to hear or be present at
the Mass, nor that it ought not to be suffered, to be said under any excuse or
pretense, and this is the conclusion of the book.
The first part.
An anatomy of the Mass and the Mass book divided into four parts.

The first part examineth the Mass from the introibo, unto the Cannon that is
to say to these words, Teigitur. and this has four chapters.

The first declares that the introibo, is false and superstitious and that the
confiteor, is not Christian, and that the two prayers which are said softly
when they goo to the altar the one is false and the other robs Christ's
honor and is very wicked.

The first chapter.
THe priest being ready begins to say introibo ad altar Dei and the clark
answers Ad Deu^ quilaetificat iuue^tute^ mea^, Psalm. 42.
and in this goodly beginning of the Mass he speaks a lie, or if you will so
call it an untroth. And it is not to be marueled at: seeing that this Mass is
an invention of man and not of god as we will prove (with gods help) in the
fourt^ ^^rte of this book. And for so much as the scripture says that every
man is a liar, Psalm. 115. Psalm. 118. Psalm. 42.
It is not (I say) to be marueled at, that as the beginning of gods word is
truth, even so that the beginning of the Mass is a lie for you must
understand that this introibo ad altar Dei, is a verse of the 42. Psalm which
David made, at that time when he was driven out of his kingdom by his sun
Absolon, in which he prays god that he would deliver him from the
conspiratours of the same Absalon, and that he would grant him, that he might
enter into the tabernacle among the rest, and worthily praise God. And therefore
he called that altar, gods altar, because it was made by gods apointment and
ordinance, as all the rest of the tabernacle was, as it is written in the 35.
of Exodus, Exodus 35.
and it was part of the ceremonial law, wherefore David did then say true. But
now is it false to say I will enter to gods altar, because that he has no
more any altar, as we have no more any tabernacle, nor there is no more any
sacrifice made of unreasonable beasts, no^ there Iuishe ceremonies are used any
more, for they be all ceased, and had there end at Christ's coming, we have no
more (I say) any gods altar of stone, brick or any other earthly matter.

Hebr. 13.
We have now the thing signified and the truth of those aulters, that is
Christ, that has wrought the worck of our redemption, and does that, which
these aulters did signify and betoken, for he is the true and the gostly altar
of holeburnt, and of perfume or frankincense whether you will call it, and
these two aultars were figures of Christ. Wherefore even as God then would that
the incense, the sacrifices and the offerings should be laid upon these aultars
(for otherwise they should not have been acceptable unto him) so we ought now
to offer all our prayers, and good deeds, in the name of our lord Jesus
Christ, and by him present them to god, if we would have them well taken of him.
Christ himself said of praing in S. Ihon^, Joan. 14.
what soever you shall desire of my father in my name, I will do it. Joan. 16.
And also he says: seurly I say unto you, that all these things which you
shall ask my father in my name, he will give them you, until this time you
have asked nothing in my name, ask, and you shall receive, Colloss. 3.
And Paul says, Every thing you do, bye word or deed, do it in the name of
the lord Jesus, rendering thanks to god our father by him. And to the Hebrews
he says, Hebr. 13.
by him (that is by Christ) we allwaies offer up the sacrifice of thanks giving
unto god (that is to say) the fruit of our lips that confess his name. The
reason stands in this point, that there is no gods altar, but which is made
by gods ordinance and co^ma^dime^t. But it is plain, that that whereof the
priest speaks in the begin^inge of the Mass, is not made by gods order or
commandment, but is ma^s deuyse, and therefore not gods altar. Let the
defendours of the Mass once show, where god or Christ after his coming, did
ever apointe or command, that there should be made an altar, upon which men
should do any sacrifice. The other verse also in the Psalm that is, Confitebor
tibi in cithara deus deus meus, etc. I know not to what purpose they should say
it, having no harp nor other musical instrument, which David vsid to praise
god with. But they care not (after there old wont) how they wrythe the
scriptures out of frame.

Then says the priest, Adiutorium nostrum in nomine domini, qui fecit coelum
and terram, Psalm. 42.
and after that the Confiteor deo, in which I much marueill that there is made
no manner mention of Christ, as though he had not any part in the remission of
sins yea as though he had neauer been in the world, sewerly it were reason
that he were named there, if that Confiteor, shoul be Christian like. The
priest, there first does confess himself to god, then to the blessed mother,
to S. Peter to S. Paul, and some put in there, S. Michael and S. Ihon^
Baptist. And some put in S. Dominick, some S. Fraunces, some S. Austine, and
some S. Benett, according to the diversity of the ordes of friars or monks.
And some put in, for the end to S. Vrsula with all her company. And to be short
there is made mention of all saints, but of Jesus Christ the sun of god
crucified and dead for our sins, there is made no mention at all. How
unworthy a thing is this to be confessed to the rest of the saints of whom
there is none dead for us, none that has redeemed us, And of Christ who is our
only redemer and savior, and who only has satisfied for our sins, to make
no mention at all, as though, he were nether in heaven nor in eareth? Oh naked
yea (I may well say) wicked Confiteor. In whose name is the repentance done of
the which you would that the spoken confession should be a part? In whose, name
(I say) is it made? Is it made in the name of the other saints or ^n Christ's
name? he himself suerly has said, Luc. 24.
that repentance and remission of sin^es ought to be done ^n his name, as we
have in saint Luke. And why, ^hen have you not put him in this your
confiteor, If at all you believe in him? what will they ^ay here? paraduenture
they will say, that there is mention made of Christ in these words Confiteor
deo, Christ being god. And also in that ^ther place where there is made mention
of all the the saints Christ being also a saint. A goodly answer, And why is
there not made, mention of Christ ^s man, seeing that there is mentioned the
rest that ^re only creatures? Christ is not only god but, Romans 3. Timo. 2.
Hebr. 7.
^so man and our advocate in that he is man: Why ^oo not we confess our self
to him and pray to ^im seeing he only is appointed by god to be our ^ediatoure
and intercessour, and not the other ^aincts as much as we understand by the
holly scriptures? And so much the rather also, that we be ^ot certain that the
other saints here us? And if we should make particular mention of the others,
who, although they be by gods favor saints, yet they were not without sin.
Wherefore should we not much rather make mention of Ihesus Christ the son of
god the saint of sanictes and the hallower of all the rest? Collos 2.
And in whom dwells the fulness of the god head bodily, as S. Paul says: It
is plain therefore that this Confiteor deo, o^ the Mass, is not Christian, for
that it burieth Christ.

After the Confiteor is said the miserea tur tui and the indulgentiam and
absolutione^ and the deus tu conuersus, and the Ostende nobis domine
misericordiam tuam etc. Where neither is made any mention of Christ. This
ended, they say two prayers, the first is this, Take from us o lord we pray
the, al our iniquities, that we may with pure minds, come to the holy of
holies, through Christ our lord, Amen. This prayer were godly if there were
not these words, holy of holies, or at the leasts if there were that had the
true meaning of them. But because it seems to show, that that material
altar upon which the Mass is said, should be the holy of the hollies,
therefore it is superstitious, and tells not the truth, for the holly of the
hollis was according to the scriptures: a place in the tabernacle, divided from
the rest, by a certain veele or Corthein (whether you will call it) as it is
written in Exodus, Exodus 20.
into which place none did enter except the high priest, once in the year. And
it signifies the heaven, whither Christ is now entered, after he had ended his
everlasting raunsomming, ^s saint Paul says to the Hebrews. Hebr. ^.
So that seeing this altar whereupon the priest says Mass is not the hollie of
the hollies, but an invention of men, and not appointed by god, It is called
improperly ye falsely the holly of the hollies, for that place the holly of the
holiyes, is ended, as also the aultars be, and is no more, sense that Christ
is come, who has ended that material tabernacle, the leuiticall sacrifices,
and all that outward and ceremonial worshipping. Matthew. 27. Marc. 15.
And in token of that (as the Evangelists write) when Christ dyed on the
Cross, that veele, which parted the holly of the hollies from the rest of the
temple, was divided, and torn in two, from the topp to the ground: geuinge us
to understand that the ceremonial law, in every part ended by Christ. It
belongs not then to us to make more new holly of hollies, having no word of
god for ^t, Where as nevertheless if the prayer had understood by the holly of
hollyes, the heaven where Christ is entered, and wherein also we shall by his me
^rits, and the grace of god enter the prayer, had been ^trew, and godly: but
this is not the intent as it seems: for it ente^deth to speak of the misteri
of the Mass: and of that altar, to the which things me^ ought to goo (as they
say) with a pure mind and a cle^^ conscience.

There follows next another prayer, which (...) priest says in every Mass
softly and bowing h^self to the altar (that is) We beseech the o lord (...)
the deseruings of thy saints, whose relics (...) here and of all the
saints, that thou would vo^^safe to forgive me all my sins, Amen. A folish
^cked and blasphemous prayer, first he says t^ by the deseruings of the
saints that have the relics in that altar or in the hallowed stone they
say) And who knows that they be reliq^ of saints? What fuerty has the
priest thereof? P^ adventure they be the relics I will not say whom. And if
haplye there shall be there no relics of saints, as I thinck and believe in a
gr^ part, yea in the more part of the aultars that ^re are no relics of
saints in deed, what she avail this there prayer in that part making
mention of the saints that be not? Then what wick^nes and blasphemy is this
to give the remission^ sins to the deseruings of mere men, who thoug^^ they
be saints, yet they all have had need of the some forgeuenes of sins, 3.
Reg. 8. 2. Petr. 6. Psalm. 142.
and no one of the^ was (...) any time without sin as the scripture says
(...) many places? And Christ in the prayer that (...) taught the holy Apostles
declares the same, Eccles. 18. Matthew. 6.
who ^^^eth that they should say when they pray forgeu^^^ our debts, that is
to say our sins, as we for (...) our dettours. And S. Ihon^. says: 1.
Joan. 1.
If we shall (...) we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and tru^th is not
in us. What blasphemy (I say) is this to g^^^ such remission to mere men,
the same being (...) office only of Christ? The holy scripture ^^^n it
speaks of the forgeuenes of sins it mak^^^ no mention of any but of
Christ, and teaches us that by his only merits sin^es are forgeuen. And this
prayers does give it, Joan. 1. Acto. 4.
to the deseruings of other saints. Ihon^ Baptist pointing to Christ, says,
be^^^d the lamm of god, behold him that takes away (...) sins of the world
(and means him only ^^d S. Peter in the Acts of the Apostles says, the^^s
none other name under heaven given to men, (...) which we must be saved. If
there be none other ^^me by which we are saved but that of Christ, nor by
other deseruings then his, why then do we ^^ing in (in that case) any other
but him? what mea^th this to be saved, if not to be freed from sin? (...)
Angel also says to Joseph, as S. Matthew ^^e Evangelist writes, speaking of
Christ, Matt. 1.
not ^^en borne, he shall save his people from there sin^es ^^e means) he
shall do it, and none other. Is it not known that in his name only our
sins are fo^geue^ us, in which we be baptized, for baptism ^gnifieth the
remission of sins.

1. Cor. 1.
It is plain as S. Paul says, to the Corinthi^^ that we be Christened in
Chrsts name, and no^^ any other saints. Are you (says he) Christened (...)
Paul's name? 1. Joan. 2.
as though he would say, no, but (...) Christ's. And Ihon^ the Evangelist says,
I wryte^ you children, that your sins are forgeuen yo^ by his name (that is
to say) Christ's. And wh^ should we need to allege mo saings? all the
scr^pture both new and old, is full of this. And wh^ else says Esaias, Esa.
53.
but that Christ has suffered for our sins, and Christ himself (as we have
said before) plainly affirms, Luc. 24. Romans 3. Ephesians. 1. Coloss. 2. Hebre. 1.
that in his name is wrought remission of sins, and Paul in this matte^ is
plentiful above all, whose saings if I would bring^ forth, I should be to long,
but for that the matter i^ so clear to him that is not altogether ignoraun^ of
Christ and the scriptures, I will pass it over. Seems this to you a small
blasphemy, to take away that honor, and that glory, that belongs to Christ
only, and give them to others, to whom they belong not? Is not this a
dishonouring him, a dispysing him, and a committing of a great sacrilege? This
prayer is wicked and a great blasphemy, nor ye ought not to excuse it with
gloses, And who that will defind it, shall show himself an enemy to the honor
and glory of Christ. And be^^ds all this also, it plainli gainsaieth other
parts of ^he Moss, as those two verses of Gloria in ex celsis deo, the which
say to Christ, Qui tol ^is peccata mundi miserere nobis, Qui tollis peccata
mundi suscipe de ^recationem nostra^. It speaks against ^he consecration of
the cupp, and against the ago nus dei, the which saings affirm that Christ
only causes remission of sins, and not the ^aints.

The second chapter. THE EXAMINACION OF THE Kyrie cleeson and of the Gloria in
excelsis deo, and how that many prayers after the gloria in excelsis, be
wicked, and that the epistle and gospel, and generally the whole word of god
in the Mass, are unworthily and evil fauoredly handled.
When the priest is come to the altar and h^ opened the Mass book, he
begins (...) entry, which commonly is of the old Testame^^ and for the most
part, it is certain verses of (...) Psalms. When the entry is ended, the
Kyrie ^leeson, is said, which is as much to say as d^ mine miserere, that is,
lord have mercy, (...) Master williame Durant, in the fourth part (...) his
book called the Rationale diuino^ (that is to say a declaration of the causes
why ^^ry ceremony is used in the common service) wh^ he expounds, the
Mass, he teaches and rehe^seth the reasons of the things said or done in
(...) same, and says, that the Kyrie eleeson, h^ yet an other signification,
that is Kyri, Christ, (...) god, ei have mercy, son, upon us, so that this
K^rie eleeson, shall be four words, the first shall kyri, the second el, the
third ei, and the fourth so^ which altogether do make the Kyrie eleiso^ which
hole is as much to say as Christ god ha^ mercy upon us, but why it is said
nine times ^gether with Christeleeson, the said Maste^ william does theach the
cause saing, that for certain respects it is said nine times, The first is the
the tenth order which is of men, being now re^^ ^yred might accompany the nine
orders of An^ls. The second that the church might come to ^e company of this
nine orders of Angels. The ^^ird is, that it may be against these nine sorts
of ^^nes, that is to say, our birth sin, forgeuable ^^dlye, bye thought,
word, deed, by frailty, simpli^^ie, and maliciouslye, behold the goodly
reasons (...) this Kyrie eleeson, why it should be said ^ne times, and you may
see how auctenticall they (...) He brings in also certain other causes, which
^^r shortness I leave: but among the rest he says that this Kyrieleeson is of
great power, and that (...) Basil crieng this Kyrie eleeson, wiht a loud
^oyce, the church doors of Pauia were opened ^^d that at an other time by the
cry of Kyrie ^leeson, five kings were put to flight, And he ^ddeth that
perhaps this Kyrie eleeson, ^etokeneth some other thing then domine mi^erere,
which we do not know.

But I would first understand to what purpose ^monge the latins, of which the
great part vn^erstandeth only there natural tongue and not the ^atin, to what
purpose (I say) should the greek be spoken, seeing we use the latin? Except
that we wo^^d say that the words in greek, either are better understand then in
latin, which is false, or else that they have more vertew then the latin which
is superstitious. Wherefore then, is not lord have mercy on us said, and not
Kyrie eleeson, the one being as much in signification as the other? if there were
an English preacher, that should preach to English me^ who understand not the
dutche tongue, and would speak dutch, would not the hearers think that they were
mocked by such a preacher? Even so do they that say Mass, who speak greek to
the latins, and that which is worse, to them that nether understand greek nor
latin.

Seeing then that this Kyrie eleeson, means, lord have mercy, why is it not
rather and fitlier said only three times to betoke^ the trinity, the which is
prayed unto by such words, and to which belongs to show mercy: then nine
times for the nine orders of Angels which are nether prayed unto in this Kyrie
eleeson, nor to have mercy on us belongs not unto them? sewerly it should
more conveniently and more fitlye be said oneli three times for the three divine
persons, because it belongs to the^ to show mercy, the^ nine times for the
nine orders of Angels which have not that power. The^ whi is it said rather
nine times for ^he nine orders of Angels then seaue^ times, seeing that the
number of seven is found oftener in the ^cripture, then the nombre of nine, as
the places ^ight be showed? Or else rather then twelve times ^or the twelve
Apostles, for the twelve tribes of Is^^ell, for the twelve stars in the
Apocalipse, for ^^e twelve articles of the faith, and for the twelve ^ones of
which is made me^tio^ in Iosue the fourth? ^o what purpose when we pray unto
god should ^e multiply our words according to the nombre ^f the Angels, or
other things? this is as we should ^tye five Pater nosters and five Aue Maryes
in ^he worship of the five wounds, or seven in the worship of the seven
joys of our lady, which things I am sorry to say. And to be short, this
saing ^f the Kyrie eleeson, nine times upon so vai^e causes is superstitious
and makes us vnder^tand how feeble and vain the foundations of the Mass are,
Yea seeing the latin is more plain to ^s then the greek.

Then next, when Kyrie eleeson, is said, follows the Gloria in excelsis Deo,
which is a goodly praise and a godly, for the Angels (as Luke the Evangelist
says) did sing it at Luc. 1.
Christ's birth those words that are joined to it, as Laudamus te, Benedicimus
te, unto the end, were put to (as some say) by Hilarious, others say by
Telesphorus the pope and others, that they were put to by Symacus the pope,
there is nothing thereto be reproved, concerning the substance of the matter^
We deny not, but that there is in the Mass certein^ things agreeable to gods
word, yea and some part of gods words it self, for there are of the saings of
the psalms, of the prophets, of the Apostels, an^ of Christ himself, but the
matter is, that these things should be placed worthily, and not otherwise. And
also that the wicked should not be mingeled with the good. This is the suteltie
of Satan, who under the show of godly matters, deceaueth the unadvised, as we
are wont to say, that in the^ honye lies hidden the poison.

Tell me after what sort are men killed with poison? It is suer, that it is
neauer given alone, but mixte among other good meats, and after this son^ it
is taken and brings death: Eue^ so it happens in this Mass, for there are
diverse good things, as the Epistel, and the gospel, and other saings of the
scripture, but with such saings are covered many disceyts, are told many
untruths, blaspemies and superstitions, is taken the honor from Christ and
god, and given to only creatures. After this sort also are men deceived with
inchauntements, for ^here is none or very few inchauntments made, that have not
some words (and those good) of god, and yet they ought not be done.

Then next after the Gloria certain prayers, which they call collects, and some
of them be godly and Christian like, made according to gods word, ^ut there
are many wicked and blaspemous, as that ^f the fourth ferie (that is to say)
on wednisdaye of the Ember days in aduent, and it is the first prayer that he
says. Grant we beseech the (o lord al^ichtye) that this solemn feast that
is at hand of ^ure redemption, may help us in this present life, and give us
the rewards of everlasting blessedness. The fourth prayer also, the saturday
which follows in the same Imber days, says, the very same in substance as it
may be seen in the Mass book. The first prayer also on the saturday in albis,
(that is to say) the first saturday after Easter, says thus. Grant we beseech
the almighty god, that we which have kept with reverence this feast of
Easter, may bye the same deserve to come to everlasting joys. These prayers
plainly desire, that by the desert of the feasts that we keep of Christmas and
Easter god would give us the everlasting happiness. And how can this stand, that
by the kepinge of holy days we should deserve everlasting blessedness?

First it is plain, that in the new Testament, we have no holy day commanded
by Christ nor his Apostels, those that are kept, are by man's and not by gods
apointment. I say not for all this, that it is evil, to ordeine certain
proper days or feasts that the people may come together to the preaching of
gods word, to receive the holy communion, to make common prayer together, and
also for there rest, who in that week were weried, and to the intent (I say)
that we may have some day, wherein we may quietly have regard to the heavenly
things. But to do this, by gods commandment, there is no more one day then an
other appointed, for the days are all a like, nether is there one more holy
then an other in it sell, (...) 4.
or by gods ordinance. Paul reproved the Galathians because they did keep
days, letting them wit that such kepinge is a ieuysh and no Christian like
thing. Col^os ^
Likewise writing to the Colossians he says, let no man judge you neither in
meat, nor drink, nor in any part of the holidaye, nor of the saboth day, which
things are but shadows of the things to come etc. Then is there not any
holliday by gods commandment, since Christ's coming who has ended the
ceremonial law, of the which the keeping of days was a part by gods oune

I say more over, that although there were (law. holy days commanded by god
in the new Testament, yet we could not be saved by keeping of them, seeing our
elders were not saved by the keeping of the law commanded by god. For there is
none at any time saved or justified by the law, as Peter says in the acts of
the Apostles, Acto. 15.
but all be saved by the grace of our savior Jesus Christ. So now we (even
as our fore fathers) be saved by the self same grace of Jesus Christ. How many
saings of Paul could I bring forth if I would, that we be not justified nor
saved by the works of the law, nor by any other work, but only by faith,
which is as much to say as by the grace of our lord Jesus Christ, I say by
his only grace. And yet the Mass book will affirm that by the holy days
commanded bye men, god should give us everlasting life, which he neauer did to
our forefathers, for the holy days commanded by himself, nor for any other
work commanded in the law. We have before said, that there is none other name,
in which we may be saved, but that only of Christ's, Acto. 4.
and the Mass book will that we should be saved in the name of holy days
found out and appointed by men, which how they be kept it is well known, for
that, god is much more offended, and mo sundry ways (out of doubt) on such
days then on any other.

These prayers are wicked. And if it should be said, that in such prayers is
put in the end Per Christum Dominum nostrum geuinge us to wit, that we be saved
by Christ, I say that this is not enough, because Christ only, or hi^
deseruings only do save us: and these prayers wo^ that by the deserts of the
holy days we should b^ saved, giving to the holy days, at the least in part,
that which Christ only does, and so do less his honor. Gods word will that
Christ onel^ should have this office, and puts no other companion wiht him.
There be many other prayers i^ this wicked Collects, but we have given an
example of these few, lest we should werie the reader, m^king the book, to
great.

When the prayers are ended, the Epistle is said, and after the Epistle, the
grayle which is certei^ verses of Psalms and for the most part with certain
alleluiaes, orels the tract, which is also certain verses of Psalms, and then
is said the gospel. These things are of the holy scripture and good, but be
vndew^ifully handled because they ^re unprofitably spoken. Tell me, what can
the ^pistle, gospel, or any of the scripture profit if they ^e not understand?
It is plain that the more part ^f the people that here Mass commenly
vnder^and not the latin. But what speak I of the peop^? They themselves that
say the Mass, for the ^ost part are ignorant, and understand not the ^eaninge
of the words they speak, but like pyes ^r popingaies, they pronounce the words
and the ^ente^ces, and understand not the meaning of then. what an abuse is
this? And so much the more, as that they say softly before the gospel two
prayers, that is. Cleanse (o almighty god) my heart and my ^ippes, that did
cleanse the lips of I say the prophet with a burning stone, voutsafe eue^ so
to cleanse me with thy pity, that I may worthelie declare this holly gospel,
by Christ our lord. And after this he says the other. Our lord be in my
heart, and in my lips, that I may worthily and sufficiently show forth his
gospel.

After this sort the priest says these prayers when there is no deacon, but
where the deacon is there he asks the blessing at the priests hands, who
speaks unto him in the second person sainge. The lord be in thy heart and in
thy lips etc. The prayer ended, the deacon then sings the gospel. There is
required in these prayers to set forth the gospel worthily and as it ought.
But how ca^ the gospel be worthily set forth, when it is uttered in such sort
as it is nether understand of him tha^ hereth it, nor him that speaks it, and
proffiteth nothing at all? Suerly they mock god and the gospel, for on the
one part they desire gods grace to show forth worthily the gospel, and of the
other part they speak it or singe it in such sort as it cannot be understand.
Is the gospel worthily declare^ by reading it only on the book? Did our
savior, c^maunde his Apostles (when he said unto them preach the gospel to all
creatures) that they should preach it in a tongue that men understand not?
Whe^fore gave he them the gift of tongs? But that even nation might understand
them? The gospel why i^ it preached? to the intent to be believed. How ca^ it
be believed when it is not understand? What (...) corruption is this of this
Mass, to say it, to all the people, which are there some time a thousand
persons, men and women, little and great, and the more part of them hears
only the voice, without understanding any thing that is said in the hole
Mass? O pour people what misorder and abuse is this? There is that have hard
Mass above fourscore years that never understood any thing, nor knows what
they have done. O shepherds that have the charge of men's souls, is this your
government? do you handell of this sort Christ's poor sheep, which you ought
to seed with gods word, and ye feed them with wind? why do you not remedy in
your Councels (which to what end you keep them it is well known) this
horrible abuse and many other as great as this? but rather defend them and
increase them from day to day as laws of the church. What excuse shall you
have ^at the day of judgment, before Christ's throne, for this your
administration? Who has taught you to speak in the church before the hole
nombre in an unknown tongue? do you not know that this is against gods
commandment declared by the Apostell Paul, 1. Cor. 14.
where plainly he wills that in the church, and when the people are gathered
together, men should speak in a tongue that all men might understand? and
rebukes those that speak in an unknown tongue, because it is without
edification and proffit? what a destruction is this, to make the poor people
lose the time and to keep the people so disceaued that they should think it
well done only to here, and understand nothing? They know not that to read a
thing and not to understand it, is to despise it, as Cato says whom every
chilce does learn. The cause why in the old time the latin tongue was used in
the church, was, because, that then the people did understand it. And Gregory
at Rome to the people did use none other tongue but latin as himself does witness
in the preface to Ezechiell writing to Marian the bishop, yea it was commanded
by the Emperors Civil law, that the minister should speak the words of
Consecration with a loud voice, that all the people might here and understand,
which should have been done in vain, if the people had not understand the
meaning of the words. And therefore there was no prayer said softly, but all
were openly spoken with a loud voice to the intent that the people might
answer, amen. Which should have been askorne by the witness of Paul in the said
place of his Epistle to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 14.
if they had not understand what was said. Therefore the minister or the priest
when he should say the prayers, said, and yet says Oremus, provoking the whole
multitude gathered to gother, to whom he speaks, that they should pray and
make together with him the same peticion that he speaks, which cannot be
fitly done, if that be not understand that the priest says. And therefore this
saing of the Epistle and gospel, and all the rest as it is handeled in the
Mass, in the latin tongue, and being not understood of the ^tanders bye, is
a very great abuse and a begiling of the people, of the profit of Gods word.

The third chapter.
THere is declared that the prayer which is said in the offering of the host,
is wicked.

That the mixting water with wine, is man's invention and not gods.

That the prayer of the offeringe the cupp, is wicked, as that is of the host.

When the gospel is done the Creed is said on holly days, on other days it
is not said. After the Creed then is the offertory which is a saing of the
Psalms, and some times it is some other part of the scripture, brefe and
short. When the offertory is said, or whilst it is saing, on holy days,
chefely on sunday, men offer and kiss the maniple or the paten, and there is
said to them that offer. Centuplum accipies, etc. The which saing was a promise
that Christ made to those that would forsake father, mother, wife, children,
and there temporal goods for his name, and they aplie it to them that offer in
this offeringe. Behold wheather this be to pull gods word from the purpose, and
to corrupt it or no? As though Christ's intent had been to sai in these words,
whosoever ever will kiss the phanel and offer to give to the priests and friars,
shall receive a hunderth fould, and shall possess the life everlasting. Thus
mar they lykwyse other saings of the holy scripture. In old time this
offering was bestowed on the poor by the deacons hands, but now every man
knows to what use it turns. When the offertory is done, the host not yet
consecrated (is offered as they say) and this prayer is said. O holy father
almighty everlasting god, take this unspotted host, which I (thie unworthy
servant) do offer to the my living and true god, formy innumerable sins,
offenses, and negligences, and for all the standers by, and for all the
faithful Christians living and dead, to the intent it may be profitable to me
and to them for health to life everlasting, amen. In this prayer is said, that
that bread which they call the host is offered to god for the sins of all
the faithful living and dead, and also desires that it may be profitable for
health to life everlasting.

These are suerly great effects, and it is much to be marueled at, how this
host not yet consecrated can do (as they thinck) these things, that is to say,
to avail to forgeuenes of sins, and to life everlasting, how can this be,
that a piece of bread which is but bread should work so great effects? I can
not ^^ceaue this, I would they would prove it me by gods word. And if they would
say that they speak such words not by that which is then bread, but by that,
that it shall be after the consecration, they can not with truth speak it, for
that host when it ^all be consecrated shall not be any more bread (...) they
think no, nor shall not be any more the same, but another thing, for before it
be consecrated and when this prayer is said it is only ^ead, and when it is
consecrated, it is the true bo^ of Christ, and no more material bread (as they
^ink) And they in this prayer speak of that host, which they then offer,
sainge, O holly father al^ighty god, take this unspotted host, showing the
^read not consecrated and they mean to speak of that, that they show, and that
it is then not that (...) shall be. Also the Cannon it self in the first part
which says, Quam oblationem tu de^s etc. declares that it is spoken of the
bread ^^d wine unconsecrated, as it apereth in that pla^e. Then this manner host
that they then show, how ^n it forgive sins, and save men? The Jews in ^ede
offered such things for sin^es but the Christians (whose offering as Peter
says in his Epistel are spiritual) offer not such things to god for there
sins, being suer that they are forgeuen them by Christ only, and not by any
other thing. This prayer therefore is wicked, as many other are, that are said
in the Mass.

When the host is offered, and the wine in the challice, they also put to it
water, which thing they say, that Alexander the first pope, ordened. First, to
show that the health of the people (which is signified by the water, acording to
the saing of the Apocalipse. Aquas quas uidisti ubi me retrix sedet, populi
sunt, and gentes, and linguae) could not be without the sheding of Christ's
blood, nor the blud shedding without the health of the people: therefore it is
necessary, that, to betoken this, the water should be mingled with the wine.
Secondly it is to declare, that there issued out of Christ's side together with
the blood, water, in token that Christ is not without the people, nor the
people without Christ. Thirdly the water is mixed with the wine, to tell that
there is in Christ the manhood together with the god head, which towe things
are betokened by the water and the wine, the manhood by the water, and the god
head by the Wine. I will not at this present take on me the burdene of reproving
Alexander, but I will yet tell what I think, that in the Sacrament there ought
to be made (respecting those things that be the substance of them) no manner of
change, nether to increase nor to diminish. It is alread^ known that Christ
did not institute the Sacrament of the holy super with any other elements then
with bread and wine, and that no water in it: nor the apostels (as far as we
understand by there writings) have added any other thing. This me think should
suffice. Then even as it belongs not, to any man in the world but to god and
Christ that is god and man to institute Sacraments so ought no living man to
diminish it, and seem to understand more the^ the ordeiner. Who is that
inferior that would alter or change the laws or ordinances of his superior?
after this sort then, men might do in baptism, they might put to wine, and
allege the cause, as is aledged of the water, why should water be rather put
to the wine in the Sacrament of the holy super then wine to the water in the
sacrament of baptism? was not the godhed and manhede as well in baptism as in
the holy supper? Yea they were more plainly betokened, when Christ was
baptized, for that that was the fathers voice, the holy ghost was seen in shape
of a dove, which things never chanced in the supper, so far as we understand
by the Evangelists and writings of the apostles. And why cannot the godhed
and ma^hed be betokened, by wine and water as well in the one Sacrament as in the
other.

Forthermore none, except the ordeiner, has authority to give a new
betokening to the Sacrament. Christ has appointed what the bread and wine should
betoken, that is to say, that the bread should betoken and bring to
remembrance the body and the blud, and it belongs not to us, to change, to
put to or take fro, the betokenings of such things. And this opinion here
says that the wine betokens the godhead, and Christ has or deined that it
should betoken and bring to our remembrance his blud. There is a great
difference between the blud and the godhed for the blud is a creature, but the
godhed is god the Creator. Lastly Paul, who was taught of Christ (as he
writes to the Corinthians after what sort this Sacrament ought to be handeled)
makes no manner mention of water, and he durst not put to any thing beside
that which Christ had taught him. And by what authority I pray you, go they,
and add to the Sacraments? suerly this water ought not to be added.

Then next the priest offers the cupp sainge We offer to the (oh lord) the
cupp of health, besechinge thye mercyfulnes that it may ascend, with a sweet
sauoure, into the sight of thy divine majesty, for our health and all the
worlds. Amen. The self same that we have said of the host or bread, we may
and ought to say, of the cupp or wine. How can it be that the wine not yet
consecrated may avail for our health and the whole worlds? We will tarry till
they can declare it. It is suer that this prayer is wicked as well as that of
the offering of the host.

The fourth Chapter.
HEre is examined that many prayers which they call secreats and are said
before the preface, be damnable and hold much wickedness in them, as these.

That fasting purges sin^es and makes us worthy of the grace of god, and
leads us to the heavenly and everlasting glory.

That by the bread, and wine god is apeased and forgeueth us our sins.

Then follow certain prayers and they be three which affirm the bread and wine
to be a sacrifice, of which matter because we will treat of it in the end
where we will prove, that nether the bread nor wine before the consecration,
nor the Sacrament after the consecration, can be a sacrifice, albeit that the
Sacrament is a remembrance of the sacrifice. We will not now talk any farther
of it, least we should vnproffitably repeat one thing often. But we will examen
that which remains of this first part, and chefely these prayers which they
call secreats, because they are said softly, to give more authority to the
Mass. And let them nevertheless, allege as many reasons as they will, yet they
ought to speak it a loud, but this makes not so much matter, as the
wicknedesses and blasphemies, that are in some of them, and among the rest in
that of the fourth ferye of the Imber days in aduent which says: let our
fastings (we beseech the oh lord) be acceptable unto the, which by clensing us,
may make us worthy of thy grace, and bring us to the everlasting promesses.
The very same is said also in the third serie, that is to say the tewesday
after pashio^ sunday. And an other time, on friday in the Ember weke, after the
seauente^th sunday. after whit sunday, which prayer in few words has much
matter, that is to say three great blasphemies.

The first is that fastinges, do clear, purge, and cleanse. The second is that
they make us worthy of Gods grace. The third that they bring us to the
everlasting promesses. These three cursed wickednesses are in this little prayer,
who will deny that these be not three blasphemies? First is not this a
blasphemy to give to the fastings, which are our works, the cleansing of
sins, Heb. 1.
which is gods work only by Christ Jesus thoroughe his blod and death? As
paul says. 1. Joan. 1.
That Christ alone is he that purges sins. And Ihon in his first Epistle
says. That the blood of Jesus Christ, does cleanse us from al sin. And Ihon
Baptist says, Joan. 1.
behold the lamb of god, behold him that takes away the sins of the world.
And Esaias gives the forgeuinge of sins to Christ only thorough his passion
and death. Esa. 53.
And to be short the whole scripture gives this honor to Christ, and this
prayer gives it to our fastings. These be those godly sacrifices that are
made (bear with me you that yet know it not) in this detestable Mass, by
which the world so long has been disceaued and Christ dispysed. Besyd if by
our fastings we were cleansed and our sins forgeuen us, Romans 4.
we should be justified, by our oune works, for so much as justification is
forgeuenes of sins it self, or at the least is not without it, and that only
justifies us, that forgeueth us our sins. To. 3. and 4. Gala. 2.3.4. and 5.
Roma. 3.
But this doctrine is contrary to the Apostle Paul, who says in all his
Epistles, and specially to the Romans and Galath. that we be not justified by
works, but bye Gods grace through Christ's redemption. Paul says to the
Romans, we be justified by his grace (that is Gods) by the redemption that is
in Christ Jesus. In which place appointinge the things that perteine to
justification, he alleges, grace, the redemption by Christ, and faith, which
wholly he gives to the grace of god by Christ, and no whit to man: yea rather
he turns out all the glory of man, and gives the whole honor and glory to
God. Which he would not have done if our works (whether they be fastings or
other works) had pertained to justification, as any cause thereof. Moreover how
can fastings purge or cleanse sins, seeing that we must first be losed and
cleansed, before we can do any work, that may be thankful to God, whether it be
fasting or other work? How can fastings take away sins, if they be not
thankful to God? and if they be thankful to God, it is necessary that our
sins should first be forgiven us, and that we should be cleansed of them.
Fastings therefore cannot cause forgeuenes of sins nether in whole nor in
part, yea let the^ think this before hand that if they should be acceptable
unto god, forgeuenes of sins must necessarylye goo before them. And if it
should be said that in the end of the prayer there is, Per Dominum nostru^
Iesum Christu^, etc. Which words confess that our sins are forgeuen by
Christ: to this is answered that either they will that by Jesus Christ himself
only our sins should be forgeuen, or else not only by Christ, but by Christ
together with the fastings. If they will by Christ only, why do they allege
fastings? if they will have fastings together with Christ, this is first
against the scriptures, which thorowout allege Christ only and none other.
Further it is plain that the reason before made rests strong, that is, that
forgeuenes of sins go before fastings if they shall be thankful to god, then
fasting cannot, because of forgeuenes of sins nether with Christ nor without
Christ.

And if they would say we mean not of forgeuenes of sins as concerning the
fault, but the punishment, to this I say that when men speak absolutely of the
clensing or forgeuinge of sin, it is to be understand of the fault as of the
chief thing in that forgeuenes and here the prayer speaks absolutely:
wherefore it is understand of the fawt and not of the pain only. Than if the
fawt be forgeuen and taken away, we ought not to be any more ponisshed for the
cause of that fawt. For take away the cause, and the effect follows. This is a
general rule, where there is no fawt, there ought not to be any ponisshment.
If god do thoroughly for give and take away the fawt, he takes a way also the
ponisshment, dew for that fawt. And this distinction which is commonly made of
the forgeuenes of the pain and of the fawt, has no manner fowndacyo^ in holy
scriptures, but is fownd out by men. And though somtymes, god forgiving the
fawt does some way ponissh, as he did Dauyd and certain other, yet this is not,
that the ponisshme^t, should remain, as the ponisshme^t of that sin^, but for
other respecttys, as to humble the man, and to exercise him, or to give example
to other that they do not the like, and that he also may be ware in time to
come, that he fall not in such or like owtrage. This sentence is S. Austens in
his II. book called of the desertys of sins and of forgeuenes the 33. and
34. chapters, Where he brings in the pains laid on David and other godly
men, and says that they remain not, as ponisshme^ts for sin^es, but as
exercises of just me^. Tha^ the other words which say that fastings make us
whorty of gods grace (that is) that they make us deserve it, is an error and an
heresye by all means to be condemned, De predest natione sanctoru^ cap. 2.
as S. Austen says in his book of predestynacio^ of saints. And it was
Pelagius the heretics error, condemned in the cowncell at Palestina by
Pelagius him selff, lest else he should have been condemned. He says the same in
his 105.106.107. Lib. epist. 105.106.107.
epistel. And in many other places where he reasons against the Pelagians.
But what need we allege S. Austen and other learned men, having the words of
S. Paul to the Romai. so plain, where he says that that which is by grace, is
not by works, Romans 11.
that is to say, is not by deserts. And so of the contrary part, that which is
by works is not by grace, else grace should not be grace, nor works (that is to
say deserts) should not be works. For the thing that is deserved is not by
grace. And that which is by grace is not by desertis or works. But this prayer
denies grace, and wrappeth in it a co^trarietie. For the thing that is
deserved, as we have said, is not by grace but by works. And therefore if our
fastings should be worthy of gods grace, and that we should deserve it, than
grace should not be grace, which is an enwrapping of contradiction, as the for
said S. Austen in the alleged book says, De predestinatione sanctoru^ cap. 1.
That grace in no wise is grace if it be given according to deserts.

The third part of the prayer says that fasting brings us to the everlasting
promises, that is to say, to everlasting glory. He that sees not that this is
an insufferable blasphemy is blind, seeing that men can not be sauid by their
works but by the grace of god through Christ, Romans 6. Ephesians. 2. Tit. 3. Act. 4.
as we learn of Paul in so many places. And of S. Peter in the acts. There is
non other name under heaven, given to men, whereby we should be saved. And this
prayer would that by the name of works we should become safe.

There is a another secret prayer on the xxiij. sunday affter whitsontide which
says thus, Take o helpful lord, the hosts, with which thou would be
pleased and have saffety restored unto us through thy mighty mercy. This secret
says here ij. things. First that god desires to be pleased by the hosts
which the priest offers. Secondly it says that god would by these hosts have
safety restored unto us. And where would god ever be pleased by that bread and
that wine which are not yet a sacrament, much less have our safety restored
by them. From whens have they that god would such things should be done by these
offerings? In what place of the scripture find they that? The scripture says
that by Christ god is pleased with us, as we have in Esaias, Esa. 24.
where it is written, Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my well-beloved,
Matthew. 12.
in whom my soul is much delighted, which saing Matthew alleges somewhat
diverse in words but not in sense. For in stead of that word which the
Prophet calls servant, matthew says, Son^. And it is the very same in sense.
For christ in that he is man, is gods servant and is yet for all that gods
son. The father also says as it is written in the evangelists, when christ
was baptized, Matthew. 3.17. Marc. 1. Luc. 3.
and also at that time when he was tra^sfigured, This is my well-beloved son in
whom I am well pleased. Which saings all, do give us to understand that god is
pacified by Christ, and by him are all men reconciled. Romans 5.
Paul says the like to the romai. We being enemies are reconciled to god by
his sons death. And to the Colosseis it is said, that it has pleased the
father to reco^cile all things to him by Christ, being pacified by the blood of
christ's own cross. Coll. 1.
These saings of Paul are clear and plain, and affirm that christ is he, by
whom god is pacified and men reconciled. And this prayer or secret says that
god will be pacified by those offerings, Which are yet no other but Common
bread and wine, and are not yet any sacrament. Likewise the other point of the
prayer, that by those offerings, we might have safety, is a great blasphemy.
For eue^ as by Christ only god is pacified toward us, so by him and not by any
other thing, We have safety. Seeing then that christ is our only savior, this
is sure a great rasshnes, and a deuelissh self likinge to talk so boldly of our
safety withowt the holy scripture, yea against gods word. And if any to
defend this prayer, would say, that by these offerings is not meant that they than
be, but that they shall be, and at that time when they shall be consecrated. To
this we have allredy answered, in the chapter before, when the prayer of the
offering of the host not yet consecrated was examined. There is yet a great
number of these secreates which declare, that that bread and that wine not yet
consecrated, take away sins, and forgive them. But of this will we speak in
the end, where we will prove that the sacrament does not take away sins, nor
forgive them, much less the bread and wine ca^ take away sin being not yet
consecrated (that is to say) yielded to an holy use, For to consecrate is none
other thing then to yield a thing up to an holy use.

The second part examyneth the canon which they make the most holy and chese
part of the mass. And it is said all in secreat which is divided in iiij.
chapters.
In the first is examined the iij. first parts of the cano^, that is to say,
the Te igitur, the meme^ to off the living, and the communicantes.

WHEN the secreates be said, they say alowd, per omnia secula seculoru^,
Dominus uobiscum, Sursum corda, gratias agamus, and the uere dignum and iustum
est, and all the preface, and affter that, the Sanctus, when the Sanctus is
ended they begin to say the canon that is tho say, the Te igitur, very sofftly
which they say, is the chief part of the mass. Yea some thinck that the mass
begin^eth there. For all the rest is but of the solemnity, alleging, de
consecratione distincti. 2. capite panis. Albeit in that chapter which is taken
out of the book entitled. Off Sacraments, and attributed to Ambrose, it is
not said that the mass begins at the canon, but it is said only of the
words of the consecration and not of all the canon. Innocentius in the
decretallis de celebratione missarum in the chapter Cum marthe wills and
commands (because he was pope) that this canon should be received as delivered
by the apostels, although it were written at the least v. hondreth year affter
the apostels time and but a little before gregory the first, Lib. 7. epist. cap.
63.
as he him selff witnesses. It was written by a certain man named Scolasticus
and is divided in to xi. partis, some going before the consecracio^ and some
following. Master William dura^t in his Rationale diuinorum officiorum (that is
to say the declaration of the cause of every thing used in gods service) with
great reverence, expounds these, one part affter a another, as a thingful of
very great, and godly mysteries. And says that every point of this cano^,
which we goo about to set out, does very hardly appear, to be of any valewe.
Wherefore (says he) The tongue fails, The spech is unfit, The wit is over
come, And the understanding oppressed: Notwithstonding, I will knock at the
door that is to say, I will pray god that he will open to me these great
secrettis. And yet for all these there is not in this canon made by scolasticus
so much as one word of the holy scripture, except those of the consecration,
which are the least of it, For the pater noster was added after by Gregory as
in the place before rehearsed.
and be christ's words. So that, if he should have declared, John's gospel, or
the mystery of the trinity, he would not have made such a furniture of words.
And he expowndeth it with so great diligence, and reverence as it is meruolose.
These be the worthy expownders, that expownd man's words with more reverence,
and with greater labor, than gods. So now expownding this cano^, he says many
things vain and childish, yea many things wicked. Amongst the rest, he says
that parauenture, by gods foresight it is brought to pass, and not procured by
man's labor, that the first letter of this canon should be T. which in hebrew is
called Tau. Which Tau in his shape shows and expresses the sign and mystery
of the cross, because god says by Ezechiel, print the Tau, Ezech. 9.
in the forhead of them that sorrow and mourn for the abominations of
Jerusalem. For these things, says he, be fullfilled by the passion of Christ,
and the cross, and have their strenght. And he adds that in certain books,
that is to say massebokes the majesty of the father, and also the Image of the
crucifix is painted, to the intent that the priest might see (as it were
presently) him that he calls on, and with whom he speaks, saing Te igitur
etc. And that the passion which here is represented, may pearce in to the eyes
of the heart. And he adds, But the priest kisseth the feet of the Image of
the same majesty. and is crossed in the forhead, giving us to understand, that
he goes reverently to the mystery of the redemption. Not withstonding (says
he) some kiss first the feet of the Image of the fathers majesty, and affter
of the crucifix according to the order of the canon. Other contrary wise. For
by the son, men come to the father. And where has this honest fellow fownd,
that the majesty of the father can be painted? Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. 4.5.
what shape has the father (who is an high spirit) that we may paint him?
Seeing he himselff has so straightly in the law commanded that there should be
made no fasshion nor image of god. Is not this to teach men to committ Idolatry?

Let no man marvel that I offten allege William Durant. For I do it to none
other end but that it may appear, of what sort the fowndacions of this mass
are. For this is he that yeldeth and tells the causes and reasons of the
things that are said and done in the mass. Therefore I allege him offten. But
let us run over a little, this canon, And examining it we shall see in it these
inexpressible mysteries affter master durant.

The first is this.
WE therefore, O most merciful father, by Jesus Christ thy son, our lord do
humbly pray and desire the, that thou wilt accept these gyfftes, these
presentys, and these unspotted sacryfices. (And here must be made iij. crosses
over the host, and the chales likewise) And he adds. First that we offer to
the, for thy holy catholic church, which vouchsafe thou to quiet, to keep, to
Join to gether, and to govern in every part of the earthes compass, to
gether with thy servant our Pope, and our bishop (And here is the Pope, and
the bishop of that dyocesse where the mass is said, named by name. Or if
they be friars or monks that celebrate, they name their general or Abbat, and
affter he adds this. That is to say, And for all the right opinioned, and
kepers of the catholyke and apostolik faith.

This is the first of the xi. partis of the canon. In which it is destred that
the bread, and the wine, may be accepted for the church, for the pope, for the
bisshops, for the generals friars or monks, and for all the right opinioned,
and kepers of the catholic and apostolik faith. And it is affirmed, that that
bread and that wine, not yet consecrated, are holy and undefiled sacrifices
which are offered to god for the church and for all those that are there
mentioned. And here is no great hardness, for the words be plain enough,
except that those iij. crosses which are made over the bread and wine should
betoken some very great mysteries. Master William durant says here, that these
iij. crosses do betoken the iij. deliueries of Christ, the first when god
deliuerid his son to the world, the second when Judas deliuerid him to the
Jews, and the third when the Jews deliuerid him to death. If this reason be
good, whi make they not there 4. crosses? Seeing that Christ has delivered also
him selff as Peter says, 1. Pet. 2.
Tradebatautem se iudicanti just that is he delivered himselff to him that
Iudgith Justly. Is not this Christ, as man and as priest, delivered or offered
unto god, Ephesians. 5.
a sacrifice for our sins? And does not S. Paul to the Ephesians. say, that
Christ delivered himselff for the church to sa^ctifie it? Heb. 9.^0.
and to the hebrews, in how many places is there made mention, Math. 20.
that Christ has offered himselff to god? yea Christ him selff does witness,
that he has given his life for us. Is not this delivery of as great
importan^ce, as that of the Jews, and rather greater? And why is there not
mention made of it in these crosses? He says also that these iij. crosses are
made, in the worship of the trinity, and also in betokening the threfold union
in the acceptacion of Christ. Also in rememberance of the threfold crucifie^g,
that is to say, In the will, In the cries, and in the work. And for the iij.
times before the law, that is to say from Adam to Noe, from Noe to Abraham,
from Abraham to Moses. So that this our master Durant, allegeth as many
significations of these iij. crosses as there are threfoldnessis or nombers of
three Imagined. Behold now the great mysteries of this Canon.

Moreover who has auctorised him that made this Canon to give so many
significacions to these crosses? Is it in man's power to do it? These things, to
him that understands, are supersticious, and unknown, not only of the
Apostles, but also of the primative, and puer church. I could, if I would, touch
that matter, how that bread, and that wine, not yet consecrated, could be
sacrifices which are offered for the whole church and for all the faithful:
but of this matter we will speak more here affter when we will prove, Yea that
the bread and wine consecrated, that is to say, when they be, a sacrament are
no sacrifyces: but only a memory of the true sacrifice, they be so much less
sacrifices when as yet they be not a sacrament, that is to say not yet
consecrated, as we shall further declare.

The second part of the cano^ is the momento, which is a prayer that is made
for the living, and it is this, Lord remember thy servants men and women. (And
in this place, prayer is made for certain particular parsons, as seems good to
him that says the mass, and affter he adds, And all the bowt standers whose
faith is plain unto the, and their devotion known. For whom we offer unto
the, or else they offer unto the, this sacrifice of praise, for the^ selves, and
for all theirs, for redemption of their sowles for the hope of health, and for
their safety. And they yield up their vows, unto the eternal living and true
god.

In this memento there is nothing but may be easily understand. Here he that
says the mass affirms, that that same bread and wine which are not yet
consecrate, but bare bread and wine, are offered to god for the redemption of
their sowles, of whom memory is made, and also of the about standers. This
speech does a base Christ, because it seems, that Christ should not have
redeemed those sowles, as withowt dowt he has done. And he first promised it,
and all the scriptures affirm, Math. 20, Heb. 9.
that he needs no more to do it. Paul to the hebrews says that Christ has
fownd out the everlasting redemption. In the Apocalipse, John says, Apoca. 5.
Thou have redeemed us in thy blood (and speaks to Christ) of every tribe,
tongue, people, and nation, And have made us, unto our god kings and priests.
And how many saings, if we would, and also need were, could we bring forth? But
it needs not in so plain a matter, to allege moo witnessis. Should we
confess, (as this prayer does) that with bread and wine is made the
redemption of our sowles? Christ only is our redemer, and not the bread, nor
the wine, unconsecrated, no nor when they be consecrated, (as they call it.)
But let us admit that they were consecrated (which not with stonding they be
not) and that Christ were with us bodily in parson, yet it should not need any
more to offer him for the redemption of our sowles, because he him selff has
done that withowt us, and has offered him selff ones for ever, to bring that
to pass. What needs it than any more to offer him for that purpos? Ought we
not to believe that our redemption is made, withowt seking who should make it
again, as though it were not made? Therefore this memento is wicked.

The third part of the canon is a prayer in this form.

Communicating and honoring the memory of the glorious and continual virgin
Mary mother of god and of our lord Jesus Christ, and of the blessed Apostels
and Martyrs, Peter and Paul, Andrew, The euelnes of the latin proves him
unlearned in the latin tongue that made it
James and Ihon, Thomas, James, Philip, Bartilmew, Simon and Thadeus, Linus,
Cletus, Clement, Sixtus, Cornelius, Cyprian, Lawrence, Grisoganus, John and
Paul, Cosmyan and Damyan, and of all thy saints, for whose desertis and
prayers grant us that we may (with the help of thy defense) be strengthened in
all things by the same Christ our lord Amen.

It is said that Siritius the pope did add these words. In which is celebrated
the rememberans of the gloryos mother and Virgin, and of the other saints
here named. But why there should be made memory of those rather than of many
other, he that has made this Communicantes, ought to tell it. It is destered
that by owre communicating with the saints, and by partaking of their good
things, and by honoring the memory of them, that god through their merits would
grant us in all things to be strengthened with his help. In this part also
there is nothing has is not easyly understand. And why he does ^ere suppose,
that the saints pray for us, which ^s not fownd by the holy scripture, we
should ^alke a little on this matter, but at this time we will attend to that
which is of more weight, And we will leave this till a another time to avoid
tedyosnes to the reader.

THE II. CHAPTER. The iiij. and v. part of the canon is examined, that is, Hanc
igitur oblatione^ and Qua^ oblatione^ It examineth also the vi. and vij. part,
which is Qui pridie and simili modo, where me^ may plainly see, that the
defenders of the mass, know not what Consecracion is, no nor with what words,
nor whanit is made.
The iiij. part of the cano^ is this, that is to say, We beseech the therefore o
lord, that thou wilt accept or take this oblacio^ of our service, and of all
thy howsold, and that thou would dispose our days in thy peace and command
that we may be freed from everlasting damnacion, and be nombred among the flock
of thine elect through Jesus Christ our lord, Amen.

Te fifft part is this, that is to say. The which oblacion, o god, we beseech
the, vouchsaue in all, things to make blessed, auctorissed, reasonable and
acceptable, so that to us it may be made, the body and blood of thy very
well-beloved son our lord Jesus Christ, (And saing these words there are made v.
crosses, the first but over the bread only, and the last over the cupp only,
the other iij. over the bread and the cupp together.) Master durant recites
diverse exposicions of these words, benedicta^, ascripta^, rata^, ratio nabile^,
and acceptabile^, and of these crosses, and finds out certain other trines or
threes, diverse from them that he has taught before: But what neded it to
institute so many crosses and supersticious doings, as things necessary, when
Christ has not commanded them nor his apostels, nor were neauer used by the
primative church. The apostle paul, not being so bold, to ordein the sacrament
otherwise, than as Christ had taught him, that he had done in the last supper,
saing to the Corynthyans, Hoc.n. accepi a Dno^ quod and tradidi nobis etc. 1.
Chorin. 11.
That is, that which I received of the lord delivered I unto you. That pure and
holy order geuin by Christ, and kept with so great reverence, by his apostels,
ought to have suffised us, and not to make so many addicions, which blemissh,
(I will not say beray) the pureness of the sacrament, as they have done of
baptym, to which they have joined, salt, oil, spyttel, coniuring, which things
neither John Baptist, when he baptized Christ, nor the apostels did ever use.
And these which with reverence do keep Christ's appointment, and with humblenes
do obey him, are now cownted for heretics, as though they were more bownd to
obey men than god. Let every faithful Christyan, judge if we say the treuth.
This fifth part of the canon, gives to understand clearly, that by these words,
offerings, sacryfices and gifts, is understand the wine, not yet consecrated,
And that they be none other, but bread, and wine. ffor he desires, that they
may become, the body, and blood of Christ. So that according to the canon the
bare simple bread, and the bare simple wine are a sacrifice for the redemption
of sowles and for salvation, as in the ij. part has been said. We may not here
gloss that the Canon intends that the bread and wine when they shall be
turned in to the body and blood (as they say) shall be a sacrifice for the
raunsominge of sowles, for it means, of that bread and of that wine which
are to become the body and blood. Now is it certain yea affter their own mind,
that that bread and that wine which are yet to become the body and blood of
Christ, are bare plain bread and bare wine, And yet the Canon says that they
be a sacrifice for the raunsominge of sowles, which is a plain wickedness.

The syxt part of the Canon, says, The which (that is to say Christ of whom is
made mention in the former part) the day before he suffered, The sixth part of
the cano^ of the mass whith the consecration.
took the bread in his holy and honorable hands (here the priest takes the
host in his hands and adds) And his eyes being lift up into heaven, to the
god, his father almighty, yelding to the thanckes, he blessed. (And here is
made a cross upon the host and is added) he brake and gave to his discyples,
saing, Take and eat all of this ffor this is my body. (And here the host is
liffted, up and caused to be honored, a thing which christ has not appointed.
But why is not the bread than broken as Christ did, seeing he commanded that
they should do this in his rememberance, And not to cause the bread or wine to
be honored?) When this is done the host is laid down, upon the altar and the
cupp is taken in hand, and the other part which is the seventh part, is said,
that is to say.

Likewise when they had supped taking this noble cupp in his holy and honorable
hands, The vij. part of the Cano^ of the mass.
rendering thanckes again unto the, he blessed (and he^e is made a cross over
the cupp and added) And ^aue to his disciples saing, Take and drinck all of
^his, for this is the cupp of my blood, of the new and everlasting testament,
a mystery of the faith, ^he which shall be shed for you and for many for ^he
remission of sins, so offt as you shall do these things, you shall do them
in my remembrance. (And saing these last words the cupp is lifft up and caused
to be honored as we have said of the host, that is to say, all to gether
contrary to christ's ordinance.

In these ij. parts is made the consecracion of the bread and wine. And in the
consecracion of the bread are added ij. words that are not in the
eua^gelistes, that is to say that word, enim, and that other Ex hoc oe^s. And
in the co^secracio^ of the wine are added ij. other, that is eterni, and
misteriu^ fidei, which likewise are not in theeua^gelistes. And it is to be
marueled seeing the defe^ders of the mass say, that with Christ's words the
consecracion is made, and that they ought not to add or minissh them, and so
much the rather as they them selves say, that Christ gave the power of
consecracion to those words that he spoke not to any other, how durst they be
bold to ad any one word. I will not now say that by this the sentence is
changed. Nevertheless seeing we ought not to use any other words than those same
that Christ spoke, because he gave the power of consecracion, to those only and
not to any other, as they say, and that we cannot know certainly what words
they should be, but by the eua^gelistes or by paul, And finding those words
that the canon does add, neither in theuangelistes nor in paul, it is a great
rasshnes to add them. Here the Rational or cause teller of divine officis,
says, that the apostels had the manner of the consecration from Christ and we
from thapostels. And that it is not to be merueled though these words which
seem added, be not fownd in the evangelists, and yet spoken by christ: For the
evangelists for shortness have past over many things which the apostels have
supplied. And he gives thexample of the vision which Paul declares in the 1.
to the corinthia^s, 1. Cor. 15:
that Christ affter his resurrection appeared to moo than v. hondreth brethern,
of which vision theuangelistes make no mencyon at all, and yet it was true. He
alleges also that among theuangelistes one declares one thing and a another
leauith out the same etc. All this is true that theua^gelistes have leffe out
certain things which were done, and allthoughe the one supplieth that which the
other leaves out, this makes not that we ought to add to the words of the
evangelists, chefely to them of the consecracion, to which words only, Christ
(according to their oppinion) has given power to change the bread in to the
body and the wine in to the blood, and not to any other. Who does asserten us
that Christ spoke this word enim and these other words aded that is to say, Ex
hoc oe^s and those other ij. that is to say aeterni and misteriu^ fidei. We be
certain of the appearing of Christ, to moo than v. hondreth brethern, because
Paul, to whom christ did reveal it, has writon it. But if Paul had not writon
it, and finding it not in the gospel how could it be certainly known? And how
shall we be bownd to believe it. Likewise this is the cause why things lefft out
by one evangelist are known, because a another does tell them, but if all had
lefft them out, how could we certainly know the^? O sai they, the church had it
from the Apostels, Say thou so, how do thou know it? I will not believe
the, how many things are said of the Apostels and are attributet to the^ which
neauer were? We might than affter this sort attribute to the Apostels what we
would. Paul writing to the Choryntes, 1. Corith. 11.
teaches them the form of the dedicacion of the bread and the wine, and
says that he had it of the lord, and yet he puts not in, any of these
words, and yet surely for all that he teaches to consecrate well. Why than
does he not putt in these words? If in the consecration there were nothing
considered but the sente^c^, it made no matter though some words were added or
minisshed, so that the sentence were not altered. But the consideracion here is
of the words, that is to say, what they be to which Christ has given the power
to consecrate, and to them it behooves not to add or to minissh. All this I say
according to their opinion. For they would that Christ should have given the
vertew of consecrating, to the words which he himselff spoke and not to other.
And yet these words, that I say are added, be neither in theuangelistes nor in
Paul. Here must we say, that Paul taught not to consecrate well, because he
spoke them not. Or else if Paul taught to consecrate well, that Christ spoke
not those words. And if Christ spoke them not, they have used a great rasshnes
that have added them, specially, having that opinion that they have of the
consecracion, that is to say, of the power given to those words only that Christ
pronownced. Moreover what is the cause that in the consecracion of the bread
are not putt in these words which christ pronounced, that is Quod prouobis
datur which is given for you, as Luke says, or else quod pro uobis tradet and
fra^gitur, which is broken for you, as Paul says, as in the co^secratio^ of
the wine there be these words, Which shall be shed for you and for many for the
remission of sins, the body being no less given for our redemption than the
blood? Why have they in this part maimed the words of the consecracion of the
bread and not those of the consecracion of the wine; let every man Judge if
this ought to be done. But this is the best of the matter, that the defenders
of the mass to maintain it, say that that bread and that wine is changed,
the one in to the body, that is to say the bread, and the other in to the
blood, that is the wine. And are much combered, because they can not tell what
is showed by this demonstratiue, Hoc when is said, Hoc est corpus meu^ that is
to say, this is my body. If by this word Hoc, be showed the bread, the saing
is false, because the bread is not changed in to the body, till all the words
of the consecracion be uttered. If the body be showed, it seems that the body
should be there before the words were spoken, and before the consecracion should
be made. And we have the like to say of the words of the consecracion of the
wine, which thing is declared when is said, Hoc e^. n. sa^guis meus etc. If
the wine be showed, it is false that the wine should be blood. If the blood be
showed, it seems that the blood should be there before the consecration were
made. Which thing cannot be. And therefore some say affter one sort and some
affter a another, and to be short they know not what they may say.

Hoc. does show partly to the sense and partly to the understanding. And this
is the meaning of these words, this is my body that is to say, that into which
this thing shall be transsubstantiate, is my body. And this is the opinion of
Rychard of S. Victor in his book of the trinitye. Certain other say that the
with comes of the bread are showed, And this Hoc, is Hoc est corpus meu^ and
Hic e^ calix sa^guinis mei. Some other have said that the with a divine power
not known to us, and affter he declared the fasshio^ with which affter him me^
should consecrate. For Christ blessed with his own power, but we do bless by
the virtue that he has given to the words with which men consecrate, that is
Hoc est corpus meum and hic est sanguis meus. And when the priest pronownceth
these words, the bread is changed into the body, and the wine in to the Hoc
est corpus meum, and that he consecrated when he blessed. Peter co^mestor says
that Christ consecrated with these words Hoc est corpus meum and hic est
sanguis meus but he spoke them sofftly to him selff and changed the bread in
to the body and the wine in to together, that is to say when the wine is
consecrated, than is the bread consecrated and not before. Other some say that
the bread first is consecrated hic est calix sanguinis mei be of the substance
of the form of consecrating the wine the other which be added, that is to say,
Noui and aeter ni testamenti, be only to furnissh. Thomas should be the parts
of consecracion, And this is the proof theroff. For if they had known it,
there should not have been so great a diversity and confusion of opinions as we
have seen. And we could yet, (if we would) speak of others. This their so great
diversity, shows plainly that they never knew it nor never were certain of
the matter. And it is most certain that if the opinion that they defend were
true, there should never have been so many and so diverse opinions.

What a vain thing is it than to say that by the virtue of certain words should
be made a changing of the bread and the wine in to the body and blood of
Christ, which thing not withstonding by the holy scripture cannot be showed,
that is, that by the virtue of certain words the substance of things should be
changed, and of the other part not to know or not to be certain which should be
those words? They speak also in such sort of this consecratoin, that affter
their own opinion, the church or the people that hear the mass are never
certain whether the consecracion be made or not. For the master of sentencis
says in the iiij. that the heretics can not bring it to pass, that is to
say, to consecrate. And also he says, you must have the intent, for otherwise
you consecrate not. And who can be certain, either of the faith or of the intent
of him that celebrateth? Surely no man, being such things in the conscience of
man which none seith but god and he that celebrateth. Therefore the people that
hear the mass, is never certain when the consecracion is made and when not.
The cause whi this confusion is among them, first is because they know not
properly what manner of thing consecracion is. For consecracion means one
thing, and they thinck it should have a another meaning. Besides they believe or
at the least cause me^ to thinck that they believe, and they preach the same as
an article of the faith, that that bread and that wine is changed the one in to
the true and substa^ciall body of Christ, (that is to say the bread) the other
(that is to say the wine) in to his blood. And they say that Christ really in
body and soul, as great and as thick as he was upon the wood of the cross, and
as now he is in heaven, is wholly in that little host and wholly in that cupp
where the wine was. And they will that here there should come to gether many
miracles, and they hold that this meruelos change, which they call
transsubstanciacio^, should be done by the virtue of those words of the
consecracion, And they will that consecracio^ does mean changing of bread in
to the body, and of wine in to the blood, made with these words. So that they
make this consecracyon, as the inchanters were wont to make their inchantme^ts
with certain words, which they (being deceived by the deuel) thinck to have
virtue to work certain wonderful effectys. So do they, that thinck with these
words spoken softly over the bread and the wine, to change by virtue of the
same, the bread and the wine in the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

These ij. be the causes why they know not with what words, the consecratyo^ is
made, nor wha^ it is made. ffor having that opinyon that they have, that is to
say, that there is made that marvelous change of bread and wine, these words
hoc est corpus meum, make than the difficultye, and they know not what thing
is shwesd by this word, hoc, For if the bread be showed the saing appears
falss unto them, because the bread is not the body of Christ till all the
words be spoken, and when they show the bread, the words be not yet spoken.
Than seeing the body is not yet there, there can not be showed by this word,
hoc, the body which yet is not. And if they say, they show the body by this,
hoc, that saing hoc est corpus meum semyth to them untrue likewise, for seeing
the body is not yet there in that host, it can not be shwed in it. And thus not
knowing how to make true that saing, what soever sort they should speak it,
they goo about writhing it a thousand manner of ways and would feign help the
matter if they could, but they find not the way, for god will not. As it
cha^ced to Pharaos coniurers that could not do that they would. Exo. ^.
So they would (yet for all that holding that opinyon they hold, and for to give
credyt to the mass) they would yet, I say, make that saing agree with this
their opinion, but there is no means how. Let them turn it yet as they will,
their opinion standing, Christ's saing hoc est corpus meum cannot be made
true. Tha^ their opynyno^ is most false, which cannot stand with gods truth
that is to say, his word.

It is chanced also to them, as to those that would have bylded the great tower of
Babylon and have made it meruelos high, as it is writon in Genesis, Gene. ^.
but god confused their tongues, that one did not understand a another, allthough
that all did agree to the bylding of it. Eue^ so it hapnyth to these carpe^ters
or builders of the mass, which also would if they could, lifft it up even to
heaven and make it be cownted as a godly thing, and an high worship. And they
all are agreed to this workmanship. And because they see that if they hold not
that the true body of Christ is in the host and his true and natural blood in
the cupp, the mass should not be in price or any estimacion, but rather by and
by should decay, therefore above all things they take heed to this to persuade and
by all means they can, to make the people believe that Christ is really and
bodily in that host and that cup. Nevertheless god has confused their to^gs and
their minds in to so many ways and opinions, in to so diverse fancies and
spechis, that the one is disagreing and contrary to the other. This is now a
plain and a manifest toke^ that this workma^ship pleases not god, and finally
shall fall to the grownd, to the intent that the saing of Jesus Christ may be
verified, that eueri plantinge which the heauinly father has not planted shall
be rooted up. Mat. 15.
We do not now intend to goo about to prove here that that their opinion is
false, that is to say that the bread and wine should be changed, the one in to
his body, and the other in to his blood, because we should make to long a
digression from our purpos. But with gods favor, when we have ended this
discourse of the mass and the mass book, we will in the end of the book Join
to it a plain sermon of this matter in the which we will prove the treuth. And
for this time we will make it only appear, that they understood not what
consecracio^ means. Therefore you must understand that Co^secrare affter the
holy scripture, meane^h not to change one thing in to a another by virtue of
certain words, as they take and understand the consecracion of bread and wine,
minding that it should be a changing of their substances in to other substancis,
that is to say, in to the body and blood of Jesus Christ. For a thing that is
consecrated, is not marred or destroyed, that it should not be any more the same
that it was (as they say of the bread and wine, that they remain no longer
affter the consecracion, but are undone and destroyed, and be no more that they
were) but the thing that is consecrated, remains the selff same that it was
first, and is not altered in his substance, but only is dedicate or appointed
to a certain holy use to the which first it was not appointed or ordained. This
is the meaning of consecrare As for example, And hows is said to be consecrated
to god, when it is appointed to some holy use, as a man would say to the
preaching of gods word to the administracion of the sacraments and to common
prayer. Even so man is consecrated to god, when he is dedicated and appointed
to an holy and secred use of gods service. All christians be consecrated to
god, that is to say, dedicated and appointed to his service, which is an holy
thing, because they be the true temple of god, in the which he dwells with
his holy spirit, as S. Paul says in many places. 1. cho. 3. 2. cho. 6. Ephe.
2.
Now it appearith that the man remainith still the same and is not changed in
substance, because he is consecrated to god, but only is dedicated and
appointed to gods service, to which he was not first appointed. This which we
say, we say not of our selves, but out of the holy scripture in mani places,
Exo. 13.29. number. 6. Leuiti. 27.
as in Exodus numerus, leuiticus. It is writton in exodus, that every first
borne male should be consecrate to god as well of men as of beastis. Also that
Aron and his childern were consecrated to be priests. It apperith in numerus
as well of men as women that were consecrated to god. In the last of leuiticus
where is spoken of the consecracion of men and of feldys and universally of
eueri consecrated thing. It appears that that consecracion does not mean to
change one thing in to another with words, but means to dedicate and
appoint, and as a man would sai to appropriate a thing to god and to an holy
use. Every thing that is consecrated to the lord, says god, whether it be man,
beast, or field, shall not be sold nor can not be redeemed or raunsomed. And
these were the consecracions made in the law, which although we do not now
use, yet nevertheless they give us to understand, what Consecrare means, and
that it imports nothing else but to dedicate and appoint a thing to an holy
use. And so we will say of the consecracion of bread and of wine, that it is
no changing of their substancis made by virtue of words, but it is an
appointing to an holy use, that is to say that they should signify and bring to
our remembrance the body and blood of Christ how he gave them for our
redemption. As he him selff said when he instituted this holy sacrament of
bread and wine, Matthew. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Corint. 11.
saing that they should do this in his remembrance. We have been long in this
our talk, which we have done, for the ignorant and not for the learned, and
because the matter is weighty.

THE III. CHAPTER. This examineth the viij. part of the canon and declares how
he that says the mass, usurps that office that is Christ's, and also says
a most wicked prayer, which is a great wrong to Christ.
THe viij. part of the canon, is this, that is to say, Wherefore we thy servants
and thy holy people, remembering us of christ thy son our lord of so blessed a
passion and resurrection from the dead, and of the glorios asce^sion in to the
heavens, do offer to thy most excellent majesty of thy rewards and gifftes,
the pure host, the holy host, the unspotted host. (and here saing these words
are made iij. crosses over the host and over the cup consecrated, to gether,
that is to say over both of them. And affter he adds) Holy bread of life
everlasting and the cup of continual health, (And here ij. other crosses be
made, the one when the bread is named over the same host, and the other over
the cupp when the same is named.)

In this viij. part, is affirmed that the priest and the people by the
remembrans that they have of his death, resurrection and ascension, do offer
unto god that host and that cupp consecrated, which be, as they think, the
true body and very blood of Christ. But where is it fownd in all the whole
scripture that Christ or god did ever ordein that either the priest or the
people should offer unto god the body and blood of Jesus Christ? In deed we find
that we ought to make a memory of such an offering as christ has made. And
therefore he has ordained this sacrament to the intent that we should use the
remembrance of that oblacion. But that we ought to offer to god either the body
or the blood of his son, that has god not appointed us, nor yet Christ nor
any Apostel, ever made mention of it. For this office to offer unto god the
body and blood of christ, belongs only to christ, who is the high and
everlasting priest, Heb. 7.9.10.
and it belongs not to us. And the some christ has done it ones for all,
when he was offered and died upon the cross. And it needs not to do it
offtner, because that that only time has suffised to satisfy god for the
sins of all the elect. And that which we do now in the sacrament, is not the
offering of Christ's body and blood but is a memory of that offering. And who
knows not, that the memory of a thing, is not the selff same thing, but a
remembrance of it? And if any would say for all this, that it belongs to
christians to offer christ in the sacrament, because Peter says that the
Christians be an holy priesthood, to offer spiritual offerings acceptable to
god by Jesus christ, To this I say, that Peter means not here to speak of
the sacrament, but means of those hostis, that is to say, spiritual
sacrifices, the which not only the priests, but all christians may and ought
to offer unto god, accepted by Jesus Christ. And these hosts or sacrifices, we
be first our selffes, which ought to offer our selves unto god ass. Paul
exhorts to the romans, saing, I pray you that you will give up or offer your
bodies an holy, living, and pleasing host unto god, which is your reasonable
serving of god. This sacrifie is made by denie^g of ourseluis, besides that,
praisses, thankesgeuing, prayers, allmes deeds, and to be short, all duties
off Christian deuocio^, be sacrifices. And to prove that this is trowth, Peter
speaks not here to the prestis only, but he speaks to all the christen people
and to all the faithful whom he calls a chosen people, a kingly presthode etc.
The pressed than that says the mass, usurps the office that belongs only to
christ. But we will speak of this yet more largily in the iiij. part.

There follows further more in this part, a prayer, that is to say, Upon
which things (or else) upon which gifftes (and speaks of that host, and that
wine consecrated, which affter their opinion are the true body and the
natural blood of Christ) Upon ihe which things (says he) vouchsaue to look,
with an helpful and a favorable cowntenance, and to accept them as thou did
vouchsaue to accept the gifftes of thy just servant Abel and the sacrifice of
our patriark Abraham and that holy sacrifice, unspotted host, that thy high
pressed Melchisedech did offer unto the. They that have made this prayer, and
that which follows, which is the ninth part, either they byleued not that
Christ should be in the host, or in that cupp (and so be heretics affter the
opinion of defenders of the mass, which hold as an artickle of our faith that
Christ is really in the Sacrament) or else, if they byleuid it, they have spoken
most folisshly and wickedly. For in this prayer, is desiered that god would
accept the body and blood of Jesus Christ, as he accepted the gifftes and
sacrifices of these iij. that is to say, of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedeck,
which were plainly men, and not withowt sin (although just by gods grace) and
had need of the forgeuenes of sins. If it be so tha^ (as in deed it is) how
does this prayer desire of god, that he would accept the bodi and blood of Jesus
Christ his son^, as he accepted the sacrifices of those 3. As though his own
son were not more accepted, but rather less accepted tha^ the sacrifices of
these 3. which were sacrifices of unreasonable beasts and of plain creatures.
And who dowteth the body and blood of christ is withowt measure more accepted
tha^ as many sacrifices as ever were made in the world? Yea who dowthet that
all the sacrifices all the offerings, all the services, all the good works of
these iij. fore named, and of all, other me^ that ever pleased or were
acceptable to god, were accepted by Jesus christ, by his body and by his blood
by the which, god is pacified with us? who dowteth this but the infidel and the
wicked man? And this prayer desiereth that god would so accept the blood of his
son^, redemer of the world, as he did the blood of beasts. Ah blasphemos
prayer. These be those great mysteries that this canon has, which William Durant
expowndeth with so great reverence. But some man may parauenture say, that
there is not desiered in this prayer absolutely that the body and the blood of
Jesus Christ for themselves, should be acceptable to god as the sacrifices of
those iij. holy men, because there is no dowt, but that they be more acceptable,
for them selves, tha^ all the sacrifices of all me^ of the world. But there is
desiered, that they may be acceptable to god for us, and so is the prayer to be
understand. This answer seems subtle, and some contentios man might paraue^ture
show him selff stowt with it, but it is nothing worth. For let them say what
they will, it shall be allwaies inconvenient. ffor if they will desire that the
body and blood of Ihesus Christ (for them selves) should be acceptable to god,
as the sacrifices of simple men, no man will ever say, that this should be
conueniente. And even so shall it be inconuenye^t also to pray that the body
and the blood off Ihesus Christ, should be accepted, for us as the sacrifyces of
those iij wear. Because it is very co^uenyent that they should be much more
acceptable to god for us than the sacrifices of those iij. ffor because the body
and blood of Ihesus Christ have obtained us forgeuenes of sin^es, redemption
grace and everlasting liffe, a thing that those sacrifyces could not do to
those iij. that did them. Those sacrifyces were in deed fygures of Christ, but
they did not take a way sin^es nor gave not health as S. Paul says to the
hebrews. He. ^.
Here William Durant says in his ratyonall, that this word, sicut, does mean
likelynes and not quantytye.

But this is nothing worth, for if we should offer any gyfft that were a plain
creature, we might ask this: But the son of god is offered, who cannot but be
more accepted to god withowt comparison than those sacrifices. This prayer is
fond, and is, as if for a great prince that had infinite riches, some frind of
his would desire and pray god that he would make the same prince as rich as a
private citizin. Such a prayer, should be scorn worthy and folissh, even so is
this. And absolutely to him that well considers the matter, he that made this
prayer, did not believe that the body and blood of Christ should be really in
that host and cupp, but believed that there was thonly bread and wine, even as
in baptime we have no change of the water but the water remains water as
before, allthough it be a sacrament which it was not before. Yet to be a
sacrament does not change the water, as concerning the substance. Even so the
bread and the wine in the sacrament remain bread and wine still. For if he
had thought that the body and blood of Christ had been in the sacrament realli,
he would never have made that prayer, for it is to fond. If Christ's body and
blood be there, and he byleued it not, it follows, according to their opinion,
that this prayer is heresy.

THE IIII. CHAPTER
Here is examined the ix. part of the canon which is most wicked it examineth
also the x. part, which is folissh and speaks against it selff. And it
examineth also the xi. and last part of the same canon.

THe ix. part of the canon is this prayer, On our kneis we beseech the Allmighty
god, command that these things (that is to say that host and that which is in
the cup) may be carried by thy holy Angels hands, to thine high altar, in to
the sight of thy divine majesty to the intent that as many of us as shall
receive of this partaking of the altar, the most holy body and blood of thy
son, may be fullfilled with every heavenly blessing and grace through the same
Jesus Christ our lord. (And here are made iij. crosses. Mass prystes make ij.
manifest lies in the canon even when they are most devoutly at mass which they
can not deny.
One up on the host when the body is named, another over the cupp wha^ the same
is named, the third is made crossing him selff) And at this prayer the pressed
boweth him selff a little but he ought to knele down, seeing he says that he
prays up on his kneis, and yet he does not knele but only boweth him selff.
As in the first part of this canon, he says also that he kneleth and yet he
kneleth not. And here William Durant upon these words, that is to say, command
that these things may be carried by the hands of thy holy Angel, upon the high
altar etc, says that they be of so great depth, that man's understanding is
very hardly sufficyent to enter in to them. And minding to expound them, he
brings forth first, Gregory's words registerd in the decree of consecracyon
the 5. distinction Cap. Quid sit sanguis. And because he seemed not satiffyed,
he brings forth iij. other exposityons. the first is that that word, Hec,
that is to say, these things, may mean, not the body and the blood, but the
supplicacyons and prayers of the faithful, which prayers the angels offer unto
god. And than he geuyth a another significatyo^, which does not satisfy him. And
affter he gives also the third, that is this.

Command that these things, that is to say the mistycall body of Christ, which
is gods warfaring church, may be carried to the high altar that is to say, to
the victorios church, and that by the hands of thy holy angel, that is to say,
of christ who is an a^gel of the great counsel as Esai in the ix says He
adds yet a another, which for shortness i will let pass. It is an hard matter
surely to defend an unjust cause for a man is constrained to say many things
that be not to the purpos. Id needs not here that master Dura^t should find out
so many glooses. For the canon speaks, when it says, these things, of the
host and of the wine consecrated, as it spoke before in the other prayer, and
speaks not neither of the prayers nor of the mystical body, ffor it made no
mention neither of the one nor of the other in the the other prayer. And desyring
in this prayer that god would co^ma^d these things to be carried by the hands of
his a^gels, there is showed by those words (these things) the selff same off
which he spoke off, in the other prayer immedyately going before. And if he
should have meant of other things, it should not have been to the purpos. More
over if it should have meant of the prayers or of the mystical body, these
words should not have been of so great depth as he says. Yea they should have
been very easy to understand, which is against Durant him selff. Therefore than
the canon speaks of the host and wine consecrated, which be, as they thinck,
the very body and the very blood off Ihesus Christ, and desyereth that they may
be carried and presented upon gods high altar, that is to say in heaven in gods
sight. What a tale is this? that Christ ^huld be carried by the hands of angels
and pre^ented in to gods sight? Is not Christ now by him selff, present in
heaven in the sight of the father withowt being carried and presented by the
a^gels? What, the article of our faith says that he sits at the right hand
of god, and Paul to the Hebrews says that he sits there contynually, He. x.
what needs it than to carry him where he is allredy? If any man would say that
the angels may carry him so far as he is in the sacrament, because that affter
that sort he is on the earth. This saing is a very mo^ster and vanytye, for
Christ so far as he is in the sacrament, because he is there vnpartably, as
they thinck, he is there in such sort as he ca^ not be carried as the scole me^
themselves say. More over if he should be carried forth affter such sort as he
is in the sacrament, it were necessary that the angels should cari the sacrament
in to heaven, which is never seen. I have said now that he that has put in
these ij prayers in to the cano^, by the talcke that he makes, does show that
he by leueth not Christ's corporal presence in the sacrament, as we told you
in the former chapter. For if he had bileued it, he would never have said such
words, if he had had any vndersto^ding. He than that made these prayers, the
opinion of these scole men standing, is an heretic. And master Durant to defend
the canon, because he saw, that these words according to his opinion could not
stond, he magnifieth them as divine things, but it neded not being men's words
and not of the holy scripture, so much to magnify them, and to defend express
errors, desiring to make them holy matters, as he is forced to do in that his
rational or reason giver.

The x. part is the Memento in which the dead are prayed for. And thus it
says, Also, o lord, have in thy rememberance thy servants men and women (here
is made a particular rememberans, for certain particular dead folks, as like
him that says mass, and affter is added,)

The which are gone before us with the sign of faith, and sleep in the sleep
of peace. To these, o lord, and to all those that rest in Christ we pray the that
thou wilt grant place of comfort, of light and of peace thorough the same
Christ our lord Amen.

Here master Durant in thexposicion of this part, says, that on the sunday
thorough our lords resurrection, it is thought that the sowles should have
rest. He meanith, I think, that they suffer not the pains of purgatory, but
the other days they do. O master Durant it is very honest that the sowles in
purgatory also should keep the feasts. But I meruel why they have not rest also
on the friday, on which day our savior suffered to take from us the pains that
we had deserved, Esaias. 53.
as the scripture says in so many places and chefely in Esaias the Prophet,
where it is writton that he has borne our greffes, and that the lord has
laid upon him all our iniquities, and how he was beaten for the wickedness of
the people and other such saings which be there. Thapostle Paul would not that
there should be difference of days in Christ's church in this life. And rebuked
the galathians who observed days. Gala. 4.
And he wrote to the colossians, Let no man judge you in meat or drinck,
Colos. 2.
or in part of an holy day, or of a new moon, or off the sabbath days etc.
And shall we put difference of days in the other liffe? Not withstonding this is
not of the canon, but master Dura^ts. And to return to this prayer of the
Memento, me thincketh that it is folissh and unsavory, and that it speaks
against it selff. Because first it confesses that the dead do sleep in the
sleep of peace, and that they rest in Christ. And notwithstonding affter it
desires that god would give them place of comfort, of light and of peace. If
they sleep in the sleep of peace and rest in Christ, have they not the place of
peace? What need you axe that those that sleep in peace should have the place of
peace? Is it not all one to sleep in peace and to have the place of peace? To
rest in Christ and to have place of comfort? If the sowles be tormented in
purgatory, be they not dead in torment? How rest they than? parauenture the
defenders of the canon will answer that this prayer means of the body, when
it says that the dead sleep, and not of the soul. Let it be so. For the soul
in deed slepeth not but only the body. But it says also that they have
quietness and rest, which spech can not be conveniently understand but of that
part that may be trobled. What rest shall that be to rest in that part that can
feel no manner of thing withowt the soul and to be trobled in that part that
in deed felith and l^ueth? When they say in their service for the dead,
requiescant in pace, surely they mean to speak of the soul and not of the
body. For as much as it needs not to pray that the body of the dead should
rest, because that of necessity it does rest. But the soul may, as they
thinck, have troble and pain in purgatory. And therefore they pray that they may
have rest as concerning the soul. Apoc. 14.
S. John in thapocalips when he says blessed are the dead that dye in the
lord why does the spirit say that from hens forth they rest from their
trauale? will we say that he should speak of the rest of the deades body and
not of the soul? If he speak of the body what prerogative have the bodies of
the just until the day of Judgment more than the bodies of the wicked? The
one and the other do rest equally, and there is no difference in this point. And
yet Ihon makes a difference between them, for he calls them the dead in the
lord that is to say, the Just blessed. And why blessed? because that from
hensforth they shall rest from their travel and be in quiet, giving to
understand that the other do not rest from their trauale but have more tha^
ever they had, because they be damned to everlasting pain. So that when the
quietness of the Just is spoken of, it means of the quietness of the soul and
not of the body. Being than thus, that this prayer in one part affirms that
the just sleep in peace and rest in Christ, and in a another part desires that
god would give them a place of peace and comfort, appears that plainly it
speaks against itselff.

The xi. and last part is this. To us sinners thy servants that trust in the
multitude of thy mercies, vouchsafe likewise to give some part and company with
thy holy Apostels and martirs, with John, Steven, Mathy, Barnaba, Ignatius,
Alexander, marcellus, peter, felicitas, perpetua, Agatha, Lucia, Cecilia,
Anastasia, and withal thy saints in whose fellowship we beseech the admit us,
not as a regarder of deserts but as a giver of pardon through Christ our lord
Amen.

And these words are said somewhat with an higher voice to thentent that they
should be somewhat hard. And the pressed knocks his breast, representing (says
master durant) the contricion of the these that rebuked the other these. And
Ame^, is not answered, partly because the angels that ever be assistent do
answer the^ seluis, and partli for other causes that he him selff alleges.
See what reasons these be of the mass, vain and to no purpose. For if Amen be
not a^swered because of the assistence of the angels it follows that in the
mass, Amen should never be answered, for ^hangells, as they thinck, be allweies
assistent. He shows also the cause why Steven is put there accompanied with
Ihon before mathy and barnabas, and whi memori is made of Ihon and not of the
other Apostels. Without dowt this cannon being made and affter put in to the
mass, for such causes as William Durant alleges, they may boldly take it out
of the mass and the mass book, withowt any scrupulositie, saving those few
words of Christ that are there. For the mass shall be less beastly,
although it be esteemed for the chief and bewtifullest part, seeing that it is
altogether full of supersticions, beside the multitude of iniquities and
blaspemies that be in it. And he that would axe why mention is made in this
place raither of Ignacius, of Alexander of Marcellinus and Peter, which was a
another, than Peter thapostell, and so forth of these particular holy women and
martirs than of the other saints men and women, I know not what they should
answer, being so many other besides these here named. It is said that certain
desiered with great ernestnes, of the popes, to put in there in this canon s.
frances, but it wat not granted them, I thinck for this cause least they of s.
Benet, of s. Dominik, of s. Austen and of other sects should have start up and
also have desiered to put thereinto their saints me^ and weme^, as a man would
say, s. Peter the martyr, s. Catarin of Siena, who had the marks of Christ's
wounds as s. francis had. And if not these, yet at the least the heads of
their orders. I do not willingly tell these things, but they be of gretter
importance than some thinck. There follows affter also in this xi. part, By
the which (that is to say by Christ) create, halow quicken, bless and make
these things, O lord, allweyes good unto us. And here saing these words, they
make iij. crosses over the host and the cupp together. And the cupp being
uncovered and the host taken in hand, there is added, By him, with him, and in
him (and there is made iij. other crosses over the" cupp and ij. other between
the cupp and him selff that says the mass, saing) And to the, god the
allmighty in the unity of the holy ghost, be all honor and glory. (So that
there are in all, viij. crosses in these few words. And master Durant,
according to his accustomed manner gives a reason of every thing. And what
reasons be they? Folissh and vain. And surely if they that made all this
canon, (I say they, because it was not made all at onis, but at sundry times,
and of sundry men) were not moved by more reasonable causes, than a great part
of those reasons that he rendereth, they were meruelos lightly moved. For the
mass should have been less blasphemos than it is if they had been lefft out.
And if those crosses have so many significacions, surely they had great
authority that ordained them, chefely that making so many of them in this
mass they have not allweies like significacions, but now this, now that
according to the diversity of places where they be made.

THE THIRD PART.
This third part of the book is from thend of the Canon, to thend of the mass,
which is divided in to iiij. chapters.

In the first is declared that the saing of the prayers in secret, and to will
that he should answer Amen that neither understands nor hears the prayers as
it is in the mass is a folissh thing. with out reason and against that which S.
Paul says. Also that the prayer that is said affter the Pater noster ought not
to be said in secret as it is. And that the making iij. parts of thost and
mingling the one of them with the wine is not convenient.

The first chapter.
When the canon is ended, per omnia secula seculorum is said with alowd voice,
that every man may hear, and Amen is answered, which words ought to be joined
with them that goo before, which be the end of the same canon that is to say,
By him, with him and in him, and, to the father all mighty in the unity of the
holy ghost, be all honor and glory, affter the which words this does follow,
per omnia secula seculorum, to the which is answered Amen. But I ask these men
that have ordained that this per omnia secula seculorum should be said a loud,
and affter Amen should be answered, and all the rest that goith before they will
that it be said in secret, that no man should hear it, but he that says the
mass. To what purpos, I say, will they that all the people which are present at
the mass, or the clark in stead of them and of all, should answer Amen, when
they understood nor hard no manner of thing that was said in that prayer that
goth before this per omnia secula seculoru^? How can Amen be answered by him
that understands not nor hears that that is said? what does, Amen, mean,
but so be it? And a how can a man say, so be it, that is to say, acording to
that which is said and desyered, if he understand not what the pressed said and
desyered? But let us put the case that the pressed did blaspheme or desired
certain cur^singes in the stead of blessings, what a^ answer should this be to
say Ame^ that is to say, so be it? Is this a reasonable matter that the people
should say Ame^ and confirm a thing that they understand not? s. Paul in the 1.
to the Corinthians says expressly that a man can not answer Amen, 1. Co. 14.
except he first understand the thing that is spoken. And they care not to make
a mocking stock, of the poor people, I will not say of god. And this is not
done here only but twice besides, that is to say affter the secrets that goo
before the preface. For the pressed says them sofftly and therefore they be called
secrets and when they be ended, the pressed says per omnia secula seculorum?
And he answers Amen, that neither understood nor hard what was said. And the
like is done in the prayer that follows the pater noster, which is said
sofftly, And when that is ended, also, per omnia secula seculorum is said, and
Ame^ is answered. It should be less evil, that the pressed who says these prayers
in secret, and who knows what he said (if he understand the latin him selff)
should say Amen, and not make him to answer that knows not what he said. Al be
it offt times it happens also that the pressed himselff knows not what he has
said because he understands not the latin, and yet he says Amen. And surely
the mass is not worthy any other ministers than such like, that is to say,
Ignorant and that know not nor understand not what they them selves do. Than
next affter follows, Oremus, preceptis salutaribus moniti, and that the pater
noster, which M. Durant says, has vij. peticions for Christ's vij. words on
the cross, and for the vij. words of the blessed mother, and for the vij.
gifftes of the holy ghost, for the vij. beatitudes, and for to flee the vij.
deadly sins. I meruell that he put not in the vij. planettes of heaven, the
vij. stars, and the vij. spirits of the apocalipse, the vij. cannonicall
hours, the vij. days of the week and as many seuens as are fownd in the
scriptures. I should speak also of the vij. yoyes of our lady, but it is not
fownd in the scripture. And from whens is it gathered, that for these
seue^foldnessis Christ has ordained that in the pater noster should be vij.
peticions? These are the grownd works of the mass. wha^ our savior taught his
disciples the pater noster had he ever any thought of these seuenfoldnessis, of
the which the rational or reason geuer withowt reason speaks? I say even
uprightly that I never red book more contrary to his oWn title, than this. It
is called the rational, or reason giver, but it is the most withowt reason,
and the folisshest thing that ever I saw. And gives to understand that the
mass is an unreasonable composicio^, and an hotchpotch ill fauoredly Iombled
to gether of diverse men's fantasies. These his reasons that he rendereth tend to
no other end than to give authority to the mass, and to persuade that it is a
thing full of secretis and of divine mysteries. But let him read it that is
minded to loose the time, as they do that goo to the mass. Affter the Pater
noster is said this prayer, We beseech the, O lord, deliver us from all the
euels, past, present, and to come, and at the request of the blessed and
glorios continual virgin mary mother of god, and of the blessed apostels,
Peter, Paul and Andrew, and of all thy saints, give us peace in our days to
the intent that being helped by the help of thy mercy, we may be both free from
all sin and sure from all troble, by the same our lord Jesus Christ thy son
who liuith and reigns with the in the unity of god the h. ghost. And this
prayer is said in secret, and I see no cause why it should be said in secret. The
rational or reason giver says that this silence signifies the sabbath day in
the which the body of the lord did rest in the grave. For tha^ no^e did preach
the faith. And a fore in the title which is of the pater noster and the
exposition thereof he allegeth a another cause, that is, that this prayer is said
sofftly in token that christ sometime did hold his peace in his preaching O
vain reason. And why can it not signify, when he held his peace under
Caiphas, Herod and Pilate as well as the silence in the sermon? and why is it
not said with a loud voice, to signify that christ sometime cried out, Mathei
27.
as wha^ he cried on the cross, Heli, Heli? and wha^ also preaching he cried
if any be thirst let him come to me and drinck. And the rational a little
affter, says that be cause we be not worthy to deserve the forgiveness of the
things past, present and to come, except it be given us by the prayer of the
blessed virgin Mary and of the blessed Peter and Paul and the other saints,
therefore we do call them here to our help. But I ask by whose intercession are
sins forgeuen? by Peter's, Paulis or the saints all which had their sin^es?
If this prayer intend that, that the rational says, it is blasphemos, as
though we deserve not pardon eycept by the blissed virgin and of the blessed
Peter, Paul, Andrewe and other saints? And where is this sownd in the holy
scripture, that we deserve not forgiveness of sins, but by the prayers of
saints? How does this rational know this? How can we surely speak of the
remission of sins, if not by the word of god? The word of god thorowowtly
says that sins are forgeuen us by christ's entreating, and that Jesus Christ
is our mean, advocate and intreater and it appoints no another but him, nor
makes no mention of any other. And this prayer will have that by saints
prayers, sins are forgeuen us. Why says he not by Christis intercession? Why
do we than feign to our selves of our fansy, other advocates and other
intreaters? But let the rational with his mass tell me a little the forenamed
saints, and all the rest, by whose intercession deserved they pardon having all
had one sin or others? Sureli all had need of pardon. It is necessari if they
will answer well, that they say by Christ. If it be so, why do they allege
other than him in the forgeuenes of sins? What man so ever he be in the
world, for so much as by one only way, the sins of the world are forgeuen, as
S. John says, in his 1. pistell, that he is the propycyacion for our sins,
and not only for ours but for all those of the world. Wha^ this prayer is done,
the host is broken over the cupp in 2. parts, and one of those partys is laid
upon the pa^en, and the other also is broken in 2. parts, and the one of these
2. second partis is laid also upon the paten With the other that first was put
there. And affter holding in his hand that other of the 2. pecys also over the
cupp, he says per omnia secula seculorum. And Amen is answered. And affter he
adds, pax domini sit semper uo biscum. And saing these words, there are made
3. crossis with that piece of the host over the cupp. When the words be spoken
and the crossis made, the pressed says these words, that is to say, Let the
mixing and consecracion of the body of our lord Jesus Christ be unto us that do
or shall receive them unto everlasting life.

And all these things have their significacions and their mysteries, that is to
say, their supersticions. But why do they not handle the sacrament as Christ
taught? Christ did not put any part of the bread in to the cupp, but severally
gave it to his disciples, first the bread which signified the body, after, the
wine, which signified the blood, each one a part by it selff. And did not mingle
them together as men are wo^t to do sometimes with common bread that is eaten
sopt in wine. This is not conuenyent in the holy sacrament, the which ought not
to be ha^deled otherwise tha^ as Christ has taught us. Here the racyonall
says, that this mixture is made for iij. causes. The first is to signifye that
the body is not withowt the blood nor the blood withowt the body. The second is
to signifye that there is not but one sacrament.

The third is to declare the return of the soul to the body. And what means
it that the Apostels and the prymatyue church the which kept the singlenes of
the institucyon of the sacrament have not added these mynglings? What is this
but to handell the divine misteryes affter our own fasshion, yea rather to
make a mock at them. And even as they them selves have added, why also may not
we make other addicyon and give them their significacyo^s, and add eueri day to
this mass even till the day of judgment, and make it so long that they should
stand an hole year in saing it? Than, what means this word co^secracyon when
the pressed says, let this mixture and consecracyon of the body and blood of our
lord Ihesus Christ be mades? Is not the consecracyon made allredy and the bread
turned in to the body and the wine in to the blood, as they say? what needs it
more that it should be made again a new, if it be made already? Except they
would understand and golfe affter this fassho^, that is to say let the comixcyon
of the body and the blood that we make, and the consecracyon already made,
become to us that shall take it, the body and blood of Christ to the profit of
everlasting liffe. But I can not tell if this were his mind or no that ordained
this part of the mass.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. Of the Agnus Dei: of the iiij. prayers that goo before the
receauyng of the sacrament and of ij. that follow. How great a part of the last
prayers in the mass be wicked and some of them speak against the pryuate
mass.
THe agnus dei follows which is said iij. times. Affter that are said iij.
prayers the first destreth that god would not look upon the sins of him that
says the mass, and that he would according to his will agree and make one the
church. The second destreth that by the most holy body and blood of Christ he
would deliver him from iniquity and from all his euels. And praith that he may
be brought nerer to the commandments of god and that he may never be sondered
from him. The third desires that the sacrament should not become his judgment
and co^demnacion but that it might be a defense of his soul and body. When
these iij prayers are said, he takes the host in his hand saing, I will take
the heavenly bread, and will call up on the name of the lord, and knocks his
breast iij. times saing also thrice, Domine non sum dignus that is lord I a^
unworthy. And affter he has taken the host in his hand, he says, the body of
our lord Jesus Christ keep my soul to everlasting life, Amen. And when he has
said thus, he receives the host. And affter, he takes the cupp in his hand
saing, Quid retribuam Domino etc. that is what shall I render to the lord. And
he says thus, The blood of our lord Jesus Christ keep my soul to everlasting
life, and receives the cupp. The One and the other being received, the pressed
affterwardes says ij. short prayers. In the first is des^ered that the
sacrament may be taken with a clean mind and that it may become unto us an
everlasting remedy. The second desires that the body and blood of Christ may
come nigh to our bowels, and that there may not remain any spott of sin.
when the ij. prayers are done, and the clensing made with water or wine or with
the one and the other, the post communion is next said, that is to say certain short
verses of the psalms or of some other part of the scripture. And affter are
said the last prayers of the mass, sometime one only if the feast be
sole^pne, sometime ij. sometime iij, sometime moo as it hapnith. And of these
prayers a great part are wicked, as that which says, We beseech the, allmighty
and merciful god, let the sacraments which we have taken cleanse us etc. In
the which is desired that that sacrament should be a wasshing of sins, and
among the other things that it might be the forgiveness of all sins of all the
faithful living and dead. As also that other, that is to say, Let this
communion cleanse us from sin, and at the intreati of the blessed Mari mother
of god, let it make us partakers of the heavenly remedy. And that other, Let the
receiving of this sacrament, be unto me, o lord, forgeuenes of my sins etc.
And so many other as make mention that sins should be taken away or forgeuen
by the receiving of the sacrament. And also those that make mention that by such
receiving, everlasting health and glory should be given us. Off which prayers
thorowt the mass book there is a great number as well before the consecracion
as affter. And chefely the last, They be all wicked. For the receiving of the
sacraments is not that that forgeueth sins, no nor that that gives us
health. These offices be to great, nor they do not belong to the sacraments, as
at large we will prove in the iiij. part. Where we will show that the
sacraments be not instituted for such causes.

Beside this, it is to be noted that many of these prayers are contrary to the
private mass, that is to say, contrary to that where the people do not
communicate, but only the pressed, receives the ost and the cupp. Because they
make plain mention that the multitude of the people has been partakers of the
sacrament, and not the pressed only. As that is which says, Satiasti Domine
familiam tuam etc. that is to say, thou have filled o lord, thy famili with
holy gifftes (and speaks of the sacrament). And this prayer is said very offt
affter the sacrament received. And that other Corporis sacri and pretiosi
san^guinis repletilibamine that is to say. Being filled with the received
sacrifice of thy holy body and preciouse blood. And so many other as give to
understand that the people has communicated, it is plain that such prayers can
not be true, unless the people receive the sacrament and yet the pressed says
them, as though the people had received, and in deed received nothing at all.
By these prayers and such like, whereof there are a great number in the mass
hook which are said affter the pressed has received the host and the cupp, is
given us to understand that the mass in that time that those prayers were made,
was no another than the holy communion. And the same supper of the lord, which
offt times was made, because they would never have spoken affter that sort if
the pressed alone should have received thost and the cupp. And it is not to be
answered here that these prayers speak in the plural number and not of the
pressed only because the pressed does communicate in all the peples name, seeing
that even as one can not be baptized for a another, so can he not receive the
supper for a another. And affter a certain sort there is likelines between this
spiritual supper and the common suppers or daili eatings. We will never say
that one can eat for a another, but every one does eat for him selff, and
thones meat can not help the other. So is it of the holy supper, that every one
ought to receive for him selff. Also the sainge of the pressed geuith us to
understand this, who when he says such prayers, turnith him to the people and
says Oremus that is to say let us pray all to gether and wills that the
people should pray as well as he, and should say the same words that him selff
says. Which words can not be verified if the pressed only should communicate and
not the people. Which thing also the name of the communion teachith us which
agreith not to one only but to mani. So that than such prayers be contrary to
the private mass, and can not be true if the people do not communicate. But
of necessity must be false. Therefore they give us to understand, that sometime
they were true, that is to say when the things were not yet in that disorder
that they be at this present.

THE THIRD CHAPTER How the first prayer of the mass for the dead is f^lissh
and to no purpos. The pistle of tha pocalipse does gainsay not only the first
prayer but generalli all the mass for the dead. The offertory also is an unfit
prayer:
WE have not yet particularly touched the mass for the dead but for the
living. And if we would tell all the errors that be there, our book should
grow to great. But our mind is at this time to make plain that the mass is
the greatest error that is in all christendom. This shall suffice us for this
time. I do not dowt but this our anatomy, as rude as it is, will wake up some
other to handell this argument or matter more worthily than I have done. And so
I desire, for the dear love of Jesus Christ that they to whom god has given
more vndersto^ding of his things than to me that they will take in hand this
enterprise, to the honor of god and profit of his church, because it is most
weighty and worthy to be well handeled.

Now let us look up on this mass for the dead. In the mass for the dead the
first prayer desires that the soul of the dead man or dead woe man should not
be given in to the hands of the enemy, but should be received by the holy
angels, and carried to the contry of paradyse, to thente^t that having byleued
and hoped, it should not suffer the everlasting pain but possess theuerlasting
loies. But to what purpos does his prayer desire that that soul of the dead
man or woman, should not suffer everlasting pain, if it be in such state as it
can not be damned and ^o which such a request does not agree? It is plain,
that the church prays not for the^ that be damned, as also according to their
opinion it prayth not for them that are blessed and in liffe everlasting. So
that than being no perell nor possybylytie that the sowles of the faithful
affter they be past this liffe, ca^ be damned, but be certain of their safetye
(nor it can not be no another wise) it needs not than to pray for them that,
god would not dampne them, but there ought only to be desyered that they might
be delivered from the pains of purgatory, if at least they were there, and
not from the everlasting pains from which withowt dowt they be (by gods grace
and through Christ) delivered, nor there is no more perell that they should fall
in to it. Wherefore such a prayer is made in vain, and is unfit, because it
puts in dowt the safety of the faithful sowles, of the which they be most
certain. To be short, the sowles that be departed this life. either theibe of
the true faithful or not. If, they be not of the faithful, it needs not to
pray for them because the prayers do not help them. If they be of the true
faithful, it needs not to pray for them that they should be freed from
everlasting pain, for such a prayer should help them nothing, being withowt
dowt allredy freed. Tha^ next affter it is writton in the lesson of
thapocalipse, which is recited in the same mass, Apoc. 14.
that tha^gell said to lhon, write, blessed be they that dye in the lord, for
fro^henfforth (that is to say from their bodily death) the spirit says, that
they shall rest from all their labors and travels. If it be so, that affter
their death they be in quiet and rest, and these men speak not, but the spirit
of god which ca^ not lie, to what purpos should we need to pray for them that
god would lead them in to the place of comfort? If they rest from all their
trauells and be in quiet, it needs not to pray or desire god, that he would
give them that the which, we be certain they have allredy. We be certain (...)
the saing off the holy ghost that they rest from all their labors and
consequently be free from all pain and have no need to be freed. If they were
in purgatory or in any pain, the spirit would not have said, that they were in
rest as he affirms, but would have caused me^ to desire it. Surely this office
for the dead speaks against it self and against tholy scripture, for it
affirms that the sowles off the faithful be in rest and on the other side
desires that they may have rest. Affterward in the lesson of the machabeis,
what is the cause that they have not putt in the text as it lies? Whi, have
they kept back that word sacrifice? The text says thus. 2 Match. 12
Et facta collatione duo decim milia dragmas argenti, misit Ierosolima offerri
pro peccatis mortuorum, sacrificium. How have they thus put in all the rest of
this lesson and these words only, that is to say Sacrificium they have lefft
out? They should with out dowt have put it in. But I Imagine they feared least
it would hinder their opinion. And be it as it will be they have fauted, and used
crafft in hiding it, and they imagined such a manner of word should not be much
for their purpos because that the sacrifices were not made of money but of
beasts not with stonding this is none of the greatest fawtes.

Than next in the offertori is prayed, O lord Jesus Christ king of glory
deliver the sowles of all faithful dead, from the pains of hell and from the
deep lake. Deliver them from the mowth of the lion that hell may not swalow
them, and that they fall not in to darkness, but that thy standerd bearers.
Michaell may present them in the holy light the which in time past thou did
promise to Abraham and his seed.

This offertory, as thou seist, praith for the sowles of the dead, that Christ
would deliver them from the pains off hell (as the first prayer says) and from
the mowth of the lion, that is to say, of the devil, and that the horrible
place, that is to say the depth of the dongion, should not swalow them, and that
they should no fall in to the dim darkness. And it geuith us to understand
that the sowles of the faithful be yet in perell to be damned, the which is
not only falls, but contrary to their own opinion that bring in purgatory, the
which says that the sowles of them that die in grace (for the which only the
church prays hand not for any other) can not be damned as the reprobate for
whom the church praith not, because they can not be saved. Why than does not
this prayer (called the offetory) desire that christ would deliver those sowles
from the pains of purgatory and not from the pains of hell whether they can
not goo? Parauenture some will gloss, that these words (pains of hell, mowth
of the lion, Deep lake, Terrible and dark place,) do not mean the pains or
place of the damned, but of purgatory. They cannot reasonably say this. For
such manner words do not agree with purgatory. And with out dowt they mean
the hell of the dampened, and of the everlasting pain, as the first prayer
meant, the which expressly made mention of purgatory. Surely this offetory is
folish and erronios as the first prayer is, because it geuith tunderstand that
the sowles of thelect passed from this liffe may be dampened.

The, iiij. Chapter.
THat the blessing in the massboke, that is to say, of ashes, of candels, of
bows, of chese, of eggs of bread, of fire, of fankincens, of the paschall,
and of water, are wicked and full of superstitions.

The blessing of the ashes is not only wicked, and supperstitos, but plain
blasphemy for that is very blassphemie when that is given to plain creatures
which belongs only to god and christ. As for example to forgive sin^, to
justify and to save. Now let us see a little, what this blessing of ashes
says? there be ij prayers. The first says, Grant by the calling upon of thy
holy name, that all those which shall cast the ashes upon them for rede^pcion
of their sins, may receive the health of body and defense of soul. The other
that follows, affirms and confesses that we put these ashes on our heads
to show forth humblenes and to deserve forgeuenes, saing thus. O god which
do not desire the death of sinners but their repentans, look most favorably
upon the frailty of man's state and vouchsaue to bless these ashes which we
have determined to lay up on our heads to thentent to show forth humblenes
and to deserve forgeuenes etc. In these ij. prayers it is plainly confessed that
we cast those ashes upon us, for to have redemption, and to deserve forgeuenes
of our sins. O cursed blasphemy. And shall we redeem our sins with ashes?
And why not with towe? And what need we to labor to disprove so great and so
plain a folly? How vile a thing does Antichrist make the redemption of sin^es?
For the bringing of which to pass, it was needful that the son of god should
become man, should be borne in our miseryes, should suffer so many trobles, should
be of wicked men persecuted, delivered, taken, beaton, mocked, spytefully
handled, whipped, Judged hy thuniust, crucified, dead, and that he should goo
down to the grettest lowlines

And here he says that with the ashes is made the redempcyon of sins. How
can the godly and Christen ears hear this. Look up on this you that goo to
the mass, Look up on it yowr selves. Read what I tell you is in the mass
book. They that understand the latin have not consydred it. Thoter know not
what is said, because the hole is said in a tongue not understand of the
unlearned. And they may blaspheme and say what they will at their pleasure. And
be these things to be born, to close up our redempcyon within thasshes of wood
the which only Christ has brougth to pass with his hlood and death?

That of the candels which is done on candelmes day, in the first prayer it
desires that god would by the calling up on of his most holy name and by
thintreatyes of the blessed Mary allweys virgyn, and by the prayers of all
saints, bless and make holy those ca^dels for man's use and health of bodies and
of sowles, whether it be up on the land or in the waters. And where find we in
the hole scripture, that any bodyly creature fasshoned by me^ as the ca^dels
and the weekis be, should have this use to give the helt of sowles? The health of
sowles is the forgeuenes of sins, and the holy making. These so great and godly
things are done by thonly favor of god and by Christ, Esaias. 53.61. 1. Pet. 2.
Luke 4. Esa. 61.
and are not wrought with wax candells. Yea this prayer speaks against it
selff, because in thend it says that we be redeemed with the precyos blood of
the son of god. And before he says, that these ca^dles be for men's use and for
health of sowles, that is to say, for remissyon of sins. And how ca^ these ij.
things stand to gether? that is to say that we be redeemed with the precyos
blood of the son of god, which is most true, and that the candels should be
the health of our sowles, that is tho say the forgeuenes of sins? Seeing that
forgeuenes of sins is redempcyon it selff, as Paul witnesses in many places.
Surely if the ca^dels forgive sins, than they worck our rede^pcyon. Roma 3.
Ephesians. 1. collo. 1.
But Christ only has wrought our redempcyon, and has not wrought it with
candels. I know well that the wranglyng and supersticyous parsons, will not
want answers and glosts. Notwithstanding let every faithful and godly man wey
and judge whether the candels ca^ work such effectis or no. when the candels be
blessed and the holy water cast on the^ and that they be censyd, certain verses
are song? Affter they goo on processio^, and they sing iij. songs of praise,
which they call Anthemes. And one of the^ which is the second says, Adorna
thalamu^ tuum Syon, and suscipe regem Christum, amplectere maria^ quae est
coelestis porta, ipsa enim portat regem gloriae. And here this Ante^ confessith
that mari is the heavenly gate. And though I shall say somewhat here to defend
gods honor and christis, let no man meruell. I speak to those that have no
knowledge of the holy scripture. For I a^ sure that they which have, will not
meruel. There is no dowt, but the most blessid mother, was and is blessed above
all weme^, and is in that gretnes and worthiness that ca^ not be esteemed,
because she is Christ's mother. And yet for all that, we ought not to give her
those praises that be not fit for her and that belong only to christ. For so,
thin king to honor her, we dishonor her and do her most greatest wrong, and if
she were nere us and hard us wha^ we give her such titles, that is to say, gate
of heaven, mother of merci, wha^ we call her our hope, our advocate, and such
like titles, which be long to christ only, or to god, she would spitt in our
facis, and would not suffer that the honor of god and of christ (the which she
and all tho her saints do more esteem with out comparison than theit own)
should be given to plain creatures, were they never so excellent. Only Christ
is our liffe, and hope, Io. 1.6.11.14. Collossen. 3. 1. Timot. 2. Iohann. 10 1.
Johan. 2. Actor. 4,
the gate of heaven, our advocate, fowntane, king and father of mercy. These
names be namis for god and Christ. To be the gate of heaven and to be the
advocate, belongs to Christ, god and man, but the other belong to god and to
Christ as god. So that they tha^ co^mitt a great error, that to honor the
saints and chefely the blessed mother, do sing these Ante^s as the Salve
regina, the Aue maris stella, and as many other as give godly honor to plain
creatures. Fom hens it comith, that the devotion to christ and god is lost, and
it comith to pass that where we should call up on god and Christ and ron^e to
the^ in our need, we ron^e to me^ and we place the^ in our redemer and makers
place. The blessing of the boughs in the first prayer affter the preface of
the same blessing, destreth that those that shall take of those boughs, that
they may be unto them, a defense both of soul and and body, a remedy of our
safety through Christ our lord. The fourth prayer, which beginnith Deus qui
per oliuae ramum, desires that god would bless and make holy those boughs of
the olife and of other trees, so that they may be profitable for soul health to
all the people. Surely these be very great effectis, that is to say, to be a
protection of soul and body and to be a remedy, or to be profitable for our
soul health. God does noth use these means to defend our sowles and to save us.
We have not in any place of the scripture a^y of these things. Paul thapostel to
the colossians, Coloss. 2.
says that in Christ we be furnisshed, that is to say, that as concerning the
things perteining to the soul health, we have no another but Christ, god
excepted. For in Christ and by Christ we have all things, whether we speak of
forgeuenes of sins, of Iustificacion, of repentans, of holy making or of sowl
health. We have all these things in Christ and by Christ, and not by the boughs
of olive, palm or of any other thing. And beside it is a great supersticion to
be content to believe that the boughs of olives palms or other treis should (by
reason of those blessings made with those words, crossis and other ceremonies
that are made) take any power to bring to pass such and so great effectis. We
find not that the Prophetis, thapostels or Christ himselff, did ever use such
things, or that they should with words give power to any bodied thing to work
such effect is.

On saturday which they call holy, is blessed the fire, the frankincense and
the wax candel called the paschall. In the blessing of fire in the second
prayer, the which begins Domine Deus pater omnipotens, is destered that god
would bless that light, that is to say, that kindled fire to thentent, that
that fire being blessed and made holy of him that has lightened all the world,
we may be kindled by the same light, and lightened by the fire of his
brightness. And he means by these words, that god by that blessed fire, should
kindle and lighten us with the fire of his brightness. This can not be, Luce.
12, 2. Corin. 3 Gallat. 3. Actor. 10.
because that god to kindle us or to lighten us, uses not for his instrument
or mean, the material fire, but his word the holy gospel, by which that
divine fire of the holy ghost which works these effects is given.

The blessing of the frankince^s in the mass book immediately follows that of
the fire. And is a prayer that begins, Veniat quesumus omnipotens Deus. And
first it desires that the large onpowring might come upon that frankincens,
that is to say, that god would largely power on his blessing upon that
frankincens. And it seems that a little affter it affirms, that that
frankincens to gether with the rest, that is to say with the paschal, and the
fire and such like ceremonies as are made, It seems (I say) that it affirms
them to be a sacrifice the which is sacrified that night. And this he says
because at other times such duties was wont to be done by night. And it
desiereth that it may not only shine with the secret mixture of gods light, but
in every place where any of that mystery, that is to say of that sacrifice
shall be carried, that the crafft of the devils wickedness may be driven out and
the power of the godly majesty may be help ready. If this prayer will as it
seems that it meanith, that such frankincense together with those other things,
should be a sacrifice unto god, sacrified that night, and that it should have
power to drive a way the deuell, this is a very supersticion. For we do not
find in the holy scripture, with as many words as may be said, that a thing
does take any new pour the which it had not before. And it should behoue them
to prove, why such power is rather geuin to these words that they speak, to
bless these things, than to other. Also we have not that such things may be
called a sacrifice, by the apostolic scripture. We find in deed that the
praysings of god, Hebreo. 13. Roman. 1^.
the allmosts and works of charity be a pleasing sacrifice unto god. But
affter that Christ came, it is not fownd that we ought to offer unto god,
frankincens, fire, or candels. And they be all fancies and diuises of me^.
There is also to consider one other great abuse, that is that they have given
many significacions to these such things as they have fownd out, the which serve
to no purpos. For neither the people that are present at such ceremonies
understand them, no nor they much less that do them, nor there is not among a
thousand one, that knows what is done. And to what purpos are made so many
ceremonies and gestures, and are geuin them so many significacio^s as the
thousand part of them that see them, know not to what end they are made? This
is to true, but it is an error common to all the ceremonies of the mass. For
every man seith many garments, sondrines of apparel, that is to say, stoles,
phannells cord girdels, albes, Amises, vestmentes, copes, corporas clothes,
patentes, and so many gestures as are made, so many Ioining to gether of
hands, so many casting open of arms, putting to gether and sondring of
fingars, so many crosses, and to be short, so great a diversity of things
which be used in the mass. And yet the people understand not why they are done.
And why do they not teach some of these significations, if they would they
should profit. The Rational of divine offices, makes so many significacions,
so many mysteries of such things, and yet no one, or very few do know them.
Well it is enough that they be writton in the book. Let it be axed a little of
all that multitude that stands present at the service on the holy sabbath
day, what profit they have gotten by seeing those frankincensis, those wax
candels, fires and other ceremonies, and by standing iiij. or v. hours at these
services? This is the profit that is brought thens, that they have lost the
time, and return supersticios in that they by leave that the wax of the pascall
should have power against the enemies, against the deuell, against night sprites,
and some do put it up on the doors off their howses, and some other (sely
sowles) do put it within the horns of their oxe^ and other beasts and up on
the vinestakes against the tempest. Affter this sort the poor people is handled.

Than next follows the blessing of the wax, that is to say exultetiam
angelica turba coelorum. The which calls the 5. peck of frankince^s that are
stickt in the pascall Crosselike, An evening sacrifise the which is offered to
god, And praith that the wax consecrated to the honor of god may vnfailably
co^tinewe to the destruction of the darkness of that night, so that being
accepted by god to be a savor of swetenes, it may be mixed with the heuinly
lights and that the flame of the same may find out the morning day starr, that
is to say, Crist. And about the end it grants to much to that frankincense
and to that taper. For if we would do a thanckfull thing to god, we must offer
unto him a another thing than frankinsens and ca^dels. The next blessings be
putt in the end of the mass book. The blessing of chese and eggs desires that
god would power out his blessing upon the chese and eggs, so that they being
armed with his heauinly defense may be profitable for everlasting life to all
those that shall taste of those chese and eggs. That of the bread desires that it
may be to all those that shall take of that bread blessed with the spiritual
blessing, health of mind and body and defense against all sicknessis and all
waytlaings of enemies. There is a another, appliable to eueri thing, the which
desires that god would bless that creature, (that is to say what so ever they
would have blessed) so that it may be an helpful remedi to mankind and that all
those that shall take or taste of that thing may by the calling upon the holy
name of the lord, take the health of body and the defense of the soul.

These iij. blessings give to much to the bodily things. How can such things as
me^ eat and drinck be profitable to everlasting life, to health of mind and of
body? How may they be a defense against all the enemies, Mathei 15.
and a sheld of the soul? Christ says, that which goith in through the mowth,
defiles not the mind. If it cannot defile nor do any spiritual harm to the
soul, it can neither bring any spiritual help. Romans 14.
And Paul to the romans says, The kingdom of god is neither meat nor drinck,
meaning to say that the kingdom of god, which is a spiritual thing, does not
stand in bodili things but in spiritual. These things than that are eaten and
dronken can not work so great effects as these blessings do attribute to them.
And so much rather as they be mennis inuencions and not according to gods word.
And they be of those things that are wasted by using them as Paul says writing
to the Colossians. Collo. 2.
Where is it fownd in tholy scripture, that god by means of certain words ever
gave to a bodied thing like strength and power? And if any man would say, that
Paul for all that says in the 1. to Timothi, that the meats be hallowed by
gods words and by prayer, and therefore may have by such halowing or blessing
some virtue the which before they had not, To this I answer that Paul in that
place by the halowing of meats, means not that the same meats should take
any new and spiritual power the which they had not he fore, but means by
hallowing, the clean and lawful use granted by god to the faithful, the
which may eat for the maintenance of life at any time or of any manner of
meat, giving thanckes to god who has made all meats for the use of the
faithful. By the which thing we have to understand that the people of god under
the law, could not at their pleasure eat of eueri meat but of those only that
god did grant the^ in the law, and the other they called unclean and common,
that is to say, of which the gentiles might eat. Now those that they might eat
were hallowed, that is to sai that the use of the^ was lawful and clean
according to gods word. And because that since Christ's co^ing eueri meat is
made lawful to a Christian nor we have no more that prohibicio^ as in the old
law, therefore eueri meat is hallowed to the. And this the vision that appeared
to Peter geuith us tunderstand as we have in the deeds of thapostles, Actor. 10.
when Peter saw that shete full of all sortis of beasts, clean and unclean,
and herd a voice which said unto him that he should kylle of those beasts and
eat. And he answering that he had never eaten any unclean and common thing,
affter the manner of the gentiles, but in that part had kept the law, It was
said unto him, That which god has hallowed. thou shall not say that it is
common. Here the heavenly voice gave us to understand, that every meat is
hallowed to the faithful that is to say made clean and lawful as s. Paul says
also to Titus, all things be clean to the clean: But to the unfaithful and
unclean, there is nothing clean, but their mind and conscience is defiled. So
that than when the Christian takes his meat, praing and giving thanks to
god, such me ate is hallowed, that is to say, the use of it made lawful, for so
much as now seeing that Christ is come there is no more differens to the
faithful between this meat and that meat as Was in thold law. And therefore
they that forbid meats do very evil. 1 Timot. 4.
And Paul writing to Timothy says that such doctrine is the deuels doctrine,
and against gods word, because the meat and every creature made for man's use,
is hallowed, that is to say, the use off it made lawful by gods word and by
prayer. First by the word of the creacion the which has made all meats and
all bodied things for man's use. Than also by that word that Peter hard which
also was gods word, And by that word also the which assuerith us that we be
fr^id from the law and that we may for our need use any meat giving thanks
unto god and making prayer. So that the faithful ought not at any time to take
meat except prayer and thanks giving goo before. See now affter what sori
Paul is understand? So than that halowing is no another but the clean and
lawful use of meat.

The blessing of the holy water is all full of supersticions. First the salt is
charmed and coniured. And there is desired that the salt may be come charmed
salt for the soul health of the bileuers, and that it may be to all those that
shall take it, health of soul and of body (And than be made iij. crosses) The
second prayer says the like, that is to say, that this salt may be safety of
mind and body to all those that shall take it, (and there is made one cross).
The other that follows, does charm and conjure the water and desires it may
become charmed and coniured water, to drive a way all power of the enemy, and
that it may root up and pluck out the same enemy with his frogoing angels by
the virtue of the same our lord Jesus Christ. (And tha^ be made iij. other
crosses) The Other prayer that follows desires that god would give the virtue of
his blessing to that water, (And there is also made one cross) and this is
said, that his creature serving gods mysteries may take theffectt of the godly
grace to drive a way deuels and diseases. And besides it desierith that that
place where it shall be sprinkled may be free from all uncleanness and from all
harm, that it may be free from the pestilent spirit and from corrupt aye^.
Let all the waitelaings of the hidden or lurking enemies (says that third
prayer) pack the^ he^s etc. This blessing attributes great powers to the water
the which gods word geuith it not. How can the water with words fownd out by
me^ (as they of this halowing be) do that that we read not, that the words
of the holy scripture which be gods words ever did? We find in deed that
Christ and thapostles speaking brought meruelos effects to pass, but that
they should have given to these words, they spoke, any power (a another man
uttering the^) to work any effect, we read it not. Surely all these blessings
be supersticios and wicked and do give to much to the bodied things. I would
feign saylom what of the blessing of the popes, Agnus deies, which be made of
white wax. But I ca^ not tell with what ceremonies it is done, because I have
not those books wherein it is writton. Yet notwithstanding master durant in his
vi. book of his Rational says that those such Agnus deies are made of new
hallowed wax, or else of the pascal taper of the former yea are mingled with
the Cream. And there he tells the significacions of those Agnus deies the
which affter ward be distributed or dealt to the people by the pope him selff, on
the satterday in A^bis, that is to say, the first saturday affter caster. And
in thend describing the virtue of these Agnus deies, he says that they by the
virtue of their consecracion and blessing, defend the byleuers from lightning
and tempest. But sureli the pope has done a great wrong to his Agnus deiies,
that having himselff authority and power to give to things all those ^tewis that
him lists, as he has given unto Ashes power to work rede^pcio^ of sin^es,
and to the holy water salted (the which every pressed ca^ bless) the virtue to
drive a way deuels and to save me^, chefely to that water of the holisabbath
which is carried from hows to house, and has given so meruelos vertuis so so
many other things as we may see in this chapter of the blessings) he has done,
a great wrong to his Agnus dei, which no man can bless but himselff, that he
has not given the^ the virtue of the herb Agnus casius of the which
Dio^corides and Galene do write, seeing the prestis, the friars, the monks,
and the no^nys and universally all the ecclesiastical state have so much need
off it. For all have vowed chastity and marriage is forbidden them. It were
much more to the purpos to give them this virtue and so to take a way so great
an abomination from the world as sends the stink of it even to heaven, than
that virtue, to serve against lightning and tempest. O benommed and blind world,
wha^ wilt thou begin to open thine eyes to remember thy selff and to see how
myserably thou art bowght and sold? And by whom? By them that profess to have
the in charge. It is the right judgment of god For when fables are preched
every man bileueth them. But let gods word, christds doctrine and truth come
and be preachet, it is not only as a perelous error despised, but rather
fersely persecuted.

THE FOVRTH PART.
The fourth and last part follows, the which is of the abuses and of the
abhomynacions of the mass, and has vi. chapters.

THe first is that the mass does not satisfy for them, nor apply such things
to man.

THE.I. CHAPTER.
ALthough we have in the former partis touched many abuses and errors of the
mass: nevertheless we intend (in this last, specially to treat of certain
partycular and great abusis. As for example, that the mass should forgive
sins, that it should satisfy for them, or else that it should apply to us such
forgiveness or satisfaction and that it should be a sacrifice for the living and
for the dead. Than next also that the same mass, is man's invention and not
gods, made by many. And to be short we will speak of many other abuses which
partly are touched and of many wheroff yet there is no mention made. And first
we will prove that the mass forgeueth not sins, satisfies not god for them,
nor applies not to us the forgeuenes and satisfaction made by Christ, And to
say the contrary is a very great error and abuse. And I prove it affter this
sort. For those that affirm the mass to work these effectis, either they will
and mean it of all the mass, that is to say of all those words that are said
and ceremonies that are done from the beginning to the end, and of all that
made heap of words and gestures, or else they mean of the sacrament of the
body and of the blood only the which is chefely considred in the mass. If they
mean it of the whole mass it is false. For by saing of words and by doing of
ceremonies sins are not forgeuen. Seeing that if a man should say the whole
bible over, which are gods words, from the beginning to the ending an hondreth
times, they could not forgive him his sins, How than shall sins be
forgeuen, or satisfaction made for them by saing mass, which is man's
inuencion, as we will prove in the third chapter? It is plain that sins are
not forgeuen by saing of words nor doing of ceremonies, because that
Iustificacion else should be by works which is contrary to Paul. Who dow^eth
that the speaking and vttring of words should be our work? Yea who is that
wicked man that can not do this, (say many Psalms, prayers, lessons) and do
ceremonies? Roma. 3.4.5.8. Gallat. 2.3.4.5. Coloss. 2.
The deuell him selff can say many words that be holy and of god. Paul
thapostel, as we have in so many places of his epistles, to the Romans, to the
Galathians and the colossians, says that no man is Justified, that is to say,
no man's sins are forgeuen him by the works of the law commanded by god. And
he means of those law whether it be of the commandementis, which is the
moral law, or else of the ceremonial law. And will we say that sins be
forgeuen by reading or speaking of words, or else by doing of ceremonies not
commanded by god, but divised by men? This can not be. If they will say that
they mean not of all the mass, but only of the sacrament, the which has this
virtue and strength to forgive sins and to satisfy god for them, or else to
apply Christ's redemption to them for whom the mass chances to be said, This
is not true neither, but is very falls. For the office of the sacra^ents is not
to work these effectis, but it is to be token the^ and to bring the^ to mind
and to assure us of them. For if the sacrament should have this virtue, it should
have it chefely toward them that worthily should receive and take the
sacrament, but it has it not to wards those same, wherefore it has it not
toward no another.

That no sacrament, not only that of the lords supper, should have this office,
I will make it plain and prove it. For the worthy receiving of the sacrament
whether it be of thanks giving or of baptime, presupposes forgiveness of
sins and Iustificacion, than neither the one nor the other does it. It is
plain that none ought to take, what so ever Sacrament you will, if he be of
age, except he do true repentance and have true faith. But he that does
true repentance and has true faith, Actor. 10.
his sins are forgeuen him and he is Justified as we have in thactes of
thapostles. Peter says, speaking in Cornelius the hunderders hows in Caesarea,
To this says he (that is to sai to Christ, for he spoke of him) all the
Prophets bear witness, that every one that byleueth in him, receives
forgeuenes of sins by his name. And Paul also says, Actor. 13.
know ye, o men and brethern, that by this (and he spoke of Christ) the
forgeuenes of sins is declared to you, and by him, (that is to say by Christ)
every one that byleueth is justified from all those things from the which you
could not be Justified by the law. If than faith and penance not only may be
had withowt the sacraments, but rather necessarily goo before the sacraments
if they should be worthily received, it follows consequently that the
forgeuenes of sins or Iustificacion do not hang nor be not caused by the
same sacramentis, nor be not applied to man by them. Because it is necessary
that such things should first be applied before the sacramentis should be taken.

The use also of the church declares this, the which never gives baptim to
one of full age, except he first confess that he byleueth. And so we will say
of the supper, the which all men do confess that none ought to receive it but
he that first has done paenance. We have thexample of baptim in thact^s of
thapostles of Candache the queen of thethyopes cunuch to whom Philip would not
give baptime till he first confessed that he byleued. Actor. 8.
Gene. 15.
Abraham also was Justified before the circumcision as the genesis says, that
is to say, Abraham byleued god and it was imputed to him for Justice, that is
to say he was Justified by faith. The which example Paul to the romans,
brings forth, meaning to prove that Iustificacion is not by works nor by
sacraments, And he says that Abraham was justified before circumcision, and
that the circumcision was to him a token of the Justice of faith. Giving to
understand that the office of sacraments is not to forgive sins or to
Justify man, but to be a sign of such things. And if they be signs they be
no causes. It is well known that there is a great difference between the cause
of an effectt and the sign of the same. The sacraments be signs and not
causis of forgeuenes and therefore they can not forgive sins. Than moreover if
the sacraments were those that should forgive sins, and withowt them forgeuenes
could not be wrought: it should follow that the grace of Jesus Christ should be
of less strength affter the coming of Christ tha^ it was before in the law.
It is to plain that this should be inconvenient, that is to say, that Christ's
grace should be of less strenght sins his coming than before. What an
inconueniens should this be, that now that Christ has fullfilled the
Prophecies, that he has wrought our redemption, (This being called the time of
fullnes, the acceptable time and the time of grace) Christ's grace should be of
less virtue and strength tha^ before he came? But that this inco^uenie^ce should
follow if the sacraments be necessary for the forgiveness of sins, I will
show it. For before the law, by gods grace and by Christ, Abel, Enoch, Noe,
yea and the scripture makes particular mention of Abraham, that all these and
the other saints were justified withowt sacraments. Why now than shall not
Christ's grace have the same virtue? It is plain that a thing that can worck
his effect with out anothere help, is of more efficacy, force and strength,
than that which has need of it. If than now gods grace and Christ's virtue
have need of sacraments to worck this effect of forgeuenes of sins, and
before it has not need, it is surely of less strength now than in that time,
for by it selff it can not worck that that it could do than when Christ yet
was not come in the flessh. So that now it shall be of less vertew and power,
than it was than which thing is inconvenient. How many examples also have we in
the new testament, that the forgeuenes of sin^es is not caused by the
sacrame^tis? The sinful woman, The man palsyed, The howsold of Zacheus, The
these crucified with Christ, and Cornelius of whom we have spoken, all these
received forgeuenes of sins and not by sacraments but by faith only. Than
the sacraments do not forgive sins. And if any would bring forth that common
saing of the doctors, that is that the sacraments of the new law work that
it selff that they betoken and signify. And that also of Augustine in the
preface of the 73. Psalm, who showing the difference between the sacraments of
thold law and owrs, says, that the sacraments of thold law did only promise
the savior, but ours do give the safety. Which manner of speaking have a little
excessiuenes. To this I answer that men must give to such saings (if they
should be true) fit expositions, and not leave them in this largenes or rather
hyperbolike than otherwise, Hyperbolik is an ouerpassing kind of spech.
and to give them that sense which is fit for them, and the which the selffe
same ancient fathers give them. The same Austen in many places affirms that
the sacraments of Moises law have foretold of Christ, but our have showed
him. Against faustus lib. 19. cap 14.
Speaking against faustus he says, the law and the Prophets had fortelling
sacraments of the thing to come, but these of our time do witness that that is
come. So that they are diverse as to the manner of signifieng but as to the thing
signified, they agree, and are like. Against petili. l. 2. cap. 37,
In his book against Petilian, he says, the Jews sacraments were diverse in
the signs but in the thing signified al one, diverse in visible kind and form,
but like in spiritual virtue. Also up on ^hon he says. In his treatise upon
John. 26. and 45.
The selff same says is in signs that be diverse as it is in words that be
diverse. For the words do change the sowndes by times, And surely words are
no another than signs. The fathers did drinck the selff same spiritual, but
not the selff same bodily drinck. Behold than how that the selff same faith
abiding, the signs be changed. There the stone was Christ: To us, Christ is
the same that is laid on the altar. And they by a great sacrament dranck the
water that flowed out of the stone, we what we drinck, the faithful know it.
If thou look up on the visible form it is diverse. If up on the spiritual
understanding they dranck the selff same spiritual drink. And in a another
place he says, Theirs and ours is one selff meat and drinck in a mystery, but
it is one in meaning and not in form. For the selff same was betokened to them
in the stone that was showed to us in flessh. So than if we would that saings
above leadged should be true, it is necessari so to expownd the^ amd to give
them the same meaning as we have showed in austen. That is to say, that the
difference between their sacraments and ours is in the manner of betokening. For
theirs did betoken the thing to come, ours do exhybite it and make it present,
that is to say do betoke^ that it is not any more to come, but that it is
present and allredy comne, and that it should be no more looked for. We do not
deny notwithstanding that there is not also for us a doctrine, that is to say
that ours do more expressly and more clearly betoken than thold. For so much
as now in our time there is gretter knowledge of christ and off grace, because
it is the time of fullnes, So our sacraments can more clereli betoke^ than
theires. But that they can satisfy or forgive sins, or Justify man or give
grace, or apply it to the same man, They can not do it, as neither thold
sacraments could do any of these things as we have proved before. Concerning
forgeuenes of sins and Justification it is plain that they do it not,
because that necessarily both the one and the other must goo before the sacraments
if they should be worthily received. Thapplication also of Christ's
satisfaction and redemption is made by faith the which receives the whole work
of our salvation by gods grace through Christ, and receive forgeuenes,
Justification, holimaking and redemption from the mere and pure grace of god
through Christ, and not from any other thing, and to it does attribute and give
all the praise and glory, Roman. 3.
as we have in the pistle to the romans. And therefore the savior so offt does
beat in this faith, saing that who so ever beleuyth in him has life
everlasting, giving to u^dersta^d that by faith are received the benifites of
salvation by gods grace through Christ, and he that has it not is not partaker
of such benifites. Therefore when we find in the saings of the Evangelists or of
thold doctors that the sacraments forgive sins, as that of mark and luke,
that John preached the baptime of repentans in forgiveness of sins, or else in
thactes of thapostels, that Ananias said unto paul, Rise up, baptize the and
wassh thy sins. And the creed received from the church which says, confiteor
unum baptisma in remissionem peccatorum, And such like saings the which seem to
attribute the forgeuenes of siinnes to baptim, I say that they must be
understand safely by that figure which attributes to the sign that that
belongs to the signified. The saing of luke and mark and the article of the
faith are understand affter this sort, that is to say, that the baptime is a
sign of the forgeuenes of sins. The saing of Ananias when he says to Paul,
wassh thy sins, is as much to say, as take the sign of the wasshing. And
that saing of Peter in thactes of thapostels, Actor. 2,
when he says. Be repentant for sins, and let every one of you be baptized
for the forgeuenes of your sins, is thus understand, Let every one of you be
baptized in token of forgeuenes of your sins, And so of the other saings that
attribute the forgeuenes of sins to the sacraments, we must give them the
true understanding, that is to say, that they be tokens of such forgeuenes,
and they certify the byleuers of the same, but they be not the cause. And if
any would axe to what end than be the sacraments given, if they work none of
these effects, that is to say, if they forgive not sins, if they Justify
not, satisfy not, save not, nor apply not such things to man? I answer as
before, that thoffice of the sacraments is to be witnessing signs of these said
things and they be as it were certain sealis which assure us of the forgeuenes
of sins, of gods grace, and of salvation. The merciful god and our favorable
father saw, how we are by nature vnbyleuing and weak, And there for for
maintenans of our faith, and help of our weakness, causes not only his word,
that is to sai, the holy gospel, to be preached us, but confirms us in the
faith, with the sacraments, and shows us by certain owtward signs and plain
to our sensis, that which is preached by the word. Wherefore wha^ we here said,
he that believes the gospel, his sins are forgeuen him, and affter we see
one baptize with water, and know that this baptime is ordained by god to
signify such a thing, we be confirmed in faith, that is to say, we bileue more
surely, perceiving that baptime is ordained to signify that even as the water
wassheth the spots or the vnclen^es of the bodi, so is he that byleuyth
washed with in the soul. The sacraments have other offices of the which it is
not our mind presently to speak. It suffiseth that among other they have this,
that is to say, to bring us forgeuenes of sins, gods grace and our salvation
not only at that time when they be given, but thorowt all our liffe, when so
ever they come in to our reme^berans, so that we bileue. And they work not all
this effect by their own virtue, but by tholy institution, and because they be a
ministry of the spirit as gods word is.

Returning therefore to the purpos, I say that it is a great abuse and
supersticion, willingly to goo about to say that the sacrament of thanksgeuing
forgeueth sins, for it is gods grace that forgeueth sins through christ,
when we bileue with a true faith, and not the sacrament of thanksgeuing. It is
true in deed that this sacrament does certify us of that thing, because it
brings to our remembrans that christ gave his body and his blood for our
redemption and how his death is cause of our life, but it works not the
forgeuenes, nor it can not work it, as we have before proved. And if those that
defend the mass, should say that they mean of the forgeuenes of the pain and
not of the fawte, when they say that the mass forgeueth sins, And that
affter this sort also the prayer of the mass book ought to be understand, in
the which is made mention of such forgeuenes, that is to say, that they be
understood of the forgeuenes of the pain and not of the fawt. Tho this I say
first, that the prayers absolutely make mention of the forgeuenes of sins.
and do not any thing speak of the pain, whereby it appears that they mea^e
of the fawt which is princypall in sin. And the selff same words show that
they mean of the fawt. As for example, that prayer, haec nos communio domine
purget a crimin, It says not, liberet a poena, but purget a crimine that is to
say from the fawt. And that other which says, Sit absolutio sceleru^, that is
to say let it be a discharge of the fawtes. and affter al^o it says, Sit
uiuoru^ atque mortuorum fidelium remissio omniu^ delictorum, that is to say,
let it be a forgeuenes of all the sin^es of the faithful, living and dead.
These words surely being so general as they be of all sin^nes as well of the
living as of the dead, can not conveniently be understand only of the pain
and not of the fawt. Than the Summistis and scol me^ defenders of the mass,
say that theffect of this sacrament is to forgive venial sins, and also
mortal whereof man has no co^sciens, that is to say, as I thinck, when either
he reme^breth not, or Judges not the^ to be deadli sins allthough they be in
deed deadly. And among the other somnistes, the Angelica, where it speaks of
theffectis of tke thanks giving, says the same, and the master of the
sente^cis in the iiij. the xij. distinction about the end, says that it
forgeueth venial sins. And thomas of Aquine also in the iiij. of the
sente^cis the selff same distinction, says the same thing, and besides that it
forgeueth these mortal sin^es whereof man forgets himselff. And that saing of
the prayer the which says, sit absolutio scelerum may be understand affter ij.
sorth, that is to say, either so far as it hurts him, or else it is
understand of those sins which man has no rememberans off. These be the
fautors of the mass and they mean that the Tha^ksgeuing forgeueth not only the
ponishment but also the fawt. Thanks giving allweis is that which is called
Eucharista
Although these ij. distinctions that they make, the one of the venial and
mortal, and thotherof the forgeuenes of the fawt and of the ponisshment be
bilded by them selves and not of gods word. The first distinction is false. For
if we speak properly, every sin is deadly in it selff, having respect to the
rigor of the law. For as much as sin is so much sin as it is against the
law. And if it had not been against the law, it should in no wise have been
sin. If it be against the law, it curses, according to the saing of the
psalm, Cursed be they that decline from thy commandments. Deuteronomy. 27.
The which saing, David took out of moises in the deuteronomy, where is writton
this sentence. Every one is cursed that abides not in all the things that be
written in this book, that is to say, Romans 3. Gala. 4.
of the law. And there for Paul to the Romans says that the law works
wrath. And to the galathians, that the law curses all men, because no man
keeps it. And for this cause it is needful, that Christ should deliver from
such a curse, those that bileue in him. So that this distinction, speaking
properly, is nothing. For the sin which they call venial, if it be sin,
it is against the law. If it be againgst the law, it curses and damneth.
If it curse and damn it is deadly. Nor by this that is said, that every sin
is deadly, is meant that all sinnis are like as certain have said. Nor it denies
not that one sin is gretter than another. As for example, murder gretter
than theffe. But this only here is affirmed, that all sins in them selves, be
deadly, having respectt to the rigor of the law. Than that the thanksgeuing
should forgive the venial and not the deadly sins, is false. For the
forgeuenes of sins is gods perfight work. Nor god forgeueth not a man one
sin, but he forgiueth him all. For accordingly, he that repents for one saut
must repent him for all, at the least generally, otherwise no one saw^ should be
forgeuen him, for as much as repentans is, when the man is sorry that he has
offended god in what so ever sort he should offend him, And that he bileueth
that through Christ all his sins be pardoned him. And that one should repent
him for one fawt and not for all, that were not true repentans done in
Christ's name. So the mass that forgeueth not the deadly sins, can not
forgive the venial. Also that other distinction of the forgeuing the fawt and
the ponisshment is not of gods word, but against the word of god, Iere. 32.
who says in Jeremy that he would no more remember their sins. What does this
mean, that he would remember no more? It is plain that he that ponissheth
sin, does remember it. David also says in the Psalm, Psalm. 31.
Blessed is he to whom the lord has not imputed sin What means this, not
imputed, except pardoned in such sort as if it had never been done? Thus much
does that word, not to impute, betoken. Than what else means this, to forgive
sin, but not to ponissh it? And if god does pardon the sin, surely he does
perfitely pardon it. So than he requires no ponisshment, and if he should, he
should not perfitely pardon, and so he should not be perfitely merciful to wards
his elect. Romans 8. 1. cho. 1.
Further more if Christ's Justice be so imputed to the true bileuers as
though it were their own, For as much as god giving them Christ has given them
his Justice, it surely follows, that the justified by Christ should not be
ponisshed affter any manner of sort. Nor it should not be convenient that where
Christ's justice is, there should be any manner of ponissment, seeing he has
ple^tifuly satisfied. And it would some that he had not taken up on him and born
all that pomisshment the which gods elect deserved for their sins. The which
thing is against gods word, who affirms in so many places of the scripture
that Christ has laid upon himselff our iniquities. Esai. 3.
Also it might seem that gods justice were not by Christ perfitely pacified and
reconciled to wards the childern of god, loking for other satisfaction than
that of Christ. Yea it should follow that the death, and so great a suffering of
the son of god had been insufficient for our rede^pcion. And to be short, seeing
that all the elect be not only the children of god and Christ's brethern but
his members, this would sownd to Christ's dishonor. And surely every ponishement
that should be putt for this cause on such as have so great a conjunction with
Christ, Christ would cownt it to be put up on himselff. And though god sometime,
affoer the repentans done and the fawt forgiven, has putt some ponisshement,
as he did up on David and up on certain other. This was not because he had not
perfitely pardoned, and that such ponisshment should be a ponissment of the fawt
committed, but it was an exercise for them, and for other respectis than to
ponish the fawt. As Austen says well in his ij. book entitled of the desertis
of sins and of forgeuenes the 33. and 34. chapters, where he says that the
ponisshments with which god chastises men, ougth diversely to be considered.
For to the saints, affter the forgeuenes of sins, they be strifes battles
and exercises, but to the refused, they be with out forgeuenes ponisshments of
iniquity, where he brings forth thexa^ple of David and others: and as for
this we have spoken of it before.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. That the mass is no sacrifice nor remembrans of sacrifice.
IT is sureli a great abuse to use a thing to any effectt or end with which it
agreith not. The defenders of the mass, will that it should be a sacrifice for
the living and dead. The which thing very mani saings in the same mass do
witness. As for example, that In spiritu humilitatis, And, In animo contrito
etc. that is to say, let us be received of the, o lord, in the spirit of
humble^nes and in a sorrowful mind and so let our sacrifice be made this day in
thy sight, that it may please the, o lord god. And that other the which the
bowt standers say, that is to say, Let the lord receive the sacrifice from your
hands, to the praise and glory of his name. The which saings be affter the
offering of the host and the cupp, before the preface. And that which is said
in the^d of the mass, that is to say, let the willing duty of my service,
please the, o holy trinity, and make that the sacrifice which I unworthy have
offered before thy miaesties eyes may be acceptable unto the etc. And very many
other saings innumerable, which all make mention that the mass or the masses
sacraments should be a sacrifice. Allthough that in the former chapter we have
sufficiently proved that this is a great error for so much as that if the mass
do not forgive sin^es, it is not neither any sacrifice for the same.
Nevertheless for the ple^tifull clerenes of the truth, And for that the matter
is of such Importa^s, we will particularli prove that the mass is no
sacrifice, but because this word, sacrifice, has diverse significatio^s, to
thente^t that we may well understand, affter what sort they make a sacrifice,
It is to be understand that acording to the scripture there are fownd many
sortis of sacrifices, as we have in exodus, leuiticus and in numerus. Exodus.
29.
Where it is taught as well what manner of sacrifices they did owe to make, Exo.
29. Leui. 4.5.6.7.10 12.13.14 17.22. Number. 1.6.8 15.19.
as of what sort and for what cause. Chefely in leuiticus where is spoken at
length of sacrifices, the which all to gether may be brought generalli to ij.
sortis of sacrifices, that is to sai, cle^sing sacrifices and praising or
thanks giving sacrifices And all though that this division should not comprehend
all the sacrifices, it shall make no matter, so that we prove that the mass is
not a sacrifice affter that sort as they mean. The cle^sing sacrifices were
those that were made to pourge and cle^se from sin^es or else to satisfy for
the^ as that was of the bulchin or young bullok which is writton in leuiticus
And very many other sacrifices that were made for sins. Leuiti. 4.
All the rest that are made for other respects, when have by a general or comen
name called them praising or thanckes giving sacrifices.

If they that say that the mass is a sacrifice, would have said that it had
been a praising or thanks giving sacrifice, they had said so^thing better. But
they will have it, and they use it for a quiting sacrifice, that is to say,
purging or clensing and satisfieng for the sins not only off the living but
also of the dead. Surely this is a great effect to wipe a way and to purge the
sins not only of the living but also of the dead. From whe^s gather they
this? Where have they it? They have it not out of thold scripture for it
speaks not of the mass, because it was not than, nor out of the new. Let
them show one only word that Christ or the Apostles ever spoke, that the mass
should be a sacrifice for the living and for the dead. They shall find in deed
that the sacrament, or let it be the lords supper, is a reme^brans of the
sacrifice the which Christ made for us, that is to say of his death. This does
Christ him selff say, when he did institute the same holy supper, as Matthew,
Mat. 26. Mar. 24. Luc.. 22.
Marck Luke and Paul in the 1. to the Corinthia^s do say, Do This in My
reme^brans? In a matter of so great weight, as this is, how durst any man (yea I
speak to all the men in the world gathered to gether) be so bold to affirm
such a sente^s without gods authority? how can men know that any thing should
be a sacrifice for sin if gods word say it not? The selff same that is the
sacrifice for sin is the same that sauith us. The mass than or let it be the
masses sacrament, shall be thatt that shall save us, nor Christ shall not be our
savior but it shall be the mass or her sacrament. And how comith this matter
to pass that the sacrament should work an effectt contrary to his office?
Thoffice of the sacrament is to signify that Christ is dead for us in
forgeuenes of sins. This Christ him selff says, and signifies that Christ
forgeuith the sins and yet they would that the sacrament it selff should be
that that forgeueth sins. These ij. things can not stand to gether, that the
sacrament should both signify that a another thing. forgeueth sins and also
that the sacrament it selff forgiuith them. If the sacrament it selff
forgeueth them, how does it betoken that Christ does forgive them? So than it
selff will forgive them and not Christ. Here they allege that the holy
fathers, as Ambros, Austen and others did call it a sacrifice. And therefore they
also call it a sacrifice. Than further they say that the scripture says the
same, that is to say the Prophet malachy the which says, Mala. 1.
I have no delight in you, that is to say, you please me not says the lord of
hostis. And I will not take the gifft at your hand, for that from theast to the
west, my name is great among the gentiles, and in every place is sacrifised and
offered to my name the clean offering. For that, great is my name among the
gentiles, says the lord of hosts. Loo here they say that the mass is a
sacrifice, the which from theast to the west, is made to god called by the
Prophet a clean offering the which in every place is sacrificed, In france, in
Spain, in flanders, in Almany in Italy and every where. To these so feeble
profes, I first answer that thold fathers called the supper of the lord a
sacrifice meaning that it was a rememberans of the sacrifice as the stone out
of which came forth the water in the desert, was called Christ no^ because it
was in deed Christ, but because it did signify Christ. Nor this is not mine,
but the fathers exposition them selves. And I could bring forth the authority
of many but the authority of Chrisostom for this time shall suffice us,
Chrisost. Heb. 9.
who up on the Pistel to the hebrews speaks of the sacrament affter this
sort. That which we do is done in remembrans of that which is allredy done. We
do not any other sacrifice, but allweyes, the selffe same. Yea we rather use
the remembrans of the sacrifice. These be the words of Chrisostom who will that
she sacrament therefore should be called a sacrifice because it is a remembrans of
the sacrifice. Also the master of the sentencis, Senten. 4. Distinc. 12.
the defender of the mass, says that the sacrament of the bread and wine is
called a sacrifice and an offering because it is a remembrans and a
representacion of the true sacrifice, and of the holy offering made upon
thaultar of the cross. Because on is, says he, Christ was dead on the
cross,, and offered in him selff, but every day he is offered in the sacrament
because that in the sacrament is made the remembrans of that that ones was
done. we might if we would, bring forth Cipriane, Austen, Ambros, and many
other awncient authors, but seking for shortness we will pass them over. And
allthough that all thold men should say that it were in deed a sacrifice, not
bringing gods word for them we shall not be bownd to believe them: because it
behooves that such a thing belonging to our faith, should be grownded upon gods
word and not up on men's. To the saing of Malachy, I say, that it proves not
their intent, because they must if they will that that saing should be to their
purpos, prove that Malachy should speak of the mass. Malachy says that in
every place is offered and sacrificed to god the clean offering, he says
true, but he says not that this clean offering is the mass or the sacrament
of the lords supper. He only makes mention of the clean offering and tells
not what that is. How trifle they to guess affter this sort, saing that he
speaks of the mass or of the sacrament? They must first show that the mass
is a sacrifice, And affterward that malachy should speak of the mass, or else
of the sacrament But they shall never prove neither the one nor the other, I say,
by gods word. Than further let us admit that malachy Speakith of the sacrament
of thaultar and that the same is a sacrifice the which is offered in every
place, they should not yet by this, have their intent. Because that they must
also prove, that this is a clensing sacrifice for sins as they would have it.
It may be granted affter a good sense, the same sacrament being called
Eucharistia, because in the same is yielded thanks to god for so great a benifite
as he has given us in Christ, It may, I sai, he granted that it is a praising
or tha^ksgeuing sacrifice, but they have not by the saing of malachy, that it
is a cle^sing sacrifice as they do mean. And if they should ask, Affter what
sort than, is malachy understand, and of what sacrificest takes he? I say that
our meaning is not at this time to expownd that saing. It is only to make
known that the proof is nothing worth, as you may see. Nevertheless, I will sai
that malachi spoke of the spiritual offerings and sacrifices the which are
offered eueri where sin^s Christ's coming. In the prophetis time me^ might not
do sacrifice except in the temple at Jerusalem. But affter christis coming are
made eueri where the true offerings and the true spiritual sacrifices the
which please god, made by the byleuers, and they be these, First the sacrifice
of praise of the which the Psalm says, Psalm. 49. Heb. 13.
Sacrificiu^ laudis honorificabit me that is ye shall honor me with the
sacrifice of praise. And Paul to the hebrews, per ipsum offerimus hostiam
laudis semper deo that is through him we offer the sacrifice of praise alwais
unto god. And he adds to, Beneficentiae and communicationis nolite obliuisci,
talibus enim hostijs placetur deo that is be not unmindful of liberality and
alms for with such sacrifice god is pleased. See here ij. goodly spiritual
sacrifices, the praise of god and the help of our neighbors through charity.
Philip. 4.
The other sacrifice which pleases god, and is made every where, is when we
offer ourselves and dedicate us to gods service, refusing and forsaking our
seluis. Of this spoke Paul to the romans. Romans 12.
There is a another offering or sacrifice of the which also Paul to the romans
speaks, when the ministers with the word of tholy gospel do offer to god
those that do turn, Romans 15.
as Paul him selff says he has done the gentiles. And to be short all those
hosts and spiritual sacrifices of the which Peter tells in his 1. pistel, 1
Petri. 2.
that be acceptable to god through Christ, those such sacrifices be the same of
the which I ymagin malachyment. For he had the selff same spirit, that Paul and
Peter had who tell which be the sacrifices that please god. And saing thus, we
speak according to the scripture and not of our own head, as they do that say
that the mass is a clensing sacrifice for the sins of the living and dead,
and know not nor can not bring forth in their favor any one saing of tholy
scripture. In the matters of sowl health which are the chief and of great test
wayght, men ought not only to be hable to defend them, but it is necessary that
they prove them by tholy scripture the which can not lie. They which say that
the mass is a sacrifice for sins, by all the means they can, they endeavor
and force them seluis to maintain that thing with distinctions with a thousand
inuencions, and it is enough for them not to be overcome as it chances to the
sect of the schole men, the which be of most diverse opinions. As for example,
the Thomists, the Scotistes and every one of them defend their own opinion and
they be in continual striffe, and it is never known who has the better.
Surely it must needs be, that having contrary opinions, at the least that the one
of them should be falls, and yet they defend them. It is not fit in gods
matters, for a man to seek only to be able to defend his opinion, affter what
sort he will, for so much as the false matters also may be defended with
writhing and wrangling. But it is necessary that we prove our opinion by gods
clear and plain word. And if we can not prove it we ought not certainly to
affirm it.

Now let us prove with the lords help that neither the mass nor the sacrament
are sacrifices for the sin^es neither of the living, and much less of the
dead. First either they mean of the hole mase, The first reason.
as we have said before, that is to say, of all that mixture or else heap and
composition of words, gestures and ceremonies, beginning from the Introibo,
even unto thend, or else they meaane only of the bread and wine that they
offer, and of the sacrament. If they mean off the hole mass, it can not be a
sacrifice. How is it possible that a thing full of so many falshods, so many
superstitions, so many wikednesses and blasphemies, and that so many ways
robs gods honor and Christ's, and offends him, should be a sacrifice for
the sins of the living and of the dead? Should we do sacrifice to god with
blasphemies? That the mass is full of such things, hitherto we have diversely
proved it by gods word If they mean only of the bread and wine, and of the
sacrament and not of the hole mass, either they mean of the bread and wine
not yet consecrated, or else affter that they be consecrated. Which way so ever
they take it, it is false that they should be a sacrifice for sin^es. Although I
know that affter both sortis they would it should be a sacrifice both affter the
consecration and before. There is no dowt but affter the consecration following
their opinion, the bread and the wine be a sacrice. For as they think, Christ
all hole is there in body and in soul, and that there is no more neither bread
nor wine, but only Christ the which is the true sacrifice. Also that they hold
that that bread and wine is a sacrifice before the consecration, how can they
deny it, so many prayers, secrets and chefely the canon affirming it? The
which canon in the first part praith god that he would bless that bread and
wine, and calls them holy untasted sacrifices in the plural number. And in
the second part, that is to say in the memento, he calls them a sacrifice of
praise. The which is offered for the salvation of sowles. And in the fourth
part he calls them an oblacyon. And in the fifft he praith god that he would
vouchsafe taccept this oblacion so that it might beco^e the body and blood of
his best beloved son. So that than they will that that bread and wine which
are not yet consecrated should be a sacrifice for the ransoming of sowles. And
they pray that they may become Christ's body and blood. If they pray that they
may become, then be they not yet consecrated. For when they be consecrated,
they are become Christ's body and blood, as they think, and it needs not any
more to pray that they should become so, because they be already so becomne.
That this bread and wine vnco^secrated should not be a sacrifice for sins it
is an easy thing to prove. For that according to tholy scripture, the sacrifice
for sins is that that has redeemed us. For so much as the redemption is as
much to say as the forgeuenes of sins, according to Paul as it is writton to
the Ephesians and to the Colossians: Ephesians. 1. Collos. 1.
But we be not redeemed neither with bread nor wine, but only with the blood of
the unspotted lamb christ as Peter says in his first pistle, 1. Petri 1
You know that you were not redeemed from yowr vain conversation, which you
took by the tradicion of yowr elders with fadeable things as gold and silver,
but with Christ's precios blood as of an hole and undefiled lamb. Is not the
bread and wine vnco^secrated things fade able and corruptible? How vile does
this mass make Christ's rede^pcion? Of how little value, his blessed blood? God
would not pardon sin^e, but that there was paid so great a price, so great a
passion so high a blood and so great a death as that was of his son. And they
will that sins should be pardoned with bread and wine which yet are no another
but plain bread and plain wine. That the bread and the wine wha^ the
consecracio^ is made, should be no sacrifice although there were no more neither
bread nor wine, but the body and blood of Christ Ihesus, as they would have it,
I say that they be no sacrifice. They be so much less a sacrifice, if the
bread and the wine remain. And that they should be the sacrament as without
dowt the Sacrament is no another in substa^s, but bread and wine, consecrated,
that is to say appointed to the use to which Christ appointed the^, that is to
sai to bring in to remembrans his body and blood. That the sacrament, I say, is
no sacrifice in what so ever sort it be a sacrament. I prove it by Paul in his
pistle to the hebrews, Hebre. 7.8.9.10.
The which if the favorers of the mass had but supperficially understand, they
would never so boldly have uttered that the mass or let it be the sacrament
should be a sacrifice. It is writton first in that pistle, that there were in
the law many prystes, because they were mortal, but Christ who is immortal,
has now theuerlasting pristhode, and therefore can save for ever all those that
goo to god by him, alweys living to that end that he may entreat god for us.
And he adds a none affter, that those prestes or else bishops had need toffer
sacryfyces not only for the sins of the people but for their own also. But it
behooved that Christ should be undefiled, innocent, the which should not have need
eueri dai toffer for him selffe, and affter for the people because he did this
ones, when he offered him selffe. For so much as that the law appoints men
bisshops that have weakenessys, Psalm. 110.
but the word of the oath, that is to sai the word of god, and of which Dauyd
spoke in the Psalm, appoints the son for ever consummate, that is to say
perfect. By these words, ij things are given us to be understand. First that
none can offer a sacrifice, that may avail, (as before god) for sins, except
Christ that is pure, innocent, separated from sinners perfect and everlasting
bishop, who has in such sort offered him selff, that the sacrifice is the
pressed him selff, and the priest the sacrifice it selff. For that toffer
sacrifice for sins it behooves not only that the sacrifice should be clean,
pure and withowt spott, but it is necessary that he that offers it, should be
him selff also clean and that he should not have need toffer for his own
sins. It is known off old, that among men also, when a thing is presented by
the hands of one that is in displeasure of any great lord, allthough that the
thing be good, yet it shall not be acceptable, because that he which presents
it is not favored. If it be so than that he who offers must be clean and no
sinner, the prestes that say mass, can not offer sacrifice for sins because
they be unclean and sinners. And albeit they should in deed offer Christ ones
again, that offering could not avail for sins: because it is needful for the
bringing to pass of such an effect that both the one and the other should be clean
and withowt spott, not only the sacrfice but also the sacrificer, a thing that
can not be among as many as be but men in the whole world. And for this cause
it behooved that Christ him selff should be he that should offer and make
sacrifice to god and no another but him selff, because he alone is without
sin, and all the rest be sinners. Than it geuyth also tunderstand, that it
needs not any more to do sacrifice for sins because he that has done
sacrifice, Christ, has satisfied, having done ones for ever, because it was
perfect, being the same Christ theuerlasting bishop that offered him selff. If
that have suffised being ones done, what needs it to make other sacrifices or
to make again the same at other times? Surely it should be superfluos, yea it
should lessen the worthiness of so great a sacrifice, for it would seem that it
were not sufficient. So than the masses sacrament is no sacrifice for sins.
Next affter in the viij. chapter he says, Heb. 8.
that Christ has so much a more excellent presthode than the old bisshops, as
he is a mediator of a more excellent testament, the which is made with more
excellent promises. And declaring of what sort the new testament should be, he
allegeth the saing of the scripture, Iere. 31.
that is to say, Jeremy, the which says, this is the testament (that is to
say, the new testament) which I will make with the hows of Israel, affter
those days, says the lord I will give them my laws in their minds, And in
their hartis I will write them, And I will be their god, and they shall be my
people. And affter a few words he says, I will be pacified concerning their
vnrightuosnes, and their sins and iniquities I will no more remember. These
words conclude that there is for us no another sacrifice for sins but that
which Christ ones made. God says (who can not lie) that giving the new
testament he would in such sort be merciful, as he would no more remember the
sins of his people, that is to say of the true byleuers. The which gives to
understand that he should be perfitely and perpetually pacified. Let us see now,
for what cause he should be so pacified? We must say, for no another cause but
for the mediators sake of such a testament, that is to say, for Christ's sake
by whom this testament was made. Let us goo on further. How is god pacified by
Christ, except by the sacrifice the which he made, offering him selff unto god
for the sins of his people? Gods anger and his Justice is by no another means
pacified, but because (affter a manner of spech) he has wreked him selff upon
Christ. Off the which, Esaias says I have beaten him for the wickedness of my
people. Than let us say affter this sort, if god be pacified by Christ's
sacrifice, and forgeuith our sin^es, It follows that there needs no another
sacrifice for sins. For if he would have other sacrifice for sins he should
not be, I say, perfytely pacifyed, nor, requiring other sacrifyce that might
satisfye for them. he would not forget owre iniquities. Surely, he that seith
not this is very bare of understanding.

In the ninth chapter showing the differens between thold bishops and Christ,
he says that the leuitical bishop entered ones in the year into that place,
the which is called sancta sa^ctorum, that is the head holy place, not withowt
blood, the which he offered for him selff and for the sins of the people. And
he says that those gifftes and sacrifices which were offered, could not make
man perfect as perteining to the conscience. But Christ the bishop of true
good things entered onys in to the head holy place with his own blood and gate
there theuerlasting ranso^. And affter he adds that forgeuenes is not wrought
withowt blood sheding? And declaring what should be those head holy placis where
into Christ entered he says that, that is heaven, and that he is there entered
that he may presently appear in gods sight for us not to be offten offered as
the bishop, (that is to say the leuiticall bishop) off^ times every year
entered by strange blood. For other wise it should have been needful that he
should have offten suffered sins the beginning of the world. But now toward
thend of the world, has he ones appeared to destroy sin by the offering of
him selff. And as it is appointed that all me^ ones shall die, and affter that
shall judgment be, so Christ is ones offered to take a way the sins of man.
All this talk does show that neither the mass nor the sacrament is a
sacrifice. First it says that those gifftes and sacrifices which were offered,
could not make man perfect as perteining to the co^scie^s, as though he would
say, that they could not for give sins nor perfitely cleanse man, but Christ's
gifft and sacrifice is that which makes man perfect as perteining to the
co^scie^s. It is plain that Christ's sacrifice is made for all thelect in all
the world that be past, present, and to come, As John says in his first pistle
that he is thappeasement of all the world, 1. Ioh. 2.
and he has made the^ perfect as concerning co^scie^s, that is to say, has
perfitely ra^somed, freed, hallowed, washed and cle^sed the^. And he only has
done that which those number of sacrifices of the law could not do. And by
that one only he has satisfied, quieted and pacified their co^sciencis and
has made the^ sure of his grace, that is to say, of forgeuenes of sins, of
reco^ciliacio^ and attoneme^t with god, and of their salvation. To make a man
perfect in conscience, does bring with it these forsaid things. If it be so than
what needs it more to make other sacrifices, and to goo about to seek to make
that a new that Christ has perfitely made, as though he had not man it? that
other word that follows, proves the v^ry same, that is to say that christ
has fownd ow^ theuerlasting ransom, that is to say, the per^ freing of all
thelect in the world, from sin, from damnation, from death, and from all
evil for ever, and this by the sacrifice that he made ones, with his blood,
and by his passhion and death. If he have with his facrifice ones made, gote^
theuerlasting ransom, that is to say, that which shall allwaies be, and shall
never fail but ever co^tinewe, wath needs there any other sacrifices for
sin^es? We have enough of that which christ o^es made, because with that he
fownd out theuerlasting ransom. And that other word which says that withowt
blood sheding forgeue^es is not wrought, what does it mean but that it is
needful in the sacrifice which is made for sins and which forgeueth the^,
that blood should be shed, and that it should satisfy for sins? And for this
cause was needful that christ should shed his blood. In the mass there is no
sheding of blood, therefore it is no sacrifice for sin^es. Tho there word that
comes next affter, that is to say, that Christ is e^tred in to heaven to the
intent that he may appear in gods fight for us not to be offten offered (for
it is as much to say as one time suffiseth. Forels it should have been needful
that he should offten have suffered sins the beginning of the world) what do
these words mean, but that christ cannot be offered for sin^es more the one
time, And who so ever seeks toffer him off^ner than one time, there follows
this inconueniens that it should have been needful that christ should offten
have suffered sins the beginning of the world? They say that christ is offered
in the mass for sins, that is to say they offer him them selves to god, not
only for the living but also for the dead. If christ be offered one only time
and that has fuffised, what needs it any more to offer affter any manner of
sort? If that only time have suffised for sin, what needs it more to say
mass to that end? Oh, say they the mass is that which applies the merit of
christ's passhion. But from whens gather they that their saing, but ^owt of
their own brain, I will not say from the spirit of Antichrist? It is not
enough to say that it is so, but they must prove it by the scripture. The mass
avails them not to apply the merit of christ's Passion. Faith suffices, as
before we have said. For by the testimony of peter and Paul, he that bileueth
in Christ his sins be forgeuen him and he Justified. The other saing is that
Christ in thend of the world has appeared ones by thoffering of him selff to
drive a way and to destroy sin, that is to say, all the sins of the elect.
If he have destroyed all sin with his sacryfyce ones made, to what purpos
should we make moo sacryfices? It needs not any more to do that that is already
done. And that last saing, what does it mean? That is, that as it is appointed
and ordained that all men shall ones dye, and affter Judgment shall come, so
Christ is ones offered to take away the sins of many, that is to say of all
thelectt. The scripture uses offt this word, many, for all thelectt, as we
have in matthew, Math. 20
where Christ says that the son of man was come to give his life for the
redempcyon of mani And when he did institute the sacrament he said that his
blood should be shed for many. Math. 26 Roma. 5
And Paul to the romans says that by christ's obedye^s many be made just. This
word, Many, in all these places, importyth as much as all thelect. To our
purpos, if it be appointed and ordained that Christ should be offered one time
for the sins of many, as it is appointed that all men ones shall dye, what
needs it any more to offer him? will we do against gods ordynans? Here the
defenders of the mass answer; that Christ is ones offered affter that manner,
that is to say, suffering and dying, and affter that sort, it needs not that
he should be any more offered, because that only time suffised. But now he is
offered affter a another sort, that is to say sacramentally, and affter this
sort he may be offten offered for sin. This answer is nothing worth. For if
Christ at that only time when he offered him selff, destroyed sin^, to what
purpos needs it to offer him any more to that effect and to do that is already
done? The destruction of all sins was wrought by that only time that Christ
was offered, It needs not any more to do it neither affter that, nor affter
any other sort.

In the tenth chapter he says first, Hebr. 1^.
that if the sacrifices the which were offered in the law could have made men
perfect, that is to say, cleansed them perfitely, they should not have been many
times done, because that they that should have done them, being ones cleansed
should not have had any more co^sciens, that is to say, gnawing of sin. For
that thing that takes a way sin, takes a way also the gnawing of the
conscience for cause of sin. And this word, sin is put there for all sins.
And he adds that the blood of bulls and of hegootes ca^ not take a wa^
sins, and therefore he (that is to say Christ) entering in to the world,
speaks the worde^ of the psalm, Psalm. 39.
that is to say, thou woldi^^ not have sacrifice nor oblacio^ nor thou art not
delyted in whole burnt offerings for sins. Tha^ I said, lo I come, that I may
do, oh god, thy will. And affter he says. By the which will we are hallowed,
through the offering of Christ's body ones done. And affter a few words, a^ it
were showing the cause why we be hallowed by the offering of Ihesus Christ's body
ones done, he says, because that with one only offering he has made perfect
those that be hallowed. Which thing the holy ghost does witness, the which
foretold that god would make a new testament. And amongst other things, he
says that he would no more remember their sins, that is to say his peples, and
his electis sins. And he adds that where forgeuenes off sins is wrought,
there needs not any more to make other oblacion, that is to say to offer other
sacrifice for sin. These words be cannon shot is, enough to beat down the
whole bilding of the mass, or else they be swords enough to throat cut her or
utterly to kill her. First, he says, that if the sacrifices of the law had
been able to make me^ perfect, the selff same should never have been so offten
done again, because that they that had sacrifised should not have had any more
conscience of sin, being allredy ones cleansed and purged. Here the text says
plainly that it needs not to do again those sacrifices which take a way
sins and make me^ perfect, the which is all one. If the mass take a way
sins, why do they say it so offten? It should suffice to say one only to
satisfy for them for who^ it should be said or that say it, and to forgive
their sins. Here the text says that therefore those sacrifices were the more
offtened because they could not take a way sins. If they had taken them a way
it had not nedid to do the selff same again. The defenders of the mass say
that they do no another sacrifice in the mass, but the selff same that christ
did, and that, they do offten: O goodly ymaginacions. They putt than Christ
offten up on the cross wetingly done and of purpos. The Jews understood not
that Christ was Christ, nor they knew him not, and therefore they crucified him,
as Paul to the Chorinthes, says. And they know that Jesus is Christ, and yet
they put him so many times up on the cross, 1. cho. 2.
and they be so many times made guilty of his body and blood, as they say
masses. It is a godly sacrifice. What will they say here to the reason that the
text makes? that is to say, that if those sacrifices of the law had been able
to take a way sins, they should not have be done more than ones? If the mass
take a way sins why is it said again so offten? Than Further, as we have
said. If that sacrifice which christ has made one only time, that is to say,
when he offered him selff, did than forgive sin, and that only time sufficed,
what needs it to make any more sacrifices for sins? The second saing is that
we be hallowed by gods will, through the oblatio^, that is to say, the sacrifice
of christ's body ones made. If we be hallowed, that is to say if we be made
clean, and if our sins be forgeuen us through christ's sacrifice ones made,
wath needs it to make any other sacrifice, or to offten the same? Now the
third saing, the which re^drith the cause of the whole, that is to say, that
with one only oblatio^ and sacrifice christ has made perfect, all those that is
to say all thelect from the begin^ing of the world unto thend. If it be true,
as withowt dowt it is, what needs it any more to make sacrifice for sins,
neither the selff same nor any other? By that, says the text here, be all those
made perfect, that be holied, that is to say thelect. If they be made perfect,
that is to say, perfitely cleansed, and it meanith that they want nothing, what
need have they of moo sacrifices? furthermore if the holy ghost which ca^ not
lie do witness that god through christ would no more remember the sins of his
people, that is to say, would perfitely and thoroughly forgive them, what needs it
any more to make sacrifices for sins? To be short, if where as forgeuenes or
sacrifice for sins is made, there is not any other offering or sacrifice for
the same, as the text here says, because that that of christ's is enough, the
which was made onis, why will we make mo sacrifices for sins if they be
wholly forgeuen, and of such sort as god would never remember him any more of
them? So that than it is clear and plain by these so many saings of this most
christen and holy pystle fore ledged, that we have no another sacrifice for
sins but that which christ made on the cross. And if it be so, it does in
deed follow of necessity and certainly that neither the mass, nor there
sacrament is a sacrifice for sins. And if any one would say, how is forgeuenes
of all sins wrought by christ, seeing every day it is done a new by
repentans? And Christ Jesus him selff commands us in the prayer which he has
taught his apostles what they should say, Et dimitte nobis debita nostra. that
is to say, forgue us our sins. If he has allredy forgeuen them, what need
we any more desire that he would forgive them us? To this I answer that wha^
Paul says that by Christ's sacrifyce is forgeuen us all our sins, 1. Ioh. 2
that is to say, past, present, and to come, the which also Ihon affirms in
his I. pistle, when he says, 1. Pet. 2.
that he is the appeasement of all the sins of the world. And when peter in
his first also says, that Christ has born our sins, Esa. 53.
on his body up on the cross. And Esaias, likewise says, that god has laid all
our iniquyties up on him, that is to say up on Christ. These saings of the
scripture and such other like have this meaning, that is to say, that Christ
Jesus has satisfied gods Justice for the whole sins of thelect, past,
present and to come. nor god for this respect, does not look for any other
satisfaction, or payment, because he was perfitely and wholly satisfied for our
sins, wha^ Christ gave himselff for a sacrifyce, suffering and dyeng as he
did, nor there was not any other way for us to pacify god and to satisfye him,
but this. Understanding affter this sort the fore said saings (the (forgyuenes
of all the sins of all thelect of the world, present, past, and to come) are
allredy forgeuen, nor there is no another forgeuenes looked for. Because that for
the sins of the same elect there is no another satisfaccyon looked for. And
wha^ it is said, that sins be daily forgeuen by repentans, this is to be
understand, as to us, that is to sai, that we do accept by faith enclosed
within repentans such forgeuenes, and we do enter in to the knowledge of gods
grace and mercy showed toward us through Christ, by the forgeuyng of al our
sins. Wherefore even as Christ has only satisfied for thelect, and not for the
rest, to whom his death avails not, so thelect only have the true says, and
do know the forgiveness of their sin^es wrought the^ by Christ. Wherefore
speaking properli, neither the repenta^s nor the faith do forgive the sin^es,
because that gods grace only or mercy through Christ Jesus (that is to say,
because he has satisfied for us) is that that forgeuyth sins. But therefore the
forgeuenes of sins is attributed to repentans, and to faith, because the same
faith is that, which knows and accepts such forgeuenes, and it is a certain
assurednes of the same. And when we ask every day in the lords prayer that he
would forgive us our sins, we do ask of god rather the knowledge and
assurednes of such forgeuenes, than the forgeuenes it selff, of which the
faithful ought not to dowt, but that it is wrought him in Christ. But we do
ask to know such forgiveness better, and to be more certain of the same. The
which knowledge and certentie (being no another but faith it selff) is never so
great, but it may increase and become greater. And therefore the faithful
Christian every day, and as offten as he remembers him of his sins, desires
forgeuenes of the^, that is to say, the knowledge and more certentie of such
forgeuenes. Further more Christ will that praing daily, we should ask forgeuenes
of our sins, to make us to know that we be sinners, and that we do
continually offend him. The which thing when we know, first it does humble us
before god. Tha^ it makes us know his mercy how great it is. It hangs of this
knowledge that we be inflamid more fervently to love god, to honor him, to
reverence him, to serve him from the heart. And according to his example, to
love our neyghbor, to do him good, to forgive him when he offendith us, and to
pardon wrongs received, the which in comparison, of those that we do unto god,
which be withowt number, and most great, we ought to accownt them no wrongs and
of no w^ight.

Now there remains to prove, that the sacrament of the mass is no reme^brans
of a sacrifice. For, if it were a remeberans of a sacrifice, it should be a
true sacrament, but it is no true sacrament, chefely to the^ that be there
present, and say not the mass, therefore it is no reme^berans of a sacrifice. I
prove that it is no sacrament, because that to a true sacrament is necessary,
that the words of the co^secratio^ be said, and that they be understand
according to that common saing (and it is of Auste^) accedit uerbum ad eleme^tum
and fit sacramentum, that is to say, when the word is Joined to the Eleme^t
the sacrament is made, it is necessary, I say, to a true sacrament that the
word should be Joined, other wise it is no sacrament. But how be they certain
which be present at the mass that the words with the which they consecrate,
be said by the pressed or not? For so much as they hear it not, the same pressed
saing it very sofftli, in such sort as none hears it, except the pressed him
selff. Therefore to the^ which hear not, nor u^dersta^d what is done, nor said,
it is no sacrament. A few years past, Mark
there was in Mantua a certain frire of a certain order the which was put in a^
Iro^ cage because he had celebrated mass ma^i years, and never did consecrate.
So it might chance of ma^y other that might do the like, who ca^ asserte^ the
people that the bread, and wine, is consecrated, neither hearing, understanding
what is said? And if any man would say that there may be a sacrament, although
the words of the consecration should neither be hard, nor understand, seeing
that the childern be baptized, which understand not what is said. To this I
answer, that there is diversity between childern and the^ that be of full age,
for the childern although they neither hear, nor understand, yet they may and
ought to be baptized by gods commandment. And this is taken out of the
scripture. But they of full age, ought not to be baptized, except they
understand that which is said. Yea baptime in full age requires faith, and the
confession of the same. And if at any time it should be done otherwise, that is
to say, if it should not be understand, it should not be unto him true baptim.
So much more we shall say of the sacrament of bread and wine (the which none
use butt they of full age) that they be no sacrament, if the words be not
spoken, and understand, with which words they be consecrated, that is to say
appointed to an holy use, and become a sacrament. For this cause in old time
the words of the consecration were said with a loud voice, to thente^t that
every one might understand what was said, so that, seeing the sacrament of the
mass is no true sacrament, it is no memory of a sacrifice Further more we
must know, that the sacrament is not an absolute thing but is a thing that
has respect to a another thing, that is to say, to the use to which it is
appointed. And when such use is taken a way, it can not be properly called a
sacrament. The true use of the sacrament is, that it should be distributed to
the multitude. And to this end it is consecrated, that is to say, appointed.
Let us see how the savior used it, when he instituted it. It is ce^ten that he
gave it not to one only, but to all his disciples, and said unto them, that
they should do as he taught them, and did him selff. And how did he? He said
not only over the bread and wine, the words of the consecration, as the
priests do, which seem to make an enchantment, but he commanded them that
they all should take, and eat, the bread, and drink the wine. He did all this,
and said that they ought to do as he had done. It behooves if it should be a
sacrament to do all that which Christ said and commanded, and not part. But
now the Priest, beside that it is not understand what he does, he does not
deal the sacrament to the people, but takes it him selff alone, and yet he
says that he does communicate. And he calls that receiving with the mowth,
that is to say, taking the bread, and wine, he calls it, communion, speaking
and doing abusingly. It is called a communion when many do partake of one
thing, not wha^ one by him selff alone, does take the whole, as is done in the
private mass. By the which thing we may truli say that that sacrament of the
mass, is no true sacrament. Wherefore if Paul, for that disorder that the
corinthians did use (as it is writton in the 1. to the same corinthians) which
was, 1. Cho. 11.
that one tarried not for another (and it was but a small fawt in comparison of
this) said, that that which they did, was no eating of the lords supper: what
shall we say of this sacrament, in the which is committed not one, but so many
abuses, and where the whole true use of the lords supper, is changed? Christ
commanded that all should take it. And here in the mass the pressed eats and
drinks up all alone. My reason stands in this. The use of the sacrament, is
of the substance of the same sacrament. And where the use is not to which it
was appointed, there the sacrament in deed, is not. The use of the lords
supper, or of the thanks giving is not only to say the words over the bread
and the wine, but it is that many should take it, and eat the one and drink the
other, as Christ appointed Than where such use is not, there is no sacrament,
for he said to many. Eat you, and drink you. And why is not this done in the
private mass, but rather the clean contrary? For one alone that is to say,
the pressed, does take the host and the cupp. So that than it is no true
sacrament. I will give the example of baptim, to thentent that every one may
understand how the sacrament stands in the use, And when the use is ceased it
is no more a sacrament. The water of baptim is no sacrament, but for that time
that it wassheth, and is put up on the body, saing these words, I baptize the
in the name of the father, the son and the holy ghost Amen. Let that water
fall in to another vessel, affter that the creature be baptized, it is no more
baptime, but is as any other water, this is plain. Even so I say of the
sacrament of thanksgeuing, whilst that it is dealt, and distributed, it is a
sacrament, but that which is lefft of the bread and wine, is no more a
sacrament, but it may be eaten and dronken as other bread and wine, because it
is no more appointed to such use. So I say of those crommes of bread that fall
up on the grownd, that they be no sacrament. I know that of this my talk many
things do follow, the which will seem inconvenient. And amongst other that these
osts, the which are kept in the tabernacles, or pixis and in the little
closettis, be no sacrament, because that there we have not the use, the which is
of the substance of the sacrament.

And there does follow it, many other. But let the^ follow at their will, I am
of Christ's opinion. There for in this I remitt my selff to the Judgment of
Christ's churches. I say thus, because it semith unto me according to gods word,
that it should be so, that is to say, that as when the use of baptime is ceased,
the water is no more a sacrament, so when the use of the thankesgeuing is
ceased, that is to say, when it is no more taken and dealt, eaten and drunck,
it is no more a sacrament, I mean, eaton and drunck in common, for so much as
the lords supper is not a doing of one particular man, but of many men. And
because that in the mass we have not this use, but the pressed alone takes that
ost, and cupp, withowt communicating them to other, I say it is no true
sacrament. And if it be no sacrament, it is neither any memory of sacrifice,
the which they would have proved.

But admit that there never had been neither the one, nor the other, of these ij.
disorders, what will they say to this that none of the pristes in this time,
does perfitely make the sacrament according to their own doctrine? I prove it
thus, They them selves say, that none can work, and make the sacrament except
it be a prist, and he that is no prist, can not consecrate, But to be a prist
is necessary that he should be consecrated by a bishop, the which in the
co^secracio^ should give him the mark, the which mark, is a certain spiritual
virtue given by the bishop. Standing this there doctrine and opinion, that he
who is not a bishop, cannot make a prist, it follows that from certain
ho^dreth years hitherto, either none at all or very few have been true
pristes, because they have not been made, by true bisshops, for so much as that
he is no true bishop, that has not at the least these ij. points necessary
for a true bishop. The first is that he should be chossen by the people. The
other is, that he should feed his flock, that is to say that he should preach
gods word to his people. These 2. points be of the holy scripture. For as, to
the first, we have that Paul and Barnabas, as it is writton in thactis of
thapostles, Acto. 14.
they the^ selves that had so great authority and chefely Paul, being made an
Apostle by Christ him selff, and by him called a chosen vessel, did appoint in
the cities, the prestes, that is to say the bisshops (For than, there was no
differens between pristes and bisshops) and they made them not of their own
head, but by election. And thold canons them seluis did not cownt them for
bisshops that were not chosen by the people, Distinct. 62. Cap. nulla Distinct.
63. Cap. nosse.
as we have in the selff same decree. As to the second, seeing this word bishop,
is a name of an office, and of a work, as Paul himselff says to timothy, he
that desiereth a bisshopship, desiereth a good work, he says not desires a
dignity. 1. Timoth. 3.
For even as the name of a shepard, agreith not except to him that fedith, And
he that fedeth not, may well be called a shepard, but yet it can not be, that
he should be one in deed, Even so we will say of a bishop, there is no bishop
nor true shepard that does not the office of feding and preaching. Seeing it is
so than, as it is in deed, Thus it follows that no pressed made by our late
made bisshops, is in deed a pressed as the bisshops them seluis of whom they be
made, be in deed no bisshops. If he be no pressed then he can not consecrate, as
the favorers of the mass them seluis think, And if they can not consecrate it
follows that their sacrament, is no true sacrament, And if it be not a true
sacrament, it is not a memory of a sacrifice, but it follows, that as much as
in them is, from many an hundredth year hitherto, they have caused the Christen
people to commit Idolatry. Do you thinck that this so great a disorder should be
inconvenient?

THE THIRD CHAPTER. How the mass was not ordained by Christ, nor by his
apostels, but it is man's inuencion, bilded not by one man only, but by diverse,
and from whens this name, Mass, had the beginning.
Because in this our treatise, by this word, Mass, we do not mean the
sacrament, the sacrament of the lords supper the which with out dowt was
instituted by Christ, in his last supper and affter offt used, by his apostels,
and even unto our days, by his church, has been and ever shall be reverently
kept unto thend. But we mean all the gathering to gether of words, gestures,
and ceremonies, beginning from the Introibo even to the Ite missa est, as also
it is of all men commonly understand, or else that their sacrament that they
handle, and the defenders of the mass, When it is understand affter these ij.
sortis, will defend it as a godly institution, and that it has been used from
the apostels. Therefore we will at this present prove, that neither Christ, nor
his apostles, ever said or ordained mass, in which so ever of these ij. sortis
they take it: but it is man's inue^tion, affter either of both sortis. And that
this is true, First I say, Understanding by this word, Mass, all the whole
gathering, from the Introibo unto the Ite missa est, that the same is a divise
of men, and not of god. And this I prove, by the favorers of the mass the^
seluis, the which say that Christ Ihesus did ordeine the sacrament, and that
Peter added the pater noster. And affter that James bishop of Jerusalem did
increase it, but they tell not what he added. And that Basil likewise has
increased it. Celestinus the pope added the iudica me deus Pope Damasus the
confession, which is made by the pressed. Certain do ascribe it to Pontianus.
Gregory the.1. did appoint there the entry and that the kirieleeson should be
said.ix. times. Thelesphorus the Gloria in excels^s Deo. Gelastus the I. the
collectis, that is to say the prayers that goo before the pistell. Iherom the
pistell, and the gospel. Anastasius ordained that while the gospel was
reading all men should stand on their feet, but stowpingly and with reverence.
Marcus the bishop ordained that the creed should be song on holly days, and
that it should be said by the people present at mass. And damasus affter
confirmed that decree. Gelasius did ordeine the ante^ that follows the creed.
They took the incense from the old law, and from the paynams, the which did
use the incense in their sacrifices, as virgill faith in the 1. of the Eneidos,
that is say, ubi templum, illic centumque Sabeo thure calent arae that is to
say where his temple was, there were an hundredth altars warmed well with
frankincens. The prefacis that goo before the Sanctus, which as gelasius says
be.ix. the forsaid gelasius ordained the^, and vrbanus, put to the tenth.
Sixtus the.I. ordained that the sa^ctus should be be song. Concerning the canon,
which beginnith, te igitur clementissime pater, certain say, that gelasius made
the beginning as it is now. Siritius the pope made the communica^tes. And
Alexander the.1. the Qui pridie quam pateretur Pope Leo the.1. added the ^anc
igitur oblatione^, Gregory added these.ij. petions, that is to say diesque
nostros in tua pace disponas, atque ab aeterna damnatione nos eripi and in
electorum tuoru^ iubeas grege numerari Certain other say that the canon was made
by one called Scolasticus. It is clear that it was not made by one man, nor at
ones, but at diverse times. And the order of the times, is much less kept, that
is to say, that that which the more awncie^t have appointed, should be now first
in the canon, but it is clean contrary. For Alexander the.1. was before all
the^, and yet the qui pridie quam pateretur, which Alexander him selff
appointed, is put in the vi. place. And the te igitur, the which as they say,
gelasius made, who followed Alexander a long time: goth, before all the other
partis of the cano^. Gregory, as the ratio^all of divine offices affirms,
added the preface before the pater noster, that is to say the Oremus,
praeceptis salutaribus mo^iti, and also that the pater noster, should be said,
as he affirms in the register, saing that it should be an unfit thing, that
the prayer of scolasticus, of which we have made mention before, that is to
say, the cano^, should be said, and christ's prayer, that is to say, the pater
noster, should be unsaid. Sergius the pope did first appoint that the Agnus dei,
should be thrice so^g over. And to be short, affter their own Judgment, Christ
has instituted of this mass, nothing except the sacrament. All the rest, was
added by diverse me^, and at diverse times. Look upon platina in the life of
sixtus the 1. bishop of rome. And the ratio^all of divine offices in the fourth
book, and polidorus Virgilius of vrbine in the.x. chapter of the.1. book de
inue^torbus reru^, all the which say, that christ did say no part of this
mass, except the words of the consecration. But it is worthy of noting, that
the defenders of the mass sai, that the mass is gods institution, for the
sacrament is the chief of the same mass, and that it is true, that the mass
was augme^ted, and increased by diverse me^, and at diverse times, yet for all
that, they sai, that the mass, for because of the chief part, is gods
institution. And those additions be for furnisshing of it, nevertheless, the
substance which is the sacrament, was made by christ. And it semith to me, that
they would sai of the mass, as of a great river. As for example of the poo, the
which at the head, The poo is a great River in Italy as Thamis is in England.
where it begins, is very little, and is no better than a little spring, but
because there comyth in to it many other ryuers, therefore it becomyth affterward
great, nevertheless it kepith the name of Poo. So is it of the mass. But this
talk is nothing worth. Our questyon is not now of the name, that all that
gathering is called mass, and the same sacrament should be also called Mass,
as it is called Poo, not only the spring where it beginnyth, but all those
ryuers gathered to gether in one great river, which affter, is all to gether
called Poo. We speak here of the whole mass, and we say that all the mass
that is to say all that myxture of words, and of so mani ceremonies, was not
instituted by Christ, but by many Popys and that Christ made no more of the
whole mass, but the sacrament only. And seeing that we have putt the similitude
of the mass, and of the Poo, we will say, that allthough, that all that
composition or gathering to gether of ryuers in to one great river, should be
called Poo, not withstanding, we shall never sai that all that great and large
river, should grow out of that little spring but we will say that it grows of
diverse ryuers, that is to say the great Poo, And that all the Poo, does not
grow of the little spring, but only a little part of it. So all the mass came
not from Christ, but only that little part of the consecracion. Yea according to
their own opinion the rest was added by plain men.

It is plain, that taking also this word Mass, for the sacrament, that they
make, it was never ordained by Christ, nor used by his apostles. For the
sacrament that Christ ordained, and the Apostles used, was of a another sort,
much differing and diverse from theirs. First, the consecracion was made, after
a another sort. Because Christ said the words of the consecracion a loud, and did
pronownce them plainly that all understood.

They, say them sofftly, that none hears them, but he that says the mass.
And how can it be a sacrament, to them that understand not, nor hear not the
words, seeing a thing can not be a sacrament, except the words be hard, and
understand? Furthermore Christ said not those words, with mind to change the
substance of the bread and wine in to his body and blood, as they think, but
to appoint the one and the other, to be signs in his rememberans, as his words
do show. So that seeing they have not the same meaning, that Christ had, nor
will not do the same, that Christ did, but a another thing, we must needs say
that such a sacrament, is not Christ's sacrament, but a thing fownd out by them
selves, made affter their own manner, and not according to Christ's institution.

Furthermore the sacrament which Christ did institute, was instituted to
thentent that it should be a spiritual supper, dealt to many, and he gave it to
all. They do it not affter this sort, but the pressed only takes that his
sacrament, and gives it not to other, nor this thing is no communion, because a
communion is, when many do partake of one thing, and not when one alone uses
it. So that seeing they do not as Christ did, or rather as he commanded that it
should be done, their is no true sacrament, as also we have proved in the
second chapter of this part. Nor it was not instituted by Christ, but by man's
inuencion. Let them than understand this their mass, either for all the hole
gathering, from the Introibo to the Ite missa est, or else for the sacrament
only, because it is no true sacrament, I say, that it is not gods ordinance but
man's. And being man's ordinans, yet they make it a sacrifice, and a woshipping
of god, against his express commandment, who will not be honored with the
invention of men, as allredy we have so offten said.

There remains now to see from whens this name of Mass had the beginning?
Certain say, as Master William Durant in the proheme of the iiij. part of his
reason giving of gods service, that this Name Mass is some time a nowne
collectiue some time a nowne proper. A Nowne collectiue is a word that
gatherith many into one.

A Nowne proper speakith but of one only.


wha^ it is a collectiue, that is to say when it imports all the whole
gathering from the entering to the end, that is to say Ite missa est, he says
that it is as much to say, as sent or committed over. Because the faithful
people, by the mystery of the priest, the which does Christ's office between god
and men does send their prayers and supplications to god. Some time this name
mass, is a nowne proper, and does signify Christ, first sent, from the father
to us, and sent from us to the father, to thentent that before him, he might
entreat for us, Albeit for shortness, I do not recite all his opinion. Some
other, as Ihon rewcklin a man very well learned in the hebrew to^g, says, that
the mass is no greek name nor latin but hebrewe, and is as much to sai, as
sacrifice. And now our massemongers, would that the mass should be a sacrifice
for sins. Othersome say, as Polidor virgil of vrbine, that Missa, is as much
to say as giving leave to depart, or licensing the people that they may goo
their way, that is to say-that license and leave is given them, that they may
depart, for so much as, in old time no man ought to depart from the holy
things, they being present, except licens were given them. And Missa is as much
to say, as missio, or dimissio, a licensing, or giving leave to depart, because
that being ended, the people is licensed to goo at their pleasure to their
howses. He says besides, many things up on this matter, but because I know that
this name has an abominable signification, I little desire to search any
further for the beginning of so vngracios a name. When it should have begone to
be so named, and who should have fownd it out it is not well known. It
appearith that from pope gregory's time the first, hitherto, it has been used.
And I do not remember that I ever redd that before his time it was used.

THE.IIII. CHAPTER. That the mass is a gathering together and an heap yea a
sea of abuses wikednessis and superstitions,
IT is not our purpos nor mind, to tell all the abuses of the mass, because we
know them not all. And allthough we knew them, they be so many, that to goo
about to write them all they would make to great a book. It shall suffice we
write some of the^ by the which may be sufficientli Judged, what manner a thing
this mass is. not institute them to this end. But be did institute them, in
remembrans of his body and blood geuin for forgiveness of our sins. This
remembrans, the bread and the wine allredy work withowt that that they should be
worshipped. And it is to be noted that if they should be worshipped, the
apostles when Christ did institute the sacrament, of his body, and blood, they
would have worshipded it, but they did not worship it, so far as we have by the
story of the evangelists, yea they sat still at the table. And it well
appearith by a certain text of Honorius the pope in the iij. book of the
decretalls, in the title de celebratione missarum that this worshipping is no
old, but a new thing. And it semith, that it should be the institucion of
honorius himselff, who died in the year of our lord 1226. His words in the
said decretall be these. To thentent that through the small care of the pristes,
gods anger should not be more greuosly sent, we do straitely command that the
sacrament of thanksgeuing, be by the prestes placed in a singular place, clean
and locked, and kept deuowtly and faithfully. But let the pressed very offten
teach his people, that when the helthfull host is liffted up on high in the
celebracion of the mass, they reverently bow them seluis, doing the same wha^
the priest bears it to the sick. Here honorius co^ma^deth that the people
should bow the^ seluis to the host, and does not say than expressly, that they
ought to worship it, he says only that they ought to bow the^ seluis. And he
gives us to understand by this his talk, either that he him selff was the
institutor of that thing or else that this bowing to the sacrament, began not
long affter him. For if the use had been old it had not neded to make so
straight a co^ma^dme^t to keep it, for those things that the custo^ and use is
to do, are done withowt co^ma^dme^t. And whithowt dowt the sa^e ho^orius, if
such a custo^e had be^e before him, he would have alleged either which had be^e
the begin^er, or at the least the custo^ it selff. And he of him selff would not
so have spoken as he has done.

The defenders of tbe mass will say, that christ may be and ought to be
worshipped where he is, he is in that host, wherefore he ought to be worshipped
in the same. I answer that worshipping is a deed of faith, faith is not but by
the same word of god. Let them show one Jot, if they ca^ do it by gods word,
that Christ should be in the sacrament bodily. We do worship Christ in heaven,
because we have the scripture clear that he is ascended in to heaven and there
abides and sits, on the right hand of god, Luke 24. Mark 16. Act. 13.
Ephesians. 4. Act, 3.
as it is writton in luke, and mark, in thactis of thapostles, and to
thephesians. Who does asserten us that Christ is in that host and in that cupp?
First we be not certain that the pressed has consecrated, having not perceived
the words. Furthermore, he may have said the words, and yet the consecracion
shall not be made, because that either he shall not have had thentent, or the
true faith which things the consecracion requires, as the master of the
sentencis says. I speak now affter their opinion. But of this thing we will
speak more at large in the sermon of the sacrament, Now I will not stand to
dispute, because I should be to long. That may be said to them that worship
Christ in the host, and in the cupp, that Christ said to the samaritane, you
worship that that you know not. Furthermore, as we have said before and also
will say, there has been no one or very few true priests from many an
hundredth year hitherto, because those that have ordained them were not true
bisshops, so than they did never consecrate. Here there might be said many
things, but for shortness I will leave them.

be not said with a loud voice as they ought to be, seeing they be words of the
holy gospel, the which Christ has commanded should be preached to every
creature. What else be these words but that Christ has geuo^ his body and his
blood for our ra^som, and forgeuenes of our sins? Seeing this thing is of
necessity, that it should be preached to every Christian, nor he is not a
Christian, that does not bileue, why do they not say it with a loud voice, as
in the old time it was wont to be? Here they find certain scusis, and among
other they say that such words ought to be said in secret, to thentent that
the high holy words, should not become vile, And that it is red how in old time
when the canon was said with a loud voice, as it were, all did understand those
words, and did openly sing them in the streates, and in the ways, Whereupon
certain shepardes singing those words, and having laid the bread up on a certain
stone, at the uttering of the words, the bred was turned in to flessh, and for
this cause the fire came from heaven that killed them, for the which thing, the
holy fathers have ordained, that up on pain of cursing, such words in the
mass should be said in secret, and with the holy garmentis. This master William
Durant says in his racional of divine offices. So what fowndacions these be,
(I will not say fables) of saing the words of the sacrament in secret? If
these words for this cause ought to be said in secret, to thente^t that the high
holy words, should not become vile, than it were needful to say the holy
gospel in secret, and not to preach it openly with a loud voice. For what
words be more high holy than those of the holy gospel? Furthermore the holy
fathers that have ordained this, if it be true in deed that they did ordeine
it, why did they not rather command that the holy words should be pronownced
with reuerens, withowt making them say them in secret? The which words among
all the rest that are said in the mass, euer^ Christe^man ought singularly to
understand? Ought not every Christian to know that Christ has geuin his body
and his blood, for our ransom? And that for remembrans of so great a mystery
Christ has ordained this sacrament? And what else do the words of the
consecracio^ say exeept this in substance? I could here, if I would, say many
things, but what needs it to heap words in so plain a matter? It is withowt
dowt a great abuse to utter those words in secret. The words of the sacrament
ought to be hard of all, withowt the which it is no sacrament, neither the
bread nor the wine, nor any other thing if that the significacion of it be not
known nor that can not be known but by the same words of the sacrament. Let
us goo on further.

1. to the Corinthians, As offten as you shall eat this bread and drink the
cupp, 1. Cor. 11.
ye shall show the lords death until he come, that is to say, you shall
preach it. It is clear that in the mass the lords death is not showed, nor
preached, to the people. And what speak I of the daily and private masses? It
is not showed neither in the time of the communion, wha^ they reach forth the
host to the co^munica^ts, where they ought to teach the pore people of the
significacio^, and of the importance of the sacrament. They sai nothing to
the^, except whether he bileue that Christ be in that host or no. As though
Christ had instituted the sacrament, to thentent that it should be bileued that
he were in that host. so great, and so large, as he was up on the wood of the
cross, and not for reme^brans of his death. Yet Christ him selff said, do
this in my remembrans, and said not, bileue ye that I am hid den, in this
bread, so great and so large, as presently you see me. This was not Christ's
meaning, for so much as he would have said it. Wherefore tha^ is not Christ's
death showed in the mass? Surely this is a manifest abuse.

^. Cor. 11.
who rebukes the chorinthes because they did not take the sacrament together,
and with company, nor they did not tarry one for a another. And if he so sharply
rebuked them, because they did not tarry one for a another, allthough that all
should take the sacrament, how would he have suffered that one only should have
taken it? They do also against the words which they speak in the
consecration. For before these words that they say, (Hoc enim est corpus meum)
there be these, that is to say, accipite and manducate ex hoc omnes, that is to
say, take you and eat you all of this bread. Why than do they not give it to
all or to many, as Christ commanded according to their own opinion? Parauenture
they will say that Christ spoke these words for thapostles, and not for any
other. But this is not reasonably spoken, for so much as Christ taught them
withthes words that he spoke, how they should do and minister this sacrament.
If he should have spoken these words for the Apostles only, the Apostles them
selves should never have known how to have ministered the sacrament to others,
but only to them seluis. Furthermore, in old time this is certain that there was
no private mass said, that is to say, that one only should take the sacrament,
that is the priest that celebrateth, but allweis there was a communion used. In
token of this, the grekis did never receive the private mass, doing better in
this part, than the latins, and keeping Christis institucion and the apostolyke
use.

get good money, and other things. Forthei give penans to them that they hear
in confession, that is to say, that they of force cause them to say massys, and
they make the^ to pay lustily, in such sort as they make, they make them
sometime scratt the head again. And what has the herb betonica, which has so
many vertews, as Anthonius Musa says, to do with the mass. It is no meruel
that it should be good for so many things, because that they that have fownd it
out, and have framed it, have much more power than the Apostles, as paul says.
2. Corin. 13.
to whom was given power to bylde, and not to destroy. But the mass makers have
the fulness off power to pervert, to co^fownd, to destroy, and to overthrow,
every thing. And when they have done all this that pleases them, no man may
say unto them, why do ye so? Because they be above all, and may be judged of
none, how like ye this so great a power? Let no man therefore meruell of these so
many vertewes of the mass. O IESV CHRIST, which art come to repair the
decays, when wilt thou amend these disorders. Christ has ordained the
sacrament to one end, that is to say, for a rememberans, and they use it for a
thousand other ends. From whens gather they that the mass should have so many
vertews, as they say it has? This is a very great abuse and to great a disorder.



fairer and richer furniture, that which is song, which is rong with the great
bells, that is there descanted, where as be candlestickbearers Accolites,
deacons, subdeacons, many lightis, plaing on the organes, and such owtward
knacks: These such masses, they call solemn masses. And the moo and greater
ceremonies their be, the more solemn those massis be. They follow the Iewis or
else the Idolaters, the which in worshipping of their gods, did make
solempnities of feasts, and of reioisinges. That kind of worship in the hebrew
people, was not blamed, because it was ordained by god, but yet in a figure of
spiritual things, and to entertain that people inclined to Idolatry, that they
should not committ Idolatry. But to us christians, it needs not to make these
solempnities, and pompes, seeing the time is come of the true worshippers, the
which ought to worship god, in spirit, and truth, and not with owtward
deckings, as christ says in S. John. Ioh, 4*
Yet furthermore, seeing the dignity of the sacrament comith from his thing
signified, and from the institutor of the same, it is not convenient to make it
one time more solemn, than a another. And as all the baptismes be alike, if
they be trow baptysmes, so will we say of the sacrament of thanksgeuing that
one is not more worthy than a another.

Romans 2.
because that before god, there is no respect of persons, nor the seruyces that
be done to god, be not more accepted of him, because one is set in a greater
state and dignitye, but when he has a greatter faith, and religion.
Furthermore yff the mass in it selff be that that has the vertewes the
strength, and efficacy, of working, it hangs not of men, but of god only, why
make they than one more greter, and more worthy than a another according to the
diuersitye of persons?

A another is, that it can not be said withowt so many deckings, as be the
Amises, the albys, the phanells, the stolys, the cordgirdles, the sandales,
many towels, altares, chalises, corporassis, animates (as they call them) and a
hallowed stone. And all these things must be blessed and consecrated, The
deckings also, be of diverse colors, according to the diversity of the days.
In the feast of martirs they put on redd. On the virgins days white, on the
co^fessors, other colors. Here we have deckings of lyning cloth, of say, of all
colored cloth, here be some of silk, of velvet, of damask of chamlet, of
satin, of cloth of gold, and of silver. If it be a blame worthy thing for a
man, or a woman, to be over costly decked, as paul says in his pistle to
Timothy, 1. Tim. 2. 1. Petri.. 3
and Peter in the first pistle, for so much as it is a vanity, why shall it
not be blame worthy, for one that handles gods things, to be over costly
decked, as though god should be delighted in owtward things, who would have the
inward decking, and the decking of the mind. What means it that there is not
made so great sole^nitie at gods word? They put not on tha^ so many garments.
And to the mass, that is man's invention, they use so much honor. What needs
it for the ministratio^ of the sacrament. to set a broad so mani things, and to
make so great a furniture? These things be Jewish, or rather heathnish than
otherwise. I remember I have hard that in Rome there were fownd certain Imagis
of the flamynes, which were prestes of the gentiles, clothed thorowtly like the
pressed at mass. The which geuith to understand, that such decking is an
heathnissh thing. The use of so many garments, and of the consecracion of the
same, is the ordinance of pope Stephan the first, and came from the Iewis. The
corporassis was the divise of Sixtus the first. the chalises first were made of
wood. Zepherinus the pope did institute that they should minister in vessels of
glass. Affter it was appointed that they should minister neither in wood nor in
glass, because that the wood being vnfast, the wine entrid into it, And the
glass was lightly broken. For this cause it was ordained, that they should
minister in silver or in gold. And if they could not be gotten, at the least
in tin, and not in any other metal, because of the evil savor of the other
metalls. Some say that pope Vrbanus the first did institute this. And what
means it, that the Apostles, nor the primative church, did not use so great
pomp in vessels? what superstitions be these? How much were to be said here?
But it suffiseth me to toch the abuses, because they would axe to many words to
declare them at length.

Also they give to understand, that that day, 1086.

A another is that albeit the mass is man's inuencion, Deuteronomy. 12.
and thou shall not add, nor minissh. And against the saing of Esaias, Esaias. 29.
which offten times we have alleged, that is to say, that god will not be
honored with men^s commandments, Matthew. 15.
And Christ in S. Matthew says the same, alleging the Prophet.

A another is that they affirm that he who says because they hold that in the
mass is made the transsubstancion of the bread, and the wine, in to Christ's
body and blood. And bileuing that Christ him selff is present bodily in the
host, and in the cupp, the which things neither the angels, nor the blessed
virgin have authority to do, but the prestes only, they conclude, that those
prestes have gretter authority, than the angels, or the blessed virgin. And
they say, that the same most blessed mother, caused Christ to come in to her
virginlike womb, with 8. words, that is to say, Ecce ancilla domini, fiat
mihi secundum uerbum tuum And the pristes, make him to come in to the host with
v. words only, that is to say, Hoc est enim corpus meum. I will leave at this
time, to examen this their falls spech, that the blessed mother should make the
son of god to come with those words, as though they should have had vertew, to
make him take flessh, that being only of gods work. I will leave, as I say, to
speak of this, and I will axe them from whens it commith, that on the one part,
they so much exalt the blessed virgin, that they abase Christ and god, for they
call her queen of heaven, starr of the sea, our hope, our life, mother of
mercy, And they give her such titles, and honor, as be only due to god and
Christ. And here they make her meaner than a plain pressed, sometimes, as I have
said, very wicked. Indede I confess that the ministry of gods word, and of
the sacraments, is not committed to the blessed mother, nor to the angels, but
to men. Yet for this cause to goo about to make men that be sinners, more
worthy than the angels that be withowt sin, or than the mother of god, it is
unfit, chefly for that the prestes be not true ministers of the sacraments,
for so much as he that does not minister the word, ought neither to minister
the sacraments. Further also, as we have said before, they be not called by a
true vocacion, the which is necessary to the ministry.

A another abuse is that the corporasses the challises, that be in sacris, that
is, in holy orders, and not to other. But for what cause may not a thing be
toched with the hand, if it be clean and nett, the which may be eaten and
dronken? But this sacrament is eaten (that is to say the host) and is dronke^
(that is to say the wine (for what cause tha^ may it not be touched with the
hand, seeing it is touched with the mowth? This supersticion is against Christ's
ordinans and the custom of the Apostles. For Christ when he reached the bread
and the cupp to his Apostlos, he said unto them, that they should take, and they
took the one, and the other, with their hands, and surely they touched them.
Christ did not than give it them in their mowthes. Shall we say that Christ
should speak these words, that is to say, Take you, Eat you, Drink you, only
for the Apostles, and not for other? This is not so, but he spoke them for all
those that wear to receive the sacrament, as also S. Paul geuith to understand,
the which writing to the Corinthes in his first, recites Christ's words, and
teaches not only the ministers, but all the whole church what they have to
do. Seeing than this things is common to all Christians and not belonging to
pristes only, why may they not than be touched by lay men, seeing they also
ought to communicate, and receive the same sacrament? The old church, and the
Apostles delivered the sacrament in to the hands of all them that did receive
it. From whens is this new religion come, contrary to Christ's Institution,
and to the Apostles custom? Shall it be convenient that a lay man, who with a
good and a clear conscience receiuith the sacrament may not touch it? And a
wicked pressed, with a blotted and a defiled conscience, shall be Counted worthy
to handle it?

A another abuse is that the mass is said in the gospel should be preached in
the honor of saints the which is Christ's only? Eue^ so is it of the sacrament,
They handle their masses, as poor ignorant men do their prayers, which will
say Aue Maria, in thonor of S. Christopher, and the pater noster in worship of
S. Lucia or of a another saint. How much should it be to the purpos and
convenient, if one having need to entreat the Emperor or a king would goo to a
poor man and on his kneis would say unto him, I commend my selff to your
magestie, and I beseech you that you would show me this favor, and would desire
of him such things as he could not do, and as were not convenient to be axed
of such a parson, should not that poor man cownt him selff mocked and scorned?
They do much wors, because they attribute to a plain creature, that which
belongs to god only and to Christ, who withowt measure, do more excede every
creature, tha^ any earthly estate does any poor or base parson, as to the
world. And mark that in the councelles of these owre times their is no word
spoken of these and many other so great and gross errors and abuses as
Reingne now Among Christ's flock. Be these things deuocio^s? Men must not
touch the^. Well it is enough that they goo about to condemn the Luthera^
Heretics, that is christ with all the whole holy scripture, as their fathers
have done, that is to say, the chief priests, the scribes, and the phariseis,
Who crucified Christ, condemned, euelha^dled, and in the end killed the holy
Apostels. Even so do they.

done, as some understand the saing of Paul to the Chorinthes, 1 Corin. 15.
Vt quid baptisantur pro mortuis? This was by error, and it was not well done.
So we will say of the super, that it was instituted for the living, and not for
the dead, because that the dead can not use it in Christ's rememberans, nor
eat it, nor drinck it. Some man will say, the dead can not use it, but the
living may use it for the dead. I would have of these men that they would allege
me the cause why this sacrament, may rather be used for the dead, than
baptism? There is differens between baptism, and the supper, I know it:
because baptism is used only ones, in the life for a man. But the holy supper
many times. I do confess that in this point there is a differens, and there
be also other differencis, but this notwithstanding baptism at those times that
it is used, may also be taken for the dead, such a number of childern being
baptized as there is, for so much as that in baptism there is made memory of
the passion, crossing, death and burieng of Christ, Roman. 6. 2 Coloss. 2.
as we have to the romans and to the collossians and mention is made of the
forgiveness of sins. Yea if we should speak by the scripture, it seems to
attribute more unto baptism, than to the holy supper. Marc. 1. Luc. 3. Act. 2.
et 22.
If we should consider many saings according to the letter, we have in Mark,
and in Luke, that John did baptize in forgeuenes of sins. We have in the
acts of thapostles, how Peter said, let every one off you be baptized in the
forgiveness of sins, and Ananias said to Paul, Rise up, baptize the, and wassh
thy sins. The article off the faith which says, I do confess one baptism
in forgeuenes off sins, etc. All these saings and other which we could bring
forth if we would, seem according to the letter, that they should attribute,
more to baptism (as concerning forgeuenes of sins) than to the supper, And
yet no one of the catholics, ever said, that baptism should help the dead. Why
than shall the holy supper help for the sins off the dead? It is certain, that
where the holy supper is spoken off, there is not so offten and so express
mention made, that it should be taken in forgeuenes off sins, as where the
baptism is spoken of. I mean not, by this my saing, to affirm that by
baptism sins be forgeuen. I will not affirm this, for before we have proved
the contrary, that is to say, that the baptism is in deed a sign off the
forgeuenes off sins, and it certifieth us, and makes us more sure off the
same, not that it does it. But I will say that in the writings of theuangelists
and Apostles there is more mention made of the forgeuenes of sins, when the
baptism is spoken of, than when the supper is spoken off. And that if the
lords supper should avail for the dead, baptism also should avail, but
baptism does not avail for the dead, wherefore also the sacrament of thanks
giving does not avail.

how much a do. I know well that they give to all these things their
significacion, Imagined at their pleasure, and fained of their own head. The
which significacio^ nevertheless, neither the people that seith and hears, nor
they the^ selves that say the mass, do understand. But tell me I pray you, to
what profit serve so many trifling things at Christ's institucion, that is to
say, at the holy supper? It is clear that they be not necessary for the
co^secrating the bread and wine, that is to say for thappointing them to an
holy use, and for the making the sacrament, nor for the receiving it. For if
they had been necessary Christ would have ordained them, and the Apostles would
have used them, but neither ^hone nor the other was done, that is to say, that
neither Christ has instituted them, nor the Apostles used them, wherefore they
be not necessary. They will say parauentur, that allthough they be not of
necessity, neuertheless they be for orname^t, and solempnitie of the
sacrament, And for this cause the holy fathers have ordained these so many
deeds, and gestures, in the mass. But this answer is not good: For if they
be not necessary, what is the cause that they have commanded they should be done,
under pain of deadly sin, and that menn sin deadly, if they be not done.
This is off necessity and not only for an ornament, when a thing is commanded
under pain off deadly sin. If the sacrament may be made according to
Christ's institucion and the use off the Apostles Withowt so many novelties: Is
this convenient and Just to bind those that make it as Christ has commanded and
taught them, and that will not stepp out off his most holy ordinans under
deadly sin, albeit they should not do the addicions off men which rather
defile than settfurth, Christ's institucion, who would have off us obedience and
that we should do, as he him selff has taugth and commanded us? Joan. 15.
And he says in John, You be my frindes if you will do those things that I
command you. Nor Paul never durst be so bold, as to add, minissh or alter any
manner off thing, but allegeth Christ's plain and only institucion, And so he
teaches the Chorinthes, that they should do, saing, Ego enim accepi a Domino,
quod and tradidi uobis, etc. that is to say, for I have received off the lord
that, which I have delivered to you, etc. as though he would say, I make you not
off my selff any ordinans, that which I do appoint, is Christ's institucion
and not mine. What is the fairest ornament of Christ's and Gods institucio^,
if not, simply and plainly to do that which they command us? This is the
office of Antichrist, to goo about to bind under deadly sin, that is to say,
under pain of damnacio^, where God, who only can save and damn, James 4.
(as James says) does not bind us, but leaves us free. This is to sit in
Gods temple, that is to say to reign in consciencis and to govern them and to
keep them subject to the bondage off men, contrary to Paul, 1. Corint. 7.
Galat. 3.
who says that we ought not to be servants off men. Christ has made us free
from damnacion, the which Gods law does threaten unto us, and they will make
us bond to the devil and damn us for ever, if we do not keep their laws.
Surely this is a great abuse and a deuelish presumption.

A another abuse more manifest than the rest, and more solemn, so much the
fayer is made more solemn. Yea then they traffic and occupy. How much more
holy the place is, so much the rather this merchandise is made in it. We may
see that the Innes do make no holidays, but they labor alike, on all days.
They lodge the wayfarers and also other that come thither, as well on holy
days as other, nor they make no differens between one day, and a another, but
they make all a like. It is true, but yet they do make a certain differens, at
the least of the places, because they occupy not every where. Who if that
Innholder, or Tauerner, that would make an Inn, or a tavern in any church? None
surely. But the massmarchantes have not this respect, but how much the holier
the place is cownted, so much the willinglier the mass is there bought and
sold. This excellent privilege with many other withowt number, the mass
merchants have obtained off Antichrist, who has all power over such things. And
long a goo the time was, thatt this merchandise was sold very dear, but from
certain years hitherto, it is become dog cheap, and a mass is given for a
dandy prat, yea and for less, according to the places, and to the parsons,
that know how to bye. This is it that has made rich the pristes, the frires
and the monks, that makes men fownd chapells, bilde churches, colleges,
howsis, monasteries, off friars abbaies, commandries, and to beshort it is
that, that has made rich the state called ecclesiastical. It has meruelosly
liffted it up in the world. The mass is that which geuith so great revenues to
the most reverend Cardinals, and which makes them ride up on these fair mulis,
covered with velvet, with those faier redd hattis, the which do signify the
order off the Seraphins, burning in charity and in godly love. This is the
significacion, some say, off red hattes which (the mass I say) makes to ride
with so many horses, with so great a company of gentlemen, as though they were
Dukes, or Princes, that when they goo to the consistory, the shalmes are played
on to them, on the battleme^ts off the castle sent Angelo, and they ride with
very great mirth, pomp, and triumph. The mass makes all these things to be
done, for if it were not, surely there should want such pomp, and gretnes. Off
the Bisshops, oh how many things might I say if I would, but I must leave to
other to say their part. I will say only this, that it made them wholly forget
their office, and has made them attend to certain scornworthy baggagis, as to
Christen the bells, to consecrate the stones, and the wallis, with more endeavor
and diligens, than if they should baptize the sons off a King, and an
Emperor, and than if they should minister the thanksgiving, to all the
Monarchies off the world, and all this to give credit to the mass. I speak
not off the preaching off Gods word, because it is a thing for poor men. This
Mass is the mother off purgatory, the which purges the purses, the garners,
the howses, the sellers, so that there is no brom in the world, that swepeth
so well an hows as this purgatory does. To tell you at few words this abuse is
so open and so large, and gives us so much to say, that in an whole year it
would not be ended. I have only spoken off theffectis that it works in these
ij. degrees or statis, withowt rising higher or going down lower to any
particularitie.

if there come forth a priest apparelled ready to say mass, a grett part off
the hearers turning their backs to the preacher will ronn affter the priest to
hear mass. This is an assuered grownd, that the great part off the people have
more devotion to the mass, than to Gods word and the holy gospel. And what
else does Satan desire, but by such means, to draw a way the people from the
holy gospel, and from Gods word? The savior says, Luc. 11. Roma. 1.
blessed be they that hear Gods word and keep it. And Paul says that the
gospel is the power of God for health to all byleuers. And the mass carries me^
away from Gods word and the holy gospel, and consequently from their salvation.
And if there were not any other abuse in the mass but this, it ought to be
fled as a deuelish inuencion. And who could ever set out this abuse as it is
worthy? This is the cause that Satan has sought by so many ways, to deck it and
to make it fair, affter the sort off an harlot to intise the people to whore
with a spiritual and a sowles whordom, which withowt comparison does much more
displease God, than the fleshly. What else be so many ceremonies, so many
garments, and so many handsome handlings as be there, but ornaments, and as it
is said, bewtifiengs of this mass, to bring to pass that every man may love
the harlot. I could tell many other abuses of this mass, for they be so many,
that there might be volumis of books writton of them. Nevertheless these be ynowe
to make it known for as stroyfull a thing as ever was in the world. If they
be considerd with a spiritual Judgment.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. That the mass is the gretest sacrilege and the greatest
abhominacion that ever was in any time from the beginning of the world, and is
the chief greatest mystery of Antichrist.
IT will parauenter seem strange that I shall thus speak of the mass. And
they will say that I speak uncomely, and stepp (as it is commonly said) out of
the sorrow. But those men if they knew what a thing this Mass is, they would
say that I am very far from the mark, and that I speak not the thousand part
so much as I ought, and that I am not yet well entered in to the sorrow, much
less that I am stepped out of it. I say and affirm again, that the Mass is
the greatest sacrilege and the gretest abhominacion, that ever was in any time
from the beginning of the world, and is the great mystery of Antichrist. And if
I shall not prove it, It shall not be because the trowth is not so, but my weak
habilite shall be in fawt. Nevertheless, I trust in the lord, allthough not to
the striuers, yet at the least to the lovers of the truth, I shall persuade my
meaning, affter this sort.

We have out of Paul the Apostle, Romans 3. et 7. Gala. 3.
that the knowledge of sin is by the law. (I speak of the 10. commandments
which they call the moral law) is divided as men know in to 2. tables, the
first, and the second. The first is of the worshipping of God, and regards
directly Gods honor and glory.

The second does teach and instruct man toward his neighbor. These things to all
those that have knowledge in the holy writing, be plain. And because that the
honor and glory of God is withowt comparison of more importans, than those
things that respectt man, we ought to say that the sins that be against the
first table, be heuier and gretter, than those that be against the second,
because that they be directly against gods honor. And therefore infidelity,
Idolatry and blasphemy, which be sins against the first table, be greter and
heuier sins, than thefft, than adultery and the rest which be against the
second table, and against men. This is with out dowt. Let us goo further. We
ought to know also that even as among the sins of the second table, the one
is greter and more weighty than the other. as for example, adultry is gretter
sin than simple thefft, and one murder is gretter than a another, as the
murdering of the father, or the mother, is a gretter sin than the murdering
of a another parson, So among the sins that be against the first table, one is
gretter than a another. As for example, one blasphemy is greter than a another,
Math. 12. Marc. 3.
by christ's testimony in S. Matthew and mark where he says that all sins and
blasphemies of men shall be forgeuen them, but he that shall blasphme against
the holy ghost, it shall never be forgeuen him. By the which spech is concluded
that one blasphemy is gretter than the other. And so we will say that one
infidelity is gretter than a another, and one Idolatry heuier than a another.
That of gods people, that is to say, of the hebrews, was a more heavy sin,
than that of the gentiles. The hethnish people were vnbileuing and Idolatros
before that Christ was showed unto them, and they did honor the things made, in
stead of the maker, they did worship pictures and Images, Romans ^.
as Paul to the Romans says. And they were in most theik darkness of vnbilefe,
of ignorans and of error. They had in deed the law of nature, but by the
corruption of the same nature, brought by sin in to all men, that law was in
them so darkened, that it was not hable neither sufficiently to show them, nor
to direct them in the way of salvation, Romans 2.
the which withowt Christ can not be had, allthough it were sufficient enough
to condemn them and make them inexcusable. And God, as the same Paul says in
thactis of the Apostles, Act. 14.
did let them goo their own ways, that is to say, did let them walk in their
error, withowt giving them the light of his word, and of his spirit, so that
as blind men, they saw not, nor knew not what they did. A great judgment, by
the which is showed, what man can do if god forsake him, and does not light
him with his word and with the light of his spirit, because he knows not what
is to be done, and in Gods things he does all contrary. Withowt dowt the
gentiles did greatly sin in their vnbyleffe, committing Idolatry, and
blaspheming their maker, notwithstonding they sinned by ignorans, nor they
could not do otherwise, having not the light of the scripture. But the
Hebrews, who had the benifice of Gods word clear and open, did sin more
greuosly in their vnbilefe, committing Idolatry and blasphemy, than the
heathen. For it was even as he that seith the ditch, and yet of purpos and
willingly falls in to it. It is plain that he does much more sin, who has
thexpresse commandment of the lord, and knows his will, and noth withstanding
yet does against such commandment and will, than he that knows it not, Luc.
12.
as the Savior says in S. Luke. That is to say, the servant that knows the
will of his master, and does it not, shall be worthily beaton with many
stripes, but the servant that knows not the will of his lord and does it not
shall be beaton too, but not so much as he that knows it.

And for this cause the Hebrews when they worsshipped the calff in the desert,
they did much more greuosly sin than the heathen who did honor the Idols, for
so much as that not long before, they were cowncelled by God him selff who gave
them the law and commanded them that they should not make any image to honor
and yet they made it against Gods express commandment. And so as many other
times as they have committed Idolatry (as we have in the books of the Kings
and of the Prophets) they have much more offended God and more greuosly sinned
than the heathen. And the Idolatry and unfaithfulness of his own people, was more
abominable in Gods sight, and did more provoke him to anger, than that of the
heathen. And for this cause also they were more threatened, than the ame heathen.
And how many scorgis, how many overthrows have they suffered for the sin of
vnbilefe and Idolatry?

The 10. tribes of Israel, for what cause were they so offt by God scorgid, and
at the last berefft of their right, 4. Reg. 17.
and by Salmanasar King of the Assyrians led in to continual bondage, as it is
writton in the book of the Kings, but only for Idolatry?

The tribe off Judah, how many ways was it stricken, as well off their borderers
that is off their next neighbors, as affter by a people that came far off, as
the Caldees and the Assyrians were? why was it sent in to exile to Babylone?
Why was the temple destroyed and every thing overthrown, but only for their
Idolatry? Be cause these things be known, I do not labor to recite the stories
where they be writton, and therefore I pass them over.

Exodus 32. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Parali. 7. Ierem. 43. and 44. Esa. 65. Ezech. 9. and.
43. Exodus 4. Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Reg. 14. Ezech. 8.20 4. Reg. 23.
How offten has God threatened the overthrow to Idolaters? Look in Exodus, in
Deuteronomy, in Paralipomenon, in Jeremy, in Esaias, in Ezechiel, and in very
many other placis of the Prophets. Idolatry in the scripture is called
abhominacion, because God has it most chefely in hatred. Look in Exodus, in
Deutronomy, in the 3. book off the Kings, where Achias the Prophet foretells
the exile and sparkeling off the tribe off Israel for Idolatry, and also in
Ezechiel. In all these places the scripture calls Idolatry, Abhominacion,
because that God, as we have said, has it in meruelos hatred. This fowndacion
being laid, that God has chefly in hatred Idolatry, in what so ever sort it be
done, but much more in his own people than he had in the other And this because
his people had the knowledge off God and were taught with his word the true
worship off God, that is to say how they ought to worship him, and honor him,
the other people were not so, the which sinned by ignorans. It does fitly follow
also that if there shall be fownd Idolatry among the Christians, who be now
Gods people, that that shall be more abominable before God, than any other, not
only of the heathen but also of the Hebrews. For where as the knowledge off
God, and off his true worship is gretter, and the trowth is more manifest, in
that place Idolatry and vnbilefe be greater sins, and gretter abhominacions
before God, than where there is not so much knowledge, nor the truth so open.
But who dowteth, that there should not be in the Christian people a greater
knowledge off God, and off his true worship, and off Christ, who is the truth it
selff, by the witness off him selff, the which says in S. John, I am the way,
John 4.
the truth and the liffe, than in any other people and nation? does not he
witness the truth, talking with the Samaritane, as John writes, that the
Christians, that is to say the people gathered to gether of by leuing Jews and
heathen, which we be (turned to Christ by Gods grace) should be the true
worshippers that should worshipp the father in spirit and truth? Have not we
more knowledge of God having greater knowledge of Christ, by whom God is truly
known, than the Hebrews? who will dowt this, but he that knows not, what
Christ is? Also this time is compared to that of the law, under the which the
Hebrews were, as the day is to the night. For they had the flesshly worship,
that is to say, those sacrifices and number of ceremonies, and we have the
spiri^uall. Coloss. 2.
They had the shadows, and we have the body as Paul says to the Colosseis. The
knowledge that they had, was dark because it was shadowed with figures, and
certain veales, or couerings, owrs be clear, bare, and open, we do better
know Gods benifites through Christ than they, how sins be forgeuen us, how we
be Justified and saved. Now we know that Christ is dead for our sins, Rma.
4.
and is risen again as Paul says, for our rigthuosnes. We know that he suteth
at the right hand of God, and where he is, there we shall be, John 12.
as he witnesses in John. And of this we be sure. We believe certainly as an
artikle of our faith that Christ is true God and true man. The comen sort of
the Jews did not clearly know these things, as we do. And that it is the
truth, Jesus Christ's Apostles them seluis, although they had hard him a long
time, and had conversation with him, yet they did not think that by death, and
chefely that death off the cross, he should redeem the world and that he should
be a sacrifice and satisfaccion for our sins. To him that has redd the
stories of theuangelistes, this that I say is plain. If it be so than that
where the knowledge of God, of Christ, of the threw worship is greater,
Idolatry, vnbilefe and blasphemy be more greuos sins than where there is not
so great and so clear knowledge. Surely if we shall find these so greuos sins
in the Christen people, we must of necessity conclude that they shall more
displease God, and shall be more hateful unto him, than all the Idolatries,
all the vnbilefes, and all the blaspemies off the heathen, yea and off the
Hebrewissh people too. Now let us see if these most greuos sins be fownd among
the Christian people (I call them Christian, because they be so named) or no. I
would to God there were fownd none. How much vnbilefe, how many blasphemies, how
many Idolatries have we?

Tell me, is it any vnbilefe and Idolatry to worship very me^? And what shall
we speak of very me^? Is it Idolatry to worship their bonys, their ashes,
their garments, there hattys, their girdles? And what more, to worship that
which is not known? Sometime the bonys off some wicked parson, I will not say
of other beastys (which thing may easily happen) in the place of saints
relics? They do also worshipp in diverse places, diverse bodies, as though
they were the bodies of one selff saint, and the simple people byleueth, that
both the one, and the other, of those bodies be the bodies of that saint, as though
one man should have had 2. bodies. I do remember that I have seen in the city
off Arle, a certain body the which they say, is S. Antonis the abbot, and yet
not withstonding, there is showed a another in the city of Vienna, In Dolpheny,
the which neuerteles, they say and affirm is. S. Antonyes. The body off S.
William of aquitan, the Seneases say, that it is in an abbey in their
territory, and they show it. And yet a another body is showed, in a certain vale
called, S. James vale, under the rule of grisones and there is done to it great
reuerens. It is worshipped, they ronn to it for rain, for fair wether, and
other business. How many heads of S. Johan Baptist be showed in diverse placis?
And what scorns be these of the Christen religion? What madnesses, what
dulnesses be these, that men should loose the common sense and should have less
Judgment, than the brute beasts? So we could if we would tell you a great
nombrer of like abuses. This corrupcion can not be scused for it is to plain.
Let us goo on further, Is it Idolatry to worship the Imagis, to knele before
them, to stick candels before them, to set lamps there, to call up on them,
to make vows to them, to hang torches, tapers, cloth corn, garments, eyes,
hands, heads, legs, sometime off wax, sometime off silver, before them, to
hang before them, Imagis off men, off women, of young childern, off oxen and off
horse? Is it Idolatry, and likewise I ought to say, plain doltisshnes, to have
greter deuocio^ to one Image or picture, than to a another, off the selff same
saint or saints? As for example, more to that off S. Loreto, than to that off
the Annunciation in Florence, and to think that the one should do more miracles
than the other? Is it Idolatry to make the Image of the Trinity the which is
an high spirit, that can not be painted, nor carved by any manner off means?
And yet against Gods commandment they paint it, and carue it, in the shape of
certain strange monsters, that is to say, sometimes in the shape of a man, with
3. heads, sometimes in the fasshon of 3. men with 2. legs only, and in this
form they worship it, and make their vows to it. What will they say here?
will they defend these manifest abuses, with that their distinction, that they
make off Dulia and Hiperdulia and Latria? This thing means a another manner of
thing than Dulia and Hiperdulia. I will not declare these words and their
distinction, the which I know well enough from whe^s it comes. If there were
not worldy gain here in this Idolatry, their Images, and heir Dulias and
Hiperdulias would soon cease. It can not be denied but among the Christen people
there be many Idolatries, much vnbilefe many blasphemies and sacrilegis.
Sacrilege is to robb the holy things. What is more holy than Gods and Christ's
honor? This is to clear. Nevertheless, among all the rest, as there be many
Idolatries, (I will not say withowt number) that of the mass, is the gretest
and the chief, not only because the host and the cup, be worshipped in stead of
Christ, not being certain that the same Christ is there, as before in the Cannon
we have proved, in that part where their consecracion is spoken off, and as
also we will better prove, in the sermon in thend of this book, but much more
because they will, that all the Mass should be a worship of God, saing that it
is a sacrifice for the sins of the living, and of the dead, in the which God
is honored, yea Christ him selff is offered to God, wherefore it does well follow,
that it is a most great Idolatry, for so much as, that Idolatry is not only
where any visible ydoll, or image is honored, but every worship the which is
made unto God withowt his word, is Idolatry, for because that no such worship is
true worship, nor pleasith God, but rather it is to him abhominacion. for so
much then as that God will not as before we have allredy offten told, that we
should honor him affter our own mind, and as it seems good to us, but will that
we should honor him, as he does teach and command us, Esa. 29. Math. 15.
as we have in Esaias and Christ alleges him selff in sanct Matthew: We have
before allredy proved that the Mass is man's inuencion, therefore seeing we will
make it a worship as we do, yea the chief of the Christian religion, we must
conclude that it is an Idolatry because that it is a worship withowt Gods word.

But let us see off what sort off Idolatry it is? First there be many deceites,
and among the rest, there is this, that they persuade the people, as an article
off their faith, not only that Christ is bodily in that host, and likewise in
the cupp, and make them honor the one, and the other, but that he is there, as
great, and as thick, as he was up on the wood off the cross, and that he is
wholly, not only in that little host, but in every part off the host and the
wine, and that he is in heaven, and in earth, and in all places where the
hosts be consecrated. And they persuade that there is the whole court off
heaven, and that there is no more bread nor wine, but only the withco^mes, off
the one and off the other. For their substancis, they be transsubstanciated, that
is to say, changed in to the substance off the body, and blood, off Christ. All
the which things, and many other, they have fownd out, to give the more credit
to this their mass, to thentent, that the people should have more devotion to
it. They have fownd that it is good for every thing, and that it has vertews
innumerable, and they have given us to understand so many other things off this
Mass, that it is a wonder. Further more, as we have proved in the former
discorse that we have made from the Introibo, to the end, how many falsedes,
how many supersticions, wickednesses, and blasphemies be in this Mass? There
Christ is robbed off his honor many ways, Yea he is euel spoken off, the
forgeuenes off sins, the satisfaction, the ransoming, the entreating, and the
salvation is attributed to other things. Do you not think that a most greuos
sacrilege is committed when his glorios titles be directly plucked from him, and
his honor and glory taken away? The which outrages so open and so plain, were
never committed in any Idolatry off the heathen, or off the Jews.

And to perceive better that which we do say, you must understand, that even
as Jesus Christ is Gods best beloved, nor that the same God loves any other
thing so much as Christ his only begoten son (yea I speak off him in that he
is man) nor no another man off the world can be reconciled, nor return in to
Gods favor but by Christ, yea no manner thing, whether it be prayer, thanks
giving, allmes or any other manner off work is acceptable, or thankful to God,
if not by Christ, nor we can not have any manner off benifice, perteining to
salvation, but through Christ, so on the contrary there can not be done a thing
more hateful, more displeasing to god, and that should be more abominable to
him, than to do against Christ, and to robb his honor and glory. And the more
a thing is against Christ, the more it displeases him, for so much as nothing
pleases him but through christ. And because there was never in the world any
Idolatry the which so directly, and so many ways did robb Christ, as this
mass, we must conclude that no ydolatry, although it were most grett, was ever
so abominable before god as this. Let us take the ydolatries of the heathen,
it is clear that they had not the knowledge of Christ, and therefore could not
rob him in such sort, as the mass does, in the which chefely it made
express mention of him in many places. The Idolatries likewise of the Hebrews
they have not so expressly taken the honor from christ as the mass has. Let
us beginn with the Idolatry that they did in the desert, when they honored the
calff, it was in deed a heavy sin, not withstanding it was done by want of
consideracion, with an vprowr, and rage of the people, And Aaron unwillingly
and for fear agreid unto them, Exodus 20.
as it is writton in exodus. Nor that people had not so much know led of Christ
as we, there was made no mention of forgeuenes of sins, of satisfacion, of
ransoming, or of the things belonging to Christ's office. Nor Christ was not
robbed of his honor, so many ways as in the mass he is. And so let us goo
thorowall the Idolatries of that people, as well of the tribe of Judah, as of the
x. tribes. The x. tribes did worship ij. goldin calves, made by king hieroboam,
the one was in Bethell, 3. Reg. 12.
and the other in Dann. This was ydolatry for (...) respectis. First when by gods
commandment they should have worshipped in Jerusalem, they worshipped else
where. Than also because they worshipped carved things, that is to say, the ij.
Imagis of caluis against gods express commandment in the law, the which for
bids, that there should be made any Image carved, or of any other sort to
worship it. They did worship also the image of baal under king Achab, as it is
writton in the book of the kings, in Helias time the Prophet, 3. Reg. 16.18
and they did sacrifice unto it. The tribe of Judah, and the tribe of benjamin,
they also have many times done ydolatry, the which allthough that they fawted
more committing ydolatry than the x. tribes, because they had gretter knowledge
of god, being better instructed, and taught, in gods worship and in his law,
because they had more plenty off Prophets, And also because with them was Gods
doctrine more pure, and less corrupted, than among the 10. tribes,
nevertheless, they had not for all that so much knowledge off God, and off Christ
as we, nor they did not so many ways directly offend Christ, as these do in the
mass, as it appears plainly by all this whole discourse.

Seeing it is thus than, that God and Christ is more offended in the Mass, than
in all the other Idolatries that ever were in the world, whether it be off the
heathen, or off the Hebrews, the conclusion follows that we desired to prove.
And for more clerenes, or else evidence off this our proof, let us gather to
gether in a Somm all our talk made in this chapter. An Epilog. or short
rehearsal off the reason.
And let us say, that Idolatry, or else falls worship, in the which God and
Christ be more, and off moo sortis robbed off their honor, and is among that
people that have more knowledge off the same God and Christ, than the other, that
Idolatry (I say) is greter sacrilege, and abhominacion, than all the other.
This sayng is so clear, that none can reasonably deny it. But the Mass is a
falls worship, and an ydolatry, in the which Gods, and Christ's honor, is more,
and affter moo sorts robbed than in my other, and is among that people that
have more knowledge of God, and Christ, than the rest, for it is among the
Christian people, therefore that is the gretest sacrilege, and the most
abhominacion, that ever was in any manner off world. That the mass is such a
worship and such an Idolatry in the which Gods, and Christ's honor is more
robbed, than in any other that ever was, we have by our former talk plainly
enough proved it. First that it is a falls worship, we have proved it, because it
is fownd out by men, and further, because the ost, and the cup, be worshipped,
and that Gods honor and Christ's is robbed many ways, we have also proved.
First because he that says the mass does usurp Christ's office as well because
he offers Christ him selff to God, as the favorers off the mass confess and
affirm, the which thing (that is to say to offer the same Christ) belonged
only to him, who as the chief priest has offered him selff unto God, up on the
wood off the cross. Further also, because that he, that is to say, the Mass
sayer, is made intreater between the people and God, the which thing is Christ's
office only. Thirdly, because it makes the Mass to be a sacrifice for sins,
the which in like sort belongs to Christ only, as likewise we have proved in
the second chapter of this fourth part. The fautors, of the mass would that the
same should forgive the sins of the living, and the dead, should satisfy for
them, and that it should save men, all the which things belong only to gods
grace through Christ, and be the proper offices of Christ, and they be not of
any creature. This mass robs from the cross, from the passion, from the
blood, from the death, and from the beriall of Christ, because that that which
Christ did, with these things, they would that the mass should do it. Surely,
the mass, as they think works these effects. And what is it to robb christ of
his honor, if this be not? That is to say, to pluck from him the glory of the
pristhode, of the intreatorship, of the only sacrifice, and to be short, of the
only redemer, and sauer? We have seen how many falsedes, how many
supersticions, wickednesses, and blasphemies be therein, shall it not than be a
sacrilege, shall it not be an abhominacion above all other sacrileges and
abhominacions saying it is an heap of sacrilegis and abhominacions? Yes surely
shall it. It is therefore clear and plain, that the mass is the gretest
sacrilege, and the gretest abhominacion, that ever was in any world.

It is an easy things to prove, by the things allredy spoken, that it is the
great mystery of Antichrist, And it follows necessarily, that if the mass be
the gretest sacrilege, and abhominacio^, that ever was in the world, that also
it is the great mystery of Antichrist, called by Paul, for the excellenci of it,
the mystery of iniquity. Nevertheless for more clerenes, and better proffe of
the thing, we will say also a few words to this purpos. It is plain that
Antichrist is the chief child, member, and elect instrument of satan, 2.
Thessa. ^.
called by Paul, the son of perdicion, by the which the same satan, with all
the means and weies that he can, and knows, seeks to withstand Christ, and
to fight against him. And this he does chefely affter ij. sortis. One is openly
that every man seith. The other is secretly and much wors. The open way is
with the persecucions that he does against the servants of Jesus Christ,
afflicting them, tormenting them and killing them, by means of the princes of
the world, and as it is said, with the secular power. For surely these same be
no another but the Arms, of Antichrist, with the which he fights against
Christ, although that the poor princes be not aware of such things, but be
deceived by the Antichristians, that be in their cowrtis. And this manner off
withstanding Christ, although it be open to all men, nevertheless Antichrist
being full off the mysteries off iniquities, and off deuelissh crafftines, with
meruelos and most craffty pretensis, and colors, makes it to seem, to be of a
another sort than it is. For although this manner of persecuting Christ, is all
wholly wicked, and Satanike, yet nevertheless, he gives to understand, that it
is a godly, and a religios thing, and that it is, a defense of Christen
religion, and a keeping of it, persuading that Christ's servants be heretics,
and that the faithful Christians be Lutheranes. He gives to understand that
he is Christ's lifftenant, yea, that he is a God on earth, and not withstanding
he procures as much as he can, that Christ's doctrine should not come in to the
light, because it is that that discovers him, and makes him open to the
world. And he would not be known for him that he is, that is to say, for
Antichrist, which is as much to say, as Christ's chief adversary. Do you not
think that this is a new manner off making war against a prince, to search by
all means to beat him down, to kill all his, and to overthrow him utterly?
And than off the other part to give to understand, and make the world bileue,
that he workith for him, that is to say, to maintain him in his state, and to
keep him in his dominion? What say you? Does not this seem to be a fine art, to
make war upon one wit his most might, and openly to seek to overthrow him
utterly, and of the other side, to make believe to the world that every thing
that he does, he does it to serve him and to do him pleasure? Even so does
Antichrist against Christ. For he withstondeth him, he is his chefest and most
mortal enemy, and nevertheless he says he is his Leefftena^t, and does every
thing to serve Christ, and to maintain his kingdom, that is to say, his
church. Why do you not now at length open your eyes Oh Christians? Is it not
enough that hitherto you have been so miserably, and with so great loss
deceived? Rise up, o God, and judge thine own cause. Suffer not any longer, o
lord, so great disorder that the people should be of this sort handled. Apocal.
13.
Deliver them now at length, from so great a bondage, from this so hard and
long a tyranny.

The other way of making war against Christ, is more hidden, and secret, and
is not seen as the first, but it is withowt comparison much wors, and more
hurtful, because that the first directly hurts the bodies, but this second
hurts and is deadly to the sowles. For somoch as that with more craffti and
secret ways, he does falsify christ's doctrine, the holy gospel, and the
truth, It takes Gods own word, giving it falls understanding, and uses it for
a weapon against Christ, and the truth. And this withowt fear of persecution,
persuadeth under the show of godliness, and religion, that the falsedis,
wickednessis, and blasphemies, be holy, and godly things. As for example that
the pardons which to him that has eyes to see, be an open deceit, and yet he
has given to understand that they forgive sins, with bullis, with
visitations of churches, with stacions, with pilgrimagis, with cords, with
girdles, with garmentis, and such like trompery, and that these things help to
everlasting liffe. And here I might have to talck a long time and could if I
would, give innumerable examples, but because I would not be long, I have only
given the example of the pardons. But to come to our purpos, among the whole
number of doctrines, inuencions, deceites, craffti barterings of Antichrist,
there is none so wittily done, with so great art and conueians, as the Mass.
In the which Antichrist him selff, has bestowed all his wit, and all his
knowledge in bilding it, to make it be cownted, and taken for the principal
worshipp of Christian religion, nor one only has not laid hand to this doing,
but many.

About the bilding off Salomons temple (the which surely was done with most
high wisdom) the bilders were 7. years, and than they ended the work. But
about the bilding of the Mass, how many hondreth years have been bestowed,
and by how many bilders? One has put to one thing, a another a another,
according to the diverse Antichrists that follow done a another. And how should
one only, ever have been able (I will not say to make) but to Imagine, so great
an h^^dy work. Surely it could never have been possible. And all this is done
under color and show off doing a thing most choysefull, and thankful to God,
for the benifite off the sowles, and profit off the bodies. And Antichrist
has not withowt great cause bestowed here all his whole knowledge and labor,
because that he has well seen, that principally his kingdom, and rule,
consists in the same Mass as in a strong castle, and in a well defended
hold.

And withowt dowt when the mass is thrown to the grownd, the whole kingdom of
Antichrist, goes to utter decay. Therefore it is no meruell, though by all
means he can, and knows, he has sought and does seek a fressh to favor her,
to defend her, to keep her, and to privilege her. He carith not though every
other thing goo to the mischeff, so that his kingdom may remain still on
foot. There is no man's wit that can search out, and much less any tongue
declare, the crafftines, the suttlety, the bartring falsode of this Mass, nor
the great harm that it has done sins it begann, and does continually among the
Christen people. There is no pestilens, there is no manner of sickness, that so
infecteth the bodies, as this Mass does the sowles. The pestilens kills the
bodies, this the sowles. The pestilens if it be in one city it is not in a
another, if it be in one contry, it is not in a another, if it be at one time,
it is not at a another, it does not commonly continue any long time, but for a
few months. And it were a great thing if it should last a year. But the
disease of this Mass, has been common to all the Christen people, and yet is,
and has continewed many hondreth years and yet does.

I have goone about in this book to say somewhat of this mass, but in deed I
confess, I am no thing nigh the mark, nor have hit the point I should, as well
by reason of my dull wit, as also that it is not possible that one only man,
might be able to disclose so many deceites, as be therein, and to say so much
as the matter requires. Therefore I desire those to whom God by his grace has
granted more understanding of his things then to me that they will supply my
want. And let it not be one only that should take in hand this enterprise, but
many, because here is enough to say for all, the matter being most large, and as
it were endless. And let the^ not dowt a whit, that this deep sea can ever be
drawn out, or utterly dried up. And they shall do a most thanckfull thing to
God, And very profitable to the Christen people.

Many have writton of this Mass, and one has said one thing, a another a
another thing, but all in generality, and no one that I know, has considred
it particularly. And therefore it could not well be known what manner a thing it
is. Therefore when I saw that no man took this enterprise on him, seeing that no
better surgen than my selff came in place, because the rest were occupied about
diverse other things, God did put in my mind to take in hand this labor, that is
to say to Anatomy her, and to consider her, part by part. And I have done that
little that I could, desiring every faithful and Christen reader that he will
pardon me, if I have failed in any thing, because, to say the truth, who could
ever be able to say of this abhominacion so much, as suffiseth, And as it
displeases God and provoke his anger? If God were so angry for the Idolatry
committed by the Hebruissh people, Exodus 32.
that he ponisshed the^ so many ways, first in the desert for the Idolatry of
the goldin calff, Affterward particularly the 10. tribes in the land of promise,
he rooted them out, and sent them in to perpetual banisshment for their
Idolatries as it is writton in the 4. of the kings. 4. Reg. 17.
And further the people of Judah was offten afflicted, and stricken, for their
Idolatries, that they did now in the hills, now in the valleys, now in the
groves, and affterward they were sent captive to Babylon, And in the end,
because they sold Christ, crucified him, persecuted his Apostles, evil handled
and killed his disciples, And above all, because they despised the holy gospel,
also the same people were sent in to continual banisshment, and wors handled
than ever was any people under the heavens, and withowt comparison more greuosly
afflicted, and ponisshed, than the 10. tribes, And that which is more, they be
so cast off, that they shall never be more the people of God as Christ foretold
in theuangelistes, Matht 21. Marc 12. Luc. 20.
what shall become of the Christen people, that is to say of us, the which
withowt comparison, as before we have seen, do deserve much worse? The
Hebrewissh people many ways co^mit^ed Idolatry, but we moo ways and wi^h
greater Idolatry than they, as we have proved, but specially in this mass. The
Jews old Christ one only time, the massers sell him an infinite sort of times.
Judas sold him for 30. pens, these sell him for a dandy pratt. The Jews
crucified him ones only, and that unwittingly, not knowing that it was Christ,
as Paul says in the first to the Corinthes. For if they had known him, 1.
Corint. 2.
they would never have crucified the King of glory, we that know him and
confess him to be Christ, do every day so offten putt him up on the cross,
as we say Masses. If those people that withowt comparison, have committed much
less Idolatry tha^ we, and have less crucified Christ than we, were so
sharply afflicted and stricken, and aff^er sent in to perpetual banisshme^t,
what shall become off us? If the Jews were so evil handled, and affter
utterly cast off, what can we look for, for so greuos and great an Idolatry of
this Mass, in the which so many ways we offend God and wrong Christ? Would to
God that I were no prophet, and did not truly foregesse? And what do I say
forgesse? If Gods word be true, as it can not be otherwise, If God be ever
the same as he ever was, If affter the most greuos sins, and withow
repentans of the people, if affter continual perseuerans from evil, to wors,
allweyes and in all times, there followed and never failed, sharp revenge, most
great scorgis, and utter ruins, what other thing should we conclude but that
either the self same, or a much greater overthrow and ruin, must fall up on
us, for as much as we have much more sinned, and provoked God unto anger? Ought
we not now at length to know, that how much more slow God is to ponissh, so
much greter ponisshments he laith on? And when he beginnith to beat, he
strikes so much the more greuosly? we see the most mighty enemy of the
Christian name, which is the great Turk, draw nigh to wards us, yea that he
has driven us in to this corner of Europe, and continually he commith on nerer
us, and day by day makes his coming on gretter. And who dowteth but this is
gods work, with the which he threatnith us, and called us to repentans? And yet
we, as it were blind men, not considring gods goodness, and long suffering, do
heap up, and bring to gether sins up on sins, hurding up gods wrath up on
us, stirring and provoking him to to greater fury. Banisshment, bondage, and
other worldly ponisshments, be in comparison of owre deserts of litil weight
and small punisshmentes, because they all pass a way, and with the present liffe
shortly do end, but the spiritual ponisshments, and those of the soul, that
allweies continewe, that is to say, the everlasting owtcasting, the horrible
and continual wailings, who can esteem them and worthily consider them? Seeing
it is thus than, O Christian people, flee this mass, the which many ways
kindles gods wrath, Flee it as a deadly and most perellos pestilens of your
sowles. And you chefely, which were and yet be ministers of so great
abhomynacion. Seeing now that ye know it, cease from saing, and celebrating it
any more, and from being cause to make the poor people, committ so grett an
error. And do you penans for that which is past, and desire you the most
favorable lord, and our heavenly father, that he would deal with you, not
according to your sins, but according to the multitude of his mercies, that
he would deliver you from all euel through Jesus Christ our savior.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. That the mass is of such quality and crafft, and affter
such sort abominable, that no man living, for any manner of pretens, respect or
occasion that can be, may by any manner of means, with a safe conscience, either
say it, hear it or any ways be present at it.
MAN'S nature is of such sort craffty and witty, that it can tell, even how to
deceive it selff. There are fownd in the world certain excellent dise Coggars,
and cardsetters, that trapp, as it were, all men that they have to do with,
and it behooves a man to be well ware, least they begyle him, nevertheless they
do only begile other, and not them selves. But our nature is so shiftfull and
ware, that it does not only begile other, but it selff also. And this it does
chefely in those things that like them, and serve for their commodities. And it
semith that it has learned the art of deceiving, of the subtle serpent, tree
which with his persuasions and Intiseme^ts, brought our first mother Eve to
eat of the apple, and to do contrary to gods commandment, making her believe
one thing for a another. Even so does also man to wards him selff, that can
meruelosly color, and set a face on his deceites to make them excusable. Not
wi^hstonding when he has well turned and tossed him selff, with as many scusys
as he can bring forth, it is fownd at ^^ight, that he has erred. And he
plainly seith that his crafftes, be very folies. There be many now a days in
Germany, in France, in Spain, in Italy that have received the gospel, and
have the knowledge of Christ, but finding them selves in the mids of their
enemies, and fearing persecution, chefely when they see the poor Christians to
be evil handled, the which now by this hateful name to the world be called
Lutherans, And that some of them be taken and putt in to the galleys, Some
Imprisoned, some other be cruelly tormented up on the Rack, Some hanged, Other
drowned in the rivers, and other burnt, they be affraied, And because they would
not be marked, and accused for Lutherans, they goo to the mass, and do
against their conscience. And to prove that this is true, if the fear that
they have, had not been, they would never have gone to the mass. And the cause
why they would not have gone is, that they should have thought to have done
evil, and against their conscience, this is clear. Yet as I have said, being
affraied either of losing their temporal goods, or rather their skinn, they
do as other do. And to the intent that they might affter some sort be scused
they allege certain pretensis with the which they deceive them seluis, and the
reasons that they bring forth, be these.

The 1. reason.
First they say that if they goo not to mass, and Eue^songe or other used
ceremonies, they fear to lay a grett Stumbling stock for the simple and weak,
and to give them occasion to thinck, or else at least suspect, that they be
despisers, yea scorners of Christian religion, or else heretics, and enemies of
the church, and not going to mass there is given them a wicked example, seeing
the poor sowles think such things to be lawful and christianlike. And that
for such respectt, it is well done to goo to the mass, and to their service,
and to dissemble so long, till they may have gotten the true knowledge. And when
they goo not to the mass, the simple take a very evil example to do the like
against their conscience.

Than next the Apostle Paul does teach us, The second reason.
to apply our selves to all men, and to fasshon our selves with other, as we
have in the first to the Corinthes where he says, I am made servant of all
men, to the Jews I am made a Jew, 1. chor. 9.
to winn them: To the^ that be under the law, as though I were under the law,
to thentent that I might win them: To them that be withowt law, as though I
were withowt law (allthough that I as to ward god am not withowt law, but
bownd to Christ's law,) to thentent that I might winn them: I am made to the
weak as though I were weak, to the end that I might winn the weak: I am
become allthings to all, that at the least I might winn some. If thapostle
Paul applied him selff to all, and did teach that the like also ought to be
done by others, Why shall not we goo to the mass with other, doing as they
do, applieng our selves to them, when we seek to win them?

The third reason Psalm. 7. Ierem. 17. Apocal. 2.
Also the scripture says that god is the sercher of hartis, and he looks
chefely up on the minds, and considreth to what end a thing is done, this is
plain. Therefore if one with a good intent shall goo to the mass, not to
offend god, but only for the foresaid respectis, that is to say, for to avoid
giving of evil example, and occasion of sla^der to the weak, but rather to
draw the^ by little and little to the knowledge of Christ, he shall not sin,
chefely not consenting to the abuses and to those supersticions that there be
committed, for so much as the sin is in the will, and in the consent, and not
in the out ward show.

The 4. reason.
Furthermore, by this that we goo to the mass, we allow no another thing but
Christis institution, that is to say, the sacrament of Jesus Christ's body and
blood. For not withstonding those addicions that be made there, the substance of
the same sacrament, by this is not taken a way, as by the addicio^s that be
made in baptism, that is to say, salt, spittle, cream, Tapers, Light,
Coniurings, and that the child is axed of the faith: And to conclude, that
every thing is said in an unknown tongue, these addicions make not that it should
not be true baptism, because there is the substance of the same, that is to
say, the water, And affter, those holy words, that is to say, I baptize the in
the name of the father, the son, and of the holy ghost, Amen. Even so is it of
the mass, that for all that, that there be many things added, and that it is
infolied with many diuicis of men, yet the substance not withstanding of the
sacrament is there, that is to say, the bread, and the wine, and the words of
the consecracio^, the which things be instituted, and ordained, by Christ him
selff, nor our purpos is not to allow any other thing but Christis plain
institution. And allthough there be made a certain worship, we do not worship
the sacrament (For god forbid we should) but we do worshipp Jesus Christ and no
another. Therefore we do not sin going to the mass, for so much as that we do
not approve any other thing than that which is good, and that which is of god.
The rest we leave, and we gather, as it is commonly said, the rose and leave the
thorns.

To conclude, The fifft reason.
they bring forth thexamples of the holy scripture, that is to say, of
Nicodemus, of Joseph of the city of Aramathea, which both were secret
disciples of Jesus Christ. Luke 23. John 3.7.19.
And theuangelistes do witness of them, saing that they were Just. Ioh. 3.7.19.
And of Nicodemus John writes that he came first to Jesus by night, Affterward
he defended him in the cowncell of the Jews, In the end he carried an hundredth
pownd of mirrh and Aloes to Christ's burial. Surely these were holy and just
men, yet they hidd them selfs for fear of the Jews, the which cowld not have
been if they had not dissembled with the other Jews, doing as they did.

4. kings 5.
They bring forth also thexample of Naaman Sirus of whom it is writton in the
iiij, book of the kings, that Heliseus granted him, that he might enter in to
the temple of Remmon, which was an Idol, and to worshipp in the same with the
king of Siria, Naaman being the chief of the same kings war. And why may not
we also do the like?

Now these and other like reasons and scusis be no another, but pretenses to do
evil, and leaves with the which men would yet cover those things that they do,
but they be deceived, as we will make it appear. But first we will prove our
purpos, that is to say, that by no means it is lawful to a Christian, to say,
nor to hear, no nor to be present at the mass, and affter we will answer to
these reasons. He that goes to the mass, does iij. great euels. He that goth
to the mass does 3. great evils.
First he does against the honor nor of God, Secondly against his neighbors
safety: Thirdly against his own soul health. That he does against Gods honor,
I will prove it. It is plain that in no case, it is at any time lawful, to
do against Gods honor, for so much as the honor and glory of God, with the
angels, with me^, and with all manner of creatures, is of more importans, than
the heaven and the earth, because that God has made every thing for his glory,
as Solomon says in the Prouerbis, that is, Prouer. 16.
the lord has wrought all things for him selff, and the wicked for the evil
day. That he who goth to the Mass, or says it, or stands there present at
it, doith against Gods honor, it is to plain, for that we have in the former
discourse hitherto proved, that the Mass is the greatest abhominacion that ever
was in all worlds, because that there is committed a most great Idolatry, and
that honor that belongs only to God, and Christ, is given to plain
creatures. The Mass is full of falsodes, of supersticions, of abuses, of
wickednessis, and of blasphemies against God and Christ. And how can it be ever
lawful in any case (let it be what so ever it will) for a Christen man to say
it to hear it, or to be present at it? And if a gentle man do more esteem his
honor than his own liffe, how much more ought we to esteem Gods honor for the
which we ought to give not only one, but infinite lives if we had so many. And
so much the more as every life is his gifft, and proceeds from him, yea is
his? We do read that many Idolaters have bestowed their liffe for their
earthly co^try, and for thonor of the same, the which notwithstonding affter
this present life did look for none other. And shall the Christian fear to
give his mortal life for Gods honor and Christ's, for the^, of whom he is
every way most sure that he shall have everlasting life?

I prove this thus. Paul says to the Romans, every thing that is not of faith
is sin. Who is he knowing what manner a thing the Mass is, that knows not
likewise the same to be against Gods word? If it be so, how than can one with
faith, and good conscience be present at a thing the which he judges to be
blasphemos, damnable and against God? And who dowteth that he who does against
his conscience sinnith, let him do what so ever he will? It is not therefore
lawful by any manner of means to be present at the Mass. That he doith against
his neighbors safetye likewise prove it. First he offends, and hurts them
that have not yet the knowledge of Christ. For so much as wha^ they see one that
has the knowledge of the gospel, stand at the Mass, harken to it, bow him
selff, and knele to the Sacrament, and worship it, what else can they thinck,
but that he has the self same opinion that they them seluis have? And this
being persuaded, they be confirmed in their error, saing to them seluis, behold
him who was come to that new opinion or religion, now he changes his mind,
and returns to the old faith the which he had forsaken. Surely he would never
have returned if he had not known that he was deceived by the pretens of the
gospel, and perceived that with us is the true gospel, the true church and
Christ's religion. God forbid that we should forsake our opinion, the which he
with evident deeds, does show to be good. And with these thoughts, they be
enstranged from the gospel, and from the truth, and be confirmed in error. Do
you thinck that this is a small evil, with our example to estrange the minds
of men from the gospel, and and from Christ, and to confirm them in
Antichrists church?

Secondly it hurts the weak faithful, the which begin to bileue the
gospel, for when they see that they, who better understand tha^ the^ selves
goo to the Mass, they become weaker in faith, and occasion is given them to
return to their first errors. And affter this sort in the raze of faith, they
be stopped, not only hindered, because they begin to dowt. And what says Christ
of those that offend the little ones? Math. 18. Marc. 9. Luc. 17.
He that shall offend (says he) one off these little ones the which bileue in
me, it were better for him that a mill stone should be hanged about his neck,
and that he were drowend in the depth of the sea.

Thirdly he hurts the stowt and strong in faith, and hurts the Christian
cause it selff, because he makes, that the wicked men more boldly do say evil
of the true faith, do wrong it, and make it hateful, many manner of ways. Is
not this daily seen, that how many moo men do openly enter in to a lie, and in
to an error, that so much the more falsoode is strengthened, and the same lie
confirmed, and the truth more down beaten, And the wicked men become so much
the more fearce, and stowt, to down beat the good cause, and all those that
defend it, as they see it wax weaker?

He does also against his own soul health. For wha^ he goth to the Mass
against his conscience, he shows that he loves better him selff, than Christ
and God, and the tymed liffe, more tha^ the everlasting, and he is condemned by
Christ's sentens, the which says, he that loves his soul, John. 12.
that is to say his temporal liffe shall lose it, and he that hates his sowl
in this world, shall keep it in everlasting liffe. And in luke he says, if
any man come to me and hate not his father, his mother, his wife, his childern,
his brethern and sisters, yea and his own life, he can not be my disciple. Luc.
14.
Is not this well known, that they that have the knowledge of the gospel, and
goo to the Mass, goo thither for fear least they should loose their goods,
and be affraied least they should be persecuted? why follow they not the
cowncell, yea the commandment of Christ who says, fear not those that kill
the body, because they ca^ not kill the soul, Math. 10.
but rather fear him that can send the body and soul to destruction in to
hell fire. So that than these grownd works remaining that the going to the
Mass is against the honor of God, the profit of his neighbor, and against his
own soul health, that goth thither, It is an easy thing to answer to those
reasons or rather scusis that certain make of the which we have spoken before.

Where as first they say that they goo to the 1.
Mass, to avoid the offending of the simple and weak, and to thente^t that
they should not thinck of them, that they were despisers, and mockers of
religion, or else heretics and enemies off the church, if they goo not to the
Mass. And that for such respect it is good to dissemble so long till that such
weakelings might be brought to the true knowledge. I answer that there be 2.
sortis of offenses, the one is called an offense given, the other an offense
taken. The first offense is when a man does any euel work, by the which he
offends his neighbor. As for example, if one should blasp heme or committ
some thefft, or else otherwise should expressly do against Gods commandment.
This manner of offense is an offense given, because that he who does such an
evil work, does surely give occasion of offense, the work being of it selff
wicked, and against God. Or else if the work off it selff were not wicked, but
might be lefft undone withowt offendinge God, and yet the man not having
respect to his weak neighbor, would do it to satisfy, his appetite. As for
example, there is one that has the knowledge of the gospel, and of Christ, and
knows that a Christian may at all times with thanks giving, 1. Timo. 4.
use every meat for his need, and shall chance sometime into the company of
certain simple and ignorant men, the which shall thinck greuosly toffend if
they shall eat flessh on the friday, and he that has the knowledge, to
satisfy his appetite will eat of it, not having respect to those poor sowles
the which be offended with him for that eating. This manner of man sins, and
doith against charity as Paul says to the Romans, Roma. 14.
If for meat thy brother be trobled, thou do not now walk according to
charity. And in the 1. to the Corinthes he says, 1. Corint. 8.
rather than the meat should offend my brother, I will never eat flessh. These
such like offenses be called offencis given, because in deed the man gives such
occasion of offense and sins.

But there is a another sort of offencis, the which as I have said before are
called offenses taken, shat is to say, when a man is offended for things, for
the which he ought not to be offended, but takes occasion of offense withowt
just cause, as certain do that be offended, at good works, affter the manner of
the Phariseis, which were offended with Christ, because he healed certain sick
men on the Sabbath day, or else be offended if a man abstain from wicked
works. Now this such kind off offense is no sin, because the man properly
does not give offense, but other do take it for offense the which they ought
not to do, yea they offend, esteming and cownting that to be offense, which is
well done. The faithful and godly man ought not to pass, even as Christ
passed not, though other were offended for such works or things, for so much
as that a man must cease from well doing, or else must needs do euel, that would
avoid such kind off offencis. Even so it is in this case. If any will be
offended that one goth not to the Mass, or else that the Images be not honored,
a man ought not to care for it. For if it had neded to care for such offencis,
it had been fit for the martirs that they should have worshipped the Idols, For
the Idolaters were offended at them, because they worshipped them not. Yea, I
say, that the simple and the weak, have more occasion off offense (speaking of
the true offense) and be more offended, if one that has knowledge goo to the
Mass, than if he went not. For as before I have proved, by such going they be
hurt, for so much as that they be confirmed in their error, the which is much
wors for them to be so offended than to be offended, for that other offense the
which, is no true offense in deed.

To the saing of thapostle the which says that

To that other scuse which says, that God beholds a thing is done, and so
that a man do not consent with his heart to the abuses that be committed in the
Mass, it is no sin to goo to it: I answer, that if this reason auailed, the
martyrs, as I have said before, might have worshipped the Idols withowt sin,
and we with a good conscience may deny Christ. For allthough that the martyrs
should have worshipped the Idols, they would never have worshipped the^ with the
heart, but only owtwardly, and unwillingly, And we may deny Christ with the
mowth but not with the heart. And what inco^ueniencis be these? Christ will not
only that we should believe in him, but will that we also should confess him with
the mowth, and with the owtward deeds, for else we shall not be true Christians,
Math. 10.
but we shall be denied of him, as he says in S. Matthew. He that shall
acknowledge me before men, I will acknowledge him before my father which is in
heaven. Luck. 12.
And in Luke he says, before the angels of God, And he that shall deny me
before me^, I will deny him before my father which is in heaven. And thapostle
Paul says to the Romans. Roma. 10.
With the heart men believe to Justice, but with the mowth is made the confession
to safetye. God will for 2. respectis have of us the owtward confession, that is
to say, that we should make plain to men, our faith and religion, as well with
words, as with deeds. First for his own glory, because that he is honored and
glorified, when the true religion is openly vtterid. Than further also, for
the benifite of our neighbor, to thentent that by such confession, he might
follow the true knowledge of God and holy religion. And to prove this true,
tell me affter what sort is the Christian religion increased, except first by
the preaching of the holy gospel, and than by the blood of martyrs? The
ydolaters saw the poor Christians constant in acknowleging Christ's name, they
saw them persecuted, taken, imprisoned, ponisshed, and miserably murdered, and
said to them selves, surely this people could never have been so constant, with
so great and stowt minds, nor they would never have suffered so great tormentis,
and so sharp death, if they had not been certain that, affter this present
life, there be laid up for them, most great rewards: And if this their
religion had not been true. And affter this sort they were conuertid to
Christ, and Christ's religion increased, that is to say the number of byleuers.

Further I say, that true faith is not withowt the profession, not only of
words, but of deeds and works. Hebr. 11.
Paul says to the Hebrews, that by faith the saints have wrought justice,
and some of them by faith were racked, tormented, and beaton, some were stoned,
some cut in pecis, sawed, killed with the sword, and diverse ways exercised.
2. John. 5.
And John in the 1. says that our faith is the victory that ouercommith the
world. He that has the true faith, confesses it, and shows it with deeds.
Therefore to be short I answer to that reason, and I say, that it is true, that
God looks up on the hartis, and if the heart had not consentid, there should
not have been any sin, but here in this case, the heart consents unto it,
for if the man had not agreid to goo to the Mass, he would not have gone
thither, but he goith because he agreith to goo although he goo thither
unwillingly. The heart had not consented, if the man had been carried thither by
force, or drawn thither with roopes, or chains, And in such case he had not
fawted. But this chances, not to those that goo to the Mass, because they be
not forced to goo thither, but they goo thither willingly, although with a
certain lothsomnes. And we must know, that all that which is done unwillingly,
is not done by force, for so much as many things be done with grefe, and
unwillingly, and yet they be done with the consent of the mind. As for example,
the taking of a bitter medicine, the causing of some sick part of the body to
be cut of, these things should not be done if the man were not content, and did
not agree to the^. That saing, that is to say, that when a man has not a
wicked, but a good intent, Roma. 3.
and does that which he does to help his neighbor, is not to the purpos, because
we must not do evil that good may come of it.

To the other reason or rather scuse, the which other: because that this
allowing is only known to them selfs, and not to other, who when they see
that one goes to the Mass, do thinck that, he allowith the whole, and they
be confirmed in their error if they be wicked, if they be not wicked, they
have occasion of offense and remain offended. And although that none were
offended, nor confirmed in wickedness, yet understanding that the Mass is a
bottom, and a roll of blasphemies, how should the ears of the faithful,
behable to hear, and their eyes suffer to see, so great an abhominacion, the
which so many ways does robb God and Christ, of their honor, yea that speaks
evil of them.

2. and those that goo to the Mass. For although for fear they did not open
them selves to be Christ's disciples, nevertheless they did not for all that
committ any manner of Idolatry, nor they went not to such abhominacio^s as the
Mass is. Further, it is no good reason, to goo about to defend a man's own
fawtes, with the fawtes of holy men. Nor we ought not to follow the saints in
those things wherein they have erred, but only in those things that be worthy of
commendacion. What a folissh thing were it, if an adulterer would make his
excuse that to committ adultery is not evil, because that David committed
adultery. And would excuse the denial of Christ to be no sin, because that
Peter denied him thrice? Even so do they that will with Joseph's and
Nicodemussis weakness scuse their error, that is to say, that it is lawful to
goo to the Mass, and dissemble, because that those 2. holy men, for fear have
dissembled, they being of Christ's disciples. But let these manner of men tell me
this one point, what is the cause why they do not rather follow these holy men
in the stowtnes of their doings, rather than in their weakness, that is to say
that although whilst Christ lived on the earth they were afraid to be known
for his disciples, nevertheless at the time of his death when all the other
disciples were hiddon, except John, and the women, and when, rather than in any
other time they should have been affrayed, than they waxed stowt.

Thus they in time of tribulacion, and when there was cause of fear be came
stowt and did not remain fearful. Why do they not follow them in the stowtnes
of the mind, which is a vertew, and not in the weakness of fear which is a
vice? Who dowteth that Joseph, and Nicodemus, when they dissembled for fear,
were weak and imperfect Christians, and erred in that they did not boldly
confess Christ? Let us not I pray you allege the holy men in things euel
done, to follow the^, but in things worthy of praise and well done, only, for
so much as that in those things only we ought to follow them, and not in other.

4. Kings 5.
where the text says, that the same Naama^ chief of the king of Assyria^s
war, when he was healed of the leprosy by Heliseus, through Gods might, and
being washed 7. times in the river of Jordan, when he was returned to
Helyseus, he said, Surely I know that there is no another God on the whole
earth, but he of Israel, and desyring to give him a gifft, Helyseus did not
accept it. Further the text says, that the same Naama^ desiered the Prophet,
that he would grant him so much earth of that contry as 2. moyles could carry,
and said, because thy servant will not make any more burnt offering, or sacrifice
to strange Gods, but to the lord. By the which words he declared him self to
believe in the true God, and to profess him. And affter he added, But there is
this one only thing, in the which thou shall pray for thy servant, when my
lord, that is to say, my king of Siria shall enter in to the temple of Remmon,
to worshipp and while he leanyth on my hand, If I shall worshipp, when he
worshippeth in the same place, that the lord would pardon me thy servant for
this thing, And Heliseus said unto him, goo in peace. Here we see that Naaman
desiered Helyseus that if it chanced him to worship in the temple of Remmon,
that he would pardon him that fawt, which fawt if he should have done, Naaman him
selff withowt dowt knew it to be sin, for if he had not known it to be euel
and sin, he would not have said to Helyseus, that he should pray God for him to
pardon him. And Helyseus said unto him, Goo in peace. The which words did not
signify that the Prophet Helyseus did grant to Naaman or permit him, that he
might enter in to the temple of Remmon, and worship there. These words did not
mean to signify this, but they did signify and give to understand, that if
it did happen him to committ such a fawt, that he would pray to God for him to
pardon him. There is a great differens between the sayng to one I will pray to
God for the to pardon the, if thou shall do or committ such a fawt, and to say,
I do grant the that thou may do it. And if any would say, what is the cause
that the Prophet reproved not Naaman, sayng to him, take heed Naaman that you
commit not this great sin, nor do so great a fawt. To this I answer that it
neded not to say such words unto him, nor to warn him of such a thing because
that Naaman did well know it to be evil done, yea he did confess it to be
sin, if it should chance him to do it. And it may be also that Helyseus did
warn him that he ought not by any manner off means to suffer him selff to be
brought to fall in ^o that error. For we must thinck that all the words be not
writton that happened between the one and the other, the story being shortly
writton. And to give an example let us admit that one should come to me that
should say I goo to the Emperors court, and because I am nere about his Majesty,
it may chance me that I shall wait on him some time to the Mass. I know well
that to goo thither is sin and idolatry, yet if it should chance me for
worldly respect, that I should at any time goo thither, pray unto God for me,
that he would pardon me this sin: And put in case that I should say unto him goo
in peace, by this my sayng goo in peace, I mean not to grant him that he might
goo unto the mass, Only I mean to say, goo your way, and if any such thing
shall happen you, I will pray to God for you, that he would pardon you. Even so
were Helyseus words with Naaman. For he did not grant him that he might enter
in to that temple, nor that he might worship, but only signified unto him that
he would pray to God for him. This example therefore of Naaman does nothing help
those that will be scused by going to the Mass with a good conscience, but
rather it accuses them. For if they will do as Naaman did, they shall accuse
them selves and confess to do evil, if they goo to the Mass, as he did
confess it to be sin, if he should goo in to the temple of Remmon. Why do
not they accuse themselves, and tell their fawt, and axe pardon of God for so
great a fawt, and not goo about to scuse it?

Parauentur they will answer here and say, you in deed have goodly talk, you I
say, that are out of gunne shote (as men be wont to say) and that are out of
perels you that are in a sure place, and fear not to be taken, can give goodly
cowncell, but we that be sure, if we will not goo to the Mass, to loose our
goods and our riches, and our liffe withal, if we presently will not deny
Christ, what should we do? If you were in our place, we ca^ not tell what you
would do, whether you would be so stowt in deeds, as you be bold in words.
Here I do freely confess that I have great compassion on this manner of men,
nor I will not show my selff strong by reproving others. I know that stowtnes
is a rare gifft of God, and not granted to all men. And the more part of
Christians have a weak and feeble faith, and the strong, and stowt of mind be
very few. But in this I reprove the^ that goo to mas, that doing euel, as they
do, they would excuse the^ selves that they sin not, and will with scuses
lessen that their fawt, which whilst they do, they increase the sin to their
co^demnacion. Why do they not humble themselves, and confess that they do
evil? why do they not axe of God the spirit of stowtnes, and constant faith?
It were reason that they should behold the saints examples of vertewes, and not
of weakenessis, that they should behold, as a man would say, Tob. 2.
Tobias of whom it is writto^ in his book that being the youngest of his tribe
of Neptalim, he went not with all the r^st to worship the golden calves, the
which Ieroboa^ king of Israel had made, but did flee all their company, and
went to worship God in Jerusalem, nor he feared not to be persecuted, for not
doing as the rest did. Ca^ there be fownd any one Prophet that would goo with
the rest to worship those calves, or that would worship in the tops up on the
mowntans, or else in the groves as the common people offt did. This shall never be
fownd. Why do they not hehold those 3. young men of the which Daniell speaks,
that is to say, Annanias, Danie. 2.
Azarias and Misael, the which would rather be thrown in to the hot oven, than
worship that goldin Image, which the king Nabuchodonosor made? why do they not
follow the 7. Machabeys brethern with their godly mother? the which were
miserably tormented and killed by the most cruel king Antiochus, because they
would not eat hoggs flessh, as it is writton in the book of the Machabees? 2.
Match. 7.
why do they not follow thapostles, So many martirs, not only men, but women,
yea so many Iong women, as Agnes, Katarin, Lucia and many other withowt number,
that would rather dye, than worship the Idols?

Let the^ tell me, which is the greater Idolatry, that of the Idolatros
gentiles or that of the Mass? That of the goldin caluis, or of the Mass?
Which is the greater sin to eat hoggs flessh, or to hear Mass? have not we
proved that the Mass is the greatest Idolatry that ever was in the world? And
what is the cause that the allegid saints did rather desire to die, than to
consent to any Idolatry, or else to do against Gods law? And shall we
Christians make no conscience to consent to the greatest abhominacion that ever
was? But let us lay a side the saints the which dyed because they would not
offend God: seeing they had the knowledge of God and Christ, and the true
religion, and looked, affter this mortal life, for the everlasting, it is not
to be merueled at. But what shall we say of the poor Idolaters the which had
not the knowledge of Christ nor of God, no nor looked not for the reward of
everlasting life? And yet for all this, many of them for thonor of the world
and for Temporal glory have suffered most sharp ponisshments, and horrible
torments, and were miserably killed. What shall we say of Marcus Antonius
servant of who^ is redd, that because he would not utter the fawt, that is to say
the unchaste lust of his master, he suffered to be burnt with redd hoote plates
of Iron? In the end, he rather suffered to be torn, than to reveal the fawt of
the same Marcus Antonius. And so he overcame all the force of the accusers?
What shall we say of Marcus Regulus, who because he would not break his faith
given to the Carthaginensis, returned in to their hands, being sure that they
would cruelly put him to death (as in deed they did) putting him in to a vessel
of wood all full of very sharp nails that were stickt in to the vessel to
thentent that when the vessel should be moved, they should prick him on every
side, and should tear his whole body. And many other that we might allege if
we would? They suffered for a temporal honor, and for their earthly contry, and
yet they passed not to dye. And will not we for Jesus Christ's sake, for Gods
honor, and for the reward of everlasting glory, bestow owre mortal life? Shall
we be less stowt for Christ then the Idolaters for incestuose men? Shall we be
less coragios to possess the everlasting contry, than they to keep for other
their earthly contrye?

Surely our fawt is most great, if we Christians for to have heaven, and the
chief goodness, shall refuse to suffer that, that the men void of true godliness
and religion, and that looked for no reward affter this present life, have not
refused to suffer for the temporal glory, that helped them nothing. Let us
therefore conclude and say, that it is in no case, nor by no manner of means
lawful to say this Mass, to hear it, nor to be present at it, chefely for a
Christen man, that has the knowledge of the holy gospel, as by so many ways we
have proved. And if yet it should happen that by weakness of faith and fear
any should goo thither, let the^ take heed, that they scuse not, and cover not
them selves with bows, that is to say, with trifling, and vain excusis,
affter the manner of our first parentis Adam and Eve, the which would have
covered their shames with figgleaues, byleuing that they should not be seen, for
so much as that Gods eyes do pearse, Hebr. 4. Eccle. 23.
and pass through these leaves, and see the conscience and thoughtis of man.
There is no means nor any manner of way, to be hiddon from the sight of them.
Well, let men find out as many couerings, and scusis, as they will, and can,
yet their conscie^s shall never be quiet, but they shall allweys have the
grudge thereof. And yet if they will by some means be well covered in Gods
sight, it shall be necessary that as was done with Adam and Eve affter they had
sinned, that is to say, that when they fownd them selves naked and shamfast to
be seen, and having themselves no way to be covered with cootes of skins. So
let these with tears axe of the same God, that they may be clothed with the
same most pure, clean, holy and godly skinn, that is to say, Jesus Christ, to
thentent that being covered with it, they might be no more ashamed of Gods
sight. But this can not be done, if they will scuse them selves. It behooves
that they accuse them selves, that they tell their own fawt, that they do
poenance, and that plainly they confess to have erred. Affter this sort they
shall obtain this godly garment, and they shall follow Paul's cowncell, yea his
commandment the which he teaches writing to the Romans, put on the lord Jesus
Christ, Roma. 13.
for otherwise they shall allweys remain naked and with shame, that is to say,
that their conscience shall never be quiet but they shall allweyes have hell at
home.

Wherefore o Christians, even as in the beginning of this book I have exhorted
you to read it and well to consider it to thentent that you might understand
the crafft off this mass, so many ways blasphemos, so now in the end of the
same, when you do clearly understand the most vngratios qualities of the same,
that you will wholly forsake it. Hither to many, not only lay men, but
priests, fryres and monks have by ignorance fawted, thinking that it had been
a thing most holy, and a worship most thanckfull to God, and therefore have
hawnted it, not knowing it. And though they have greuosly offended God, yet in
some part they were excusable, having fawted by ignorance. And here I do not
speak of those the which against their conscience, and knowing what manner a
thing it was, only for fear, or other wordly respect, have dissembled, bacaus
that those manner of men, have committed a great fawt, albeit that they also
shall be pardoned, if they forsake the same, and do poenance, and be sorry for
that which is past. But now that by this book, (if they will read it and
understand it) all men's eyes are opened, and made plainly to see, with how
many abuses, and cursings, it is not only full, but heaped, if they shall
(being priests, frires or monks) any more say it, or being other men, shall
any more hear it, I say surely that they shall be utterly inexcusable and
damnable, as they that knowingly and willingly shall sin even of very purpos,
and shall heap up Gods wrath up on them. Nor it shall not help nor avail
them talleage the perell of their goods, of their howsold, or of their own
life. For so much as that all these things, and as many other as can be had in
the world to gether with the liffe it selff, compared to Christ, ought to be
cownted as vile, yea of no valor, and for his love we must necessarly forsake
them: because he is that treasure hiddon in the field, and that precios
margarite for the which we ought to sell all our goods to bye it. Math. 13.
And when we be brought to such an eschew that we must either loose all these
things with the mortal liffe, or forsake Christ. Who dowteth but all the rest
ought to be forsaken, to keep Christ, whom if we have, we possess God and
every good thing. What does it help man (says Christ him selff) though he in
deed winn the whole world and lose his soul? Math. 1^.
What a folly is this to get other things, and to loose a man's selff, withowt
who^ nothing ca^ help or avail him? Off the other part, let us consider, that
needs whether we will or no, we must leave the world, and this same life, for
we be mortal, and cannot allweyes tarry here, but we be certain that we must
needs depart, and goo out off this contry, that is to say, dye and change the
liffe. This is a sure rule. And seeing that this is necessary, and we can not
eschew it, is it not better for Christ's sake to leave the whole (the which is
not in deed to loose, but to gain) and to lay up treasor in heaven, nor it is
not to leave it, but to put it in to his hands, to thentent that he
everlastingly may keep it for us? Is it not better, I say, to do thus, tha^
utterly to lose all to gether? It is a thing most certain, that he that loses
Christ, loses every thing, and he that possesses him, possesses every good
thing. I know that Antichrist with his tirantes, like a roaring lion does
threaten the la^be, and warreth with him, persecuting his affter diverse sortis,
afflicting them, tormenting them, and in thend, killing them. But for all that
let them work as much as they will and can, yet they shall lose, and the lamb
(as John says in the Apocalipse) shall ouercom them. Apo. 14.17.
For he is the king of kings and lord of lords that has all power in heaven
and in earth, Math. 28.
And has a name above all names to whom every knee in heaven, in earth,
Philip. 2.
and in hell is bowed, and there is not, that can resist him. Now it seems
that he slepeth, but the time will come of revenge, when, yea Antichrist with
his tyrants, to gether with his false prophets, shall be cast in to the
burning pit or lake of fire and brimstone, where they shall be tormented for
ever.

Now, the poor Christians be in the hands of Antiochessis, of Dioclesians, of
Domicians, of Neroes, and other cruel tyrants and Antichrists (I touch not
the good princis) the which tyrants have allweyes, and will afflict Gods people,
But let us, O brethern, have patience in Christ, as him selff does admonissh
us, saing, Math. 14.
In yowr paciens possess your sowles. And he that shall continewe to thend,
shall be safe. Let us pray and have trust in God through Christ, for he is able
to deliver us from the hand of our enemies, and defend us, if it shall please
him. And when we shall see apparent parell, rather than to deny Christ, let us
flee away, if we can from the unhappy nation. But if we can not what else is
to be done, but to confess him boldly, Roma. 8. 2. Timo. 1.2.
calling to remembrans that the true Christian has not the spirit of fear,
but of stowtnes and power? let us rather obey God than men, the which can in
deed kill the body but not the soul. Math. 10.
Let us dye for God and Christ's name, for this death shall be glorios, and let
us remember that which we said before, that needs we must dye. Let us dye, I
say, with the prophets, with the Apostels, with the holy martirs, yea with
Christ him selff. Why should we be affrayed, having such companions so noble and
glorios that have ledd us the way? being sure that if we shall dye to gether
with them, Roma. 8.
and with Christ, we shall also to gether with them and with Christ reign and
live for ever, to whom be all rule honor and glory for ever and ever, So be it.

THE END.
A SERMON OF THE SACRAMENT OF THANckes giving the which declares whether
Christ be really and bodily in the same or no.
I CAN NOT SAY HOW much mirth and yoie is in my heart when I see in this our
age, that there is kindeled in the minds of many the holy desire to understand
gods things, that is to say the inestimable, and the incomprehensible treasures
hidden in Christ Jesus, whose knowledge passes every other knowledge and wisdom,
and does so far excel, Philip. 3.
that Paul thapostel thought every other thing loss, and worthy the throwing
away in comparison of that. Nevertheless the lord does not give this desire to
know Christ to all men, but to his own, that is to say, to the elect only, the
which he has before the beginning of the world forepointed, that they should be
to his praise and glory. Ephesians. 1.


Of the other side not with standing, I can not but be sorry, seeing in these same
times when the gospel that has been hidden so many worlds past, is by the
goodness of god lately come forth to light, that there should be so mani and so
diverse opinions of these things that god has Instituted to keep agreement, and
peace among the faithful, that is to say, of the sacraments of the church, in
such sort as Satan the enemy goth about with the self same instruments of
peace and unity, to make war against Christ, setting dissension, making
schisms, and sowing debates amongst Christians, not only among the people and
common sort, but among those that should be lights, glasses, and examples of
agreement, to whom belongs to teach other, that is to say, among the ministers
and preachers of the holy gospel.

But this, dear brethern, ought not to offend you, nor to remove you from your
holy purpos, that you have in Christ, but rather to confirm you in faith, and
to kindle you to make a gretter entry in to the religion, and way of God, for
so much as that god does suffer such striffes, and diversities of opinions, for
the benifite of his church, and of the true bileuers. First to thentent that
his, 1. Corinh. 11
who abide constant, and stowt may be manifest, when the other that have not a
true growndwork, but a fained and vain faith, do fall and fail.
Furthermore also to thentent, that when we see such disorders, we should not put
our trust in men, the which may all err, but we should come to gods word, the
which only can not deceive, and that we should endeavor our selves with all
diligens and care, to understand it, and that we our selves should look in the
scripture, whether it be so or (...) as we may read of those that hard Paul
preac^^ ^n the city of Berrhoe in Macedony. as it is written in in thactis of
thapostels, Act. 17.
the which when they hard Paul's sermon, they looked in the scripture itself,
whether it was so as he said (...) ^o. And to be short, to thente^t that we
should prai unto god, that he would give us the true understanding of the same,
because the matters of gods spirit be not understand by any man's way but by
gods disclosing. 2. Pet. 1. 1. Cho. 2.


Now to return to the purpose of the striffe, that is of the sacraments, Some
say that in the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, that is to say, in
the bread and wine consecrated in remembrans of his death, is contained his
very body and his very blood, and that there we have really, and bodily, all
and hole Christ, as great, and as thick as he was on the cross. Other some say
that he is not there, but there is only the bread and the wine as signs of
Christ's body, and blood, given for our redemption. And this controversy and
striffe is in such sort gone forward, that it has with many hindered the
course of the holy gospel. And it has made that Christ's enemies have taken
occasion, and boldness to blaspheme, the holy lerning and gods truth. But be it
as it will, allthough some have committed a great fawt in this thing, striving
ever bitterly against the contrary opinion, whereby they have showed them selves
to be men, and have in some part spotted their own glory, lessening the credit
and authority that the world had of them: We not withstanding, will comfort
our seluis with Paul's saing, which he speaks to the romans, Romans 8.
that to gods elect every thing grows to good. And although that presently
through such dissensyon, we see among many nothing but disorder, offense, and
euel, yea hatred toward the gospel, yet god for all that, who knows how to
get order out of disorder, and good out of evil, will cause when it shall
please him, some great profit to grow out of it in his church, for the
present unknown, but in the end open, thus we schuld believe.

And because I know that many desire to understand what should be the true
opinion of this sacrament. I for the love of the truth, for the glory of god,
and to do them a pleasure, and also a benifite, will simply and with as much
easines as is possible, set forth the opinion, which I thinck, and hold for
certain has been, and is, the opinion of the Apostles, all the awncienty, of
the holy scripture, and of Christ him selff. And let no man meruell, though I
setting the suttletyes a side, shall rather proceed with simplenes, and
familiarity, and also though I shall rehearse one thing often, for so much as
that my mind is to be plainly understand of all men, and chefely of the simple
and unlearned. And because the thing is of so great weight, that it deserves to
be handled with all diligens, to thentent that all men may the more easily
understand it, we by order and by parts will consider it.



We must understand that the cause of the differens in this matter, that is to
say, that some say that Christ is really and bodyly in the sacrament of the
bread and the wine, and some other say the contrary, that is to say, that he is
not there, is the euel understanding of Christ's own words the which he spoke
wha^ he instituted the same sacrament. For one opinyon understands them after
one sort, and the other after a another, so that the controversy and contraryetye
of the opinyons is, because they understand not Christ's words, as they ought
to be understand. Matthew. 26. Marci 14. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.
When Christ did institute this sacrament, he took first the bread, and called
it his body, saing this is my body* After he took the wine and called it his
blood.

They of the first opinyo^ say, that seeing the words be christ's in deed they
ca^ not be falls, seeing he has plainly said, this is my body, showing the
bread, and this is my blood, showing the wine. We must needs say that
christ's body and blood be there, for else his words should not be true, but
falls, which ca^ not be, for somoch as that Christ being the chief troth can
not say an untruth. He has said that the bread is his body, and the wine is
his blood, there for it must needs be so.

And in this opinyon there be also ij. diverse minds. One says that Jesus
Christ is not only in the sacrament, but will that neither bread, nor wine
should remain in the sacrament, but that both of the^ should be changed and
should be cownted turnkynded, that is to say, transsubsta^tiated, as they call
it, the which means, turned in to Christ's body and blood: The bread in to
Christ's true and natural body, the wine in to his blood. And they call this
turni^g, or cha^ging tra^ssubsta^tiacyo^, that is to say, turning of the
substances, in such sort, as there remains nothing of the bread and the wine
but the withcommes, or accyde^tes, that is to say the whytenes of the bread,
the rowndnes, the taste, the savor. And so of the wine there remains the
rednes, if it be redd, the swetenes, or the sharpnes, according as the taste is,
and so of the other withcommes, the which remain withowt any subject, that is
withowt any body to be in. But the substances of the one and the other, be turned
in to the substa^ces of christ's body and blood, and this is done by miracle,
because god can do all things. And this is the opinion of the prystes and
fryres of the romish church. And they have in such sort preached it, that the
world in time past from certain hondreth years hitherto, have believed it, and
cownted it, as an article of the faith. And woo to him that had said the
contrary. For they would have condemned, and burnt him, as an heretik. And that,
because the pope, who was taken for god on earth, for Christ's lefetenant, and
had authority to make men believe what so ever liked him, and every man was
brought to his determinacion, would needs have it so.

Certain other of the first opinion too, the which holds that Christ is
realli, and bodily in the Sacrament, do say, that not witstanding that
Christ's body is, wholly in the bread, and his blood wholli in the wine, yet
the bread and the wine abide in their substance as before, and be not turned
nor changed in to a another thing, as the former opinion says. And these manner
of me^ must needs say, that at the least.iij. very great miracles, must come
to pass in this Sacrament. The first is, that Christ is, wholli under that
bread, and under that wine, as great, and as thick, as he was on the cross,
and as presentli as he is in heaven. This is a great thing, that a great body
continewyng great, should be enclosed in a little thing, much less then the same
bodi.

The second miracle is, that Christ's whole bodi and his wholle blood is in the
whole bread, and in the whole wine, and in eueri, yea the least part of the one,
and the other, as it is said of our reasonable soul, that it is whole in the
whole bodi, and whole in every part of the body, in such sort as if there should
be made x. thousand parts of the bread, and the wine, whole Christ, and his
whole blood, should be in eueri of those divided parts, which is yea a greater
thing, withowt comparison, tha^ that of the being of the soul in the whole
bodi, and in eueri part of the bodi. For allthough the soul be in eueri part
of the bodi, whilst that the parts abide yoined together, yet it is not in
all the parts of the bodi, when they be separated. For when one part is
divided from the body, the soul is no more in the same. But Christ's bodi and
blood, according to this opinion, be in all the partis of the bread and of the
wine, when they be yoined to gether, and when they be divided, or sondred. The
third miracle is, that the same body, and the same blood, is in heaven and in
earth both at a time, and is in all places of the world, where the sacrament
is, In France, in Spain, in England, in Almainy, in Flanders, in Italy, in the
east, in the west, in this, in that city, In this in that church, on this, The
tabernacle is a litle-closet wherein the sacrament is kept nere the altar.
on that Altar, In this, in that tabernale, as they say. Yea and that they
say, that Christ is every where, and fills every thing. But it is behouefull
for them that put, or will have the changing of the substances, of the bread
and the wine, that is to say, that their transsubstantion, to put besides
these.iij. miracles, others also, and to make a better marcket of miracles, than
they that put it not, yea a better market, than the holy scripture and god
makes, to whom notwithstonding belongs to make miracles, who is not so
liberal of mirakels as they be.

The chief grownd worck of this first opinion is, that Christ said. This is my
bodi, showing the bread, and This is my blood, showing the wine. And therefore
Christ must be in the same sacrament. For else he should have spoken falsely, the
which ca^ not be. They bring forth in deed other reasons, but they all do
little avail, as that same, that if Christ were not in the sacrament, it should
not have been so great a fawt, to him that had received it unworthily, as Paul
says, that is to say, who ever eats that bread, and drinks that wine
unworthyle, he eats and drinks Judgment, that is to say, condemnation. If
Christ were not there (say they) it should not be condemnation to eat that
bread, and to drink that wine, But the condemnacion is to him that eats and
drinks unworthily, Therefore Jesus Christ's very body, and blood, is there. And
the same Paul, in the self same chapter, does call the consecrated bread, the
lords body, and therefore they say, that Christ is in that bread, and in that
wine. They of this opinion, to my Judgment, do make no other reasons, that be
any thing worth. Not withstanding when we shall have placed the true opinion,
we will answer to this shewsom reason, and with the help of the lord, we will
make it appear, that it is triffling, and of no valewe.

The other opinion, and mind about this matter is, that Christ's body, and
blood, be really in heaven, where he sits on the right hand of god the
father, and that they be not really, and bodily in the sacrament, but says
that the bread, and the wine, be signs appointed, to signify the body and the
blood, how Christ Jesus has given both the one, and the other, for our ransom, and
satisfaction for our sins, to thentent that we should keep in our rememberans,
so great a thing and mystery, as he him self when he did institute the same
sacrament in the presence of thapostles, said, Matthew. 26. Marc. 14. Luke 22. 1.
Cor. 11.
that is to say, as often as you shall do this, you shall do it in my
remembera^s. And this is the true and catholic opinion, a greable with the holy
scripture, and with the doctrine of the old church, and awncient teachers, the
which have not said, as any one of the for said opinions says, that is to say,
that Christ's body and blood, be enclosed in that bread, and wine, and much
less as the other opinion says, the which affirms, that the substances of the
bread, and wine, be turned in to Christ's body, and blood, and that there is
no more neither bread, nor wine, but only the withcommes, of the one and
the other, but have said, that the bread and the wine remain and be signs, of
the body and of the blood, for to bring to our reme^brans, the most great and
high benefit that Christ has wrought us, dieng for us, that is to say, of our
redempcio^. And the growndworkes of this opinion be sure. and of such sort
steadfast, that all the Ingines in the world, be not sufficient to throw them
to the grownd, because they be grownd wrought, up on the sure rock, that is to
say, they agree with gods trowth, and his word that abides for ever. We do
not Intend now here, to bring forth all the reasons, and grownd works, with
the which this opinion is proved. For we should than make a long treatise, and
not a sermon, to inform the ignorante and Io^glings in the knowledge of gods
things, as we intend to do. But we will only bring forth some few
persuasions, by the which it may be clearly known, that it is even so as we
said.

First this opinion says, The first reason.
that the definicion of the sacrament, must needs show, and make Plain to us,
that the matter stands thus, that is to say, that the bread, and the wine
remain, and that Christ's body, and blood, is not really there in them. For
the definicion of a sacrament received of all men (and is sent Augustines a
catholic doctor) is this, that is to say, that a sacrament is a sign of a
holy" thing. Every man confesses that the thanks giving is a sacrament. If it
be a sacrament, it is no another but a sign of an holy thing. If it be a sign
of an holy thing, it needs not that the bread and the wine, for to be signs,
should be changed in to other substances, for so much as that the signs, that
they may be signs, do not change any substans, but only take a new
significacion. And it is much less needful, that Christ's body, and blood
should be really, and bodily present in the same bread and wine, for so much as
it is not necessary that the things signified, and represented by the signs,
should be enclosed, or present in the same signs, as by experiens we may see in
many sorts of signs, that it is not needful that the thing signified, should
be either present, or enclosed in the sign. It is enough that it be
represented. Let us give an example. The Emperors Image is a sign of the
Emperor, And because it is no another but a sign, we will never say that the
Emperor him self, is in that Image, nor that that Image, is changed in to the
emperors parson. For if he were present where his Image is, he neded not to
set up the image, for so much as the Image is therefore set up (speaking of the
bodied things) in any place, because the thing signified, is not there present,
and therefore it is set up to thentent, that it may represent it. So will we say
of the bread, and of the wine, that Christ has Instituted them to thentent,
that they might be representers of his body and blood, to thentent, that when
we see them, and use them for a sacrament, as he has ordained, we should
remember that Christ has given them, that is to say, his body and blood, for
our ransoming. And for to be signs affter this sort, it needs not that the
body and blood should be there bodily present, and much less that they should be
changed in to other substances. It suffiseth, as we have said, that they be
signs as we have spoken of the signs of the emperors image.

The reason stands in this, that the thanks giving, or for to use paul's
words, the lords supper is no another but a sacrament, therefore it is no another
but a sign. Because by the definicio^ allredy given, A sacrament is a sign of
an holy thing. The sign of a thing is not the thing it self, nor is not
changed in to it, but only does signify it, Therefore the bread and the wine be
not changed in to Christ's body and blood nor they be not enclosed in them,
that is to say in the bread and the wine, And it suffiseth that they be truly
represented by the bread and the wine. And though we say that the bread ea^d
the wine, be no another but signs, we mean not to deny the effects, that the
spyrite of god (of the which the same sacraments be the mynistery) does work
in the beleuers that receive them. For by means of the sacraments, the true
beleuers be as it were, by certain signs and seals of god confirmed in his
promises and be assuered of gods grace, and of many benyfites, which god does
give us, through Christ, but we do only deny that Christ, is body lythere,
for so much as that to work these effectis, which we say, that the sacraments by
the verteu of the holy ghost do work, it suffiseth that they be signs
appointed by god to that end. And it needs not that Christ should be there
bodyly present nor that there should be made any change of the sustances, of the
bread and the wine.

The second reason. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.
Further, this sacrament was instituted by Christ in remembrans as the words
them selves of the same insttucion, do witness, saing, Do this in mi
rememberans. If it be so than that it was instituted for remembrans, it is not
necessary that Christ should be bodyly there, and much less that there should
be made any turnyng of the bread and the wine, in to his body and blood,
because that the bread and the wine, do suffice to bring to remembrans, his
passion and his body and blood given for our ransom, As the paschal lamb was
sufficient to bring to reme^berans the pass over, that is to say, the passing
by of the Angel in Egypt. Yea it is not only not necessary that he should be
there, but if he were there he should be there in vain, because he should be
there in such sort as should help nothing to reme^berans, for so much as that he
could not be seen. And it is behouefull that the signs that bring a thing to
rememberans, as the sacraments do should be seeable. And it is well known to
what end the sacraments were instituted, that is to say, because we be bodyed,
as the old doctors say, and among the rest, Chrysostom upon matthew, the. 83.
Omelye, the which says that therefore they were instituted, that by them, as by
certain seeable signs, our mind should be styrred up to the spyrituall, and
vnseeable things signified by the same sacraments. And therefore saint Augustne
calls the sacraments, seeable words, so that if we were unbodied, it neded
not to institute them. The reason stands in this. The sacraments were
instituted in reme^brans of Christ's body and blood given for us. That which
seruith for remembrance as an owtward sign, ought to be seeable. Christ's body
and blood if they were in the sacrament, should be vnseeable, therefore they should
nothing serve to put us in remembrance. If they should no way serve to put us
in remembrance, than it is not necessary nor convenient, that they should be
bodily present in the sacrament, And it is enough that the seeable signs,
should be there, that is to say, the bread and the wine, which may work that is
to say, which may bring to remembrances the body and blood, the which thing
Christ's bodily presens in the sacrament could not do.

I confirm this reason thus, If Christ be there bodily present in the
sacrament of thanksgeuing, and the substa^ces of the bread and the wine be
changed in to his body, and blood, we must say, that either this is by a comen,
and general right of a sacrament, the which should belong not only to this but
also to all the other sacraments, orels by a particular and special right, of
this sacrament only. That is to say, that this and not the rest, should have
this prerogative. Of necessity it must be by one of these ij. rightes, or else
by them both. But first we can not say that it is by a common, and general
right of a sacrament, that is to say, that if a thing be a sacrament, it should
be necessary, that the thing signified by the same sacrament, should there be
present, and much less that there should be made any turning of the substances,
this can not be said, because that their things signified ought tha^ to be
there present in all the other sacraments, and that there should be made a
changing of the substances. But we do see the contrary, for somoch as that in
all the other sacraments, the substance remains as at the first, and is not
changed, and there was never any man, that would say any such thing, If they
would speak of the old sacraments and of the sacraments of the hebrews that
is to sai, of the circumcision, of paschal lamb, of the rock, out of which
issewed the water in the desert, and of the manna, the which things were
sacraments to that people, because they were to the^ signs of holy things, no
one of these did ever change the substance for to be a sacrament. The flesh of
the paschal lamb remained flesh, as before, And we will sai the same of the
rock, and of the manna, that there was no manner change of substancc.

The new sacraments also of the Christian people, they also do not change
substance. The water of baptism, remains water as before. The other likewise
which be by the scoole men, and new doctors cownted for sacraments, that is to
say, Cream, Oil, which they call holy, Penans, Orders and matrimony, the
which in deed be no sacraments, because they were not instituted by Christ for
sacraments, they do not change their substances, but remain in their first
substance, and there is made no manner of change, This is clear, so that there
needs not by common and general right of sacraments, to put Christ's bodied
presens in the sacrament, and much less to affirm that there should be made, a
substanciall changing of the bread, and the wine, in to his body and blood. Nor
we ought not neither to say, that by particular, and special right of this
sacrament, Christ should be bodily present, nor that there should be made such
manner of change, For so much as that the particular right of this sacrament is,
cheeflie that it should be a sign, sondred from the other sacraments, that is
to say, that it should be bread, and wine in substance, which be things diverse
from the other sacraments. And further, that it should have a particular, and
diverse significacion, from the other, that is to say, that it is instituted to
bring particularly to our rememberans, Christ's passion, and death, and that it
should represent unto us, how Christ gave his body, and shed his blood, for our
ransoming. This is the particular and special right of this sacrament, by the
which it is sondri and diverse from the other sacraments. But it is not
necessary by this right, that there should be made a change of the substances of
the bread and wine, and that Christ should be in the sacrament. For the bread
and wine remain in their substances as they were first, and may (withowt that
that Christ should be present in the sacrament) work these effects, that is to
say, bring to our rememberans, and represent unto us, Christ's passion, and
death, and how he has given his body, and blood, for our ransoming. It is
enough for the working of this rememberans, that they have a new
significacion. It is not necessary to change the substances, as in the first
reason we have said. Yea, I say, that seeing the sacraments were instituted to
thentent that they should be true signs, of holy things, their substance must
needs remain, as it was first. For otherwise, they should not have agreement and
likelied, with there things signified, nor they should not be true signs. As
for example, baptism has lykelihode with the spiritual wasshing, because it
is water. And as the water wassheth, and cle^seth the body, so be those that
believe in Christ spiritually cle^sed, and washed from their sins, but if the
Water of baptism should not remain, water, but should change the substance, it
should not have such agreement. So we will say of the bread, and the wine,
that therefore they have likelied with Christ's body, and blood, because they
abide still bread and wine, for so much as, that even as the bread, and the
wine, do noryssh, and maintain the life of the body, so Christ's body, and
blood received spiritually, and through faith in to the mind, do norissh and
maintain us, in the spiritual life. And for this cause Christ Jesus called
his flessh verily meat, and his blood verily drinck. But if the substance of
bread, and wine should not abide but the only withcommes should remain, there
should not be that liklihode, and agreement which this sacrament requires,
because that the only withcommes of bread, and wine withowt the substances,
can not norissh. And when the dew agreement, and likelyhode is not there, they
should not be true signs, and consequently, they should not be true
sacraments. And here it may be seen, that they of this opinion, destroy the
sacraments, making them not to be true but vain signs taking from them the
growndwork of their true meaning.

A another reason is this. The third reason.
If Christ were bodily in the sacrament it should be nothing profitable,
for so much as, that the only spiritual eatinge of Christ, is that, Johan. 6.
that is profitable, as the same Christ himself said to them that thought, when
he said, that his body was meat, and his blood drink, and that it was
behouefull for the having of life, to eat his flesh and to drink, his blood,
They thought (I say) that he meant to speak of the bodily eatinge, and
drinkinge, sending the one and the other, through the mouth in to the stomach,
as also, they believe, that hold, that Christ should be personalli, and bodily
in the sacrament. What said Christ to these manner of men? The spirit is that
which gives life, the flesh helps nothing, that is to say, when I say,
that you must eat my flesh, and dri^k my bluode, I mean that you must eat my
flesh, and drink my bluode spiritually, and after this sort, they give life
but my flesh eaten, and my blood dronken, as you understand it, do help
nothing. It is necessary for the giving of life that my flesh be eaten, and my
blood be dronken spiritually and not fleshly. Christ is eaten and his blood is
dronken spiritually as he him self declares, when me^ believe in him: And
Augustine i^ the exposicio^ of the said words says Creed et ma^ducasti, that
is to sai believe and thou have eaten, geuinge to understand, that Christ's
intent was, when he said these words, that is to sai, that it was behoufull to
eat his flesh and drink his blood, to say that it was behouefull to believe in
him, And after this sort, his body was eaten, and his blood was dronken. And
the text it self gives us to understand, that this is true, the which says
first, that the fathers will is, that every one that believes in Christ should
have life euerlafting. And a few words, he adds, verily, verily I say unto
you, he that believes in me, has life euerlaftinge. I am the bread of life And
a little after, he says, if you shall not eat the flesh of the son of man and
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, has life everlasting. If these words spoken by Christ, be
true as necessaryly they must be true, because Christ cannot tell an untroth.
It does necessaryly follow that the eatinge his flesh and drinking his blood,
is none other, but to believe in him or at the least, that the eatinge his flesh
and drinking his blood, and the believing in him, be things so joined to gether,
that they cannot be separate the one from the other. The reason is this becauce
that if these words were not the same in sentence, or else that they were such
as might be separated, the one from the other, that is to say, that the one
might be true without the other, we must needs say, that a man might be saved,
and have the life everlasting, without the eating of Christ's flesh, and
drinking his blood, the which is against Christ's express words, who says
that he can not have life that eats not his flesh and drinks not his blood.
Or else we must needs say, that a man might be saved not beleuinge in Christ.
This is clear because Christ says that he that eats his flesh, and drinks
his blood, has life everlasting. If it be so that man is saved by eating his
flesh, and drinking his blood, when as this eating, and drinkinge, be not the
same that beleuinge is, or else that they may be separated, that is to sai that
the eating, and drinkinge, should be without the believing, a man then shall
have life everlasting without believing in Christ, the which likewise is
against Christ's express words, who will that he that bebeleueth should be
saved and he that believes not should be damned. Seeing then that the one and
the other of these two sainges be true, that is to say, that he that eats
Christ's flesh, and drinks his blood has life everlasting and he that does
not this can not have it. And this other also is true, that is to say he that
believes in Christ, has life everlasting and he that does not believe cannot
have it: It follows, of necessity, that to eat Christ's flesh and to drink
his blood, and to believe in him should be one self thing or else if they should
not be the same, at the least that they could not by any means be separated,
that is to say, the one to be without the other. I have made this long
discourse to make men understand that these words of Christ of the eating of
his flesh and drinking his blood, be not to be understand of the bodyly
eatinge, and drinking, and much less are to be understand of the eating and
drinking the sacrament of the lords supper, but of the only spiritual
eatinge, and drinkinge, and they that allege them of the body or else of the
sacramental eating or drinking, do allege them out of the purpose. Further
also to make men know the chief purpose, that is to sai, that although Christ
were bodily in the sacrament, it should help nothing, because that the fleshly
eating after what so euersorte it should be done, does nothing proffit to the
witnessing of Christ, seeing the spiritual eatinge only, is that which gives
life.

And if any would answer and say that when Christ said that the flesh did help
nothing, that he did mean, that it did help nothing, when it was eaten, as
they did understand it, to whom Christ spoke, that is to say, the Capernaits,
the which thought that he did mean to say, that they should eat his flesh as
the flesh of the shambells is eaten, and drink his blood as wine and water is
dronk. But Christ in the sacrament, is eaten after such a certene sort as he
is not seane nor perceauid, no nor chewed, because he is in the same sacrament
vndiuideably, nor his flesh is not eaten nor blood dronken for to norish the
body, as other bodelie meats, but to norishe the soul. And therefore Christ
reprouid the Capernaties because they understood him euel fauoredly, and not as
he would be understand.

This answer is nothing, for when Christ said, that the flesh helps
nothing, but the spirit is that which gives life, he meant that the only
spiritual eating the which is done with the heart and with the mind through
belefe was that which helped, but the bodily and fleshly eating, helped nothing
after what so ever sort it should be done. There is no doubt, but though that
Christ be not eaten in pieces and parts, orels chawed as other flesh is chawed
and eaten, as the Capernaites did understand it: Yet not with standinge, after
what so eauer sort he should be eaten, by the bodily mouth, whether it were by
parts or whole as they of the first opinion believe, the which will, that Christ
great and thick as he was upon the wood of the cross, should be wholly in the
sacrament, that is to say, in that little host, as they call it. This is a
fleshly and bodily eating, for so much, as that a thing is no whit less bodily
eaten, when it is put all hole into the mouth, and sent into the stomach, as
Jonas was wholly swalowed by the whale, or as the pills that be receauid whole.
It is no whitlesse bodily eaten (I say) the^ if it were eaten by parts. I
therefore by the bodily eati^g do mean that which is not of the spirit. This of
the which they speak, that is done by the mouth, is not with the mind
therefore it is bodily, If it be bodelie, it helps nothi^ge. I will say to be
short, that if Christ were bodily preasent in the sacrament, that his being
there should be nothing profitable at all, although that we should eat his
flesh, and dri^k his bluode a thousand times, for so much as that the spiritual
eating, and drinkinge only the which is by faith, beleuinge truly in him, is
that, which helps. The bodily and fleshly eating and drinking his body and
blood, the which is done by the mouth helps nothing. They then do little
honor to Christ, that would that he should be really, in the sacrament, because
they would bring to pass, that Christ should have made unprofitable things,
the which we may not think, much less speak.

But because we have said, that the only spiritual eating and drinking
Christ's flesh and bluode, is that which helps, and not the bodily, some man
might say to what purpose then did Christ institute the sacramental eatinge
and drinkinge, the which is not spiritual, but bodily etc. To this I answer,
that the sacrament was therefore i^stituted by Christ because that although the
eatinge and drinki^ge of it, be not spiritual but bodily, yet not with
standing it serves, and is profitable, to the spiritual eating and drinking,
the which is by faith for so much as the sacrament does confirm us in faith,
because it is ordained to this end. Not that it should already have this power
of it self, but because it is an instrument, or else a ministry of the
spirit, joined to the word of the holy gospel, with which instrument, and
ministry, the same spirit works in us, And it is not necessary that
Christ should be bodily in the sacrament to serve for the eating and drinkinge
spiritually, and by faith, it is enoughe that the bread and the wine, as holy
signs, be there for us, as we will better tell you in the last reason. And
when I say that the spiritual eating, and drinkinge only, is proffitable,
and not the bodelie, I mean of the bodily eating, of the same true body, and
of the bodily drinking, of the true blood of Christ put into the mouth as the
Capernaites did mean, and as they affirm, the which would have Christ to be
really in the sacrament, both in body and soul. I do not mean of the
sacramental eating the which without doubt is profitable, when it is joined
with the spiritual. And when it is not joined, it is not only not profitable,
but it is damnable, as Saint Paul says in the first to the Corinthians
because it is unworthily received. 1. Corin. 11.
If Christ then, be not really in the sacrament the substances of the bread and
the wine, be much less changed, but do both abide in substance as be fore.

The fourth reason.
Another reason is this, and it is particularly against the opinion of
transsubstanciation, that is to say of them that would that the bread and the
wine should be changed into Jesus Christ's body and blood, and that there should
remain no more of the bread and the wine, but the withcommes, that is to say,
the white color of the bread, the color of the wine, the taste of the one
and the other, the roundnes or other form of the same bread, And so we will
say of the other withcommes, that is to say of the moystines, drines, heat
and could. This opinion cannot stand with those effects, that we may
manifestly see, and that experience it self does show us. First the sacrament
is hable to norishe bodelie, wherefore if there were one that should eat, a
quantity of hosts and wine consecrated, they would norishe as other bread and
wine not consecrated. Further it is seen by experience, that the sacrament
sometimes, is corrupted and worms be ingendered in it, as in other bread and
wine not consecrated. But how ca^ these effects be wrought, this opinion
standinge of the chaunginge of the bread, and the wine into Christ's body and
blood, the only withcommes of the bread and the wine remaining? How can the
withcommes norish without the substance? What is to norishe but that the
substance of the meat and drink, is turned into his substance that eats and
drinks it? Seurly the withcommes without substance cannot norishe because
that norishing means chau^ging of the substance of the meat, into the
substance of the thing norished, we cannot now say that the substance of
Christ's body and blood should be that which should norishe, because that the
thing that norisheth, is as we have said converted i^to the substance of hi^
that receaueth it. Christ's body and bluod ^^i^g i^mortal and incorruptible, be
not receiueable of such chaunges. Like as we have said of the norisheme^t we
will say of the inge^deringe, the which we may see is made in the sacrament,
when the worms be enge^dered. How ca^ a substance be engendered, of the only
withcommes?

Here thy of this opinion be entangled and they answer some after one sort,
and some after another. Innocentius the third, in his book of the office of
the mass says that even as the substance of the bread is miraculously turned
into the substance of Christ's body the withcommes only of the bread and the
wine remaininge, so the substance of the bread, of the which the worms or any
other thing, might be enge^dered, may miraculouslie return. Egidius Romanus
in his Theoremes of Christ's body says, that such an enge^deri^ge is not
miraculous, but natural, for because (says he) that the reasonable mi^de,
although it be made by god only, yet not with sta^di^ge, for as much as god
has disposed, and ordened, that after the body of the creature be fashioned
in his mothers womb, the reasonable soul is put into the same creatures
body, and this is a natural poinct by the reason of gods order taken therein,
and if it were otherwise it should be a against the order of nature. Even so
saying that god has ordained, that the withco^mes should be grownded in the
substance as soon as the withcommes of the bread and the wine, be corrupted
immediately, by the natural order that he has given to things does creat the
matter, and does put it under the other withcommes newly brought in of the which
matter the worms be after engendered. Some other say that a norishinge matter
may be enge^dered in the priests stomach, the which with the sacrament
received may easily norishe, although the forms, that is to say the withcommes
of the bread and the wine of them selfs should not norishe. Certain other have
said, that even as god by miracle has made that the withcomes of bread and
wine, should be without subject, as though they were substances, so he gives
them the nature of the substa^ces of the bread and wine, that is to say, that
the worms may be enge^dered of the withcommes and so we must say that by
miracle, substances may be engendered of things which be no substances,
although such a matter be imposible by nature. But what dreams? what
imaginacions? (and let them pardon me) what mo^sters be these? who makes the^
fuer that it is so? as for example, from whence gathers Innocentius that the
substance of the bread should miraculously return? And Egidius Romanus that
god should creat new matter, and should, put it under the withco^mes newly
brought in, and under the shape of a thing newly engendered? And those other,
that a norishinge matter should be engendered in the stomach? And finally the
last of all, that by gods might, a substance should be engendered of the
withcommes? If in a matter of our faith, we will after this sort dally and
guess at a ve^ture without the holy scripture, we may the^n settforth and
affirm all that we list, as though it were true, and tell as many pha^tasies
and fables, I will not say follies as shall come in our head. We ought not to
dress up gods things after our manner, and as toies come in our brain: but we
must handle them with fear and reverence and with gods words, and walk suerly
not according to our own pha^tasies. Without doubt, this Imagination of the
chaunginge of the substance of the bread, and wine into Christ's body and
blood, and that the only withcomes of the bread, and the wine remain, is
false. but the substances of the bread and wine remain, for if they should not
remain these evident and open effects could not be wrought, that is to say,
the norishinge and new e^ge^deringe which be made. The cause why they speak
thus, that is to say, without any manner of groundeworke, and be forced to
grant to mani inco^ueniences, is, because they defend an evil, and an unjust
cause, and therefore they must grant many inconveniences. And in deed (as it
is commenly said) they wot not what they fish for, bear with me you readers,
seeing I tell the truth.

Another reason is this. The fifth reason.
God is not wont to work miracles but for to confirm the faith of the
beleuers, and his doctrine, as it is written in saint mark in the end of his
gospel. Marci 16.
And the miracles that Christ works for to confirm his word and the faith of
the beleuers, be seealbe things, as it is manifest, lokinge through all the
miracles, that Christ and the Apostels wrought, as giving sight to the blind,
cleansing the leepers, making the domme to speak, the lame to go, healing the
feuered, and the other sick, reising the dead, walking on the water of the sea,
co^mau^dinge the wi^ds, changing the water into wine, driving away the
deuels, satisfyng with a few loaves, and certain fishes many thousand persons.
All these miracles were seen, and therefore did confirm the doctrine of the
holy gospel: but if they had been secret that none had seen them, they had
helped nothing to that matter, that is to say, to confirm the faith of any.
Seeing it is thus then, that god therefore works miracles, to confirm his
doctrine, and the faith of the beleuers, and the miracles could not work such
effects if they were not openly seen, to what purpose then should, Jesus Christ,
as great and as thick as he was upon the wood of the cross, and as he is
preasently in heaven, be hidden whole under a small cake, and a little wine,
much less without comparison, then his body is, and all his blood? To what
purpose were it to work this most great miracle, that it should not be seen,
when it were ones done? to what purpose were it to work that other, that Christ
should be whole in the whole sacrament, and whole in every part of the
sacrament, as though he were a spirit? to what purpose were it to work, that
Christ should be bodily in heaven, and in earth, here and on all the aultars
where the mass is said, to what purpose were it that the bread and the wine,
should be turned into Christ's body and blood? To what purpose were it, that the
withcommes of the bread and the wine should abide without a subject as though
they were substances? All these most great and stonishinge miracles, and
greater then ever Christ wrought, or that ever were hard of must nenedes be, if
Chist himself should be enclosed bodelie within that sacrament, and yet not
with standing, no one of these miracles were ever seen, as they are not, nor
can be possibly seen. Seeing then that such miracles cannot be seen to what
end, to what proffit, or to what purpose, should they be wrought, when they are
not hable another to confirm Christ's doctrine, nor our faith? shall we say
that Christ would work miracles, and such miracles as were neauer the greater
without any manner of profit? suerly no, if We would not make god now less wise
than men, the which if they have reason, will neauer do a thing that they be
not persuaded is to purpose and profit for some end. We must then say, that
Christ is not bodily present in the sacrament, but he is in heaven, where he
sits on the right hand of the father, from whence he must come, at the
latter day, to judge the living and the dead.

And this may be another reason to prove that Christ, The sixth reason.
in as much as he is man, is not personally in the sacrament, because the
article of our faith says that he is ascended i^to heaven, from whence he
shall come to judge the living and dead. If Christ were really i^ the
sacrament, what should he need on the latter day to come so far of, that is to
say, from heaven, he being nearer on the earth? what else neded, but that he
shall go out of some consecrated cake, orells host, as they name it, and
appear in majesty and glorious. Suerly it needs not that a thing which is
nere us, should come to us from a far of, and it can not be denied, but a
thing from at hand, may lightlyer and easelier (If it be not let) come to us
then from a far of, Christ therefore is not in the sacrament, nor there is not
made any manner of change of substance.

Another reason is this the opinion that says Christ is bodily in the
sacrament diminishes the truth of Christ's true and natural body, therefore
it is false. It is clear that the Christian religion holds for an article of
the faith, that Christ is a true, and natural man, that is to say, Luc. 24,
that he has the very nature of a man, and that he has a very body and a very
soul, as other men have. And although presently the one and the other, that is
to say the body and the soul, be glorified: nevertheless they be yet a very
body and a very soul. For the glorification, takes not away the nature, It
makes it in deed more perfect, but it takes it not away, so as it is not the
self same that it was before, as we understand by Christ himself, who being
risen and having taken his glorified body, said to his disciples, behold my
hands, and my feet, that it is even my self. Suerly he should not have been the
self same that he was before if he had not had the self same hands the self
same feet and the self same whole body, and the self same soul that he had
before That that opinion which holds that Christ is bodily in the sacrament
diminishes the truth of Jesus Christ's body, and his man's nature, I do prove
it, because the nature of a body has, two properties or conditions the first
is, to have quantity, that is to say some manner of lenght, some manner of
breadth, and some manner if thicknes, and even as a body has greater or smaller
quantity, so much greater, or smaler place it occupies, as by eyperience we
may see. And his property, agrees and is natural to every body, in such
sort as also the glorified bodies do occupye place that is to say, that the
greater glorified body occupies greater place, and the less body less place,
even as Christ Jesus when he was risen, did occupye place, that is to say he
was in so much place as the quantity, and greatness of his body was, nor he was
not in any less place, then the greatness of his body was For so much as that
this, that is to say, to be in less place, then the quantity of the body is,
should diminishe the truth of the body.

The other property is to be only in one place. And these properties be in
such sort natural to a body, that they cannot by any means be separated from
it, and when a man separateth them from the body, then shall it be no more a
body. These among the rest, be two properties, that make the body
vndyuidehable as the philosophers sai, that is to say, they make that the
body is an vndyuidehable thing, that is to say, only one, other this, or
that, distinct, and diverse from other. And that these two properties, that is
to say, to occupy place, and so much as the quantite and greatness of the body
is, and likewise that a body cannot be but in one place at ones, and at one
time, be in separable from the body, nor there can be no manner of body that
has them not, whether it beglorified or no.

We speak not this of our self only, for Saint Augustine says it in his 57.
epistle answering to dardanus the bishop, who had made certain questions or
demau^ds to him, and he answering him to one after another, says to the first,
speaking of Christ risen and glorified: doubt not (says he) but the man
Christ Jesus, is now there, from whence he shall come. And after a few words,
he says, he shall come from none other place, then from whence he shall come
to judge the lyuinge and the dead (and means from heaven) And so he shall
come by the witness of the Angels voice, in the self same form and substance
of flesh in the which he was seen go into heaven, to the which form and
substance, in deed he has given immortality, but he has not taken away the
nature, we must not think that according to this form, that is to say, of the
flesh, he is spread abroad every where, for we must take heed, that we do not,
in such sort, affirm the godhed of the man, that we should take away the
troth of the body, for so much as it does not in deed follow that he that is in
god, should be so every where as god. And after a few words he says. God and
man is one person, and one Christ Jesus, is the one and the other, In that that he
is god, he is every where, but in that that he is man he is in heaven. And
after about the midst of the Epistle, or a little before, he says: Take the
rowmes of places from the bodies, and they shall not be in any place, and
because they shall not be in any place, they shall not be at all, take the same
bodies, from the qualities of bodies, and there shall be no place, where they
should be, and therefore it is of necessity that they be not. Also he says in
the 30. treatise upon Ihon, the lord is above, but yet the troth is here, that
is to sai, the lord, because that the body of the lord, in the which, he is
risen, must needs be in one place, but the troth of the same, is spread abroad
every where.

By all these words of Augustine we have specially two things. The first is
that Jesus Christ risen and glorified, is not in that he is man but in one
place, that is to say in heaven, from whence he shall come to judge the living
and dead, in that he is god, he is every where in the world. The second is,
that the bodies of necessity do occupye rowme of place and if they did not
occupy rowme, they should not be in any place, and being in no place, they
should not be any thing at all, but should be nothing: this groundwork
standing that these two properties, that is to say that every body does occupy
so much place, as his greatness is, and likewise it is not at one time but in
one place. And these two properties cannot be taken from bodies, And he that
would take them away, should bring to pass that the bodyis should not be in
any place, as S. Austen says and if they should not be in any place, they
should be nothing: It follows necessaryly, that if Christ were bodily in the
sacrament, for so much as there he should not have nether the one, nor the
other of these two properties, It follows, I say, that Christ in the sacrament
should not have a true body, yea no body, because that his body (be it where
it will, and as it will) it cannot be separatid from these two properties, to a
body most natural and inseparable, according to Austen and the troth.

Here they say that it is true (speakinge naturally) that these two conditions
and properties cannot be separated, from bodies, but speaking supernaturally;
and by miracle, they may be separated from the bodies, as in effectt they be
separated from Christ's body in the sacrament. To this I answer, first, that
the substa^tiall properties be never changed by miracle, let them find, that
god ever did it, let them give me one only example. We know that god is
almighty and there is no manner thing that may be done, Impossible unto him, as
the Angel said to Marye, but who knows that this thing may be done? I will
not stand now, to dispute this thing, I desire the^ that they would give some
other example, but they will neauer do it. Further I say that it belongs to
them to prove that god does these miracles. This is no good reason God can do
it, therefore he has done it. How many things ca^ god do that he has not
done? God could have sent more then twelve legions of Angels for to deliver
Christ out of the Iewces hands, Math. 26.
as he himself does witness in S. Mat. and yet he sent the^ not. And how many
other things might we allege, if we would, that god can do and yet he does
them not? They must prove then, that god does these miracles. By Christ's
sainges, nor by the scriptures, they cannot prove it except that they will
allege, that Christ has said it, that is to say, this is my body showing the
bread, and this is my blood showing the wine: but this is a tryflynge proof,
for so much that Christ meant not by this manner of speech to affirm that he is
within the bread and the wine, but meant to say, that both the one, and
the other, were signs, and a remembraunces of his body and blood, as plainly we
will show hereafter.

Peradventure they will say, that in matters of faith there needs no profes
but men must stand to the letter. This thing is of faith therefore it needs no
proof I say that in matters of faith we must stand to gods word with the right
understanding of it, and true sense of the words, nor we must not give the^
other and strange senses, Contrary to the mind of the spirit. The sense of
the spirit is not, that Christ should be bodily in the host, and in the cupp,
as it is said, but it is that which we have said, and will better say, in
the talk that follows, where we will declare the ma^ners of sacramental
speeches, according to the scripture.

And to be short that we may end now at le^ght this reasoninge, I say that
this opinion of the being of Christ's body and bluode in the sacrament, does
diminishe the troth of Jesus Christ's true body and true bluode. And it makes
him to have in the sacrament, a fantastical body, and much more fantastical
then Martiane, and Manicheus who when they spoke of Christ and appointed him
notrew and natural body, but a fantastical, and Imaginable, orels a seming
body, they said things less striving against nature then this opinion,
because they did neauer divide Christ's body, nor speak of him things so
vnimaginable as this opinion does, nor they neauer said that he was in two
places at ones. This opinion makes him to be (in that he is man) In infinite
places, nor they neauer said, that a great body was contained in so little a
thing as these me^ say, and so we will say of the other so many Imaginacio^s,
which the forsaid opinion places. And yet though Manicheus and Martia^, did
say these or like things, as they say, It should have been less in convenient,
saying they did apoint him a fantastike and a semeable body. But this opinion
affirming that Christ has a true and a natural body in the sacrament does yet
speak such things of him, as nether can be in deed, nor be not Imaginable,
and be without all reason, without also gods word, and more reproweable (as to
this) the^ the fore said opinions (I mean) of Manicheus and Martion, and
without doubt they speak things disagreing to themselves. Furthermore if Christ
be in the sacrament what means it that the old church when should make the
consecration of the bread and wine, did singe the preface, as it is called, Sur
sum Corda that is to say, lift up your hearts on high, and also these words be
now said in all the masses? Suerly we ought to have our hearts where Christ and
our treasour is, as he himself in S. Math, Matthew. 5.
says, that is to say, where your treasoure shall be there will your hearts be.
Our treasoure ought to be where Christ is. And S. Paul to the Colossians
says. Coloss. 3.
If you be risen again together with Christ, that is to say, If leaving the
evil you have taken the good, and new life, to the likeness of Christ, who
leauinge the corruptible, and mortal life has taken the incorruptible,
Immortal, and glorious life, seek things which be above where Christ is, who
sits on the right hand of god, seek those things that are above, and not the
earthly things geuinge us to understand, that seeing Christ Jesus is our
treasour and all our wealth we ought to have our hearts were he is. If it be so
then that we ought to have our hearts where Christ is (let him be in what so
ever place he will) what neded it that the old church should admonish the
people that they should lift up there hearts on high, that is to say, into
heaven, if by and by after a few words he should have descended into bread and
into wine? what need we to seek Christ so far of, that is to say in heaven, if
he be so nere us, that is to say, in that bread and that wine? This sainge
Sursum corda, suerly gives us to understand that the old church did not believe
that Christ was bodelie in the sacrament, for if they had believed it, they would
neauer have said lift up your hearts on high, but they would have said, be you
atte^t o you faithful, for by and by Christ Jesus our lord shall be here
present in the bread and the wine, as soon as the co^secratio^ is made. Direct
your minds to the bread, and the wine, wha^ they shall be consecrated, because
Jesus Christ shall be there bodily, but they said not after this sort, they have
in deed said lift up your hearts on high, giving to understand that they
believed that Christ was in heaven, and not in the sacrament. The ninth reason.
The ninth reason is this, and it gainsaieth the turnekindinge, If the bread be
turned into the body, and the wine into the bluod, because Christ said, this is
my body shewinge the bread, and this is my bluode showing the wine and that else
Christ's words should not have benetrue, if the bread should not have been
turned into the body and the wine into the bluode, or at the least that Christ's
body should be in the bread, and his bluode in the wine. It follows that the
paschal lamb which Christ did eat with his disciples, was turned into the
passover, because Christ said, the la^b is the passover, as it is written in
luke; I have earnestly desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer.
Luke 22.
if is clear that by this word passover Christ did mean the paschal la^b, and
because that pascha is that going over, and passing by that the Angel made
when he passed over the hebrews, not entering in but only entered into the
Egiptia^s houses, killing their first borne, as we have in Exodus, Exodus 12.
we shall be compelled to say, that that la^b was turned into that same going
over, or passing by or else that that going over or passi^g by was in that lamb
according to there opinion that will, that Christ should be really in the
sacrament, the substances of the bread and wine remaininge. And because that
that going over, was not then, when Christ said those words, that is to say,
that, that lamb was the pascha or passover, but it was only in Moses time in
Egypt, it follows that he did eat a thing that was not, behold what manner
things do follow their opinion, that would that Christ should be bodily in that
host and that cup, because he spoke these words, this is my body, shewinge the
bread, and this is my bluode, shewinge the wine. For so much as it is no less
true, that the lamb is the pascha or passover, then that bread and that wine be
Christ's body and bluod, because Christ who cannot lie has spoken the one and
the other. And god himself said the lamb is the passover. It was therefore of
necessity that the lamb should be turned into the passover or at the least
that that passover should be in that la^b because god said so.

If we will say that Christ has given to the words of the Sacrament of the
bread and the wine, the power to make the turninge of the one and the other into the
body and bluod, but he has not gewen the pouer, to the other words, of the lamb,
to turn it into the passover, orels that the passover should be the lamb.
Exodus 12.
This saing must needs be self willed and without reason because the one and
the other, is a sacrament and is made for remembrance, the lamb was ordained in
remembrance of that passover of the angel that was in Egypt, the bread and
the wine, in remembrance of Christ's body and bluod, given for our
raunsominge. Furthermore they must show how Christ has given such power to
those words, that is to say, this is my body and this is my bluod, that by
vtteringe them, such turning should be made, orels that his body, and bluod
should be made present. They shall neauer be hable to show this their self wild
talk, to be true, nether by the holy scripture (as it were behoue full they
should do, Intending to affirm such a matter) and much less by any manner of
reason auailable. Further though it were so that Christ had given such power to
the words, yet he gave it not but to those words that he the^ said, when he did
institute the sacrament and not to other. And this they of the same opinion do
confess, but the words that Christ spoke the^, be no more true, because he
spoke the^ of the time to come, and not of the time past, that is to say this
is my bodi, the which shall be given for you, and this is my bluod the which
shall be shed for you. These words were the^ true, because that his body was not
yet given, nor his bluod shed but they were to be given. but now they be no
more true but false, because that eue^ as Christ now ca^ no more die nor suffer
so ca^ he no more give his body nor shed his bluod. For so much as if he could
do these things, he should be sufferable and mortal, and this cannot be.
Therefore if these words had power to work those effects, the^ false words
should have had pouer to turn the substances, orels to make Christ present in
the sacrament, but if they be true, the^ have they power, to make Christ
sufferable, and mortal. I co^firm this reason thus, If, because Christ said
those wosds, this is my body and this is my bluod, such turning should be made,
or else that he should be present in the sacrament, there would follow
inconveniences, because that we should be compelled to say, that all the
speeches of the scripture, and of god, in the which is affirmed that a thing
is, other this, or that (seeing that god can not, tell an untroth) we shall be
compelled (I say) to affirm and grant, that it is so, as the words seem to
say. And so we shall be compelled to grant that the Testament or gods covenant
whither you will call it, should be there in the same circumcision. For so much
as that god, as we have in the Genesis, said to Abram when he did institute the
circumcision, Gene. 17.
this is, my covenant, speaking of the same circumcision, and for all that the
circumcision was not that covenant, but only a sign of that covenant, as in
the same place, that is to say, the same chapter, it is plain, that god called
the circumcision, the sign of his covenant. It is plain that the sign of a
thing, is not the self same thing. And yet god said that the circumcision was
the covenant. We shall be compelled to grant that that fearful fantasy, the
which appeared to Saul, 1 Regu^. 28.
as we have in the first book of the kings, was Samuel in deed, because the
scripture there, dothcal it Samuel, and yet all the Catholic doctors, say and
affirm, that it was a fa^tasie and a deceit of the deuel and not Samuel. And
we shall be compelled also to say, that because Christ said that he was the
vine, that he was so in deed. And because the scripture calls, Christ a rock,
a lion, a lamb, a sheep, and as many other things, as it speaks of him, we
shall be compelled to affirm, that Christ in deed was all those things. But what
will they say to Christ's own words in the same institution of the sacrament,
Christ did not only say, this is my body and this is my bluod, but he said
taking the cupp, Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
as luke and paul do affirm, this cup is my new testament in my bluode. These
words be as well true, as those, this is my body, and this is my bluod, and
Christ did as well sai these as those, except luke and paul did tell a lie,
which is not to be spoken. Therefore we must needs grant, that that cupp was
turned, into the new Testament, or else at the least, that the new Testament was
in that cup, the which is not true, for the new Testament is not the cupp, nor
is not in it, but it is the ordinance or disposition the which god made to
leave to his elect children the ever lasting wealth, that is to say the
forgeuenes of sins, the freing from all evil, the everlasting life, and the
possession of every good thing If these be inco^uenie^ces as we may see, the^
their opinion is false The last reason is this. The tenth reason.
Christ may be eaten and his bluod dro^k only two ways that is to say,
spiritually, and sacramentally the which sacramental eating therefore, as we
have said, serves and is profitable to the spiritual eating. I do not find
after what other sort, except these two, we may eat Christ and drink his bluod.
But to eat Christ and drink his bluod, after these two sorts, we need not to
put him really into the mouth, another his body nor his bluod, therefore it is
not necessary that Christ should be really in the sacrament. That Christ may be
eaten and his bluod dronk after these two sorts, though that he really in body
and in soul be not in the sacrament, I prove it thus. First to receive his
body and his bluode spiritually, we need not to receive him by the bodily mouth
it suffices to receive him by faith, that is to say, to believe in him, as we
proved before in the third reason, nor it needs not, I say, for to eat his
body and drink his bluode after this sort, that we should put either the one, or
the other into the bodily mouth, this is plain, because that such eating and
drinking is done with the spirit, and with the mind. And this the adversary
will not deny. That also it is not necessary for the receiving him
sacrame^tally that he should be really in the sacrament, I prove it by the
Apostle paul who says to the Cor. that the hebrew is he people were baptized,
as well they, 1 Corin. 10
as we although under other signs then ours, because that we be baptized
with water and that people says paul was baptized with the cloud dni with
the sea, passing through the midst of the read sea, and that cloud that
covered them and the red sea through the midst whereof they al passed, was to
the^ baptisinge, where we may note that according to paul, not only they of
full age were baptized but the children also, because that all were covered
with the cloud and all passed through the midst of the sea. I desired to say
these few words, for their sakes that be seduced by the wicked spirit of the
Anabaptisticall error, who being led about by satan do deny the baptism of
children. If the hebrews, children were baptized in token that they were also
of gods people, for what cause should not now our children be baptized being,
no less of gods people the^ they, and being no less redeemed by Christ the^
they of full age? this I desired to say by the way.

After paul adds in the same place that all did eat the self same spiritual
food, and dronk all the self same spiritual drink, And he calls that
spiritual meat, or else food (whether you will call it) the paschal lamb, and
chefely the manna, the which meats they all did eat, and he calls the
spiritual drink, that water which came out of the rock. And he adds, that
that rock was Christ, that is to say, did signify Christ. That spiritual
food, that is to say the paschall lamb and the Manna, did also signify
Christ, as the water did betoken him, although paul does not expressly speak
it. And to be short he means that the hebrueish people did as well communicate
with those signs, as we do that eat the sacramental bread and sacramental
wine, And paul means in his tongue, that all did eat, and drink Christ
sacramentally, for so much, as that to eat a thing sacramentally, is none
other, but to eat the sacrament of the same. Well now if that people did eat
Christ, and drink his blood sacramentally, when they did eat the paschall
lamb, and the manna, and drunk that water that rann out of the rock, the which
things were a sacrament of Christ, as the bread and the wine be to us, and did
signify the same, as paul says, and Austen expounds it in the 45. treatise
upon John, saing, that those sacraments did signify the self same that ours
do, although after an other sort. And yet not withstanding they did not eat
Christ's body nor drink his bluod really, putting the^ in to the mouth: What is
the cause that we may not also eat his body, and drink his bluod,
sacrame^tally, without eating or drinkinge him really and bodily, forso much as
that to eat or drink Christ sacramentally, is none other but to receive with
the mouth his sacrament? And to be a sacrament, it is not needful that the
thing signified should be in the same sacrament, and much less that there
should be made any turninge of the substa^ces of the signs, And it is enoughe
that the sacrament should be a sign of the same, that is to sai, that it
should signify it, according to the definition of a sacrament which says
Sacramentum est sacrae rei signum, that is to say, A sacrament is a sign of a
holy thing, It is plain that Christ, as man, was not really in the hebrews
sacraments, because, he was not yet either borne or incarnated. And how could
his body and his bluod be in those sacraments seeing his body and bluod were not
yet? And yet paul says that they did eat the self same spiritual meat, and
the self same spiritual drink that is to say, Christ spiritually.

Certain expound paul's text, of the spiritual eating and drinking of that
people, that is to say, by faith but because that all did not eat and drink
spiritually and by faith, for so much as that a great part of them, as paul
affirms, in the text were unbelievers, and yet he says that all did eat the
self same spiritual meat, and drink the self same spiritual drink. I have
therefore expounded it of the sacramental eating and drinkinge, of the which
all as well beleuers as unbelievers, did eat and drink, and not of the spiritual,
that is to say by faith the which belo^ged to the beleuers only. And though
paul calls that meat and drink spiritual, yet he means not that it should
be spiritual in it self, as that which is of faith is in deed spiritual, but
he calls it spiritual, as to the signification and as to the use, that is to
say, that it was appointed to signify Christ, who is a spiritual and an holy
thing, as our sacraments may be called spiritual things, be cause they be
appointed, to spiritual things. There was not withstanding difference between
those sacraments and ours, because that they (beside that they were appointed
to spiritual things) served also for the bodily things, that is to say, to the
necessity of the present life, for so much as the manna and the water were
their daily meat and drink, so that they had two uses the one spiritual,
because it was to them a sacrament, the other bodily the which served to the
necessity of their bodies. Our sacraments be not so the which be taken only
for the spiritual use that is to say, for sacraments, and not for the
necessity of the body.

To conclude therefore, I say, that seeing Christ cannot be eaten nor drunk but
after one of these two sorts, that is to say spiritually and by faith and then
sacramentally also. And after these two sorts Christ may be received though he
be not really, that is to say in body and in soul, in the sacrament. It is not
therefore proffitable, and much less necessary, to affirm such real being in
the same sacrament. They that say, that Christ is really in that host and in
that cup, do not know, what means to eat and drink Christ sacramentally, for
so much as, that to eat and drink sacrame^tally, as we have said, is none other
but to receive the sacrament, that is to say, the sign of the holy thing, and
does not mean to take bodily the self same thing, that is represented by the
sacrament.

I might if I would, and did not fear to be tedious to the readers, make diverse
other reasons also, but it needs not, and those that we have made, do suffice.
But let us put the case, that we had made no one reason, to prove this our
negative, that is to say, that Christ is not really in the sacrament, nor there
is not made any turninge of the bread and the wine into his body and bluod, nor
that we had not alleged any saing of the scripture, the which not
withstanding, god ayding us, we have sufficiently done, let us put the case (I
say) that we had done no one of those things, yet they of the contrary opinion
should not, by this, have had their purpose, because that it does not belong to
us to prove our negative, but it belongs to them to prove there affirmative.
For eueri one that affirms any sainge is bound if he speak reasonably to
prove it, If it were not already so plain that every man might see it: He that
denies is not bound to prove his negative. It is not enough for a man of what
so ever authority he be, for to be believed, to say it is so, the matter
stands thus but he must prove his affirmative sainge, chefely if it be a
matter of weight, and pertaining to faith as this is. Nor it is not enough
nether, to be hable to defend and maintain it, for so much as that many false
opinions be, with wit, with distinctions, with wrangelinges and intangelinges
defended, as though they were true. We may see this by experience, in the
school doctoures and questionists, for few or none of them do agree to gether,
but they be of contrary and d^uers opinions and always every one of them
defends his oune fantasies, and they strive continually, and it is neauer
known who has the right, and they confound the minds of men, they lose the
time, and cause other also to lose it.

I desire then of these manner men that they would prove this their rule or
opinion, that is to say, that Christ is bodily in the sacrament, and that the
substance of the bread, and the wine be turned into his body and bluod. I
desire that they would prove it me, other by reason, or such authority as I
should be bound to believe, This my request is just, reasonable and honest. By
reason they can not prove it, this is clear, and themselves by agreement do
confess it: by authority how do they prove it? They bring forth the old
doctors, they alle^ge the determinations of popes, and of Councels, the common
opinion of the church, last of all they allege Christ's words when he did
institute the supper, that is to say, this is my body shewinge the bread, and
this is my bluod shewinge the wine, and Christ's sainge also in S. John, Io. 6.
that is to say, I am the bread of life. I am the lyuinge bread that am come
down from heaven, and he that eats of this bread, shall live for eauer. And
the bread which I shall give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. And after truly truly, I say unto you, if you eat not the flesh of the
son of man, and drink not his bluode you shall not have life in you, he that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life everlasting. And further, my
flesh is verily meat, and my bluode is verily drink, these be the aucthorities
that they allege.

To the which aucthorities I answer, and first to those of the old doctors,
that is to say, as for example, of Ireneus, Tertulian, Cyprian, Origin, Hilary,
Athanasius, Basil, Io^h Chrisostom, Gregory Nazianzene, Gregory Nicene,
Cyrill, Ambrose Iherom, Augustine, And such other holy fathers, the which
labored for Christ's church in wrytinge books, expounding the scripture,
disputinge against heretics, preachinge and teachinge, whereby they do in deed
deserve to be honored for their lerninge, and holiness, but, I say that no one
of them, nor of the other anucients, was cauer of this opinion, that Christ
should be bodily in the sacrament, and much less, that the substances of the
bread and wine, should be turned into his body and bluod, but in deed they have
said the contrary. And though sometime it seems that they should affirm that
the bread and the wine be Christ's body and bluode, yet this is for none other
cause, but that they speak of the sacraments, after the manner of the scripture
the which does call them by the name of the things signified by them, as we
often find that Augustine did. Who very often has declared such manner of
speches as we will tell here after, And let us admit also that all the old
doctors had been of that opinion, and that all the world would say it yet ought
we not to believe them, if they bring not forth the witness of the holy
scripture, because that this is a thing pertaining to faith and, faith is
ground wrought only upon gods word, as paul says to the Romans, To. 10.
faith comes of hearing but hearing is by the word of god, he does not say
by the word of men, the which may all err, but he says it comes of gods
word, and the holy scripture is gods word. Let them allege us in such things
the holy scripture, and we will believe them, else not,

And if any would say, and the scripture also was made by men therefore we ought
not to believe it, I answer that the scripture is writ-told, and made by the
holy ghost as peter says in the second Epistle, 2. Pet. 1.
and it was confirmed with great signs, and marvelous miracles. Nor no ^ue of
the fathers or old doctors did ^auer desire, that they should be believed as
the holy scripture but they all with one voice do say, and chefely Saint
Augustine, that concerning matters of faith we should so far believe them as
is found in the holy scripture, and none otherwise, And they will that it
should be laufull to deny any men, yea let them be of what so ever holiness
learning and authority you will, but not to deny the holy scripture. Tell
me, who is he that would believe the article of the trinity, although the whole
world had told him, if it were not plain in the holy scriptures, who would
believe the article of the incarnation of the son of god, and the other
articles of the faith, If gods word had not told it? What can men know of such
things, except so much as god oppeneth unto them by the scripture? Look upon
Austen in the 19 epistle, The 19. pistell.
where he says in sentence that he bears this honor toward the Canonical
books of the scripture, that he believes seurly that no one of them has ^rred,
but for all the rest, he may deny them, if they do not prove their suings by
the holy scripture, The 3. pistell.
The very same in meaning he says in the hundredth and eleventh epistle
writing to fortunatianus the bishop. They all, beside all this, that I have
said, were of this opinion, that Christ in that he is m^, is only in heaven
bodily.

In the se second book against the denatists cap. 3.
Let us say the same of the determinacions of popes, and of councils that all
may err. Austen in the second book against the donatists, says that the
universal former Councils may be amended by the^ that follow. If they may be
amended, suerly they may err, and so they that follow after them, who doubts
but they may err as well as they that go before? And we by experience man see,
that many councels do err for one of the^ does gaynsay an other. I speak not
this because that men ought not to have reverence to councels when they be
lawfully gathered together and in the holy ghost, and when the determinations
that be made in them, be according to the holy scripture as the Council of
Nece was against Arrius, The council of Calcedone against Eutiches, And
certain other old councels, the which had gods word for their rule. And these
only were gathered to gether in Christ's name, and in the holy ghost. But I say
in deed that when they determine any manner of thing pertaining to faith, and
do not stick to gods word, that we ought not to obey such councels, nor men
ought not to believe them. And in our days, we have the example of the council
of Trent, the goodly determinations that it made, all, at the popes good
pleasure, whom the bishops cannot gainsay because they have all sworn
neauer to go against the sea Apostolic? What estimation should men have of
such councils, where no respectt is had to gods honor nor to his word, and
such as be gathered together against Christ for to que^che him out, and to
establish the kingdom of Antichrist, shall we allow such councils? This is a
chief ground. The faithful Christian is not bound nor ought not, in matters
pertaining to faith to believe the hole world together if they do not bring
forth gods word, that is to say, the holy scripture for their witness.

Well now they will say, that they have gods word, that is to say, Christ's
words, who said this is my body, and this is my bluod she winge the bread and
the wine, therefore the bread and wine be turned into Christ's body and bluod,
and Christ is wholly in the host and in the wine. Further he said those words
in the sixth chapter of Ihon, above recyted, where he wills that we should eat
his flesh and drink his bluod, and this is not done except in the sacrament,
therefore he is bodily in the sacrament. I answer first to those words, this is
my body, and this is my bluod, and I ask where in the scripture at any time is
found that such a speech, as, This is my body and this is my bluode, should
mean, this is turned into my body and into my bluod, or else my body and my
bluod be in these signs? I neauer found this manner of speech. Therefore the
fore said words have another meaning then that the which they give them, or
that which the scriptures use that is to say, this is the sign of my body
shewinge the bread, and this is the sign of my bluod, shewinge the wine, as
before we have said and we will also better say, in the declaration of those
words, This is in deed their meaning. To the saings of the sixth chapter of
Ihon, I say, that they do not allege the^ to purpose, because that there,
Christ does not speak of the sacramental eatinge, but of the spiritual, and
by faith, as in the third reason we have declared, yea as Christ him self does
expound it in the text, and so all the old doctors do expound it, And
cheefely Augustine who says believe and thou have eaten, so that saying that
opinion of the turninge of the substa^ces of the bread and wine into Christ's
body and bluod, nor that of his bodily presence in the sacrament cannot be
proved, nether by reason nor any authority that avails, we ought to
conclude that it is a feigned invention and imagination of men and comes not
from god. The reasons of the true and Catholic opinion being ended, before
that we answer to the objections and ground works of the parties contrary to
the truth there remanith to make apere that the opinion which we have proved is
that of the old church, and the forenamed doctors and holy men.

And because I should be to long, if I would bring the multitude of doctors,
It shall suffice me therefore to tell Augustines opinion a most ware and true
expounder of the old and sound opinions, the which Augustine holds not, but
the opinion of the Auntiens, and that which was holde^ in his time and of his
predecessors. In his Epistle to bonifacius he writes after this sort.
Epistle 23.
If the sacraments should not have some similitude of those things, of the
which they be sacraments, they should be in no wise sacraments, And by this
lykelynes, those same sacraments many times, take the name of the things them
selves. Even us therefore after a certain meyns the sacrament of Christ's body,
is Christ's body, the sacrament of Christ's bluod, is Christ's bluode, and so
the sacrament of faith, that is to say, the baptism is faith, and is called
faith. See here Augustine, how he understands Christ's speech when he says,
this is my body showing the bread and this is my bluode shewinge the wine, not
to mean that the bread should be in deed Christ's body, and the wine Christ's
bluod, He means not this. But he means that therefore the bread is called
Christ's body and the wine his bluod, because they be sacraments and signs of
Christ's body and bluod. Also in a book the which is against Adimantus the
Maniche in the xij. chapter Augustine says, Against Adimantus ca. 12
The lord doubts not to sai (and he speaks of Christ) this is my body when
he gave the sign of his body. Here Austen plainly expounds this sainge of
Christ that is to say, this is my body, that is as much to say, as this is
the sign of my body. The 3. book. cap. 16.
And in the third book called de doctrina Christiana in the xvi. he says that
if that thing which Christ commands shall seem strange inconvenient or
evil done, then we ought not to, understand such speech according to the
letter, but figuratyuely. And geuinge the examples of these words of Christ
that is to say. If you eat not the flesh of the son of man and drink not his
bluod you shall not have life in you. He says that such speech ought not to be
understand according to the letter, because that understanding it according to
the letter it is a disagreable, and an inconvenient thing, that is to say,
that the flesh of a man should be eaten and his bluod dronk.

And therefore it ought to be understand soundly that is to say, that Christ did
not mean of the eating of his flesh and drinkinge his bluode fleshly but
spiritually, beleuinge in him, and having remembrance of so great a benefit
as he has wrought us sufferinge and dyinge for us. And this is the eatinge and
drinking, that Christ meant of. And to eat and drink after this sort, It
needs not that Christ should be really in the consecrated bread and wine, The
thirty treatise upon Ihon.
but only that the faith of Christ. should be in us. And in the xxx treatise
upon John he says, The lord is above, that is to say in heaven, but the lord,
that is, the truth is also here. Christ's body in the which he rose, must
needs be in one place, but his troth is every where and he means by the troth
Christ's godhead. And in the epistle which he writes to dardanus he says he
shall come for to judge the lyuinge and the dead, in the self same form that
he ascended into heaven, to the which form, he has seurly given immortality,
but he has not taken away the nature of it, we may not think that according
to this manner of form, that is to sai, man's, he should be spread abroad every
where. For we must take heed that we do not so affirm his god head that we
take away the truth of his body, for it follows not that, that which is in
god should be so every where as god. Of these two saings of Austen the which
before we have also alleged, in the seventh reason is concluded, that Austen
will not that Christ's body may be in more then one place at one time, he will
in deed that his god head should be every where, but not his manhood, the
which is in one only place, that is to say in heaven.

The master of the sentences glosinge or else expounding certain sainges of
Augustine in the fourth of his sentences the tenth distinction where he
brings forth amongst his other sainges this: In the 4. of the sentences the
tenth distinction.
that is to say that Christ's body may be in one place, but the truth is spread
abroad every where: he says that Christ's body may be in one placeseable in
man's form, but his truth that is to say his godhed, is every where. upon Ihon
the sixth.
And he adds the truth also of the same, that is to say, his very body is on
every aultare in every place where men celebrate. Sauinge his reverence this is
not to set forth Austen mind, but it is to give it strange senses that he
neauer meant and it is in deed a maiminge of his saings: Auste^ by that word
troth, means Christ's godhed, the which is powered abroad every where and
does not mean the body, and yet he does notwithstanding expound it for the
body, the which is (as he says) on all the aultares where they celebrat. And
so he does with many other saings of S. Augustine in the said distinction, and
in other, where he speaks of the matter of the thanks giving, mayming S.
Augustines sainges, and calling those heretics that say the contrary, that is
to say, that hold not that Christ's bodyly presence is in the sacrament. But we
will let him gloss at his will, and say what pleases him. And it is to be
maruelled-at that he should so lightly and without reason pronounce these to be
heretics that speak nothing contrary to gods word, but they do in such sort
honor it, as they do not allow in the matter of religion and faith any more,
then so much as the same word speaks not mindinge, to stand to men's opinions
except they be agreeable with the holy scripture. The master of the sentences
here gives an unjust and a wicked judgment.

But in the third book of the trinity, The third book of the trinite. ca. 10.
Augustine says that no miracle happens about the sacrament of Christ's body
and bluod. If it be so that according to Saint Augustine, there chances no
miracle about that sacrament he then believed not that Christ, should be bodily
in the sacrament, for if he had believed it he would neauer have said, that there
was no miracle, but he would have said, that there happened, many and most great
miracles, as before in the fifth reason we have seen. Well it is plain then
after Austens mind, that Christ is not really in body and in soul in the
sacrament, but he calls the consecrated bread and wine Christ's body and
bluod because they be signs of his body and bluod not that they should be
really and in deed his true body and bluod because he will that those should be
in heaven, and not on the earth in the sacrament. We might if we would allege,
the other old doctors, as Ireneus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Ambrose,
Jerome, and Chrysostom, all the which be of the self same opinion, but let S.
Austen suffice us, who among all the rest is the most faithful witness of all
the auntientie, And this we do to be short, not withstandinge if any would see
these doctors sainges, let him look upon Ireneus, who herd Policarp. Iho^ the
Eua^gelistes disciple, in the fourth and fifth book that he makes against
heresies. Let him look upon Tertullian that was next to Ireneus in the first
fourth and fifth book against Martian the heretic. Let him look upon Origin
upon leuiticus the seventh and nynth homely. Let him look upon Ambrose in the
eleventh chapter upon the first epistle to the Corinthians. Let him look upon
Chrisostom in the 83. homelye upon S. Matthew. Let him look upon Iero^ upon
Ecclesiastes the third chapter, all whose sainges for shortness I leave out.
Then it is plain that the opinion and judgment of the old church, Mark.
is that which before we have proved. And we must here mark that the old
doctors inte^dinge in their manner of speech to agree with the scripture, the
which when it speaks of the Sacraments does name them by the name of the
things signified very often when they treat of the same sacraments and chefely
of the thanks geuinge, theical it many times body and bluod and they speak in
such sort as it seems they mean to affirm the bodily presence of the body
and bluod in the sacrament, a thing that they neauer intended. The which
thing when the late writers and chefely the schole men have not taken head to,
they have boldly, setfurth the bodily presence of the one and the other in the
sacrament, but they be deceived, for so much as that was neauer the opinion of
the Auntientes.

And if any one would bring forth the book of sacraments ascribed to Ambrose,
the which puts this new opinion of Christ's bodily presence in the
sacrament. It may be boldly answered him, that that book was neauer Ambroses,
because that neither the style of the speech was Ambroses nor the sentence, the
which is contrary to many his sainges in his other books. Nor let no man
marvel, though I deny those books to be Ambroses, for many books were
ascribed to the old doctoures that they neauer saw, much less made as that
book of the true and false repentance, ascribed to Austen, the which teaches
against Austen naminge him and yet certain have attributed it to him. Certain
men of small consciences have done this other that they might better sell such
books, or to make their opinions be believed and to give them authority under
the name of Auntients, or else for some other respects scant honest. It is no
small fault to go about under other men's auctorities without their consent to
make men believe their opinions, as it is a great fault that their labor and
books should be attributed to other. And I say more also again, that although
all the old doctors were of such opinion that is to say that Christ were
bodily present in the sacrament, we be not bound, nor we ought not to believe
the^, If they prove it not by the holy scripture the which they neauer did nor
it can not be done. And this is the sign, that as mani as eauer were of this
opinion, could neauer hitherto make reason that might avail. If this bodily
presence of Christ in the sacrament, had been true, it should have been a
thing much belonginge to faith, and the Apostolic wrytinges would have made us
clear, and suere of it but we see that such a presence is affirmed in no one
place of the scripture. Therefore it is not true but it is an invention of man,
the which ought not to have any place in gods things.

Now there remains to answer to their reasons that hold this bodily presence
of Christ in the sacrament. They make (as in the beginning we have said) many
profes and reasons, but none avails. And we will not answer, but to three or
four, which have a certain small show, for answeringe to these few it is an
easy thing to answer to all the other.

One and the first is this, The first reason.
that is to say Chist calls the consecrated bread his body and the wine his
bluod, therefore it is so that the bread is his body and the wine his bluod that
is that the bread and the wine, be turn into his body and bluod, or at the
least be there really present, or else he should have spoken a lie, the which
cannot be, seeing Christ is the vndeceaueable troth. This is the greatest reason
that they can make, the which not withstandinge is nothing worth, yea it
comes of an ignorance of the manner of speech of the scripture, or else if it
come not of ignorance it proceeds of an obstinacye and self willednes because
they desire to defend, whether it be (according to the common sainge) right or
wrong, that which ones they have affirmed, because they would not seem to have
erred. I answer to this reason, and say, that Christ said the troth and could
not speak an untroth, because he could not err being god. And it is true that
the bread is Christ's body and the wine is his bluod, and I confess it, but
it is true as Christ meant it, not as they would have it. Christ when he said
this is my body shewinge the bread, and this is my bluod showing the wine, did
not entend, nor went not a bout to say that that bread was really, and
substantially, his body, and the wine his bluod, but he meant to say that that
bread and that wine, were a sacrament and did signify his body and his bluod:
And he followed the manner of the speech of the scripture, when he speaks of
sacraments: you know well enough that Christ always did honor the holy
scripture, alledginge it very often, and prouokinge men to the same. And
therefore because he knew that the custom of the scripture is to name the
sacraments, and call them, by the name of the things signified, and represented
by them, he also desired to use that manner of speech, calling the bread and
the wine his body and bluod, because they did signify both the one and the
other, that is to say, he called the bread his body, because it did signify
his body, and the wine his bluod because it did signify his bluod, as before
S. Augustine has said.

That the custom of the scripture is to call the sacraments by the name of the
things signefied by them, it is easelye proved, and we have already seen it
in the former talk. The circuncisio^, was a sacrament of the hebrewish people,
and because it was a sacrament, the scripture does call it covenant, because
it was the sign of gods covenant made with Abraham and his of spring, as it
is written in genesis where god does first call it, the sign of the covenant,
and after a few words, he calls it the covenant. The covenant was this,
that god would be the god of Abraham and of his seed, that is to say, of his of
spring. It is a plain matter that the circuncision was not really this
covenant, or promise, and yet god does call it covenant, because it was the
sign of the covenant, should we say that the circuncisio^ was in deed gods
covenant because god called it by this name couenaunte? Sewerly no, but we
must say, if we will say well, that therefore god calls it so, because the
same is a sign of gods covenant, or else of gods promise. And if any should
say what means it that god did use this manner of speech, Could not he use the
proper manner of speech and not the improper? To this I answer, that god often
times uses with us the custom of men, because we be men and he agrees to
our manner of speech, for so much as the custom is among men, that they call
the signs of a thing, by the self same name, of the same thing signified. As
for example, If at any time we should make a covenant or an agreement with any
man as soon as the agreement and covenant is made, we cause to be made, an
instrument or a wrytinge of such agreement, and we call it covenant or else
agreement, not that, that instrument is really such agreement (for the covenant
and agreement, went before) but because it is a sign of such covenant and
agreement So we call the wrytinge of a sale or of a purchase, a sale or
purchase, because it is a sign and confirmacion of the sale or purchase. And
we do call the wrytinge or the instrument of such things, testament, or
legacy, or gift, because it is the sign and confirmacion of these things.
Let us give an other example which also is of the scripture. In Exodus and in
many other places, the ceremony of the paschall lamb, is called passover. And
Christ and the Apostels did so call it. Christ said in saynet luke, I have
ernestly desired, to eat this passover, before I suffer. Here Christ called the
paschall lamb passover. And the Apostells said to Christ, where willt thou that
we prepare for the to eat the passover. And for all that, the paschall lamb was
not really the passover, because the passover as we have in the same Exodus,
was that passage (as it is also said before in the ninth reason) the which the
Angel made when he struck the first borne of Egypt, and passed by the houses
of the hebrews. Now that passage, was properly, the passover. But because the
lamb was ordained, that it should be killed and after eaten, with many
ceremonies in sign and remembrance of that thing, therefore the scripture
calls it passover.

Behold how the scripture calls the sacraments, by the names of the things
represented and signified, why shall we marvel then that Christ did call the
consecrated bread his body and the wine his bluod, because they should be
signs and a remembrance of his body and bluod? We ought not to marvel, yea
it is our great rudenes and dulnes that we see not this thing, and why he
has done it, that is to say why he calls the bread his body and the wine
his bluod. Every man says that the sacrament of thanks geuinge does come instead of the sacrament of the paschall lamb. And if it be so, saying that the
scripture and the Apostels call the same such lamb passover yea Christ him self
in the same supper when he instituted the sacrament of his body and bluod,
called that lamb passover, not for any other cause, but for that it was a
sign and a remembrance of the passover, why should not the bread be called
the body and the wine the bluod, because they be signs and a remembrance of
the body and the bluod: even as the lamb is called passover, because it is
the sign and remembrance of the passover. And that rock out of which came
forth the water in the desert, paul calls it Christ, not for any other
cause, but for that it did signify Christ, nor there was neauer any men that
by such a sainge would think that paul meant to affirm, that that stone was
really Christ, but that he meant only to say that it did signify Christ. So
likewise let us say of the bread and the wine, that they be called body and
bluod, because they be signs and a remembrance of such things. We have been
long in answeringe to this reason because in deed the whole consists in this
declaration that we have made.

The second reason is this, If Christ were not really in the sacrament S. Paul
would not have said that it should be condemnation to them that should take it
unworthily, nor he would not have said, that such should be guilty of the
lords body and bluod. For so much as that if Christ be not in the sacrament,
there should not be any other thing but bread and wine, and being none other
thing there, it should not be to us such condemnacion, as it is in deed no
comdemnation to eat other come^ bread and to drink other wine. To this is
answered, that therefore paul says that they be giltye of the lords body and
bluod, the which do take the consecrated bread and wine and the sacrament
unworthily, not for because that eather the body or the bluod be in the
sacrament, but they be therefore giltye of the one and the other, because they
despise Christ's death they despise his body and bluod, not goinge with that
faith and with that reverence that they ought to take those holy signs
Instituted by Christ in remembrance of his body and bluod given to death for
our ransom. In old time they that did dispyse or dishonor the name or the
glory of the Roman Empire they were gyltie of treason against the state of
Rome. And they that had done wrong to Cesars Image or else had defaced any of
Cesars writings, This was as if they had laid violent hands upon the princes
person. He that would dishonor the arms or the badges, of any great state,
that prince would have esteemed such dishonor and disworship to be committed
against his oune person, for when his badges or else his Arms be despised he
him self is dispysed. So saying that Jesus Christ the chief prince of the world
has Instituted the sacrame^tall bread and wine, to the intent that that it
should be a remembrance of so great a thing, and should represent so great a
misterye, that is to say, that has given his body and his bluod, and dyed for
to deliver us from sin and from everlasting death, and to give us
everlasting life: Sewerly they that will take these holy signs without true
repentance of there sins, and without true faith, and without consideration
of so great a mystery and benefit they make no count, another of Christ's
body nor his bluod nor of his death, no nor of Christ himself. it is no
marvel therefore, that they, who go to take such a sacrament unworthily, do
eat and drink Judgment, that is to say condemnation, because when they
dispyse the signs of so great things, they do consequently dispyse the same
things, and him also that did institute such signs. It is not proved by this
that Christ is enclosed in this sacrament, but the contrary.

The third reason.
The third reason the which seems to have some show is this, that is to say
that if Christ were not here in this sacrament, there should not be wrought any
such great miracles, as men see. Sometime it is seen that the hosts have cast
out bluod and such bluod is kept in many places. It is red in the life of Saint
Gregory, that the consecrated bread maruelouslye changed into a man's finger.
It is red that that the brute beasts did knele down at the presence of the
thanks geuinge. And sometime there apered a child when the host was listed up.
What shallbe said to these great miracles, sewerlye if Christ were not in the
sacrament god would neauer have wrought these great signs.

This reason is nothing worth, and it is like the reason that they make, that
defended purgatory with saing that there was heard certain lamentable voices
of the souls of the dead which desired help of there parents or friends, that
they would cause to be said masses and chefely those masses that be called Saint
Gregory's, and as soon as they were said those voices were heard no more. It is
told also in the life of a certain seinct (but in deed a friars saint) that
he saw ones a valley full of souls, the which desired help, and that seinct
was moved to pytye of those poor souls. I leave to you to think how many
those souls ought to be, that filled that valleye, when he had said I cannot
tell how many masses (because I do not well remember the storye) he returned to
se the valley and he found them no more there, because they were delivered out
of purgatory. I do much marvel that all the souls in purgatory went not
thither into that valley that they all might have been delivered by that
saints Masses. Ergo there is a purgatory. What will the lutheranes that
deny purgatory say here what will they say? They that you call lutherans,
will sai that you be a blind sort of superstitious, I will not sai ignorant
Idiots of gods causes, and that you have no faith in Christ, thinkinge that
the material fire, can do that to the souls, that only Christ has done with
his precious bluod that is to say to purge them, and perfectly to satiffie
gods justice for all the sins of the beleuers. And they will say that you
deserve to be begyled, and mocked by the deuell, that leads you to think that
the souls of the dead do lament and desire masses, and ye perceive not that he
is the same wicked spirit, the which fayneth himself to be the souls of the
dead, and desires help, and caryeth about your brain, and makes you believe
that glow worms be lanternes, The souls of the dead go not a solasinge here
and there (as Chrysostom upon S. Matthew, says very well) but they abide in
there places appointed unto the^, those souls of the faithful and godly abide
with Christ, the other abide in there place lokinge for there final
condemnation.

Even so I say of these manner miracles (though they wear in deed) that they
be none other but illusions and disceyts of satan, for to give credit to the
Mass, and to being to pass that we should not believe sewerly in Christ. And
god by his just judgment does suffer these disceyts, because we will not
receive the knowledge of the troth nor believe the holy gospel. And for this
most great sin, he will that we shall believe lies, and be deceived. Nor
sewerly we deserve none other, but to receive and allow Antichrists miracles,
as saint paul says to the Thessalonicenses, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
seeing that we will not stand to gods word. The holy scripture and gods word
ought without any doubt to be in much more credit with us, then as many such
miracles, the which in deed be all lies, yea then as many miracles although
they be true, as can be wrought in the world. The which word of god does
affirm and say that Christ Jesus is in heaven, Mar. 16. Luc. 24.
and that from thence he shall come to Judge the living and dead, and there he
shall abide, Act. 3.
as peter says in the Acts of the Apostels until the time of the restitution
of all things, and it makes us likewise to understand that the sacraments be
signs, and be not the things signified, let us take heed, and give credit to
these things that be clear and plain, If we will not be disceaued, and not to
the opinions and fantasies of me^, which be not found in the scripture, but
be clearly against them:

the fourth reason.
They make another reason, the which I would have said nothing of, because it is
already answered, yet for so much as they bringein with the same, certain
examples or similitudes to give a color to their opinion, of the which we
have not yet spoken we will say of them a few words to the greather and more
plentiful clerenes of the truth. They say, that god can bring it to pass,
that is to say, that whole Christ great and thick as he was on the Cross,
should be in the sacrament, and that he should be whole in every part of the
same as the soul is whole in the whole body, and whole in every part of the
body, and that he should be as man, in many places, in heaven on earth upon all
altares, and in every other place where the sacrament of thanks geuinge is. He
can turn one body into another, as shall seem good and lik him, because he is
almighty, then he can make that the bread shall be turned into his body, and the
wine into his bluod. Seeing he could create the world of nothing, he can much
easelyer change one thing into another. They give eyample of Moses rodd, the
which was turned into a serpent and then the serpent was turned again into the
rod likewise the waters of Egypt were turned into bluod.

Concerning the being of whole Christ in the sacrament, as great and thick, as
he is in heaven, they give the similitude of the heaven which we see, the which
being so great, is not withstandinge whole in our little eye. Likewise our
whole face, apereth in a glass that is much less then the face is, yea the
whole man, is seen in a little glass. Concerning the being of whole Christ in
every part of the sacrament, they give the similitude of our soul, as we
have already said the which is whole in the whole and whole in every part of
the body Our face also is whole in the whole glass and whole in every part
of the glass, after this sort, that is to say, that if the glass should be
broken in many parts, our whole face would apere in every one of them.
Concerning Christ's bodily being in many places, that is to say in heaven, on
the earth and in every place where the sacrament is, they give the similitude
of a man the which should have about him many glasses in every one of these
glasses the form of a man will apere. Likewise if one speak in the presence of
many persons, his voice is but one, and yet it is whole in diverse men's ears.
If nature bring this to pass, that is to say, that one thing may be in
diverse places, much more Christ who is god the maker of nature can bring it to
pass in his body, that is to say that first the bread, should be turned into
his body and the wine into his bluod, and after, then that it should be whole
in the whole host and in the cupp, and whole in every part of the sacrament,
and that it should be in diverse places, If he can do those things, and will
do them, as we understand by the words of the sacrament, the which say, this
is my body showing the bread, and this is my bluod sh^winge the wine, then
they be done, because it is written in the psalm Quaecunque uoluit, fecit
dominus, All things that the lord would do he did.

I answer first to the reason it self, and after I will speak of the
similitudes, To the reason, that is to say if god can do it, therefore he has
done it, I say that it awayleth not, and it is already answered before in our
seventh reason that god does not all that he can do, as we give the example of
the twelve thousand legions of Angels the which god if he would, could have
sent to help Christ, and yet he sent them not. God can bring to pass that we
all may walk upon the sea without ships as some time Christ did, And as it
is written in the book of wysdom, and yet he does it not. Our question is not
whether god can do it or no, but it is whether god has done it or no. They
saiyes and we say no, It belongs to them to prove that he has done it and
that he does it a fresh, the which they shall neauer do nor can neauer bring
it to pass by gods word, this is a suer rule. Concerning that they go about
to say, that god had desire to do it, this is not only false but most false.
What reason is this, Christ said this is my body shewinge the bread, and this
is my bluod shewinge the wine, therefore he will that the bread should be turned
into his body and the wine into his bluod, or at the least that he should be in
the sacrament, in such sort as they say? This reason does not deserve any
answer, for so much as Christ by these words, meant not to say any other but
that the bread and the wine, were a sacrament and signs of his body and bluod
and meant not to say that which they affirm, as before we have so often
declared.

The examples or similitudes that they bring forth be not to the purpose, and
they be rather dissimilitudes then otherwise. The example of Moses rodd turned
into the serpent, and after the serpent turned into the rod, and of the waters
turned into bluod, it is not like, because the serpent, Note further that in
turninge of Moses rod, of the water into bluod and such other miracles the
senses did witness the change of the things, which holds not in the
transubstantiation.
into the which the rodd was turned, was not before, but was newly made.
Likewise that bluod into the which the waters were turned was newlye made, and
was not before, but Christ's body and his bluod were and be, before the bread.
They put certain turninges against nature, not marvelous but rather monstrous
and Imaginatiue. Let them give me but one example in the hole scripture, that
god eauer turned one thing into another that was before, they shall not find
it. How dare they then be so bold to affirm such a thing yea that which is
more, to go about to make men believe it as an article of the faith and yet
they cannot nether prove it by gods word, nor bring forth any example, that
eauer any like thing was done? The example of the heaven that it is in our
eye which is little, is nothing worth, because the heaven is not really in
our eye but there is only the image or the similitude of the heaven the which
similitude is little, as the eye, nor it is not inconvenient that the similitude
or the Image of a great thing should be little, as the Image of Caesar was in the
coin that was showed to Christ by the pharisees, the Image of Caesar was in
that coin the which was much less then Caesar himself and nevertheless it did
represent Caesar who was great and much greater then that Image. We will say the
like of the Image of the man in the glass the which although that it be much
less then the man, yet it does represent the man. This is no great matter,
that the Image of agreat thing should be little, but it should be agreat matter
that agreater body should be contained in one much less as they say of Christ,
that great and thick as he was upon the wood of the cross, and as presently he
is in heaven, he should be whole contained in a little cake. They that give
these examples of heaven and of the things that be seen in glasses do not
prove that agreat body is contained in a little as they say of Christ, that he
is contained in the host, but they prove only the Image or similitude of
agreat thing may be whole in a little thing, the which we deny not, but if
the similitude or image of agreat thing be in a little thing, this is because,
that that Image it self also is little and no greater then that body where in it
apereth, yea it is less, so that these examples be not to the purpose.

To the other similitudes I say also that they avail not, that of the soul
that it should be whole in the whole body, and whole in every part of the
body. This is because the soul seeing that it gives life to all the body as
it is plain, must needs be in every part of the body for so much as that
saying it gives life not only to the whole body, but to every part of the
same. It is necessary that it should be in all the parts, because that if it
were not in any part, that part should not be a live, And because that the
soul, wheresoeauer it is, of necessitye it must be whole there being
vndyuidable and not having parts because it is a spirit, there fore it is
necessary, that the soul be whole in the whole, and whole in every part of
the body, but Christ's body not being a spirit, and having many parts being
long, broad, and think, cannot be whole in the whole, and whole in every
part of the place where he is, and as it is repugnaunte, to a body to be a
spirit so is it repugnant to it to be vndeuydhable in a place. To the other
similitude of our face, the which is whole in the whole and whole in every
part of the glass after this sort, that is to say, that when the glass is
broken, the Image of the face is in every piece of the glass. I say they be
deceived, nor it is not true that one Image is in all those pieces of the
glass, when it is broken, but there be many Images and so many as there be
pieces of the broken glass, divided the one from the other. It is true in deed
that they be like, but they be not the self same as the self same body of
Christ is in all the pieces, after their Imagination.

To the other two examples with the which they would prove, that one thing may
be in many places, I say to the first, that is to say, to that which says
that the Image of one man may be in diverse glasses, if a man were set about
with many glasses, for so much as that the Image of the same man shall be in
every one of those glasses. I say that those Images that shall be in diverse
glasses shall not be one only but as many as there shall be glasses, albeit that
they shall be like, and therefore the example avails not, It had been behouefull
if it should have auayled, that one self Image and no more should have been in
diverse glasses the which is false. To the last example the which says, that
one self voice is in diverse ears, therefore one bodily thing may be in
diverse places. I answer, that that voice the which is heard is one and no mo,
but I deny that the self same is in diverse ears, yea I sai, that that which
is earde is not in any ear but is in the air next to him that speaks, It is
true in deed that the similitude of the same voice is there in their ears that
hear, but that similitude is not one, but as many as the ears be that hear,
and this is like the thing that is seen. As for example, many eyes see one
face, and that face which is seen is no more but one, nevertheless in diverse
eyes that see the face, be diverse Images and that Image that is in one eye, is
not in an other. And so is it of the voice, the same is one, but it is not in
the ears. And the Images be diverse, which do represent the voice that is in
the air, and it is behouefull that those Images should be as many as the ears
be which hear. I have made this long talk of these examples, the which
peradventure, to some shall seem superfluous yet I desired to do it, for to
make the Unlearned understand that all the examples which they can bring forth
be not to the purpose.

Last of all we will tell you one objection that they make, that is to say,
Christ said that he whold be with us until the end of the world this to be
with us here beneath, is for that he is in the sacrament, and dwells with us,
being in the churches, Enclosed with in the pixes and little closets. O pour
and wretched people that will hyde Christ under lock and keye as the Jews
did, that thought to keep him well in the sealed tomb, that he should not be
stolen away. You have kept him many hundredth years in such sort shut up,
that our predecessoures could not see him, yet at the last (by gods goodness)
he is not only come a broad, but he has broken your shettinges and does show
his merye and godly countenance to his, that is to say to them that desire to
see him and he has put you in such fear that you wot not what to do, you
would yet ones again Imprison him but there is no mean to do it. Do what you
will, yea and can apoinct, deuyse, gather counsels against him, follow your
foregoers that crucified him, persecute and take his members, evil handell
the^, make them rott in prison, as ye have alredye made some of them, torment
them after sundry and crewell whayes, and kill them, yet you shall not avail.
But by these means you shall make him more shyninge and glorious. It must
needs be o Antichrists that you should lose, stryuinge with him that is king
of kings, and lord of lords,

I answer them, that when Christ said to his disciples in the name of the
whole church I will be with you until the end of the world, he meant not to
say that he should be with us in the sacrament, no, but he meant to say that
he would be with us, with his help that he would be with us with his pour and
with his spirit, to the intent that the Apostels, and after the Apostells, we
should not think when he ascended into heaven, and as to the bodily presence,
for soke the earth that he did forsake both them and us, or had no more care of
us, as to the helpinge us. And therefore he said I will be with you until the
end of the world, even as the son although it be bodily in heaven separate
from the earth, yet as to the power and help, and as to do it good it does not
forsake it, because it gives it light, it warmeth it, it makes it spring, it
makes the trees flower covers and deckith them with leaves, it makes them
bring forth fruit, it helps the generation of beasts, and it is as it were
a life, of all the bodyed things, So does Christ notwithstanding that he is
in heaven, much higher the^ the son, yet he does not therefore forsake us, but
he has such care of us, that he does help us, and works in us, with his
holy spirit and godly pour, much more noblye and effectuously, then the
son does in all the bodyed things, because without him we can do nothing
but sin, and he helps us much more effectuously, then if he were on the
earth. And therefore he said to his disciples, that it was expedient that he
should ascend into heaven, as it is written in Ihon. He lights us inwardly,
he conuerteth us, teaches us, makes us strong, gives us faith, and love,
increases both the one and the other, he gives us trust and hope in god, he
gives us joy and mirth in spirit, he gives us patience and every virtue.
And to be short he works every good thing in us, and fulfilleth every
thing in all, as it is written to the Ephesians, where he his compared to the
head, Ephe. 1 and 4
the which power thin and gives virtue, strenght and workinge to all the
members, according to the being of every one of them. Be hold after what
sort Christ's sainge is understand? And they that expound it of Christ's
presence in the sacrament do not understand it, yea I sai that they do greatly
diminish Christ's meaning, because they draw down the hearts of men, the which
god and Christ would, should be on hye and lifted up into heaven. And this is one
of the chiefest causes, why Christ Jesus would ascend into heaven and not any
longer be conversant on earth, to thentent that they should follow the council
yea commandment of paul, the which (as before in the eight reason we have
said) writing to the Collossia^s, says, If you be risen again with Christ,
Colos. 3
seek the things that be a boue, where Christ is who sits on the right hand
of god understand you the things above and not the earthly things. And shose
men do the contrary, for they draw us down allow and to the earth, sainge that
Christ in the little closes and in the little holes when we should have our
conversation above and in heaven, and that we might say with paul: Our
conversation is in heaven from whence we look for our lord Jesus Christ, who
shall change our wretched bodies and shall make them like to his glorious
body.

We think, yea we be certain, that thus far we have plainly proved, and
showed, many ways that Christ Jesus is not bodily in the sacrament of
thanks geuinge (or the lords supper as paul calls it) and that there is
much less made in the same any substantial turninge of the bread and the
wine into his body and bluod. And we have made it apere, that the opinions
which affirm such things be false and erroneous. There remains now in the
end to see who were the auctoures of those strainge and fantastical
Imaginations, and whereby they were moved to find them out saying they be
without all reason and contrary to Christ's mind, and the whole holy
scripture.

I have not yet heatherto been hable to know, when this opinion of the real
and bodily being of Jesus Christ in the sacrament, did begin. It apereth
that about the year of our lord 877. or about the time of pope John the
eight or a little before, men began to dispute about that matter. John scotus an
English man, not he that was called sottell, but another more auntie^t, and
weary worthy in lerninge, who flourished in france under Charles surnamed
balde, made a book against this new opinion of the sacrament, whose Judgment,
shortly after, Beringarius of the cou^trye of Turonne, and deacon of Aungee,
followed, a man of singular lerninge, and of holy life who dealt all his goods
to the pour, and lived by the labor of his hands as Platina writes in the
life of Pope John the fiftenth. But one lanfranck of pauia bishop of Canterbery
in England, so much prevailed with his authority, with Pope Leo the nynth and
so much persuaded him, that in the council of vercels, he caused the said Ihon
scotusses book and berengarionses opinion who followed him, to be condemned.
And it was ordained in that council that men ought to believe not only
Christ's presence in the sacrament, but the turning of the bread and the wine
into his body and bluod. And this was as Mat. palmerius and John lucidus
Samothenus in the amendements of the times say, in the year of the lord. 1052.
so that it is now just. 500. years sense this new opinion of the turninge of
the substa^ces of the bread and the wine into Christ's body and bluod was
first determined.

Beringarius opinion of the sacrament, the which was condemned, as lanfra^ck
sets it out in his book made against him, is this. The sacrifice of the
church is mad of. 2. things of the seeable and of the vnseeable, that is to say
of the sacrament and of the thing of the sacrament. The which thing not
withstanding, that is to say, the body of Christ, if it were before men's eyes,
it should be seeable, but it is lifted until the times of the restitutio^s of
all things up into heaven, and sitting on the right hand of the father can not
be called back from heaven, (as thapostell peter writes) be cause that the
parson of Christ has his being of god and of man, but the sacrament of the
lords table is made of bread and of wine, the which things consecrated be not
turned, but abide in their substances having lykelynes with those things
whereof they be a sacrament. This true and godly opinion of Beringarius the
which, as we have said before, ^s the opinion of the old church, and is taken
out of the holy scripture, was condemned in the foresaid council of ve^selles.
And afterward a another time in Rome, by pope Nicholas the second, who compelled
Beringarius to recant, and make a beastly and shameful confession contrary to
his own true confession. Beringarius recantation is put in the decree of
consecration, the.ij. distinction, capite Ego beringarius, where he confesses
and affirms that he believes with the church of Rome that the bread and the
wine, which be set on thaltare, be not only a sacrament, but also they be the
true body and bluod of our lord Jesus Christ, and that he is not only in the
sacrament, but also in trowth sensually handled with the priests hands, and
is broken in pieces and with the teeth of the faithful is gnawed in to morsels.
Do ye think that this was a godly confession that they compelled this holy man
Beringarius to make, the which confesses that Christ is in deed sensibly
handeled, that is to say towched, and broken with the priests hands, and than
after, This host was such one as believed all things.
that he is knawed in to morsels with the teeth of the faithful? Me thinks
that this confession is like unto that bost of Bachanus that believed to much as
it is said.

The gloser of the decree, to whom such a manner of confession seemed strange and
crewel saw this well enough, and therefore he says, if thou dowst not after a
safe sort understand Beringarius words, thou shall fall into a greatter heresy
than that which he had. The master of the sentences in the fourth, the.xij.
distinction, myndy^g to gloss the words of the same confession, says, that the
same (to be sensibly handled) may be referred both to the one and the other, that
is to say to the body and to the sacrament of the body. But the same (to be
broken in pieces and to be knawed into morsels, can not be said but of the
sacrament only, A good gloss that speaks contrary to the text. This gloss
has.ij. faults. First it speaks against the auctor, that is to say against
the master of the sentences him self, who gives it, because he will that
Christ should be in the sacrament, vndyuydably, whole in the whole, and whole in
every part of the sacrament. If it be so, how can he be towched and handled
with the priests hands? For somoch as that the thing which is handled, is
felt with the hands, and if it be felt, it must needs be hot or cold, moist
or dry, hard or soft, rough or smoth, who did ever touch Christ's body syns it
ascended into heaven, and did ever feel it whether it were whote could or of
what qualytie it should be? If the master of the sentences had said that the
withcommes of the bread and the wine be handled with hands, he had said true
according to his opynion, because that the greatness of the bread, and the
withcommes of it, may be felt with hands, but the withcommes of Christ's body
can not be felt. Therefore Christ's body can not be handled with the priests
hands. Further if Christ's body in the sacrament may be handled with hands,
why should it not be seen? It is plain that every thing that is felt, may
also be seen, if it be not a through shewer as the air is. But who did eauer
see Christ in the sacrament? The Other fault of the same gloss is, that it
speaks against the text. For the text of beringarius confession, says
expressly, that not only the sacrament, but Christ's body and bluod, be sensibly
handled with the priests hands, be broken and knawed to morsels with the
teeth of the faithful. These words cannot have that sense, that the master of
the sentences gives them, because that the body and the bluod, be plainly
spoken of, and he says in the text, that they be broken, and gnawed into
morsels, with the faythfuls teeth.

Further it is not to be thought that they who were present at that confession,
did understand the words otherwise the^ according to the open and lettered
signification. For so much as that in confessions men must chefelye speak
plainly, and not in such sort as it should be necessary to give them gloses
and expositions, but they ought to be open, and many fast, and far from any
doubt. And so much the more as they that compelled him to make that confession,
did wirt it them selves as it lyked the^. It is said that a certain man called
Humbertus cardinal of burgony, worded or if you will so call it, framed that
confession, O Capernites: This is the honor that they did to Christ, to
constrain a poor man to confess that Christ, who is immortal, and
insufferable, should be sensibly handled, and broken with the priests hands,
and chawed and gnaued into morsels, with the teeth of the faithful. Be these
the councels gathered together in the holy ghost? Let the master of the
sentences, for all that, and as many other glosers a^ be in the world, gloss at
their pleasure, yet they shall never set the matter well together. This thing
is to doltish, yea it is a skorning both of the sacrament, and of Christ him
self.

what the causes should be that have moved the deuysers of these opinyons of
Christ's bodyly presence in the sacrament, and of the turning of the bread and
the wine into Christ's body and bluod, to Imagine such things, I say, in my
Iudgsment that they be chefely.ij. The first is the ignorance of the manners of
speech of the holy scripture, because they were not exercysed in the same, and
they did imagen, when Christ said this is my body, showing the bread, And this
is my bluod showing the wine, that such a manner of speech cold not be true
except that bread and that wine, were substantially, and beingly, the very body
and the very bluod of Christ, or at the least, that the one and the other, that
is to say Christ's body and bluod, were with in the sacrament. They saw that
the words were clear, and on the other side also, that the old doctors many
times did affirm and call the bread and the wine, body and bluod, they
thought that that was the mind, as well of the same doctor as of the holy
scripture, the which thing notwithstanding was never so. And they considered
not that the same scripture when it treats of sacraments is wo^t to speak
after that sort that is to say, to call the sacraments by the name of the
things signified, as allredy we have beforcerte^ times told, and that the
doctors likwyse follow the same manner of speech, this I think is one cause why
they did so utter it. And to prove this true, wha^ they goo about to prove
their purpose, they allege the saings of the doctors euel understand, and
those words of Christ, This is my body, showing the bread, and this is my bluod
showing the wine, as though he had me^t to sai that the substa^ces of the bread
and wine, should be turned into his body and bluod. Not considering that Christ
speak, as the scripture is wont to speak wha^ it calls the sacraments by the
name of the things signified. And therefore they have affirmed those their
opinions to be things pertaining to faith, the which every one should be bu^d
to believe, as an article of the faith. The foresaid la^fra^ck in his book of
the sacrament, the which he wrote against Beringarius says we believe, says
he, that the earthly substa^ces the which upon the lords table be by the
priestly ministry deuinelie hallowed, by the heavenly power, be unspeakably,
vnco^ceiuably, and meruelously turned in the very essens, or bei^gnes, of the
lords body, the forms of the same things, and certain other qualy^ies being
reserved. And he says also, that the just man, who lives by faith, does not
labor to serchout with arguments, and to understand with reason, after what sort
the bread is made flesh, and the wine is turned in to bluod, beingly, the
nature of the one and the other being changed, because he will rather give
faith to the heavenly my steryes, to thentent that hereafter he might come to
the rewards of faith, then leaving the faith to be toyled in vain, in
conprehending those things that cannot be comprehended etc.

Thomas of aquyne in his hymn of the sacrament of the lords body, and bluod
says the like, that is to say, the word flesh, that is to sai, the son of
god made man, with the word, does make bread flesh, and the wine is made
Christ's bluod, and though the sense do fail to establish a pure heart, yet
faith only is sufficient. And next after he says, let him put to faith as a
help, for the failing of the senses. These.ij. men would that opinion should be
believed as an article of the faith, but if they have believed it, as an article
of the faith, and as their words do affirm, surely they have slyghtly and
euel fauordly believed, because that nothing ought to be believed as an article
of the faith, except it be found expressly in the scripture. Let them tell me
then, where is the scripture that they allege? Where is gods word on which
they grownd their faith? Should we believe these doctors that make thearticles
of the faith without gods word, that bilde their bilding upon the sand and not
upon the sure rock? The first cause, I say, of such opynions, was the ignorance
of the holy scripture. The second cause without comparayson is much wors than
this, And parauenture it shall appear to some that I am of an evil mind,
thinking so much euel as I do of the auctours of such opinions. But if they
will consider the disceightes, the crafts, and the number of abuses that be
malytiously committed in the mass, they will sai surely that I am yet to
gentle, that I think not much wors. What good ca^ be thought of the beginning
of so great an error, from whens does proceed so many inconveniences and
disorders?

The second cause, I say, that I imagine, is this, that is to say that they
desired to give credit to the private mass, that is to say to that mass,
where he that says it only, takes the sacrament and does not deal it to the
people. We must understand that in old time, the mass was not said as it is
now said, as before we have noted in the bocke of the Anatomy: for so much as
that the mass then was no another but the ceremony of the lords supper, the
which was dealt to the church, and the mynyster did not take it alone as has
been used from certain hondreth years hitherto, against Christ's express
ordyna^ce and commandment who said when he did institute the sacrament, that
they should take it and dyuide it among the^, and not that one alone should
receue it. They saw that this mass was that wych made the^ rych and mighty: It
multiplied the churches revenues and in thend it made the^ live in delytes, as
before in the book of the anatomy in the chapter of the abuses of the mass, we
have said. And for to wine the^ credit, and bring to pass that the people
should be inclined to the^, and should have deuocio^ to the^, there could not be
found a thing more to the purpose, then to give men to understand, and make the
common sort believe that Christ should be in the sacrament, and that there should
be made a turning of the substances of the bread and the wine into his body and
bluod and to say that there be so many miracles, and to make the thing so
great and wonderful. They were sure that if the people were persuaded that
Christ were not in the sacrament, but that there were only the bread and the
wine, as holy signs, they would have cared littell for it, nor they would never
have believed that the mass should have so many virtues, as they have given to
understand. And they should not have had that unmeasurable gain. there should not
have been drawn out of that golden well thoes infinite richesses. Let every
man that has reason, and is without affection, consider and he shall find as
much as I sai to be true. This is a sure rule, if the people did not believe
Christ to be in the sacrament, and were not (I mean the people) bewitched with
some strange Imagination, that they would make little count of the mass. The
popes that saw this goodlye invention to be much for their purpose they after
did, not only with their decrees and co^cels allow it but they did bynd the
Christian people believe it, as an article of the faith.

I have spoken of the first dyuisers of these opinions, what causes I thinck
did move the^ to seek out so strange Imaginations and so far from the troth.
Of the other, that followed next after, that is to say of the scholemen, I do
not sai so. As for example of one Thomas of Aquine of Bonaua^ture, of Egidus
Romanus and such like as were questionistes without noumber, and have dysputed
endleslie on the master of the sentences and thereby entangled the world.

I think well that the first cause that is to say, the ignorance of the
scripture did seduce them to believe thus, because they did attend more to the
wordly knowleges, and to the books of philosophy, then to the holy scripture.
But I do not believe that any such malice did move them, as moved those first
inue^ters. It is true in deed that a another ignorance made them to err, that
is to say, that when they saw that the pope and the councels had so
determined, they Imagined that they were tied and bound, to believe all that
that they had appointed and ordained to be believed of all the faithful. And
therefore they have affirmed this opinion as an article of the faith, thinking
they should have been heretics if they should have holden any other wise. And
to prove this true, certain of them, and among the rest, Thomas of arge^tyne the
heremyte, in the fourth, the.xi. distinction, say that before the article of
the turnke^ding was determined by the church, It was no heresy to sai the
contrary, that is to sai, that the bread and wine remain after the
consecration. This is that which deceived them, the popes auctorytye, whom they
thought was Christ's lefetenant, and that every thing that the sea Apostolyke
and those councels determined, was an oracle, against the which it was not
lawful to speak, the poor souls not understanding, that no man is bound in
matters perteyning to faith, to believe either pope or councles, but so far as
gods word speaks, from the which if they swerve, though there should come an
angel from heaven, we should not be bound, yea I say, we ought not to believe
him, as paul says, writing to the galat. And if we have particular reverence
to any councels, Gala. 1.
it is because that in their determinacions, they agree with the holy
scripture, which ought to be the pattern, and the rule, to all the me^ in the
world And therefore we have in special worship those.iiij. councels, that is to
say the council of Nece, in the which the error of Arrius was destroyed, the
council of Constantinople, gathered together against Eunomius and Macedonius,
the first council of Ephesus where Nestorius was judged and condemned, the
counsel of Calcedo^ in the which the wickedness of Eutyches and dyostorus, and
certain other were reproved, because they have not spoken nor determined any
further, then is contained in the holy scriptures. But if that men, (let them
be of what so ever knowledge, holiness and authority ye will), shall not bring
forth, in gods things, the holy scripture, we ought not to believe the^ nor all
the whole world to gether can not make a man to believe a thing as an article of
the faith, except it be contained in the holy scripture.

A short rehersall.
It is time now that we knyt up the some of this present sermon in the which
this article that is whether Christ be really and bodyly in the sacrament of
thanks giving or no, is largely examyned. And first we have seen how there be
in this article.ij. principal Judgments or opinions. The first says that
Christ in body and in soul, great and thick as he is presently in heaven, is
whole in the sacrament. And this opinion is divided into ij. For some say that
not only Christ is in the sacrament, but that the substance of the bread and
wine be turned into his body and bluod, and that there remains no more,
either bread or wine, but the only withco^mes of the one and the other. Some
other sai that Christ is really in the sacrament but the substances of the
bread and wine remain, and that there is made no turning in them. And we have
seen the objections where upon this their fantasy is ground-wrought.

The^ next we have put the second opinion the which we hold, and sure believe is
catholic and godly, and it is this, that is to sai, that the substances of the
bread, and wine, do not only remain in the sacrament, but Christ is not there
bodyly present of any manner of sort, but as man he is only in heaven, where
he sits on the right hand of the father from whence he shall come to Judge
the living and the dead, The first reason.
as tharticle of our faith does sai. And this opinion we have proved with many
reasons. First by the definition of a sacrament, the which is none other but a
sign of an holy thing, and it is not needful for to be a sacrament, that
Christ should be really as man in the same, and much less that there should be
made any substantial turning of the bread and the wine. It suffiseth that the
bread and the wine, be there as signs of his body and bluod. The 2. reason.
Then next, saying that this sacrament was instituted only for remembrance, it
suffiseth that it do bring us in remembrance of Christ's body and bluod given
for our raunsominge And it needs not to put there the bodyly presence of
the one, or of the other, for so much as that the right of no sacrament either in
general or particular requires this etc.

The third, seeing the spiritual eating of Christ is only profitable and not
the bodyly, The 3. reason.
If Christ were as man in the sacrament he should help nothing.

The turnekindinge of the bread and wine into Christ's body and bluod, The. 4.
re.
cannot stand together with certain plain and many fest effects, which be seen
that is to say, with the noryshing, because the sacrament does norish as other
bread and wine does, and with thingenderyng of certain beasts as magots or such
like beasts, the which things cannot be made, admitting this turnkynding of
the bread and the wine, in to Christ's body and bluod.

The fifth if any such thing were, god with out any manner of need should work
some, The fifth reason.
yea many most stonishfull miracles, such as was never the greater.

The syxt, it should not be necessary that Christ on the day of judgment
should come down from heaven, The syxt reason.
but that he should stepp out of the sacrament, seeing he is here, much nerer on
earth then in heaven.

The seventh, The seventh reason.
the opinion of Christ's bodyly presence in the sacrament, dymynisheth the truth
of his body, and makes it fantastical yea nothingeth it.

The eight, The eight reason.
The surs^^m corda which is song in the mass, gives to understand that in old
time Christ's bodyly presence in the sacrament was not believed.

The nynth, The nynth reason.
If forbecause Christ said this is my body, showing the bread, and thit is my
bluod showing the wine, the bread and the wine should be turned into his body
and bluod or else that the body and bluod should be there present, seeing there be
many other speeches in the scripture like unto this, it should be behoue full
that the like should be done in all those, from whens would follow many
inconveniences.

The tenth reason.
The tenth, seeing that Christ's flesh can not be eaten, nor his bluod droken,
but after.ij. sorts, that is to say, spiritually by faith, and sacramentally.
And this may be done without the bodyly presence, 1. Chor. 10.
as the ancients did eat and drink him before that he took man's flesh as
paul says writing to the Chorynthyes there is therefore no necessytie to affirm
that bodyly presence in the sacrament.

Then further all though that we should bring forth no reason for us, it
belongs not to us to prove our negative, but it belongs to them that
affirm such a being there, to prove their affirmative, the which they did
never, nor can not do by any saing of the scripture. We have after also, made
appear that our oppinion is of thold church and chefely, Augustines. And we
have answered to the objections of the contrary opinion, making it apparent,
that, they be ineffectual, vnpithye, and weak to prove their purpose,
declaring the manners of speech that the scripture uses when it treats of the
sacraments. In the end, we have added from when the false Imagination of that
manner error is proceeded. And we have been long in treating of this article, and
we have made many moo words than we thought, and have repeated the self things
often, and have something exceded the measure of a sermon, for the which thing
the readers shall have me excused. We have considered first that the thing was
most wayghty, and worthy to be well expressed, the which could not be done with
few words. Then further also, the error was so confirmed and after such sort
rooted in the minds of the people, that it could not be plucked up nor rooted
out, without (as it is commonly said) much digging, and deluing. And therefore it
was necessary for us to be long, and parauenture something tedious to the
learned, nevertheless this labor is chefely taken for the unlearned. Well, it
suffiseth that this our purpose was upright and that we took not upon us this
entreprise for no another end, but for gods honor, and for the love, and
defense, of the truth. And last of all to do good and help to the simple
Christians, who have been so long time drowned in so great an error, and
deceived by the subtle and wicked Antichrist: Who^ let us all pray unto god
with a good heart and continually, that he will so root out, and plucck up (or
to speak better) destroy (saving always not withstanding the men to who^ we
desire all good) I sai, even destroy as the little stone did that great Image
which Nabuchodonosor saw, in his dream, that is to sai, that he will make him
utterly vanysh away, and be come nothing, to the intent, that gods final and
perfect kingdom may come through Christ Jesus his son our lord and redemer, to
who^ be honor and glory world without end Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing and corrected after this sort. Take lea. for
the leaf. A for the first side. B for the second side. Ly. for the line: R
for read.
Lea. 2. b. ly. 8. headolugnes. r headlongnes. Lea. 4. a. ly. 21 opinious. r.
opinions. lea. 6. b. ly. 1. ehyrch r. church. lea. 9. b. ly. 18. strst first.
Lea. 12: b: ly: 1: euy. r: any. lea: 11 b. ly. 20 Hollis: r. holies lea: 21: a:
ly: 2. vpistle: r: epistle 6. ly. 13: soruant: r: servant. lea. 25: b: ly. 13
and the blud: r: and the win the bluod: lea: 35: b. ly. 20 glorios: r.
gloriousnes. lea 36: a ly: 11. tedyosnes: r. tediousnes: lea: 40: b. ly. 8. ho:
r: hoc. lea: 42: a. ly: 26. poinctt. r: poinct. b. ly. 20. co^secrationi, r.
consecration. lea: 49: a. ly. 24 any: r: any. lea. 54: b. ly: 16. wat. r. was.
lea. 60. a. ly. 8: mades. r. made. and for Co^secrauyon. r. consecration, lea.
65: a: ly. 16. no: r. not ly. 25. superstitos. r. superstitious: Lea. 67. a ly.
18. tho. r. to. lea. 68: a li. 5. thert. r. there. l. 17. fom: r: from. lea.
74. a. ly. 16 byleuers r: beleuers, and all ways after. lea. 72: a. ly. 10 he
fore. r. before. lea. 77: a: li. 19. candache. r candace: lea. 81. b. ly: 26.
crimin: crimine. lea. 88. a. ly: 21: offied: r: offered. lea: 94: b: ly. 12.
passhion. r: passion. lea. 111. b: 21. except. r: except: lea: 115: a: li: 1:
song: r: soung. ly. 2. rong r: roung. lea: a: li. 2. misfortutune: r.
misfortune lea. 118: b: ly. 11. apostos. r. apostles.

Lea. 120. ly. r. super. r. supper. lea. 121. b. ly. 22 Now he he: r: Now. he.
lea. 122: a: ly: 19: parauentur. r. perauenture. le. 124. a: li. 12. these. r.
those. lea: 125: b: ly. 13. the chief greatest miste ry: r: the chief mystery.
lea. 126. a. li. 15. the law. (I speak: r: the law. Nor there is no sin but
that is against gods law. but gods law. (I speak. lea. 126. b. ly. 7. have
heuier sins. than: r: have heuior sins, then man's laughter, then. lea: 127:
a: li. 5. Idolatros: r: Idolatrous. li. 9. thcik: r: thick. li: 13. in them:
r: in it lea. 127: b: ly: 8: benefice: r: benefit. lea: 128. a. ly: 18: ame:
r. same.

Lea. 131. a. li. 19. saint or saints. r: saint or sainctess. ly. 20: S.
loreto: r: loreto. b: ly. 6: say here? will^^. say here? be these Idolatreis,
how can they de ^ey it? will.

Lea. 131. b. ly. 9: Hiperdulia: r: Hyperdulia lea: 137: a: li. 5. wis. r.
with. lea. 138. a. li. 13: follow done a another: r: followed one an other. lea
156: a: li. 22. and, and. r. and. lea. 174. b. ly: 19. mas: r: mass. lea. 177.
a. li. 7. covered with. r. covered, wear covered with. b. ly. 1. crafft. r.
craft. and likewise in other places. lea. 178: a. li. 14 eschew. r. issue. and
generally read for off, of: for those those. for these these: for couerid
covered, and for such other in vid, read co^me^ly ved. and often for ans or ens
read ance, or ence as for importans, read importance, and for reuerens,
reverence, and often for or, read our, as for savior, read savior, and for
byleuers allways beleuers, and commenly for os, read ous or ose as the word
gives, as for gratios read gracious, and for purpos read purpose.

Lea. 180. a. l. 8 yoie. r. joy. 182. b. ly. 15 true. faults in the sermom.
read true, and 185. b. li. 9. who ever. read whosoever 186. a. li. 15.
remembrans. read remembrance and after.

187. a. ly. 18. substans read substance. 188. b. li. 5. body lithere. read
bodyly there. 192. a. li. 7. dew read. due. 193. a. il. 3. everlasting: read.
everlasting. 193. b. li. 17. be beleweth. read believes. 194. b. li. 15. seane
read seen. 196. b. l. 14 blood. r. bluod. 199. b. l. 3. satisfing: r:
satisfiing 205. a. l. 25. when should. r. when they should. 222. b. l. 1. turn
read. turned. and 228. a. li. ^. being. r. bring 225. b. li. 5. shose. r.
those.

FINIS.

