CONSVETVDO, VEL LEX MERCATORIA, OR The Ancient Law-Merchant.

Divided into three Parts: ACCORDING TO THE Essential Parts of Traffic.

NECESSARY FOR ALL Statesmen, Judges, Magistrates, Temporal and Civil
Lawyers, Mint-men, Merchants, Mariners, and all others negotiating in all
places of the World.

By GERARD MALYNES Merchant.

Salus Populi, suprema Lex esto. LONDON, Printed by ADAM ISLIP.

Anno Dom. 1622.



DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT
BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDOR OF THE FAITH.
Most Dread and Gracious Sovereign,
THe state of Monarchy must needs be the Supreamest thing under the cope of
Heaven, when Kings are not only Gods Lieutenants upon earth, and sit upon his
throne; but also are called Gods, by God himself, in regard of their
Transcendent Preheminences and Prerogatives, whereby they maintain Religion
and Justice, whichare the only true supporters and fundamental stays of all
Kingdoms and Commonweals, so naturally united and conjoined, that where both
of them are not, properly there can be neither. These high Attributes cause
their Laws to be sacred, and consequently religiously to be observed; whereby
Justice is administered, which is Distributive and Commutatiue. The Commutatiue
part includes Traffic, which is the sole peaceable instrument to enrich
kingdoms and commonweals, by the means of Equality and Equity, performed
especially by the Law-Merchant by reason of her stabilitie. For albeit that the
government of the said kingdoms and commonweals does differ one from
another: 1 In the making of laws and ordinances for their own government; 2
In the making of War, Peace, or Truce with foreign nations; 3 In the providing
of money within themselves for their safeguard and defense; 4 In the election of
chief officers and magistrates; and 5 In the manner of the administration of
Justice, wherein many mutations are incident: yet the Law-Merchant has always
been found semper eadem, that is, constant and permanent without abrogation,
according to her most ancient customs, concurring with the law of nations in
all countries. Great reverence is due unto Laws at all times, and has been
in all ages. Solon caused the Athenians to swear to the observation of his
Laws during the time of one hundredth years: Licurgus did embrace a voluntary
perpetual exile, to have his laws observed by the Lacedaemonians until his
return, intending never to return: and the Romans did suffer their old law of
twelve tables (though unjust in many points) to decay by little and little,
rather than to make a sudden alteration of it, tending to the contempt of laws:
greater reverence then is due to the Law-Merchant which has proved always
firm and inviolable. Wise men have observed, that happy are those
Commonweals which are governed by Philosophers; happier is that King who can
wisely govern them; but most happy is your Majesty in whom true Philosophy
does reign and prosper, as vines do in eminent places, by an inestimable
treasure of an observing, discerning, and applying Princely judgment,
governing your kingdoms and dominions. The consideration whereof (accompanied
with my bounden duty) has emboldned me of late, to dedicate unto your sacred
Majesty, a little treatise entitled The maintenance of free Trade, wherein
mention is made of this Volume, which likewise is to be presented unto your
highness; for it befalls unto me, as it did to the Philosopher, who (by
progression in wisdom, endeavoring to attain to the perfection of knowledge)
did perceive that the nearer approaching thereunto, seemed to him to be
furthest off: so my endeavors (striving to deserve some things at your royal
hands) seem unto me to merit least of all: But being confident of your most
gracious benignity and superexceeding grace, I do offer unto your most
judicial eyes this Law-Merchant, described according to the three essential
parts of Traffic with the means whereby the wealth of your Majesty's kingdoms
and dominions may be increased and preserved, which being done by just and
politic courses, may properly be called the Preheminent study of Princes,
grounded, by Commutatio negotiativ^, upon the rule of Equality and Equity as
aforesaid, observed by your High wisdom upon the Predominant part of Trade,
which is the mystery of Exchange for Moneys between us and foreign Nations,
wherein your Highness does surpass all the Treatises and Conferences had by
your noble ancestors and predecessors Kings, with other Princes and States. If
your most excellent Majesty therefore shall be pleased (from the Zodiaque of
your gracious aspect) to cast some reflecting beams upon the plain
superficies of this Law-Merchant, every little spark therein will become a
flame, and all Merchants and others shall be enabled to draw (by the Diameter
of it) Meridian lines of your royal favor, without which this Book may be
compared to a Sun dyall which is no longer serviceable, than whilst the
Sun beams do illuminate the same. In hope of which superaboundant favor, I
do apostrophate this Epistle, but do multiply my ardent prayers for your
Majesty's most happy Reign long to endure over us, to Gods glory and our
comforts.

Your Majesty's most loyal and obedient subject GERARD MALINES.

TO THE COURTEOUS RERDER.
THat famous Philosopher Xenophon, extolling the Persian Laws, testified that
their Citizens from their infancy, were educated and taught not to attempt, or
almost to imagine any thing but honest and just. Which was the cause, as
Gellius reports, that Draco a Citizen of Athens made their laws so strict
and severe, that it was said They were written with Blood, and not with Ink:
whereas on the other side the Law made by Solon was compared to a spiders web,
which takes the lesser flies and suffers the greater to escape and to break
the same. So that (every extreme being vicious) Reason requires a Law not
too cruel in her Frowns, nor too partial in her Favors. Neither of these
defects are incident to the LawMerchant, because the same does properly consist
of the Custom of Merchants in the course of Traffic, and is approved by all
Nations, according to the definition of Cicero, Vera Lex est recta Ratio,
Natura congruens, diffusa in Omnes, Constans, Sempiterna: True Law, is a right
reason of nature agreeing therewith in all points, diffused and spread in all
Nations consisting perpetually, whereby Meum and Tuum is distinguished and
distributed by Number, Weight and Measure, which shall be made apparent. For
the maintenance of Traffic and Commerce is so pleasant, amiable and
acceptable unto all Princes and Potentates, that Kings have been and at this
day are, of the Society of Merchants: And many times (notwithstanding their
particular differences and quarrels) they do nevertheless agree in this
course of Trade, because riches is the bright Star, whose hight Traffic
takes to direct it self by, whereby Kingdoms and Commonweales do flourish,
Merchants being the means and instruments to perform the same, to the Glory,
Illustration, and Benefit of their Monarchies and States. Questionless
therefore, the State of a Merchant is of great dignity and to be cherished;
for by them Countries are discovered, Familiarity between Nations is
procured, and politic Experience is attained. Whereupon I have been moved
(by long observation) to put the worthiness of the Customarie Law of Merchants,
in plain and compendious writing, by undoubted principles, familiar examples,
and demonstratiue reasons, without affectation of curious words, more than the
gravity of the Theme (in some places) did require.

I have entitled the Book, according to the ancient name of Lex Mercatoria,
and not Ius Mercatorum; because it is a Customary Law approved by the
authority of all Kingdoms and Commonweales, and not a Law established by the
Sovereignty of any Prince, either in the first foundation or by continuance of
time. And beginning with Time, Number, Weight and Measure, I do descend to
the three Essential Parts of Traffic, divided into three parts accordingly,
by comparing them to the Body, Soul, and Spirit of Commerce, namely,
Commodities, Money, and Exchange for money by Bills of Exchanges. The first,
as the Body, vpheld the World by Commutation and Bartring of Commodities,
until money was devised to be coined. The second, as the Soul in the Body,
did infuse life to Traffic, by the means of Equality and Equity preventing
advantage between Buyers and Sellers. The third, as the Spirit and Faculty of
the Soul, (being seated every where) corroborateth the Vital Spirit of
Traffic, directing and controlling (by just proportions) the prices and
values of Commodities and Moneys. For even as, Merchants are the Isntrumental
Cause of Trade; even so is the Exchange for Moneys, the Efficient Cause with us
in the course of Traffic, and become Predominant or ouerruling the price of
Commodities and Moneys, as aforesaid. This is manifested by three Paradoxes
alluding to the said three Essential Parts of Commerce, which (for a
Corrollarie) I have added in the latter end of this Book, with such other
worthy observations as in the first Chapter are declared. And even as the
roundnesse of the Globe of the World is composed of the Earth and Waters: So is
the Body of Lex Mercatoria, made and framed of the Merchants Customs, and the
Sea-Lawes, which are involued together as the Seas and Earth. In the
description whereof, I have used to make repetition of the Material points,
according as occasion did minister unto me for to make application thereof, for
the better understanding of the Judicious Reader, which is the maine Scope that
all Writers are to regard and care for. The means whereby the differences and
controversies happening between Merchants in the course of Trade are ended, is
also declared, which most of all require Brevity and Expedition, and had need
of a peremptory proceeding, as was invented for the Common Law of the Realm
of England, the due commendation whereof is added heereunto; showing also how
of the same there might be made an Art or Science, and what observation of
other Laws are concurring with ours, both in the strictness of Law, and the
lenity of Equity, most consonant with the Law-Merchant, the knowledge whereof
is of so great consequence, that without it all Temporal Laws are not
complete, but imperfect. The Scope of all therefore is, That the Rule of
Equality and Equity may take place between Us and other Nations, which Velut
Ariadnae caecaregens filo vestigia, non modo nos errare non sinit, fed etiam
efficit, vt aberrantes in rectam viam deducamur, as has been mentioned in our
last Treatise of the maintenance of free trade, lately published. Concluding
(gentle Reader) upon all the premises handled (as I hope) substantially, I
commend and submit the same to the loving entertainment of the profound and
discerning judgment of the discreet, wise, and experienced; wishing that (like
matter set down by the Pen of Apollo) they may sound sweetly in your
apprehention, and give to your conceit most harmonious Music, Pleasure and
Delight. London the 25 of November 1622.

Thine to use always ready, GERARD MALYNES.

A TABLE OF THE CONtents of the first part of Lex Mercatoria, or the ancient
Law-Merchant, concerning Commodities, compared to the Body of Traffic.
Chapter. Page 1 AN induction to Lex Mercatoria, or the Law-Merchant, and the
antiquity thereof. 1 2 An observation concerning Time. 8 3 Of Number, and the
mysteries thereof. 17 4 Of Weights and Measures used in all places of the
world, with other observations. 19 5 Of the three essential parts of
traffic, namely Commodities, Money and Exchange of money by bills of
Exchanges. 58 6 A geometrical description of the world, especially of Europe,
measured by millions of acres of ground upon the map. 66 7 Of the Commodities
of all Countries, whereby commerce is maintained. 70 8 Of Commutation or
bartring of commodities. 83 9 Of ordinary buyings and sellings of Commodities.
91 10 Of Suretiship and Merchants Promises. 93 11 Of the revolution of buying
and selling of Commodities in the course of Traffic. 95 12 Of the
transferring and setting over of Bills obligatorie between Merchants and
others. 98 13 Of the Nature of Bills obligatorie beyond the Seas, and in
England. 101 14 Of Letters of Credit, and Blankes signed. 104 15 Of Letters of
Attorney, or Procurations and Transports, and Conueyances. 106 16 Of Factors
and servants, and Commissions given unto them. 111 17 Of the beginning of Sea
Laws. 119 18 Of the manner of proceeding in Seafaring Causes. 121 19 Of
buying and selling of Commodities by Contracts. 122 20 Of Banks and Bankers.
131 21 Of the Fraighting of Ships, Charterparties, and Bills of Lading. 134 22
Of the Master of the Ship, his power, and duty of the Master to the Merchant.
142 23 Of the duties and privileges of Marinors. 144 24 Of the office of
Assurances, and the ancient custom of the same. 146 25 Of Policies of
Assurances, and the substance of them, and of contributions. 150 26 Of the
manner of Contribution, or Aueridges. 157 27 Of the particulars to be observed
in Assurances. 159 28 Of the manner of proceeding for Assurances in case of
losses. 161 29 Of Shipwrecke, and things found upon the seas. 167 30 Of
partners, and ships voyages. 169 31 Of moneys taken upon bottomarie, by the
Master of a Ship, called Foenus Nauticum. 171 32 Of Shipping and Navigations.
173 33 An Abridgement of the imperial Sea Laws of the Haunce Towns made in
the year 1614. 175 34 Of Navigations, and Community of the seas. 182 35 Of the
distinct Dominions of the seas. 185 36 Of Customs, Subsidies, and Impositions
paid upon commodities. 193 37 Of Merchants Wagers, Stipulations, or
Conuentions. 197 38 Of Merchants marks set upon commodities. 199 39 Of the
buying and selling of commodities by Brokers, and by the Candle. 201 40 Of
buying of Commodities by Condition, termed Capiticus, and selling things upon
casualties. 203 41 Of dividing of commodities by Lots. 205 42 Of Assotiations,
Monopolies, Engrossings, and Forestallings. 210 43 Of Merchants Oppignorations.
218 44 Of the proceedings used against Bankrupts. 221 45 Of Manufactures. 229
46 Of plantation of people, and new discoueries. 234 47 Of the fishing trade.
241
The Contents of the second part of Lex Mercatoria, concerning Moneys compared
to the Soul of Traffic.
1 OF the essence or existence of Mettalls. 255 2 Of Mines Royal. 259 3 Of
mines and mineralls. 268 4 Of the profitable working of mines. 272 5 Of the
nature of gold, silver, and copper, and of the moneys made thereof. 274 6 Of
the officers of mints. 279 7 Of the assaies of b^llion and moneys. 284 8 Of the
weight and finenesse of moneys, and their several standards. 291 9 Of the
valuation of moneys, and the proportion between gold and ^iluer. 307 10 Of the
laws and prohibitions against usury. 235 11 Of usury politic, and moneys
delivered at interest. 329 12 Of intolerable Usury, and Lombards. 337 13 Of
Mons pietatis, or Banks of charity. 341 14 Of the true calculation of moneys
at interest. 345 15 Of usurious Contracts. 349 16 Of lawful Bargains and
Contracts. 352 17 Of the universal and perpetual princely contract of
commerce. 354 18 Of moneys delivered upon lives, annuities, and pensions. 358
19 Of the denomination and division of moneys of diverse countries. 360 20 Of
Merchants accounts kept by Debtor and Creditor. 362
The contents of the third part of Lex Mercatoria, concerning Exchanges for
Moneys by Bills of Exchanges, compared to the spirit or faculty of the Soul
of Traffic.
1 OF the beginning of the Exchange for moneys by bills of Exchanges. 378 2 Of
the true calculation of moneys in exchange by bills, according to par pro pari.
382 3 Of the denomination of the im^ginarie moneys of all places, whereupon
Exchanges are made by bills of Exchanges. 386 4 Of the times of payment of
moneys by exchange, and the terms of art used therein. 391 5 Of the nature of
bills of Exchanges. 393 6 Of the non-acceptation of bills of Exchanges, and the
customs observed concerning the same. 398 7 Of Notaries, Intimations, and
Protests. 401 8 Of reciprocal or double Exchanges. 404 9 Of the feats of
bankers performed by Exchanges. 408 10 Of the true reformation of Exchanges.
413 11 Of Attachments and Arrests. 424 12 Of Sequestrations and Executions. 428
13 Of denization and naturalization of Merchants. 439 14 Of the determination
of seafaring causes. 443 15 Of Arbitrators, and their awards. 447 16 Of the
Merchants courts, or office of Prior and Consulls. 451 17 Of the Laws of
several countries, whereby the differences and controversies of Merchants are
determined. 460 18 Three Paradoxes alluding to the three essential parts of
traffic. 477 19 The due commendation of natural Mother Wit. 491 20 Of the
ancient government of the Staple. 495 A conclusion to the juditious Reader. 499
AN INDVCTION TO LEX MERCATORIA, OR THE LAW MERCHANT, AND THE ANTIQVITIE
THEREOF. CHAP. I.
WHen Almighty God had created man, good and a sociable creature, who could
not so well live alone, as other creatures sufficiently provided (by nature)
for their sustenance; and had reason assigned and given unto him, above all the
said creatures: yet all the means and faculties of his body and soul, were
not sufficient to make him happy whilst he was alone. But necessity did
require a concourse of men helping one another to supply (with a common
strength) the said weakness; for the burden of the said necessity was so
weighty and great, that one man alone was not able to manage the same. Then it
came to pass, that by mutual contribution of offices, every man did afford
means according to his ability for the common good, so that those which were
of a strong body did emploie their labor to get living and maintenance for
themselves and others: And those which were endued with the best part of the
soul, as Understanding and Reason, did undertake the most important matters,
teaching men how to live well, and informing them of their felicity (which
they judged chiefly to consist in virtuous actions) endeavoring to make
impression in the soul of man, of certain good laws for the observation
thereof, with a reference of them to the first law engraffed in the soul of
man, as a part of that divine light, which was infused in him to know (in some
measure of perfection) the good and evil, Called by the Grecians Synderisis.
and accordingly to receive reward or punishment.

As for the other and better part of informing and guiding the thoughts and
affections of men to a supernatural end, that, as surpassing the compass of
that lower sphere wherein I now move, must be left untouched by me, who here
take for my object not the spiritual but the civil life of man and the means
thereto conducing.

Touching therefore the external part. The mutual contribution of offices
amongst men has from the beginning continued both in laboring and manuring
the natural riches of the lands in corn and pasturage, as in the immediate
children of our first father Adam, and in planting Vines, and making an extract
of the juice of the fruit of them, as Noah. Which riches in matter and
foundation natural, and partly also in alteration and managing artificially,
every possessor not long after the beginning of the world severally inioyed in
property: and hence did proceed a commerce, first, in real enterchange and
communication of things of the same or other kinds, but all natural
commodities, as sheep for sheep, sheep for corn, wine for oil, etc.
between man and man, or nations and nations, according to number, weight, and
measure, and after, to avoid confusion, by a commune pignus current mutual,
which we call money, both by way of merchandising; Genesis
the most ancient evidence hereof is Abraham's purchasing for money a field for
burial. The observation and customs whereof, was the beginning of the
Law-Merchant, and that especially when mankind was propagated into an infinite
number, and the domestiques or near hand commodities were not sufficient for
their sustenance in some countries, and in other countries were over abundant:
Then of necessity followed the use of trusting, exchanging, and trading;
first, on the Land in the maine Continent, and then extensiuely upon the Seas,
both for fishing and negotiation. Then did merchants travel from country to
country: So in the days of the Patriarch Jacob, Gen 37.27.
did the merchants Madianits in their journey meet with the children of Jacob,
and then Joseph was carried by their means into Egypt, and sold to Potipher
for the good of his father and all his family. And then it was and proved to be
true, (which experience has confirmed) that Vita ciculis in societate posita
est, The Lawmerchant a most ancient law.
societas autem in imperio and commercio: So that it plainly appears, that
the Law Merchant, may well be as ancient as any humane Law, and more ancient
than any written Law. The very moral Law it self, as written by Moses, was
long after the customary Law of Merchants, which has so continued and been
daily augmented successively upon new occasions, and was not altogether made in
the first foundation, as the Laws whereby the Commonweals of Israel (whose
Laws were uniformly made by Moses from God:) or those of Crete, Cybaris,
Sparta, and Carthage, by Minos, Charondas, Lycurgus, and Phalcas.
Nevertheless, many Emperors and Kings have always referred the ending of
differences, which happen between Merchants, to be done and decided according
to the Law-Merchant, That is to say, according to the Custom of Merchants; who
by their travels found the diversity of weights and measures, and the
goodness and use of commodities pleasing to all nations, whereby the
superfluities of them were vented amongst them. Vt quod vspiam nascitur boni,
id apud omnes affluat.

This Law of Merchants, or Lex Mercatoria, in the fundamentals of it,
Definition of the Lawmerchant. De^epub.
is nothing else but (as Cicero defines true and just Law) Recta Ratio,
naturae congruens, diffusa in omnes, Constans sempiterna: True Law is right
Reason, agreeable to Nature in all points, diffused and spread in all Nations,
consisting perpetually without abrogation: Ius gentium.
howbeit some do attribute this definition unto ius gentium, or the Law of
Nations, which consists of Customs, Manners, and prescriptions of all
Nations, being of like conditions to all people, and observed by them as a law:
But the matter being truly examined, we shall find it more naturally and
properly belongs to the Law-merchant.

Every man knows, that for Manners and Prescriptions, there is great
diversity amongst all Nations: but for the Customs observed in the course of
traffic and commerce, there is that sympathy, concordance, and agreement,
which may be said to be of like condition to all people, diffused and spread
by right reason, and instinct of nature consisting perpetually. And these
Customs are properly those observations which Merchants maintain between
themselves, and if these be separated from the Law of Nations, The remainder
of the said Law will consist but of few points.

Prerogatives of Princes by the Law of Nations.
Princes and Potentates by their prerogatives (respecting the law of Nations)
do permit amongst themselves a free traveling by land through their several
Kingdoms, Territories, and Dominions, unless they be open enemies: They hold
likewise a community of the seas for Navigations, as also a distinct dominion
of the seas adjoining to the territories and jurisdiction of their countries,
they take Custom, Subsidies, and all manner of impositions upon the
commodities imported and exported out of their Harbors, Havens, and Ports, as
also duties for the fishing in their Seas, Streams, and Dominions; of all
which the Merchant is to take especial notice, to avoid danger in the
traffic and trade with their subjects, for non-payment of the same, which
they claim iure gentium.

Are not the Sea Laws establisted to decide the controversies and differences
happening between Merchants and Mariners? And is it not convenient for
Merchants to know them? Considering that Merchants maintain the Fishermen,
and (by way of Trade) cause the Sea and Land Commodities to be dispersed
every where? So that the said prerogaties do also appertain to the
Lawmerchant as properly inherent unto commerce, and the observation of
Merchants being of like condition to all people and nations.

Concerning manners and prescriptions, Manners and prescriptions of the law of
Nations.
wherein the differences is to be noted from the Law-Merchant; the same consist
in the erecting of Offices, creating of Officers, and making of Laws, which of
themselves make a separation between Customs: Also the giving or bestowing of
honors and dignities, the granting of privileges, and the doing of any thing
which concerns the Honor, Body, and goods of any man, whereunto all things
touching man have a reference, and do merely belong to the pre-eminence of
Princes in their places of Sovereignty.

And herein let us observe the difference between Laws and Customs according
to the description of the said worthy author Cicero.

Difference between Laws and Customs
A Custom (says he) takes her strength by little and little in progress of
Time by a general Consent, or, of the most part; But the Law comes forth in
a moment, and takes her strength from him that has power to command: Customs
do take place gently; but the Law commands with a power suddenly. True it
is, that the Law may abolish Customs, but Customs cannot derogate from the
Law, because Magistrates will see them executed at all times. Customs have
their strength by sufferance; but the Law commands by absolute authority of
a Prince. And yet Customs are of no less power than a Law, and the difference
consists most in the manner. Lex est cui omnes homines decet obedire propter
multa and varia, and maxim quia omnis lex est inuentio quaedam and donum Dei.
All men ought to obey the Laws, which are many and diverse, and chiefly because
all Laws are (as is it were) an invention and a gift of God. So much, yea more
may be said of the Custom of Merchants, because of their continuance and
Antiquity, as aforesaid.

And for that the said customarie Law of Merchants, has a peculiar prerogative
above all other Customs, The Prerogative of Merchants Customs above all other
Customs.
for that the same is observed in all places, whereas the Customs of one
place, do not extend in other places, and sometimes they are observed, and
sometimes they are neglected. But the Customs of Merchants concerning
traffic and commerce, are permanent and constant, and when they are not
truly observed in some places, by some error or misprision: Non est
consuetudo, sed vsurpatio; For such Customs loose their names, and are called
Usurpation, which is the cause that many times Customs are established for
Laws by him or them that have power to make Laws. And Customs are the best
Interpreters of the Laws, Customs are the best interpreters of Laws.
either for suppressing of vice, or establishiug of Virtue: So that whosoever
alleges a Custom in his defense, is to prove and maintain the same, if it
be honest. Now we must not understand this of any evil Custom, because they
make no presidents, and are to be supressed by Laws. Likewise a Custom well
observed, is to be preferred before a Law not observed. A Gradation concerning
Laws and Customs.
And this Gradation ought to be maintained and se^iously observed concerning
Laws and Customs, That even as the Wills, Contracts, or Testaments of
particular men, cannot derogate or undo the Ordinances of the Magistrates, and
as the order of the Magistrates cannot abolish ancient good Customs nor
Customs cannot abridge the general Laws of an absolute Prince; no more can
the Law of Princes alter or change the Law of God and Nature.

Bartolus, Baldus, Justinian, Vlpian, Paul the Iurisconsulse, Papinian,
Benvenuto Straccha, Petrus Santerne, Ioannes Inder, Balduinus de Vbald,
Rodericus Suarez, Jason, Angel, Andrias Tiraquell, Alciatus Budeus, Alexander
Perusius, Pomponius, Incolaus Boertius, Azo, Celsus, Rusinus, Mansilius,
Sillimanus, Accursius, Franciscus Aretinus, Grisogonus, Lotharius, Iulianus,
and diverse other doctors and learned of the civil Law, have made many long
discourses and volumes of books of the questionable matters fallne out amongst
Merchants, for and concerning merchandise, Book cases of the Law-Merchant.
which are yearly observations or book cases and precedents; by the reading
whereof, Merchants are like rather to metamorphise their prosession and become
lawyers, than truly to attain to the particular knowledge of the said
Customs or Law-merchant: For they have armed questions and disputations full
of quillets and distinctions ouer-curious and precise, and many of them to
small purpose, full of Apicis iuris, Apicis iuris what they are!
which themselves have noted to be subtilties, saying, Apicis iuris s^nt quae
subtilitatem quandam recipient magis quam facti veritaetem, They do more
regard certain subtilties than the truth of the fact or matter, As for
example. To define

Quid s^^ Mercator, what a Merchant is? Quidue Mercatura, what Merchandising is?

Whether he is a Merchant that does once buy and sell?

Wherher merchandising and negotiating be one and the same?

Whether an usurer be a Merchant?

Whether selling by retaile shall be called merchandising?

Whether a Clergy man or a Gentleman dealing in buying and selling, shall be
called a Merchant in any controversy?

Wherein a Merchant may be like an usurer?

Whether a man buying commodities in gro^^e, and working the same out again
into other things to be vented by an ordinary course of traffic, be a
Merchant, artificer, or tradesman?

Whether a seller of horses may be called a Merchant?

Whether a shopkeeper trading beyond the seas and at home, be a Merchant?

Whether a Merchant shall be called to be a Merchant of one kind of
commodities, that deals for diverse sorts of merchandises or wares?

Whether he be a Merchant that deals not for himself: but others negotiate
for him? Or whether a young man dwelling with a Merchant, may be a Merchant?
And other the like questions which I hold to be unnecessary to trouble
Merchants brains withal.

The definition of a Merchant is to be noted. Definition of a merchant.
For he that continually deals in buying and selling of commodities, or by
way of permutation of wares both at home and abroad in foreign parts, is a
Merchant.

Next in order, Conditis numeri p^tioris, (...) mai^ris.
the conditions and properties which a merchant ought to have, are to be
considered; namely to be without fraud and deceit in his buying and selling of
commodities, and to keep faith with all men.

Hereupon questions are made, whether a merchant may traffic with Turks,
Heathens, Barbarians, and Infidels, and perform promise with them? whether a
merchant may sell his commodities as dear as he can, without respect of
persons? whether he may use lies (as being officious) in the selling of
commodities? Caveat emptor.
whether he may be crafty without deceit? whether learning be requisite in a
merchant? whether he may deal in prohibited commodities at his apperill?
whether a merchant buying commodities, and selling them better cheap than they
cost him, shall be held in suspicion to be near decaying? and the like of him
that takes up much money at interest.

The continuance of a merchant.
The said Ciuilians have also determined how long a merchant is to be so called;
which is either when he breaks, or gives over to deal in merchandise; or
when he is prohibited to deal, for offenses committed. And hereunto they add
a declaration of such as may trade; and by the contrary thereof, is to be
understood who may not trade, Persons exempted to be merchants.
viz. Clergy men, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Soldiers, Counselors at the laws both
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, public officers and magistrates, frantic
persons and mad men, youths under years, orphans, lunatickes and fools, all
these are exempted to be merchants: But sons and servants may deal in
merchandise with their fathers and masters.

What merchandise is fit for trade,
Lastly, they have observed, That merchandise is properly to be made of all
moveable things, excepting holy things, and prohibited wares, or munition to
be carried unto infidels or enemies. All which determinations can give but
little satisfaction to instruct merchants.

Merchandise two fold.
Plato says, That merchandise is two fold, namely, ad victum and vestitum, of
things for the back and for the belly, as belonging to the body of man; and
of things concerning the mind of man, as learning of music, and other arts
bought for money, and sold again to others for money; and this distinction is
in regard of man, but far from that matter of traffic and commerce which is
comprehended under Commutatiue justice, whereof Cicero speaks.

Let us therefore set down, what a complete merchant ought to know concerning
the course of merchandising, and withal declare the method observed in this
book of the Law of Merchants. The method of this book.


1. A merchant ought first to know the science of Arithmeticke, and to observe
the days and times in all his negotiations, and the beginnings of the year in
all countries, and to calculate all things orderly.

2. The several weights and measures of all countries concerning all
commodities, and the correspondence of them, that there may be to him in effect
but vnum pondus, and vna mensura, that is, one weight, and one measure.

3. The science of Geometry, and some inspection of Cosmography, and the
Mathematickes, thereby to know the situation of countries, with their distance
and spaciousness: and the distinct dominions of Princes by land and by sea,
with their jurisdiction and duties for fishing and otherwise.

4. To know the three Essential parts of traffic, being Commodities, Money,
and Exchange for money by Bills of exchanges; under which all the traffic
and trade is performed in all countries, or by some of them, because they are
the causes of commerce, whereof the effects are buying and selling of
commodities, receiving and paying of monyes, and delivering and taking of
monyes by exchange, with their Adjuncts and Accidents in the said course of
traffic.

5. To know also the goodness of the principal commodities of all countries,
either superficially for color and beauty; or substantially for quality and
use. As also the weight, finenesse, and valuation of the moneys of all
countries, with the proportion between the gold and silver, and the manner of
exchanges made by bills upon the imaginary moneys invented to make exchanges
between country and country.

6. The customs used in the buying and selling of commodities for money or
bills obligatorie, or by way of Commutation or Barter.

7. The delivering of moneys at interest, or upon Botomary, or upon lives,
annuities, or pensions in nature of rent, etc.

8. The fraighting and setting forth of Ships, making of Charterparties, Bills
of lading, Invoice, and Covenants and contracts. As also the sea laws, to
decide all questions and controversies which fall out between Merchants and
Mariners, and owners of Ships.

9. The customs, subsidies, impositions, tribute, and tolles paid upon all
the commodities imported and exported, within the dominions of all Princes.

10. The manner of making of Assurances upon goods, ships, the persons of men,
or any other things adventured by sea or by land; and the customs observed
therein between nation and nations.

11. The keeping of Merchants accounts, by Debtor and Creditor, and the
calculation of the diversities of money, whereby the said books of account are
kept.

12. The authority and proceedings of Merchants Courts, or Priors and Consuls,
to decide their differences according to equity in places where they are kept,
or any other laws imperial or common to some countries, whereby Merchants
controversies are determined; with the course of attachments and
sequestrations, or executions and final determinations by arbitrators, or
judicial decrees in any Chauncery or Court of Equity.

All these (making the customarie law of Merchants) have never been written by
any Ciuilian or Philosopher, The customary Law of Merchants.
nor for ought I know, of any author, as is convenient for Merchants; whereupon
I have (with Gods assistance) resolved to handle the same compendiously and
substantially in this book, upon fifty years observation, knowledge, and
experience. And albeit that the sea laws are comprehended therein, whereby the
proceedings might seem to be promiscuously handled, nevertheless the method is
followed as near as the matter could afford, according to the said three
Essential parts of traffic, or the three Simples of commodities: Money, and
the Exchange of money by Bills of exchanges, as hereafter may appear.

And this Law of Merchants hitherto observed in all countries, ought in regard
of commerce, to be esteemed and held in reputation as the Law of twelve Tables
was amongst the Romans. For herein you shall find every thing built upon the
foundations of Reason and Justice: and knowing the foresaid twelve points, you
shall be able to please your own mind, and give satisfaction of your
sufficiency to others. For the saying is true, Melius est Ciuitatem, ab optima
lege, quam ab optimo viro gubernari, It is better to govern a City by a good
Law, than by a good man. And it is better for a man to be ruled by Reason, than
by his own Reason to seek to rule others.

Finally, to give satisfaction to the learned and judicious, I have abstracted
the observations of the learned in the Civil Laws, upon all the precedent
points, and added them unto the following Chapters, distinctly from the
Customs of Merchants; using the ordinary name of Ciuilians in general,
without naming any particular Author, to avoid ambiguitie and uncertainty in
the Contents of this Book, divided into three parts, according to the said
three Essential parts of Traffic.

CHAP. II. An observation concerning TIME.
ALL men of judgment and understanding do know, that there is nothing more
necessary for the knowledge of Histories, and diverse estates of the world, than
the observation of Times, without which, great obscurity and errors will be
found in the Actions of men, as well in matters of Religion, as in civil
government, where Merchants (in regard of their Traffic and Commerce) have
the managing and disposing of the wealth of Kingdoms and Commonweales: So that
it behooves them, to observe the years, months, weeks, Merchants are to
observe Time.
and days, and (sometimes) the hours of their negotiation, with the course of
the Moon, and the ebbing and flowing of waters, the variation of winds, and
alterations of weathers, for storms at the seas, and unseasonable Times on
land, whereby the haruests do fail, and commodities become to be plentiful
or scarce, and the prices thereof dear or good cheap: with many other
considerations incident in the course of buying and selling of commodities, and
in receiving and paying of moneys.

To make a definition of Time, will (in one respect) be very difficult, if we
consider, that Time is inseperably conjoined with Eternity: But if we observe
the attribute of Time, and do distinguish things orderly, we shall easily
perceive what Time is, and make use thereof. The attributes of Time.


Time is the consumer of all things, Tempus edax rerum.

Time is the discouerer of all things, Veritas filia Temporis.

Time is uncertain and wants bounds, Tempora mutantur etc.

Times minutes past, no treasure can restore, Irrevocabile Tempus.

Time does pierce the hardest flint, Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi sed sepe
cadendo.

Time has a salve for all extremities, and yet begets usury.

Times office is to end the hate of foes.

Times glory is to calm contending kings.

Time is a tutor both to good and bad, and does discover the affections of the
mind.

Time offers still each hour to do amiss.

Time breeds grief, and heales when Art does fail.

By Time and Wisdom passions are suppressed.

In Time small wedges cleave the hardest oaks.

Time is the Anchor both of Truth and Right.

Time has set down the compass of his course.

Times motions do equal the reeling Sun.

Time measures our actions.

Time is the best governor of all our counsels.

Time on the weariest wretch bestows rest.

Both Life and Love in Time must have an end.

Many more attributes may be bestowed upon Time. But we shall find upon due
consideration, that Time is but a distinction and measure of all things, and
between all things.

Concerning the revolution of Time, let us observe, That even as God the Author
and Conseruer of all things in a comely and decent order, The revolution of
Time.
has appointed a succession and progress of Time, for accomplishment of the
natural course thereof: So has he appointed certain Periods and Reuolutions
of Time, wherein things return to the same, or like estate wherein they were
before. As we see in the motions of the Heavens, and consequently in the
seasons of the year, all which are measured by Time. The Sun, the Moon, and
the Stars, to have their particular and distinct reuolutions, wherein they
accomplish their courses, and return after a limited and determinate space of
Time to the places from which they did depart.

The Sun completing his course and Revolution in 365 days, and almost six
hours, or a quarter of a day, as shall be declared, which is that space of Time,
which we call the year, termed Annus, qui Annulus, Annus quasi Annulus.
taking the similitude from a Ring; which caused the Egyptions to make the
figure thereof in their Hierogliphicks like unto a serpent biting his own
tail.

The Moon by her Revolution in the Sphere in 28 days, or thereabouts,
determinates unto us the months, as the Sun does the days and hours.

Saturnus the Planet makes her Revolution in 30 years. Jupiter in 12. years,
Mars in two years, and Venus and Mercury in 360 days, or thereabo^ts. The
fixed stars have also their peculiar Motions and Reuolutions: The knowledge
of all which, is both pleasing and necessary unto judicious Merchants.

And because Time is subject to be numbered by Ages, Years, Months, Days,
Hours, Minutes, and their divisions and subdiuisions, we cannot in this place
omit to particularise concerning the same; albeit it may be thought
inconvenient to touch the observation of the period of Monarchies and
Commonweals, Periods of Monarchies and Commonweales.
made by some Authors, which (by many important reasons) may be amplified.

Some distribute the whole ages of the world into three parts, ascribing to
every age 2000 years, which proc^edeth from that common opinion of Elias a
certain Rabbin or Jew, affirming that the world should stand 6000 years, and
then be disolued; of the which they reckon 2000 years, before the Law, 2000
years, under the Law, and 2000 years, under Christ, which shall be shortened for
the elects sake; which opinion has been receuied, by diverse godly fathers,
supposing that as the world and all things therein, was created in six days;
So the same should endure 6000 years, taking each thousand years for a day,
according to the saying of Saint Peter. 1. Pet. 3.
That one day before the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day. In this supputation is some reason; for from the beginning to Abraham
with whom the first covenant was made, and to whom the law of circumcision was
given; we find to be near 2000 years; Of the ages of the world.
and likewise under the law, until Christ, about 2000 years; and now under
Christ is above 1620 years, reckoning toward the last 2000 years.

Augustine writing of these ages, divides them into six, and reckons the
first age to be from Adam to Noah; the second, from Noath to Abraham; the
third, from Abraham to David; the fourth from David to the captivity of
Babylon; the fifth, from the Captivity to Christ; the sixth and last, under the
kingdom of Christ until the end of the world. Others there be that do
distribute the same into four, according to the nature of four kinds of
metals, the Golden, Silver, Brass, and Iron Ages: alluding to the Prophecy
of Daniel, of the four Monarchies. Others do account, the same by thousands,
or millinaries, according to certain observations of 6000 years in the
alterations of things. Others do calculate according to the ages of men,
supposing 100 years for an age; and so now being 56 ages and more, the number
60 or before the end of the world shall come. But, let us observe the true
computation of the Church most generally approved hitherto, Computation of
ages by Scripture.
and reckon from the Creation until Noah, 1656 years when he entered into the
Arc; and from the Floo^ to Abraham, 367 years; and from the departing of the
Israelites out of Egypt, 430 years; and from the departing to the building of
the Temple by Solomon, 430 years; and from that time to the eleventh year of
King Zedekiah (deduced by Scripture) is 427 years. So the whole sum of these
years comes justly to 3360 years. Hereunto 70 years being added of the
captivity of Babylon, is, 3430 years, which are 790 Sabbaticall years, of
seven years every Sabbaticall year, without any odd number; and from that
time until Christ, there is no momentarie difference by Historical account,
whereof understanding Merchants ought to be informed, and all men take
pleasure of this observation in their Almanacks.

From the Creation of the World, A^no Dom^ 1620.
until the last year -- 5582. From the said Creation until the Flood --
1656. From the said creation, until the Birth of our Savior Christ -- 3962.
Since Brute did enter the Island of Great Britain -- 2727. Since the building
of the Temple by Solomon -- 2649. Since the building of the City of Rome --
2371. Since the captivity of Babylon -- 2258. Since Julius Caesar was slain --
1669. Since the Birth of our Savior Christ, until the last year -- 1620.
Since the Conquest of England, by Duke William -- 553.
Since the beginning of the reign of King James, the first of that name of
England, until the 24 of March 1620, is 17 years complete, but current -- 18.

Concerning the year, there are many observations, Of the several beginnings
of the year.
and even of the several beginnings of it. And let us note Obiter that the
body (the soul of man consisting in the blood) has 365 veins, as residences
agreeable to so many days of the year.

All our Almanackes or Kalenders begin the year from the first day of
January, albeit this beginning differs in many other countries, which is
convenient for Merchants to observe.

The Astrologians begin at the entrance of the Sun in Arijs, which is the 21 of
March, at 12 of the clock at noone.

The old Romans did begin their year, ab Hieberno solstitio.

The Egyptians and old Jews, from the 21 of March, with the Astrologians.

Those of Asia and India, ab aquinoctio Autumnali; being the 23 of September,
at 12 of the clock at noone. The Grecians of the longest day of the year. The
Venetians of the first of March. The Spaniards from the Annuntiation of the
Virgin Marie, the 25 of March, as England, Scotland, and Ireland. The Portugals
and the East Indies, Barbary, Preste-Iohn, the 29. of August. Moses by Gods
commandment, ab equinoctio verno, which is Easter; according to which, Easter
day.
Easter day was ordained upon the full Moon, being the foureteenth day of the
first Moon, after the Sun entered into the sign of Aries, which is also used
in Egypt. Afterward in the year of our Lord 328, the Council of Nice did
ordain Easter day always to be upon the Sabbath day, or Sunday next after the
full Moon. And the Bishop of Alexandria made thereupon a list, according to
the Circle or Golden number of the Moon, beginning from the figure 1, until
number 19; for that in 19 years the Moon makes her complete revolution, and
concurreth with the Sun: And if the number did fall out upon a Sunday, then the
Sunday after was Easter day, The List appointed for Easter day.
according to this abstract; which is now altered by ten days, upon the
alteration of the Calendar by Pope Gregory the 13.

Golden number^ 1. The 5 of April. 2. The 25 of March. 3. The 13 of April. 4.
The 2 of April. 5. The 22 of March. 6. The 10 of April. 7. The 30 of March.
8. The 18 of April. 9. The 7 of April. 10. The 27 of March. 11. The 15 of
April. 12. The 4 of April. 13. The 24 of March. 14. The 12 of April. 15. The
1 of April. 16. The 21 of March. 17. The 9 of April. 18. The 29 of March. 19.
The 17 of April.


Revolution of the Sun and Moon.
The year being exactly calculated according to the course of the Sun, or
Revolution in the Zodiake through all the twelve Signs, consists of 365
days, 5 hours, 49 minutes, and 16 seconds. And the revolution of the Moon in
her going course is 27 days and about 8 hours, and in her returning course
about 29 days and one half, called a month. Others have used, and some yet
do use, the years of the Moon divided in 12 months, every new Moon or
course respected: And this year consists of 354 days, 8 hours, 48 minutes,
43 seconds, and 12 tierces, to which there was added 11 days called Aepacta,
The Epact of 11 days added Quaere tamen quando incaperint.
as adjoined days; which made the year to be 365 days and about six hours,
as aforesaid: which was used before the flood, by Jews, Greeks, and is yet at
this day used by the Mahometans, Arabians, and those of Feas and Marocco and
other places. The Babylonians, Egyptians, and Assyrians, have also observed
365 days for the year; One wholeday added every fourth year in ^ebruarie.
But they did not add every fourth year one day, which we call the
Leape-yeare.

To make a better explanation hereof, let us note, That there is a great Circle
imagined to be in the Heavens, called the Ecliptike, whereupon the Sun has
his continual motion or period, never declining from the same: and on each
side is imagined to be another lesser Circle limiting the latitude of the
Zodiake, The Ecliptike of the Zodiake
the middle whereof is called the Ecliptike, for that whenever there shall be
a conjunction or opposition of the Sun and Moon, the Moon being upon the
same Ecliptike, over which she passes twice in one Period, in so many days as
aforesaid, (which second sections are called the Head and Tail of the Dragon)
then (if at the conjunction) is our sight eclipsed by the interposition of the
body of the Moon, being (at the same instant) betwixt us and the Sun,
Eclipse of our sight by the Sun.
thereby hiding some part of his light from our sight: yet has the Sun in
himself no more loss of light, than if a man should put a ball betwixt my eye
and the Sun, whereby he might hide from my sight, either the total or part
of the body of the Sun. But if it be at the opposition, then the Moon does
indeed loose her total light, or part of her light, according to her latitude;
for if her latitude be more than the Semidiameters of the body of the Moon,
and the shadow of the earth, then there can be no Eclipse at all. When no
Eclipse of the Moon can b^.
But whenever the body of the earth shall be interposed or put betwixt the
light of the Sun, and the body of the Moon, (which cannot be but a full
Moon or opposition, Cause of the Eclipse of the Moon.
which are both one) then must she of necessity lose so much of her borrowed
light, as the earth does take away from her.

Within this imagined Circle or Zodiake are twelve constellations of Stars,
called the 12 Signs; each of these Signs is divided into 30 degrees or equal
parts, which make 360 in the total.

Now since the nature and qualitle of these twelve Signs were found, and that
the Moon being the lowest of the Planets, does convey and transport their
operations and force through her Orb unto all Elementall Creatures, causing
alteration of change and humors, times and seasons, and distemperature of
bodies; Man's body is divided according to the Zodiake.
the ancient Astronomers have attributed unto them certain names of
creatures, figures, and poetical allusions, for distinction sake, and to
declare their property in some weak and confused sort.

Also the number 19 called the Prime and Golden number, because it was written
in Golden letters for the utility thereof, which deserves the more so to be
adorned with Gold for a perpetual remembrance of our noble King James and his
royal issue, borne upon the 19 day of several months, which is not without
some mystery, as I think.

The 19 of June An^ 1568, The Golden number of king James and his royal issue.
King James was borne in Scotland.

The 19 of February An^ 1594, Prince Henry (deceased) was born, and dyed
before 19 years.

The 19 of August An^ 1596, the Lady Elizabeth his daughter was borne.

The 19 of November An. 1600, Prince Charles his son was borne, Deo gratias.

It may seem strange, that Julius Caesar did not observe this number of the
meeting of the Sun and Moon upon this Period, when he made his Calendar 44
years before Christ; for the use hereof began in the year of Christ 532. Cicle
of the Sun is 28 year.
And this number of 532 contains 19 times 28, in which time of 28 years
(being the Cicle of the Sun) the same is multiplied by 19, which is the Cicle
of the Moon.

The Dominicall letters.
The Dominicall letter is according to the noting of the seven days of the
week, according to the Cicle of the Sun, beginning from A.B.C.D.E.F.G. and
so returning and continuing for ever.

Dieurs beginnings of the day.
The day does also begin diversely: The Astrologians or Astronomers begin the
same from one midday (or noon) until the next, being 24 hours by the clock;
which is the cause that in their Alminacks they do set down always the place
of the course of the Moon, being so many degrees at noone; howbeit we reckon
12 hours; France Spain, and other places, the Venetians, and most towns of
Italy, the Bohemians, Athenians, Egyptians, some Jews and Grecians, Poland
and Silesia from the setting of the Sun until the next setting, 24 hours.
Babylonians, Persians, Chaldeans, some Hebrews and Greeks, old Romans, and
they of Wirtenborough and Norenborough, from one rising of the Sun to the
other, 24 hours.

Calends, Nones, and Ides.
The days of the month are also noted by Calends, Nones, and Ides. The first
day of the month was Calend, so called of Vocato Populo, declaring how many
days it was to the Nonas, that all the people was to assemble in the city, to
know what was commanded unto them by the Temporal and Spiritual laws, as
being noue obseruationis initium, or nono, as the ninth day from Idus. The
Tuscanes heretofore did homage to their king that day, and then it was commonly
new Moon, and Idus was the full Moon, upon the Moon months, being March,
May, July, and October, being of 31 days, which had six Nonas, whereas the
other 8 months have but 4 Nonas, and every month 8 Idus.

Indictio Romana.
Indictio Romana, whereby many histories account their years, was instituted
when the Romans had dominion over the greatest part of the world, because upon
every Lustrum, which was every fifth year, every one was to pay tribute unto
them. The first year they did bring Gold, the second Silver, the third year
Iron for munition and armor: So that it was the space of 15 years, beginning
from the 25 of September. And at the birth of Christ it was Indictio 3, and
falls out in the year of 1620 to be also Indictio 3, according to which
observation the calculation of some historical years is made.

That the Roman Calendar may easily be reformed without the Alteration of ten
days, made by Pope Gregory the 13.
IVlius Caesar the first Emperor of Rome, a man learned and of great
magnanimity, considering that the Roman years were reckoned confusedly
according to the course of the Moon, and by the Hebrews with their intercalar
month, to make the same agree with the Sun: By the counsel and instigation of
Sosigenes, an expert Mathematician, about 44 years before the Birth of Christ,
devised a new fo^me of Calendar, first framed after the course of the Sun,
dividing the whole year into three hundred sixty five days, and six hours,
making it to contain twelve months, whereof the names are yet in use;
beginning from March for the first month; which caused September, October,
November, and December, to bear their names the seventh, eightth, ninth, and
tenth month; yet all years by the Almanackes putttng January for the first
month, bears the name accordingly from the Heathen god Ianus, painted with
two faces, as it were beholding the year past, and the year to come.
February was so called of certain sacrifices then offered, called Februa;
March, of Mars, an Heathen god; April, the denomination of the months.
of the Spring Time, and the word Aperio, opening all vegetibles and other
things; May, of Maya the mother of Mercury; June, a Iuniore, for that all the
young people had a meeting in that month for recreation; July, of his own name
Julius; and Augustus, for the enlarging of the Empire.

Now forasmuch as the odd six hours, could not conveniently be brought to
account every year: he ordained that every fourth year one day should be
added to February, because four times six hours makes up a whole day of
four and twenty hours, and the year wherein this odd day falls, The
Leap year.
we call commonly Leap year, having three hundred sixty six days. And
because it was added at the six Calends of March, it is named in Latin,
Bissixtus, or Bissextilis Annus. Nevertheless Julius Caesar did begin his
Calendar in January, when the Sun enters the eighth degree of Capricorn,
eight days after the winter Solstitium, Solstitium.
which then being the shortest day of the year fell upon the twenty five of
December. And the Spring Time Equinoctium, about the twenty five of March.
Equinoctium.
The which places of the Sun are now changed and sliden back in the Julian
Calendar, from the said observation of the Spring Equinoctium, as also from the
Harvest Equinoctium (being about the twenty six of September) the longest day
then falling out the twenty five of June, grounded upon this reason of
prevention of the Equinoctial to the twelfth, eleventh, and tenth days of the
said months, and the thirteenth and fourteenth of September: But the chief
cause proceeds by reason that Julius Caesar did reckon the year to continue
three hundred sixty five days, and six hours; which is more than the just
Astronomers calculation by ten minutes of an hour, and forty four seconds,
accounting sixty minutes to an hour, and sixty seconds to a minute: so that
the year truly contains three hundred sixty five days, five hours,
forty nine minutes, The difference as the account of years, for the error.
and sixteen seconds, as is before declared, which difference in the space of
one hundred thirty four years or thereabouts, makes one whole day; and in
the space of one thousand six hundred sixty four years, being the time that
the Julian Calendar was set forth, until the last year, it comes to twelve
days, twenty two hours, forty minutes, and twenty five seconds.

For this cause sundry learned men have heretofore desired that the same may
be reformed, to avoid inconveniences, and to have a true account of years and
days. And the matter was propounded to diverse general Counsels, but took no
effect, till now of late years, by means of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, in
the year 1582, and then it was permitted to one Aloysius Lilius, (professor in
Mathematicke Astrology) to set down this long desired Reformation; who being
resolved to do the same exactly by true account, was hindered by the Clergy,
for they would not agree that the same should be drawn back any further than
to the time of the Nicene Council, which was in the year 328: and hereupon
he brought the reckoning back only ten days, and caused the fifteenth day of
December to be called the twenty five day, Alteration of ten days, and the
inconveniences.
which is but observed in some places, and brought great controversy in diverse
countries: seeing the day of the Nativity of Christ, and other Festival
days, and also days of keeping of Faires and Markets, are changed and holden
ten days before the accustomed time. And Merchants and others in making
their Contracts and Obligations are often disappointed of their days of
payment, with diverse other inconveniences.

Whereas men of true judgment, might have made this argument: Is it by the
addition of Time, growing by certain minutes and seconds every year, arising
to one whole day every fourth year, in the month of February? Then, as it is
increased thereby thirteen days in one thousand six hundred sixty four
years, it may by the same Rule decrease so much in few years, A true and good
reformation of the Julian Calendar.
by leaving out, and suspending that one day, which is so added, until it come
to his first institution and calculation of the Julian Calendar; which may be
reformed in fifty two years, beginning from the year 1620, being Leap
year, and leaving out thirteen days, which is little more than one hour in
the said, and is no perceptable difference; and after the said fifty two
years expired, to add the said day again, and there will not increase any
one day more, but in one hundred thirty four years. And all the yearly
observations may be accommodated accordingly.

I made an exact Table hereof, in the year 1604, whereby the day of the
Nativity of our Savior fell out again to be the shortest day of the year.
This Table was showed unto the Kings Majesty of Great Britain (as I was
informed) and howsoever pleasing, yet for some causes to me unknown not held
fit to be established.

CHAP. III. Of NVMBER, and the Mysteries thereof.
Unity is the Spring and Fountain of Numbers, which has a reference unto
God, the only fountain of Goodness, the only Father, Creator, and preserver
of us all. Here let us note, that the Philosophers have not only (with one
consent) affirmed, That great mysteries and virtues are contained in numbers.
But the ancient Fathers have also observed the same in the holy Scripture; as
Jerome, Augustine, Origin, Ambrose, Basil, Athanasius, Hilarious, Rabanus, Beda,
and others; amongst whom Doctor Rabanus has made a book of the virtues which
are hidden under Number. And if there were no mystery comprehended under
Number, Saint John in the Revelation would not have said, He that has
understanding let him reckon the Number of the name of the Beast, Vie^ius
generalis Dei, in Terris. D. C. L. V. V. IIIIII.
which is the number of a man, speaking of Antichrist in the days of the
Emperor Domitian, the tenth persecutor of the Christians, and the twelfth
Roman Emperor, when the Latin tongue was most frequent, although he did
write in Greek, which number was 666 by significant letters. Now, as one is no
Number, but vnitas; so there is but one God, one World, one Sun, one King of
Bees, Vnitas.
and leader amongst Cattle. Number Two, is the first offspring of unity, not
composed, but in society united, called the Number of Justice, wherein many
things are obseruable. The Two Tables of the Law; Duclitas.
Two Cherubins upon the Arc of Moses; Two Testaments; Two great Lights; Two
Natures in Christ; Two Solstices; Two Equinoctialls; Two Poles, and many other
things.

The Number Three is called Holy, and Tria sunt omnia, Trias.
as the Philosopher faith, which diverse also do acknowledge to be of great
efficacy in all things; whereof Pithagoras, Virgil, Plini^, Aristosle,
Trimegistus and others, have written copiously; the glory of all belonging to
the three persons in the Godhead, with the virtues of Faith, Hope, and
Charity. 4. and Quiuarias.
In the figure of Four many things are to be noted, as the Four Elements;
the Four original Winds; the Four Seasons of the year, etc. So of the
Number Five, being the Medium of Ten, which in Number figurative climeth no
higher, without doubling in Letters or Figures, having this property, D^narius.
that take nine from ten, there remains one; take eight, there remains
two; take seven, there remains three, and six remains four: All which
remainders added together, make again the Number Ten, whereof the Number
Five is equidistant. To speak of the five Senses, five fingers and toes, five
sorts of creatures, and other dependences, would be tedious. The Number Six is
not void of the like applications: but no number more used in holy Scripture
(as perfect and complete) than the Number Seven, Numerus mag^a persectionis
and virtutis.
called Sacred, because God rested the Seventh day, and did bless and hallow
the same. It was orda^ned in the Law, that amongst the people of God, every
Seventh year should be held holy, wherein the land should rest from labor,
and that liberty should be given unto servants, and be called a year of Rest
unto the Lord. And by the like reasons it was instit^ted, Sabbathecall years.
that the Israelites should number unto them seven Sabbaths of years,
containing 49 years, and immediately in the beginning of the 50 year
following, Iubilee year.
the trumpet of a Iubilee should be blown the 10 day of the Seventh Month. The
sacrifices for the most part were offered by Seuens; the great feasts of Gods
people lasted Seven days, and they did eat Seven days vnleauenned bread at
the Passover; Seven weeks were reckoned between the Passover and Pentecost,
and most of the feasts were in the seventh Month. In a figure also did the
Arc of Noah (which was a figure of Christ) rest upon the Mountains of Ararat
in the seventh Month: likewise it is said, Wisdom has builded her house
with seven Pillars, understanding the Church, with the gifts of the Spirit,
which are figured by Seven burning Lamps, and by Seven graven Candlestickes;
The Stone mentioned by Zachary (which is Christ) has Seven watching eyes of
God; and the Number Seven so often used in the Revelation of John. To say
nothing of the Seven Planets running their courses; and amongst the fixed
Stars, the Seven called Pleiades, and other Seven, Hyades; and the two Polar
Images, called Vrsa Mayor, and vrsa Minor, contain each seven Stars; and
many other observations of the said Number Seven may be noted.

Some observations there are of the Numbers Eight and Nine. And for the Number
Ten, notice is taken of the Ten Commandments; Ten Curtains in the
Temple of Solomon; Ten Strings upon the Harp, Ten Musical Instruments,
and diverse other particulars.

The Number Twelve has very great use and concordance in the Scripture: the 12
Tribes of Israel, whereof 12 Stones were placed in the River Jordan, and so
many precious Stones upon the brestplate of Aaron; so many Loaves offered; so
many Altars builded, and so many Lions under the brazen Seas; so many
fountains in Helim, and so many men sent into the land of Promise; hereunto
allude the Twelve Apostles, Twelve thousand Nations marked, Twelve Stars to
crown the Queen of Heaven, Twelve Baskets of bread gathered, Twelve Angels,
and so many gates and stones of the heavenly Jerusalem; omitting to speak of
the Twelve Signs of the Zodiake, and many other particularities touching the
coherence of this number. Let us note, Indians account of Time and Number.
that some Indians and Heathen people at Guiana have no division or account of
Times and Number, they only reckon by the moons, as one, two, three, four,
or five months; or by days in like manner: their numbers they reckon thus,
one, two, three, and so to ten; then ten and one, ten and two, and so forth.
And to show their meaning more certainly, they will demonstrate the same by
their fingers, still making signs as they speak: and when they will reckon
twenty, they will hold down both their hands to their feet, showing all their
fingers and toes; and as the number is greater, so will they double the sign.
And when they appoint or promise any thing at a limited time, they will deliver
a little bundle of sticks, equal to the number of days or moons that they
appoint, and will themselves keep another bundle of the like number; and to
observe their appointed time, they will every day, or moon, take away a
stick, and when they have taken away all, then they know that the time of
their appointment is come, and will accordingly perform their promise, which
may be a president to many Christians.

Thus much may suffice to have noted concerning Number, and the coherence
thereof with Time. Now whereas God by his divine providence has made all
things subject to Number, Weight, and Measure, let us in the next place entreat
of weight and measures.

CHAP. IIII. Of WEIGHTS and MEASVRES used in all places of the world, with
other observations.
Having entreated of Time and Number, The manner of Weights.
wherein and wherewith God does govern all things according to his determinate
will and pleasure: Now in order let us handle the description of Weights and
Measures, whereby all wordly things are disposed of: which is most necessary
to be known, to give every man his own, and to buy and sell by; according to
which all contracts and agreements between man and man (in the course of
Traffic and Trade for all commodities) are made, to distinguish Meum and
Tuum, by the Law and otherwise, according to common consent of all Nations.

All WEIGHTS are divided into three sorts.
FIrst by the great number, that is to say, by Hundreths, Kintalls, Centeners,
Talents, Thousands, Waighs, Skipponds, Charges, Lispounds, Rooues, Stones, and
such like.

The second fort of Weights, is by Pounds, Mina, Manes, Rotulus, etc.

The third division of Weights does consist in the smaller divisions of 12, 14,
16, 18, 20 and 30 ounces to a pound, and the subdiuisions thereof.

The Talent of the Grecians 60 Minas, Talentum.
every Mana 100 Dragmes, so a Talent is six thousand Dragmes, 8 of them to one
ounce is 750 ounces. Another Talent of Greece is 16 Sestertios, being 40 Minas
or Pounds of 18 ounces, as also of 20 ounces. In Egypt it was 32 Sestertios or
80 Pound. The 50 Sestertios of Cleopatra are 125 ll. In Thratia 48 Sestertios
being 120 Pounds. In Africa 24 Sestertios are 60 ll. differing also in the
pound weight.

Cantar or Kyntall.
Cantar or Kyntall, or Centener, called hundreths of 100, 112, 120, 125, 128,
and 132 pounds. The Hebrews did call Cicar to be 50 Minas or Maneg.

Weighs.
Weighs are commonly 165 ll, or 180 ll, or 200 1/^ for acharge.

Skippound.
Skippounds of 300, 320, 340, and 400 pounds the Skippound.

Lyspound.
Lyspounds of 15 and 16 pounds to the Lyspound.

Rooues.
Rooues or Arrobas of 10, 20, 25, 30, and 40 pound to the Rooue.

Stones.
Stones of 6, 8, 10, 14, 16, 20, 21, 24, and 32 ll, and also 40 ll, as more
particularly appears hereafter in their proper places.

Mixias.
Mixias are also used, whereof we find mention made in some books, is ten
thousand, and is commonly understood for 10000 Dragmes of 8 to an ounce, and 12
ounces to the pound.

Marks. Besse.
The pound is also divided by Marks of 8 ounces, and Besse of 12 ounces; every
ounce was amongst the Hebrews 2 Sicles, or Stater.

Sicles. St^ter. Gerag.
Siclus is sometimes taken for an ounce, also half an ounce, and quarter of an
ounce, which is Gerag, or Obolus.

Mina Ptolomaica is 1 Rotulus which is divided into small parts, viz. 18
ounces, of 12 to one Rotulus 144 Dragmes, of 8 to one ounce. 432 Scruples, of 3
to a Dragme. 846 Obulus. 1296 Lupes. 2592 Siliquas or Carrats.


Inna or Maa^g.
Mina of the Grecians, otherwise called Inna or Maneg, is a pound. 12 Ounces. 25
Staters or Ciclos. 100 Dragmes or Rosoli. 300 Scruples, 24 to an Ounce. 600
Obolus. 900 Lupines. 1800 Siliquas. 3600 Areola or Chalcos.


Rotulus in Arabia, Siria, Asia Minor, Egypt, and Venice is 1 ll. 12 Ounces or
Sachosi. 24 Septarios or Cicles. 84 Deniers of 7 to an Ounce. 96 Dragmes or
Darchiny. 288 Scruples or Grana. 576 Obolus or Orlossat. 864 Danig. 1728
Carrats or Siliqua. 6912 Kestuff.


The 7 Deniers make an Ounce, and there were Dragmes also of 1 Dragme, and of 1
Dragme, and of one Dragme called Alby.

In the Low Countries the Pounds are divided diversely in 16 Ounces, every
Ounce in 8 Dragmes, or fifths, and 8 parts; And in France they call them 8
Grosses, the 128 make one pound. In other places they divide the pound in 12,
14, and 15 Ounces, Difference of Pound and Ounces.
whereof the Pounds and Ounces both do differ, which is the cause that
hereafter every country has a declaration thereof.

At Bridges in Flaunders they use Pounds of 14 Ounces, The Pound weight of
Bridges.
and of 16 Ounces, whereof the 100 ll of 16 Ounces make 108 ll of 14 Ounces;
which Ounces of 14 to the Pound are heavier, for 100 Ounces of these are 105
Ounces of the 16 to the Pound: which Ounces are divided in half Ounces, or
Loot, and every Loot in 2 Sizayns, and every Sizayne in 2 Dragmes or Quintes.
The smaller proportions and subdiuisions of other places are as follows.

Italian Pounds for physic used in other places also. 12 Ounces. 24 Loot. 48
Sizaynes or Siliqua. 96 Dragmes. 288 Scruples. 576 Obolus. 1728 Siliqua. 5760
Grains.


The said Weight of physic is at Lions in France as the Merchants ll. 12
Ounces. 96 Dragmes. 288 Scruples. 5760 Grains.


The Pound weight of Venice. 12 Ounces. 72 Sextulas. 1728 Siliqua. 6912 Grains.


The Pound at Paris in France. 16 Ounces. 128 Grosses. 384 Scruples. 9216
Grains.


In Italy the Pound is also divided 12 Ounces. 24 Staters. 96 Dragmes.


Vienna in Austria the Pound i^ 32 Loott. 128 Quintes. 512 Pennings. 12800
Grains.


Forasmuch as it falls out most commonly, that upon trial of an unknown
Weight, we do begin from the smallest Weight or Grain, and so ascend to the
other proportions, and to the Pound, by comparing the same to our Grains and
divisions of the Pound, Differences of Grains.
which in matter of mint for gold and silver is of great moment, when the
penny weight is divided into 24 Grains in England, and in the Low Countries
into 32 Grains. Let us note the great diversity abouesaid of 5760 Grains to
12800 used at Vienna and other places, proportionably to their pound; and
consider how easily we may be overtaken therein, whereof a more ample
declaration is in the mint affairs.

There is also a great observation to be had in the correspondencie of Weights
of one country to the Weights of another country, upon the hundredth subtle,
that is to say 100 pounds even Weight. And because in England all wares of
Volume or Bulck is sold, some by the hundredth weight of 112 ll, and some is
sold by the pound, as spices, sugars, and such like, and yet are weighed by the
said weight of 112 ll; and that moreover there is an ouer-weight allowed called
Trett which is 4 upon the 112 ll, and also 2 ll upon every skale of 3 hundredth
weight called Cloff, which is abated between the buyer and seller, Trett and
Cloffe,
and so there is a loss of weight by this Trett and Cloff: and especially
because the commodities imported are bought by the weight of foreign nations;
I have thought convenient to describe the said correspondence of Weight
according to the 100 ll subtle of Antuerp, being generally known in all
places: and for the Weight of London, to make some observations particularly.

The correspondencie of Weight of most places of Traffic.
Antuerp.
THe Custom of Antuerp is to weigh by the hundredth pounds even weight called
Subtle, for the which commonly there is allowed at the weigh-house 101 ll. A
Stone weight is 8 ll, the Skippound 300 ll, the Weigh 165 ll, the Carga or
Charge 400 ll, which are two Bales of 200 ll for an horse to carry on either
side, and the Pound is divided into 16 Ounces.

The said 100 ll weight of Antuerp weighs in the places following,

London.
At London and all England -- 104 ll subtle weight, and of the Kyntall weight of
112 ll, it weighs -- 91 ll.

At Dublin and all Ireland also, Dublin.
104 ll and 91 by the great hundredth.

At Edinburgh in Scotland -- 96 ll and all Scotland over; Edenborough.
and 103 for 112 ll.

The said 100 ll make 189 Marks of 8 ounces, which are ounces Troy; wherewith
Gold, Silver, Pearls, Musk, Corrall, etc.

Diamonds are weighed by another weight, called Carrat: Diamond weight.
which is also used in England, France, and other places. One Carrat is 4
grains in England; and with them about 5 grains, because as aforesaid they
have 32 grains to the English, being our penny weight.

The said 100 ll of Antuerp are correspondent with the 100 ll of Bruxells,
Malines, Hartogenbosh, Louain, Arschor; but at Barrow op Zoom 98 ll.

At Briges also 100 ll. But wool weight is 108 ll, Bridges.
which are weighed by Stones of 6 ll, called Nails, used also by the Skinners
there, and makes 114 ll English Wool weight waying by four nails, whereof
forty five nails make a weight, the two waighes make one pocket of wool.

This 100 ll of Antuerp is but 93 ll at Bridges, in the weight of Butter and
Cheese, waying by Stones of 6 ll, and 20 Stones is a weigh, and do make also
189 Marks of Silver, Gold, etc. Troy weight.

The said 100 ll makes at Gaunde, Ypre, Dixmuyde, Hulst, Gaunde.
Poperinge, Tornay, Ailst, Mirnow, for Hops and other wares 108 ll; and also in
the Wallons country. And at Audinard, Cortryke, Lille, Doway, Santomur, and
all Flaunders 110 ll.

The said 100 ll, of Antuerp make at Amsterdam but 94 ll, Amsterdam.
and for Silks they use the weight of Antuerp.

And all Holland, Gelderland, Walsland, and Sealand, it is 99 ll. Holland,
Sealand, etc.
And 110 ll only at Zurickzea and Tergoes makes 107 ll.

FRANCE.
The said 100 pound of Antuerpe Subtle, weighs by the Kings weight,

At Paris -- 93 ll accounting 4 quarters of 25 pound to the hundredth.

Diepe, Abbeuile, Bourdeaux, Borgoingne, etc. -- 94 ll.

Roan -- 91 ll, by the Vicontee, accounting as at Paris.

Also by the ordinary weight -- 94, waighed by the same, and account 4 per cent
over.

Lions 111 ll Ordinary weight by Centeners of 112 ll. 102 ll Almeric, or weight
of Genua, for Silks, Saffron, and such like, weighing by small weights, and
abating 8 per 100. 94 ll By the Kings weight, to pay Custom by. A Charge, is
300 ll, a Quintall 100 ll, and a Sum is 400 ll.
Tholouze. 111 ll; every Centener or Quintall, is 2 Frailes of 56 ll. Auignon.
111 ll; every Centener or Quintall, is 2 Frailes of 56 ll. Montpellier 111 ll;
every Centener or Quintall, is 2 Frailes of 56 ll. Rochel. -- 111 ll; and 119
ll by the small weight. Calais in Picardy 111 ll Ordinary weight. 92 ll
Merchants weight. 114 ll The English wool weight.
Genua 102 ll Weight for Spices. 85 ll By the great weight. Carga, or Charge,
is 270 ll small weight.
Marsellis. -- 111 ll. Saint Antoine. -- 127 ll. Aquismort. 102 ll. And all
France generally 111 ll. Lions weight are some 102 ll, or 94 as aforesaid.
Mirabel. 102 ll. And all France generally 111 ll. Lions weight are some 102 ll,
or 94 as aforesaid. Calsada. 102 ll. And all France generally 111 ll. Lions
weight are some 102 ll, or 94 as aforesaid. Offerte. 102 ll. And all France
generally 111 ll. Lions weight are some 102 ll, or 94 as aforesaid.
SPAIN.
Seuill the said 100 ll are 107 ll by Great Quintall of 144 ll of 4 roues of 36
ll. Smaller Quintall of 112 ll, of 4 roues of 28 ll. Lesser Quintall of 120 ll,
of 4 roues of 30 ll.
Granada and Armaria bona 105 ll Is pound of 16 Ounces. 93 ll Silk and Copper
weight of 18 Ounces. 54 ll Great weight for flesh, of 32 Ounces.
Castile. -- 102 ll. Medina del Campo. -- 102 ll. Burgos. -- 93 Rotolus.
Arragon. 106 ll. 96 ll, Great weight for wool.
Barselona. 131 ll, Small weight for Saffron. Valentia. 106 llBy Quintalls of 4
roues, of 30 ll for Spices. 134 ll By Quintalls of 4 roues, of 36 ll.
Carga is 3 Quintalls of 360 ll, and the greater of 432 pounds.
The said 100 ll of Antuerp makes in Spain
At Leon. -- 109 ll. Sarragossa. -- 112 ll, and small Quintal 131 ll. Lavalona,
Sallanico and Magilica. -- 131 ll. Vilaco. -- 80 ll.
The Islands of the Canaries, and all the Islands of Spain use the weight of
Seuill, as aforesaid.

PORTVGALL.
The said 100 ll make 107 Rotules or Araters by The great Quintall of 128 ll.
The small Quintall of 112 ll, containing each four rooues of 32 ll, and 28 ll.


There is allowance made, four upon the hundredth upon Sugars; and 2 and 3 upon
Cotton wool, and such like. The small Quintall is the weight of the
contraction House of the Indies: Spice is weighed hereby, but all weighed by
the great Quintall, and reduced upon the less Quintall. One Quintall of Wax is
1 Quintall of 112 ll, is 168 ll. Madera 107 Rotules, or pounds by the Quintall
of 128 ll. Cabo Verde 107 Rotules, or pounds by the Quintall of 128 ll. Santo
Thomas 107 Rotules, or pounds by the Quintall of 128 ll. Guynea 107 Rotules, or
pounds by the Quintall of 128 ll. Marocco in Barbary 107 Rotules, or pounds by
the Quintall of 128 ll. Feas and Suus in Barbary 96 ll.


Calicut 80 Aracoles for the said 100 ll of Antuerp; here they sell by Baccar
or Bahar, being at Lisbone 4 great Quintalls of 112 ll.

Baccar or Bahar is 4 Quintals for 120 Aracoles. 20 Faracoles of 32 ll per
Rooue, at Lixborne is 5 Quintalls. 480 Aracoles.


ITALY.
Venice, the said 100 ll, is -- 98 ll great weight, wherewith Flesh, Butter,
cheese, Leather, dates, Yearne, Copper thread, iron, Oil, Brimstone, and Wool
are weighed, called, A la grossa:

And by the small weight, Allasotile -- 156 ll of 12 ounces, most used for all
merchandises, every ounce is six Saffi, every Sassi of 24 Carrats, every
Carrat is four Grains.

They do also weigh by thousands of 40 Mixi of 25 ll every one. And there is
allowance made two upon the hundredth, in the Custom house, they account also
by Cargaos of 400 ll small weight: Also by star of 220 ll weight, howbeit star
is Mensuralis, to measure according to the weight of the goods, as Ginger 180
ll, Raisons 260 ll, Corn 130 ll. Star contains 54 pottles of wine at
Antuerp, Istria, Spalato, Sequia, Fiume, Piran, and Trieste, have all the same
weight, which the Venetians use, as aforesaid.

The said 100 ll at Rome. 132 ll. Florence. 125 ll of 12 ounces. Bolognia. 53
ll of 30 ounces, to weigh wax and wool by roues of 10 ll. Milan, Pauia and
Cremona 143 ll, of 12 ounces most used. 132 ll of 12 ounces, being 13 of the
other. 60 ll of 28 ounces for flesh.
Rechanate -- 137 ll, but to gold thread but 112 ll. Treuiso, Padua, 137 ll, and
108 ll by the two Quintalls. Ferrara, Ottrante, 137 ll, and 108 ll by the two
Quintalls. Vrbino, Lansan, 137 ll, and 108 ll by the two Quintalls. Cesena,
Bergamo, 137 ll, and 108 ll by the two Quintalls. Verona 90 ll, and for gold
Thread 143 ll. Bressa 184 ll, and for Venice gold 136 ll. Naples 120 ll, and for
Venice gold 134 ll. Romagna 120 ll, and for Venice gold 134 ll. Carpi,
Mirandola, The said 100 ll of Antuerp make 147 ll. Parma, Plaisance, The said
100 ll of Antuerp make 147 ll. Luca, Mantua, The said 100 ll of Antuerp make
147 ll. Forli, Carmia, The said 100 ll of Antuerp make 147 ll. Aquila, Crema,
The said 100 ll of Antuerp make 147 ll. Como, Piedmont. The said 100 ll of
Antuerp make 147 ll. Sauoy -- 137 ll, and small weight 195 ll. Rauiano, Faenza,
Modena, Rimano, Rauenna and Raguza, all 132 ll.


Genes by Roues, to a Quintall of 4 Roues and 4 ll over and above allowed,
Pepper 110 ll, and Ginger 114 ll the Quintall.

Napoli de Reame 147 ll. 53 Rotulus the 100 to one quintal or Cantar. Puglia,
Calabria 147 ll. 53 Rotulus the 100 to one quintal or Cantar. Macharon -- 147
ll. 53 Rotulus the 100 to one quintal or Cantar.
Sicilia all the Island over 152 ll of 12 ounces. 61 Rotuls of 30 ounces is a
Cantar of 24 Sestertios. 54 Rotuls for flesh by Talents of 12 Sestertios, is 30
Rotulos.


Candia -- 138 ll for gold thread. 89 Rotules, the 100 is a Cantar or Quintall.
Nigrepont 119 ll. 87 Rotules, the 100 a Cantar. Griro 119 ll. 87 Rotules, the
100 a Cantar. Laarta 119 ll. 87 Rotules, the 100 a Cantar. Cataio 119 ll. 87
Rotules, the 100 a Cantar. Lacaonia 138 ll, and 78 Rotules. Constantinople 87
Rotules, the 100 a Cantar. 39 Ochaa.

Dragma they call Metallici of 2 make 3 Dragmes of ours.

The said 100 ll make at Armenia 130 ll.

At Bursa in Natolia -- 88 Rotules. Bucca -- 44 Ochas.
Damasco 26 Rotules, whereof the 100 make a Cantar, every Cantar 5 Zurli or
stones of 20 Rotules, a Riuola is at Antuerp 225 ll.

Tripoli 22 Rotules. Bieritti 21 Rotules. Suria 156 Minas, every one of 100
Dragmes.
Siria in Hebrew 80 Minas or Maneg, and 100 is a Talent of pounds 18 ounces.

Alexandria -- 108 Rotules, the 100 a Cantar. 78 Minas of 20 ounces.
Kalla makes at Antuerp 560 ll. Molucco 88 Rotules, the 112 make a Cantar.
Arabia -- 78 Rotules of 12 Sachosi, or ounces 148 ll. 104 Maires or Minas.

Almerica Malica -- 90 ll of 12 ounces, or 36 Minas Sestertios of 30 ounces, or
is 60 Siclos.

Cyprus 20 Rotules, the 100 a Cantar, and the 100 of Famiagosta are in all the
Island 104.

Rhodes 19 Rotules, the 100 make a Cantar.

Scio: Fio 96 Rotules or Scrutari.

Corfu 97 ll great weight, and 115 ll small weight.

Leuante 26 Rotules and 156 ll.

Egypt.

Alcario. 78 Minas of 16 ounces 164 ll. 27 Rotules of 6 ll every one.
Sciba is at Antuerp, 320 ll, is Skippound. Zeroi is 50 Rotules. Forfori is 65
Rotules, is for Pearls. Zaidin is 77 Rotules.
Musk and Amber is weighed by Metallici or Dragmes, and with Peso, whereof 1
is Metallicum, the 50 are one mark, and our mark is 42 Metallici.

Suria

Tripoli 26 Rotules. Achri 17 Rotules, the 100, a Cantan Tambaran. Aleppo and
Aman 22 Rotules, the 100 a Cantar.
Every Rotule is 60 ounces, 8 Metecalo or Dragmes is the Rotulo, 480 Metecalos
or Metalicos is every one 1 Peso, and the 10 Pesos is an Ouga or Ongia,
wherewith ciuet is weighed.

Archipelago 120 ll. Nichosia 120 ll. Barbary Arcadia 92 ll. 83 ll, for
Mauigette.
Tripoli 63 Rotules. Thunes 63 Rotules. Oran 94 Rotules, the Cantar is 5 Roues
of 20 Rotules 138 ll for spices, and the Cantar is 4 Roues. 50 Rotules for
corn, every Cantar 6 Rotules. 61 Rotules for cotton wool, 15 to a Cantar.
Vna 65 Rotules for cotton wool. 75 Rotules for spices. 94 Rotules for corn.
Sus in Africa by the Quintall of 100 ll of Seuill. Feas, the Quintall is 66 ll
of Antuerpe of 18 ounces.

GERMANY.
The said 100 ll of Antuerpe make as follows, at Norenborgh 92 ll of 16
ounces or 32 Loott, some by the Centener of 100 ll, and some of 120 ll.
Constance 92 ll of 16 ounces or 32 Loott, some by the Centener of 100 ll, and
some of 120 ll. Spiers 92 ll of 16 ounces or 32 Loott, some by the Centener of
100 ll, and some of 120 ll. Bibrach 92 ll of 16 ounces or 32 Loott, some by the
Centener of 100 ll, and some of 120 ll. Collen -- 93 ll. Ausborgh all 95 ll.
Munchen all 95 ll. Wisell all 95 ll. Norlingen all 95 ll. Salsborgh -- 111 ll
by the small weight, and 83 ll by the great. Meysen and all Saxony 100 ll,
Zigostatica is the Princes, weight, mark, pounds of 16 ounces. 96 ll Merchants
weight. 148 ll of 12 ounces.
Frankford 96 ll, they do use the Centener of 100 ll, 120 ll, and 132 ll.
Hecdelborgh 96 ll, they do use the Centener of 100 ll, 120 ll, and 132 ll.
Lipsich 96 ll, they do use the Centener of 100 ll, 120 ll, and 132 ll. Friburch
96 ll, they do use the Centener of 100 ll, 120 ll, and 132 ll. Vlme, Isuff 96
ll, they do use the Centener of 100 ll, 120 ll, and 132 ll. Offen of Offner 96
ll, they do use the Centener of 100 ll, 120 ll, and 132 ll. Basle 96 ll, they
do use the Centener of 100 ll, 120 ll, and 132 ll. Costuts 96 ll, they do use
the Centener of 100 ll, 120 ll, and 132 ll. Dompstetter 96 ll, they do use the
Centener of 100 ll, 120 ll, and 132 ll. Botsen 138 ll, ordinary weight. Adler
91 ll to weigh Steel, Tin, and Copper. Bresloo 120 ll by Centeners of 132
ll, and Stones of 24 ll, whereof 5 Stones make a Centener. Silesia 120 ll by
Centeners of 132 ll, and Stones of 24 ll, whereof 5 Stones make a Centener.
Poosen 120 ll by Centeners of 132 ll, and Stones of 24 ll, whereof 5 Stones make
a Centener. Prage, Canali 87 ll. Passau, Gern 87 ll. Regensborgh 87 ll. Vienna
85 ll, a sum of quicksiluer is 275 ll of 32 Loott the ll. Ersurd 85 ll, a sum
of quicksiluer is 275 ll of 128 Quints the ll. Idria 85 ll, a sum of
quicksiluer is 275 ll of 512 Penning the ll. Loosen -- 146 ll.


EASTLAND.
The said 100 ll of Antuerpe make at Hamborogh -- 96 ll, The Centener is 120 ll
of 10 ll to the stone, 300 ll to the Skippound, or 20 Lispound of 15 ll.
Lubecke -- 96 ll, The Centener 112 ll, the Stone 10 ll, and 32 stone to a
Skippound, and the 20 Lispound of 16 mark pound is a Skippound also.
Coppenghen 96 ll as Lubecke Berghen in Norway -- 96 ll, but very uncertain
waighing with a sling. Straelsont 92 ll, the stone 10 ll, and the Lispond 16.
Statin is 96 ll, small stone 10 ll, great stone 21 ll, the Centener 112 ll.
Stockholm in Sweden 120 ll, the Skippond is 320 ll, and also 340 ll as at
Dansicke by stones of 34 ll. Revel 120 ll, and the Skippound is there 400 ll.
Dansicke 120 ll, 16 mark pound are one Lispound, and 20 Lispound one Skippound
by the small stone of 24 ll for spices etc.


They have also a great stone to weigh gross wares, as wax, flax, and the like
of 34 ll, whereof 10 to the Skippound of 340 ll.

Coninxborogh 125 ll, the stone is 40 ll, and 10 stones one Skippound of 400
ll, they do weigh also 350 ll, for the Skippound of Dansicke which is very
dangerous, besides that the citizens are much favored. Meluin is 124 ll, the
stone 40 ll. Riga is 120 ll, and 20 a Lispound, and 20 Lispound to the
Skippound. Thoren 120 ll, the stone is 24 ll. Nareca 120 ll, agreeing with the
weight of Riga. Wild is likewise 120 ll, and 20 ll one Lispound. Cracou is 124
ll, and the Centener is 136 ll.
The weight of the Last of corn.
The Skippound is used in many places, and as in Italy and other countries a
Carga or Charge is the loading of a horse of 300 or 400 ll: so the Skippound is
taken for the lading of corn in a ship, Quasi Shippond, as a diuident of a
Last of corn, and as a pound is divided into 12 or 16 ounces, so is the
ship-last divided into 12 and 16 parts: Rye.
As for example, at Dansicke 16 Skippound for the Last of 340 ll for every
Skippound which is the Last of Rye, which is at Antuerpe 283 ll, so the said
Last 424.5 ll: and of Wheat 4528 ll. At Riga and the Nerua 12 Skippound 4000
ll; Wheat.
at Melvyn and Connixborough 5200 ll, in the Low Countries is 16 Shippound for
Wheat at 300 ll makes 4800 ll, and 14 Skippound for Rye is 4200 ll, so by the
weight is the Last of Dansicke bigger and heavier than the Last of Amsterdam:
and you see the difference of weight between Wheat and Rye. These pounds are
called Mark Pounds, being of two marks to the pound, to be known thereby to
be pounds of 16 ounces.

Observations concerning the manner of Weighing.
TO weigh with few pieces or weights, take weights of augmentation double,
namely 1 ll, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64, making together 127 ll, and with these 7
pieces you may weigh all things until 127 ll: and with treble augmentations,
as 1, 3, 9, 27, 81, 243, and 729 ll, until 1093 ll. But the double
augmentation is more commodious for Germany and England where the Centener of
112 ll is used.

There must be an especial regard had concerning the Beams or Balances for
the justifying of them: If it be an iron Beam try the same empty, and
afterward laden with equal weights; and if it be a wooden Beam, it
happens many times that the ends are not even, or that the yrons about the
ends are removed more on the one side than the other; therefore try the said
Beam both empty and laden, and you may find a great difference in weight,
which with knocking in the iron with a hammer may be remedied.

Whereas the weight of Antuerpe (whereupon all the aforesaid correspondencies
are calculated) is bigger than the weight of London four upon the hundredth,
which may be thought a benefit: the same is not so to be accounted, because of
the Custom of 4 pro cento for Trett, allowed between the buyer and the
seller, at London, which takes away the benefit. This Trett is taken by
dividing your weight subtle by 26, otherwise you should allow as it were Trett
upon Trett.

The Romans had a Custom, The manner of the Romans to make their Wills and
Testaments.
to name or call every man's Capital, or Stock, a pound, or As; dividing the
same into twelve ounces, every ounce into 24 Scruples, 288 Scruples to the
pound: Besse was of the pound, or 8 ounces, Sextula of an ounce. Duellum of the
pound is Bina sextula, or part, Sicilicus is 6 Scruples, Dragma 3 Scruples. And
so in the making of their Wills and Testaments, they put down one to be heir
of Besse, is 192 Scruples, two of an Ouncia is 1/12; part, or 24 Scruples, 3 of
semissa is a Scruple, 4 of Duello, is 8 Scruples; in all 368 Scruples, there
being but 288 Scruples in the pound: so every man's portion must be ratably
diminished according to the pound. Cicero made the Testament of Cesinna, ex
devnce and senuncia, was 12/24 parts, and of Marcus Fuluius of 2 Sextula was
1/10. There is also Ebutio sextula, being 1/72, and so the Mass of their goods
was described.

Of one pound of 12 ounces, Sextans is 2 ounces, Quadrans 3 ounces, Triens 4
ounces; and so accordingly the goods were distributed in equity. By means
whereof the Testators wealth was unknown, and when he gave more than the
proportion Arithmeticall came unto, the order was to reduce the same to the
pound of 288 Scruples, by diminution of every man's rate accordingly. The
Custom used by many now to give certainties, and the remainder in uncertainty
is to be preferred.

Weights for Moneys, and their correspondence for most places of Traffic.
THere is an other weight, which is used in the Mints for Gold and Silver,
which is the mark weight of 8 ounces: This mark weight is heavier at Antuerp
than their ordinary pound, by five upon the hundredth.

This mark is divided in 20 English, every English 32 grains; so one mark is
5120 of their grains.

This manner of mark weight is used in most countries, howbeit in some places
of Italy by pounds of 12 ounces otherwise divided.

In England the pound Troy of 12 ounces is divided into 20 penny weight, every
ounce, and every penny weight into 24 grains, which in Antuerp upon the mark
is divided into 32 grains. So the pound Troy of 12 ounces at London is but
5760 grains, whereas the mark of Antuerp being but 8 ounces is 5120 grains
as abouesaid. Whereof we intend to treat more amply in our Second Part of the
Law-merchant.

There is also used a penny weight, which is divided; The mark in eight
ounces, the ounce in 24 penny weight, and the penny weight in twenty four
grains, making the said mark of eight ounces to be 4008 grains.

The Mark is divided at Rome in eight Ounces.

The Mark weight of Rome. The Ounce in 8 Dragmes. Dragma 3 Scruples. Scruple 2
Obolus. Obolus 3 Siliquas. Siliqua 4 Primi or grains; so every mark is 4608
grains.
Meysen in Saxony. Marks 8 ounces. Ounce 24 penny or Deniers. Penny 24 grains
or Momenta, is also 4608 Momenta to the Mark.
Dansicke in Eastland. Mark 8 ounces Is 512 in the mark. Ounce 32 penny Is 512
in the mark. Penny 2 Heller Is 512 in the mark.
Norenborough. Mark 16 Loot. Loot 4 Quintes. Quints 4 Prime or Numulos. Penny
4 Sestertios, is the mark 256 penny, or 1024 Sestertios.
France. Mark 8 ounces Is 4608 grains the mark. Ounce 8 grosses Is 4608
grains the mark. Gross 3 deniers Is 4608 grains the mark. Denier 24 grains
Is 4608 grains the mark.
Portugal. Mark 8 ounces 288 grains to the mark. Ounce 8 Oitauos. 288
grains to the mark. Oitauo 4 great Grains.
Venice. Mark 8 ounces. Ounce 4 quarts, or Silicos. Quarta 36 Carats or
Siliquas. Carrat 4 grains, is 4608 grains to the mark, or 1152 Siliquas.
Florence. Pound in 12 ounces 6912 grains the mark. Ounce 24 deniere 6912
grains the mark. Deniere 24 grains 6912 grains the mark.

Gold. Silver. Genua Mark 8 ounces Pound 12 ounces. Ounce 24 deniers. Ounce 24
deniers. Denier 24 grains. Denier 24 grains.

Naples, a pound 12 ounces, and an ounce 8 Octany.

Besse, or old mark of the Romans. 16 Loot or Tetradragmes. 21 Tridragmes. 32
Didragmes. 64 Dragmes. 96 Obolus or Treobolus. 128 Triobulos. 384 Obolos. 768
Miobolos. 3840 Momenta.
The old pound of the Romans, called Pondus. 64 Denarios. 128 Quinarios. 256
Sestertios. 640 Asses. 1280 Semilibellas. 2560 Teruncios.
Libra Romana. 12 Ounces or gilders. 84 Denarios. 168 Victoritatus. 336
Sestertios. 840 Asses. 3320 Quadrantes or Teruncios. 5040 Sextantes.

We have declared heretofore the division of the pound weight for wares, and
the correspondence of the hundredth pound, compared to the 100 ll Subtle of
Antuerp. And now in the same manner we shall note the correspondence likewise
by the hundredth marks of Antuerp to all the said places or most of them, which
is called the weight of the Duke of Burgundy, agreeable with the 100 marks of
Bridges, and containing 14 ounces to the pound.

The said 100 marks of Antuerp make in all places following.

Saxony. Dansicke. 105 1/19 Marks. Meysen. Milan. 105 1/19 Marks. Collen.
Vicenza. 105 1/19 Marks. Treci. Lipsich. 105 1/19 Marks. Men's. Vlme. 105 1/19
Marks. Erfurd. Frankfoord. 105 1/19 Marks. Grecia. Ausborough. 105 1/19
Marks. Norenborgh. Bauiere. 103 Marks. Franconia. Bambergh. 103 Marks.
Wessilbourgh. Fribourgh. 103 Marks. Ancona. Triuiso. 103 Marks. Roma. Crema.
103 Marks. Venice. Verona. 103 Marks. Piedmont and Turin -- 99 Marks.
Florence 72 pounds. Aquila 71 ll. Naples. 76 Pounds. Calabria. 76 Pounds.
Puglia. 76 Pounds. Adler. 76 Pounds. V^enna. 87 Marks. Hungary. 87 Marks.
Bothner. 87 Marks. Bohemia. 87 Marks. Bresla in Sileia 121 Marks. Paris.
Lions. 112 Marks, Merchants weight. Genua. 102 Marks, the Kings weight.
Genes. 116 Marks for gold. 77 Marks for ^iluer or pounds.
Spain 107 Marks. Catalonia 100 Marks. Burgas 116 Marks. Constantinople. 87
Marks. Turkey. 87 Marks. Africa. 87 Marks. Narsinga. 87 Marks. Perou. 87
Marks. Noua Spagnia. 87 Marks. Egypt 94 Besses. Persia 87 Minas.
The premises are applied for our instruction in the handling of Mint affairs
more at large.

Here follows the description of the Measures.
WHereas all Commodities, Wares, or Stuffes made of wool, linen, silk, or
hair, are measured by the Elle, or Yeard, which was taken upon the measure or
length of the arm, accounting the half Elle for Cubitus, divided into four
quarters, and every quarter into four inches: we shall also follow the elle
at Antuerp, generally known and observed in all places, in the correspondence
and buying of foreign commodities by it, reducing the same afterward to our
elle or yeard.

The hundredth else of Antuerpe make in the countries following. Correspondence
of measurer.


ENGLAND.
London 60 Else for linen Cloth with the palm and thumb measured. 75 Yards
for woollen Cloth with the thumb which is 1/36 of a yard. 59 Gods to measure
Frizes or Frizadoes. 61 Else Cords to measure Rowan Canuas whereof the
Centener is 120 Else, 10 Cords to a Centener of 12 Else.
Scotland 72 Else, and they reckon with fix score to the hundredth, is 120.
THE LOVV COUNTRIES.
Antuerpe for silk wares is but 98 Else.

Bridges in the shops is also 98, but for linen is but 94 Else.

Gaunt all 98 Else, and all Flanders and Brabant accordingly, and not named
hereunder. Audenarde all 98 Else, and all Flanders and Brabant accordingly,
and not named hereunder. Ysenghem all 98 Else, and all Flanders and Brabant
accordingly, and not named hereunder. Damme all 98 Else, and all Flanders and
Brabant accordingly, and not named hereunder. Ipre all 98 Else, and all
Flanders and Brabant accordingly, and not named hereunder. Sluys all 98 Else,
and all Flanders and Brabant accordingly, and not named hereunder. Dunkercke
100 Else. Honscotten 100 Else.
Cassell, Wynockxborough, Deyse, Low,

Bolducke, Bruselles, Die, Louain make 102 Else.

Lile, Cambray, Doway, Orsies, Meanen and Masiers 96 Else.

Amsterdam 101. Harlem in the market 94 Else for linen.

All Holland besides is 103 Else.

Henault 94 in the markets, but in shops 98 Else.

Gelderland and Ouerry sell 104 Else.

Middelborough 100 Else, and in the market for linen 94 Else.

Flissingh 104 Else, Vere 94 Else, Goes 97 Else, Romerswall 99 Else.

Artois all the whole province 98 Else.

Tourney 108 Else.

Liege 114 Else.

Maestricht, Asselt, 104 Else.

Namen, and Acon 104 Else.

Couyn but 70 Else.

Hoye 102 Else.

FRANCE.
The said 100 Else of Antuerpe make at Rouen 58 Else, the Centener of Else
being 112 of 4 quarters of 28 Else.

Paris, Rochell, and all France, the following places excepted, 59 Else.

Nantes, Abbeuile, and all Picardie 84 Else.

Lions 60 Else for linen cloth* 94 Else for silk wares.
Auignon 60 Else. 36 Cannes.
Prouence -- 36 Cannes. Marselles 36 Cannes for silk. 33 Cannes for woollen
cloth.
Geneua 60 Stabb.
ITALY.
Venice 101 Braces for woollen cloth. Istrica 101 Braces for woollen cloth.
Piran 101 Braces for woollen cloth. Venice 108 for silks and cloth of gold.
Istrica 108 for silks and cloth of gold. Piran 108 for silks and cloth of
gold. Florence 122 Braces for silks. 116 Else for woollen cloth.
Rome 33 Cannes. 105 for woollen cloth.
Luca and Raguza 120. Ferrara, Modena, 107 Braces. Mantua, Perato, 107 Braces.
Ancona, Cesena, 107 Braces. Bologna, Carpi, 107 Braces. Nigropont, Mirandola.
107 Braces. Verona 104 Braces. 108 Braces of cloth of gold. 86 Braces.
Parma 109 Braces. 91 Braces.
Rauenna, Scio, Corfu 116. Genes 122 Braces. 288 Palms for silk wares, and
104 palms is given for 34 Else. 32 Cannes for woollen cloth of 9 palms the
cane. 29 Canes of linen cloth of 10 palms to the cane.
Vicenza 98 for woollen cloth, and 80 Braces for silks. Naples 116 Canes and
33 Canes. Padua 101 for cloth, and 83 Braces for silk wares. Milan 120 Braces
Campido for linen cloth. 141 Braces for silk, which must be conditioned.
Rauenna 113 Braces. Bressa, Treuira, 101 Braces. Crema, Bergamo, 101 Braces.
Rechanati, Vrbin, 101 Braces. Cremona, Lacaia. 101 Braces. Pesaro 103, and for
cloth 107 Braces. Sicilia, Palermo 34 Canes of 4 pichy to the Cane. Masilla --
34 Canes of 4 pichy to the Cane. Gira 124 Pichy, Rama 115 Pichy, Salonici 109
Pichy. Tripoli in Barbary 124 Pichy of 4 to a Cane. Lavalona 111 Nigroponte and
Lepanto 113 Pichy. Alexandria, Larta 124 Pichy. Siria, Damasco, Bruti 111
Pichy. Suria Tripoli 112 Pichy. Achri 115 Pichy. Alepo 108 Pichy. Aman 108
Pichy.
Bursa in Natolia 114 Pichy, Bucia 158 Pichy. Constantinople 113 Pichy. 80
Pichy for canuas.
Archipelago 100. Sapy -- 100. Puglia 31 Canes for clothes. 33 Canes for silks.
Calabria, Adler, Lansan, Malaca, Rhode, 33 Canes. Candia 108 Pichy, Sebenico,
Zara 112 Braces.
EASTLAND.
Embden 122 Else. Brema 122 Else. Hamborough 122 Else. Lubecke 120 Else.
Munster 65 Else. Osenbrigh 63 Else. Wismar 118 Else. Rosticke 119 Else.
Gripswoll 122 Else. Domyn 122 Else. Statin, Ockermond, 106 Else. Dansicke,
and Melvyn, 122 Else. Connixborough 125 Else. Riga and Revel 125 Else.
Narua 125 Arsins. Sweden and Stockholm 125 Else, but at Barrow uncertain, for
they measure the bigness of your head with a rope for an Elle, and may be 120
Else.
GERMANY.
Collen 120 Else. Norenborough 105 Else for silk and linen wares. Meysen
Lipsich 120 for cloth. Ausborough 127 for cloth. Franckford 125 for linen.
Halle and Meydelborch, 105 Else. Prage 111 Else, and for silk wares 120
Else. Breslo 111 Else, and for silk wares 120 Else. Bautson 111 Else, and
for silk wares 120 Else. Vienna 77 for linen, 85 for cloth and silk. Ofner
119 Regenburch 78 Else. 130 Regenburch 78 Else.
Vlm 120, and for woollen cloth 96 Else. Ernfurd 165 Else. Ienfer 60 Stabb.
Zurich 116 Else. Basell 125 Else.
SPAIN.
Castill and Toledo, 85 Varas of 4 Quartos, every Quarto 2 Palms. Cadez 81
Varas. 108 Else for silk.
Andaluzia, Seuill, Granado 83 Varas. Barselona, Aragon, 43 Cannes. Saragosia
33 Cannes. Valentia 73 Cannes.
PORTVGALL.
Lisborne 62 Varas. 83 Varas. 100 Couados for Silk Wares.
Maroco. Capo d'Algier 136 Couados, of twelve to one Cane.
The Measure of wet Commodities.
THe Romans in times past, called the wet Measure by Ounces, Difference
between pounds or ounces, Ponderales and Mensurales.
as we do the weight; accounting ten Ounces Ponderales, for twelve Ounces
Mensurales: so Sestarius Romanorum was eighteen Ounces weight Measure, and 21
Ounces Mensurales, or wet Measure.

At Meyson in Saxony twenty Ounces Ponderales, make twenty four Mensurales.

At Lypsich thirty two Ounces wet Measure, to 26 Ounces weight Measure; the
difference of correspondence from five to six.

A Hogshead of Wine weighs 500 ll, the Caske 50 ll: so in Wine 450 ll.

A Hogshead of Corn 400 ll, the Caske 50 ll, is Netto 350 ll in Corn.

So one Tun of Wine weighs Nett 1800 ll, and with the Caske 2000 ll.

And one Tun lading of Corn 1600 ll, being in Caske also.

Two Tons are accounted for one Last: so two Tons of Wine 4000 ll and
somewhat more; Observations for the lading of Ships by weight and measure.
and in Hogsheads there should be but parts of a Last.

At Dort in Holland, they call a great Vessel, a Rod of Wine, which weighed
4500 ll, as a Last of Corn; comparing these 4500 ll Mensurales, by reduction
of six to five, are 3750 ll Ponderales, is 12 Ames. Now if you account the
gallon of Wine of Antuerp to weigh 6 ll, the capacity of this Vessel is 15
Ames, being 750 gallons.

The Rod, is a Rod quadrant, of ten foot long, and ten foot broad, and one
foot deep, every foot containing 7 gallons Antuerps Measure, or 4 foot Cubice.

The Romans had a Measure called Amphora, of four great feet, as are used at
Paris, Cubice 64 foot of 11 of the Antuerp gallon: so you shall find the Rod of
750 gallons set down for so many ounces; and ten Mixiades for 1000 gallons
Dorts, in the lieu of pounds.

Amphora, of the Romans wet Measure, is 84 ll. or 72 ll. weight Measure, is 50
ll weight of Antuerp, and in --

Wine or rain water -- 50 ll. Of diverse River water -- 53 ll. Oil or Butter
-- 45 ll. Beans and Pease -- 35 ll. Linseed -- 39 ll. Corn -- 40 ll. Almonds
-- 42 ll. Raisins -- 49 ll. Figgs and Chestnuts -- 67 ll. Honey -- 75 ll.
Quickesiluer -- 850 ll.
Observations.
Pease grinded weigh more than Corn, the roundnesse gives cause to have more
roomth, and differs from 7 to 9.

Warm water lighter then cold water.
Warm water is lighter than cold water; and consequently the cold water, as the
heavier, will sooner run through a hole than the warm water, for the weight
of the cold water presses more.

Oil and all greasy things are light, and therefore swim above, and burn.
Distilled waters are yet lighter, and will swim above, the oil, and also
burn better, being more combustible.

The caske which is made for the keeping of wine does differ much; in France, a
tun of two pipes, three puncheons, and four hogheades, is every one of
these six Ames of Antuerps measure.

In Germany they call it a Fother, or the carriage of the drawing of two
horses, is called a Voeder wyns, and they account 2 Rodds for a fother of wine,
or ten French hogheads, every hoghead being an Ame of wine measure of Dort,
whereby they measure and account their wines, namely the Renish-wines coming
out of Germany, whereof the Staple is kept at Dort aforesaid. An Ame is 100
gallons or stoopen, and every Gallon is ten Schreaues, measuring thereby by the
great.

Of the correspondence of Wine Measures..
THe correspondence of Wine Measure is taken upon the vessel of 6 Ames Measure
of Antuerp, containing 300 Stoops, every Stoop weighing 6 pound called a Stone,
which 6 Ames make in

FRANCE.
At Paris and Orleans -- Four Hog-heads, lacking ten Stoops, every Hoghead 312
Stoops, and at Paris 36 Sextiers, every Sextier four quarts, every quart two
pints, is 288 pints or grains imitated as before, every pint is two Choppins
or Obles. Bourdeaux 4 Hogsheads. Lisborne 5 Hoshgeads. Auxere in Burgondy 3
Puncheons. Poictou 2 Pipes. Coniac 2 Pipes, or 4 Hogsheads. Ay and Artois 4
Hogsheads.
ENGLAND.
London 252 gallons, the gallon is half a bushel of Corn, and the Chus
measure of the Grecians. So an Ame is 42 gallons of wine.

SPAIN.
Romani -- Two Pipes of 150 Stoops, or 1 Butt and 9/20 every Butt, is at
Antuerp 158 Stoops. They measure by the Rooue of 30 ll, is 5 Stoops of Antuerp,
and every Butt contains thirty Rooues, and the Pipes contain thirty Rooues
of 28 ll weight. Seres or Sherry Two Pipes of 150 Stoops, or 1 Butt and 9/20
every Butt, is at Antuerp 158 Stoops. They measure by the Rooue of 30 ll, is 5
Stoops of Antuerp, and every Butt contains thirty Rooues, and the Pipes
contain thirty Rooues of 28 ll weight. Canarie -- Two Pipes of 150 Stoops, or
1 Butt and 9/20 every Butt, is at Antuerp 158 Stoops. They measure by the
Rooue of 30 ll, is 5 Stoops of Antuerp, and every Butt contains thirty
Rooues, and the Pipes contain thirty Rooues of 28 ll weight. Condado is 2
Butts. Madera 2 Pipes lacking 16 Stoops. Seuill 56 Rooues of Romani. A Rooue is
eight Somer, every Somer four Quartils, every Quartill is of a Stoop of
Antuerp. They deliver 27 and 28 Rooues in a Pipe. But Oil measure by 40 and 41
Rooues in the Pipe. Ansoy or Bastard, 2 Pipes 16 Stoops for the said 6 Ames.
PORTVGALL.
Lisborne 37 Almudas of 1 Rooues of Seuill. Every Almudas is 12 Couados, or
Somer, at Seuill. Cauodo is 4 quarts.

Oil Measure by Alqueri or Cantar, every Alqueri 6 Couados, every Cantar 4
Stoops of Antuerp.

Algarue 34 Star.

ITALY.
Florence 16 Barrells of 20 Fiaschi, or 18 Stoop of Antuerp, the three Barrels
is one Star, and Star is 54 Stoops Antuerp. Rome 7 1/7 Brenten, every Brent 96
Pockall or 13 Rubes or stones of 10 ll of 30 ounces in one Brent, or 42 stoops
of Antuerp for Honey, the pound is 44 ounces. Candia 80 Mostaches, in Butt of 34
and 35 Mostaches of 3 Stope. Bolognia 13 Corbes. Padua 1 1/25 Cara. The Oil is
by Millier of 1185 ll, is at Antuerp 1100, makes 152 Stopes in one Butt.
Venice 80 Mostati, the 38 make one Butt, and 76 an Amphora, 16 Quarti Besontz
measure the 4 one Bigontz Bigonts, is a French Hogs-head, one quart, eighteen
Stopes of Antuerp. 15 Quarti measure, Secchio, or small measure of four
Tischaufer. Amphora 4 Bigonts, or Bigontines. 16 Quarti Bigots measure. 18
Quarti Secchio.
Lagel, is a Puncheon, Amphora is two Ames, for Oil they measure by Amphora
also, and for Honey, but most by Milliar of 1210 ll. Verona 1 Cara. 14 Brentes,
every Brent 16 Basses. Oil by Milliar, of 1738 ll, is Brenten 8, and 11 Basses.
Ferrara, 12 Mastelli, of 8 Seccheio. Vicenza, 1 1/26 Cara, the Oil by the
Milliar of Venice. Treuiso, 11 Consi, the 10 one Cara. Corfu 37 Zare, or Sare.
Zante 37 Zare, or Sare. Istria, 15 Venas, Prian 12 Vrna, Tunes 60 Matali of 32
Rotules. Tripoli in Barbary, 45 Metares of 42 Rotules. Constantinopolis 180
Alms. 96 Alms of Oil, is at Venice a Milliar. Calabria 8 Salmes. Puglia 8
Salmes are French Barrels, Oil also 8 Salmes, every Salme, 10 Star, every Star
32 Pignatoli.
Of the Correspondence of Beer Measures.
THe Barrel of Beer is made according to the Ame of Antuerp, and against
spilling, accounted 54 Stoops in Flanders and Brabant.

The Barrel of Beer in Holland contains 54 Stoops at Amsterdam 56 Stoops,
accounting 60 Stoops for 64 Flemish.

At London the Barrel of Beer 36 gallons beer measure, is 48 gallons wine
measure. Every gallon of Beer is just two Stoops in Flanders, and at Amsterdam
1 Stoops.

The Barrel of Lubicke, is just 50 Stoopes of Antuerp.

The Fatt of Dansicke contains 180 Stoops, of Dansicke is Antuerp 81.

Old Measures of the Romans.
THe Latins and ancient Romans had Doleum which was 1, Culeus which was 2010 ll
weight of Antuerpe.

Culeus did contain 20 Amphora, being Amphora 80 ll Mensurales, and Ponderales
69 ll, makes the Culeus 1380 ll of Antuerpe.

Amphora (is yet almost in use in all Italy and Germany) was also called
Cadus. Quadrantal being a Tubb portable between Tu of a great foot Cubice,
also Ciraminium vini is as at London the bushel of corn of 8 gallons of wine,
weighed 60 ll of Antuerpe. Vina is Amphora Quod vrinet was a leaking bucket,
also a tankard wherewith water is carried at London. Three Vrnas was 16 Stoops
or a Sestier waighing 34 ll.

Congius was a pottell of farewell, of 1 stoop, or an English gallon, makes at
Meysen 3 pots, weighs 8 ll. Campsaces is the same. Sextarius is of Congeus,
or about one pint of Antuerpe.

There was Sextarius Castrensis of double the measure, which was used in the
wars to every soldier one daily, weighing 23 ounces.

Hemina is at Antuerpe and Meyssen half a pint, called also Allabastrum.
Triblium an oil glass weighed 11 ounces.

Acetabulum was a goblet to bring vinegar to the table of 3 ounces.

Ciatus, in Germany Bacherline, is 4 spoone-full, or a small romerken weighing
2 ounces, is the bigness of the egg of a hen.

Culeus is 20 Amphores. 40 Vrnas of 4 Congios. 160 Congios of 6 Sextarios. 960
Sextarios. 1920 Heminas. 3840 Quartas. 7680 Acetabula. 11520 Clatos or Ciatos.


Measures of the Grecians.
MEtrices a metiendo, called Artaba by the Egyptians, is 16 stoop, or a
Sestier, waighing 100 ll at Antuerpe.

Chus is Congius Romanorum, about 1 stoop, a drink of farewell which they did
drink one to another, weighed 8 ll.

Cotila is Romanorum Hemina (the Spartans in their feasts gave no more to
every one) is half a pint. The king had 2 weight 11 ounces.

Quartanius is of a pint, weighing 5 ounces.

Oxibaphum, is as Acetabulum of 3 ounces, or 1 Ciatos.

Metreta Laconica was less, as Amphora of the Romans of 96 Cotilas.

Modios or Medimios is 8 stoops of Antuerpe.

Metretes is 12 Chus, or 144 Cotilas, or 576 Oxibapha of 1 Ciatos.

Bats or Bathis is Metretes, or 6 Hinas every Hina 8 ll.

Logni is 5 Eggs of ll: there were three sorts of Eggs used.

Measures used by Physicians.
Metretes is 72 Sextarios of 4 Quartas. 288 Quartarios or 12 Choas of 6 Sextar.
72 Sextarios of 2 Cotilas. 144 Cotilas. 288 Quartas. 576 Oxibapha. 864 Ciatos.


Ciatos is 1 Ounces. 10 Dragma. 4 small Mistra. 3 great Mistra. 2 small
Conchas. great Conchas. 5 Chemas. 10 Cochlearia or Spoonful.


Measures of Arabia.
Dorath is Albi, Romans Amphora, Iohem is Congeus Romanorum.

Dorath is 8 Iohem. Cophinus 3 stoop. 48 Kift. Mares or Pontes, 1 stoop. 96
Corbin. Dadix 4 stoops, measures of 192 Kesiath. Boetia. 384 Cassich. 376
Cuatum. 2304 Salgerin.


Artaba measure of Egypt, is 72 Sextarios, of 72 Nations known (then in the
world) to be, Collatum is 6 stoops, Chenix a stoop, Hidria is 9 stoops, Phiala
or Briala is a guilt cup.

Of the correspondence of the Measures of Corn.
THe differences of the corn measures are very necessary to be known of all
merchants and masters of ships, letting thereupon their ships to freight; the
Last (which is two Tons lading) being the groundwork of it, used in all the
harbors of the sea coasts diversely. Four and twenty small Barrels are
accounted for a Last, as herring Barrels, being 18 beer Barrels, or 18 Ames of
Antuerpe, which are three Tons of wine; and yet we reckon two Tons of wine
for a Last, for two Tons of wine weigh the weight of a Last of corn, that is
to say, one hoghead 500 ll, the 2 Tons 4000 ll accordingly, and 12 Hogheads
of corn waighing 350 ll the Hoghead, besides the caske, is 4200 ll. But the
corn is laden Ioose, and fills the room full. One pound of wheat
contains about 9 thousand grains of wheat; and the Last of 4300 ll, is so
many nine thousand grains in a Last. The corn measure most known is in
Latin Modius, a measure, in Germany a Molder, in the Low Countries a Mudde,
in France Muy: and the Last differing in so many places, it is not amiss to
account the weight of a Last of wheat from 4200 to 4800 ll, the Last of Rye
from 4000 to 4200 ll, the Last of Barley from 3000 to 3400 ll: Oats are yet
lighter, which is the cause that the Oats measure is made bigger to
counteruaile the weight. We shall take our correspondence upon the Last of
Amsterdam, best known every where, and where also all grains are measured
alike. The Last of Amsterdam is 27 moyes, or mudden, every mudd 4 Schepel^s,
is 108 Schepells to the Last: or a Last is 29 sackes, every sack 3 Achtelings,
24 small Tons to a Last as aforesaid, or 20 meal Barrels, that is to say,
one Last of meal is put into 20 Barrels, because it becomes more depressed
than corn, or 15 great Barrels which do contain more.

It is also to be observed, that the difference of corn measure is of 6 upon
7, also 3 to 4, and 2 to 3, and in some places one will make two. And in many
towns upon the sea coasts they use two sorts of measures, the one called the
water measure, whereby the corn is measured on ship-boord (being always the
biggest,) the other is called land measure, because the corn is measured
thereby in all markets, shops, or places where corn is sold.

The Last of corn of Amsterdam is at the following places.
DAnsick, e56 Schepells, whereof 60 there make a Last, the 4 Schepells make one
Mudde, which is the Skippound of 340 ll. Embden 55 Werps, whereof 61 make the
Last, or 15 Barrells of 4 Werps.

Hamborough 83 Schepells, whereof 90 make a Last. Lubecke 85 Schepells, whereof
96 make the Last. Fameren 78 Schepells, whereof 96 to the Last. Heyleger haven
in Denmark 80 Schepells, also 96 to the Last. Coppenhauen 23 small barrells,
whereof 42 make a Last. Ebbeltorff Danic 23 barrells, whereof 36 to the Last.
Nelleboghe 23 barrells, whereof 42 to the Last. Sweaden 23 barrells.
Connixborough 6/7 of a Last, the 6 Last are 7 at Amsterdam. Melvyn 17/21 of a
Last. Statyn in Pomerland 6/7 of a Last. Riga 42 Loops, Rosticke and
Mecheborough measure of Lubecke Antuerpe 37 1/^ Vertules. Bruxells 10 Mudden,
and differing in all places of Brabant. Gaunt 4 Mudds, 7 Hal^ters of 12 to one
Mudd is 55 Hal^ters. Bridges 17 Hoot. Dunkircke 18 Rasiers water measure.
Middleborough 40 sackes is 41 to the Last in all Zeland. Dort 28 sackes.
Roterdam and Delfe 87 Achtelinges. Schoonhauen 88 Achtelinges. Enckhuysen,
Horn, Medenblick 42 sackes. Groeninghen 33 Mudds. Texell 58 Loops.

All other towes not situated upon the seacoasts we do omit, for this
correspondence is made considering the lading of ships.

London and all England is 10 quarters make one Last; but in the ordinary
lading 5 quarters are accounted for one tun lading. Calais 18 Rasiers does
agree with England. Roan 20 until 30 Mines, every Mine is 4 Bushels. Rochell
128 Bushels 4 to every Se^tier. Bourdeaux 38 Boissiaux, whereof 33 to the
Last. Seuill 54 Hanegas, a Last is 4 Cahis of 12 Hanegas. Lyxborne 225
Alquiers, whereof 240 to the Last, or 4 Moyos of 60

Alquiers ^o the Moyo, ano so in all the Islands of Portugal. Venice 32 Star.
Genoa 23 Mina. Sicilia 38 Medinnos of 6 Moyos. Puglia 32 Cara of 36 Timani.
Cyprus 40 Medinnos of 2 Cipros.

Note that the corn does so much differ in goodness, that the measure of
Amsterdam will weigh of Eastland Wheat 156 ll, of French Wheat 180 ll, of
Sicilia Wheat 224 ll, and of Africa 236 ll.

Of the Measures of Salt', correspondence and goodness of the same.
THe heavier the Salt is, so much the better; therefore old Salt which has
lain long, and is settled, is the better, and will most increase to make Salt
upon Salt, in yielding more naturally; in so much that in the boiling of it,
you must observe the wind, which is good at the North, but contrary in the
South. Salt will loose the first year between 8 and 10 in the hundredth, and
afterward but little. But for the Salt boyler, he loses nothing, it is so
much the heavier and better. Therefore in Eastland, at Riga and other places
they sell their Salt by weight, 12 Skippound for one Last, and in some places
15 and 16 Skippound; wherefore if you have new Salt deliver it by the measure,
and if old Salt then deliver by weight.

Profitable observations about Salt.
In the boiling or roasting of your salt, so called, it will augment or increase
in measure according to the weight. New Spanish Salt from 100 to 135, 140 and
more; and old Salt of 4 years lying made 100 to 200. This Salt is boiled by
degrees, and is rough in the handling of it; for it is not driven up with a
light fire, whereby it becomes waterish and weak, uot strong enough to salt
flesh withal.

The Salt of Portugal and Bruwage, increases 25 and 30 according to the
goodness: the white Salt being weak and of great grains, will lose much in the
remoouing, and more in the carriage, by 8 and 10 p^ cent.

To salt flesh withal, take of the slow boiled or roasted Salt, but make first
his Brine, otherwise it will be too weak.

One great hundred of Salt is four small hundreths.

We are to observe the correspondence of Salt against one hundredth of Zealand,
most known in all places: they measure their Salt with Barrels, 18 Barrels to
a Last, and 7 Last to the hundredth, is 126 Barrells.

At Armuyden in Zealand, they reckon 8 weighes for one hundredth, every weigh is
11 Sackes, every Sack four Measures, and 15 weighs of Bruwage Salt make the
great hundredth.

The Sackes of Salt of Armuyden, being 122 small Barrels for the 100 Sack,
make as follows in other places.
Bruwage 4/7 parts of one hundredth of 28 Moyos, and 12 Sackes to the Moyo, also
by Charges or Load; ten load in the hundredth, and 48 Moyos or Muys to the
Last, or 21 Barrel.

Lisborne 25 Moyos, Mary port 28 Moyos.

Saintubal 20 Cays. Calis 22 Cays.

Sanlucar 21 Cays.

Gaunt 108 Sackes or Barrels.

Antuerp 144 Vertels of 24 to the Last, and six Last to the hundredth, and the
white Salt is measured with a lesser Measure of 12 upon 100.

The said 100 Sackes of Salt of Armuyden in Zealand, make

At Dunkercke 92 Water-measures, or 104 Land-measures.

Ostend 98 Measures, Damme and Axels 102 Measures.

Bridges 104 measures, and Ypre 144.

Roterdam 100, whereof six make one Mudde of eighteen to the hundredth.

Amsterdam, Vtrecht, Deuenter, 102 Scheppels.

Calis in France 130 Barrels, 19 to the Last, but 20 by fraighting.

Roan, and almost all France 6 Muys.

Hamborch 7 Last, whereof 80 Barrells makes the hundredth.

Denmark 6 Last.

Sweaden 112 Tons or Barrels, 16 to the Last.

Embden 100 Barrels, 14 to our Last.

Lubeck 7 Lasts of 18 Barrels.

London 7 Lasts of 18 Herring Barrels, but by Waighes 11.

Venice and Prian 70 Mose.

The Measures of Woad, Hops, and Sea-coale.
VVOad of Thoulouze in France, made up in Baskets of 56 ll weight, is at
Antuerp 50 ll, London 52 ll. Four Baskets are one Load and four Bales, or 400
ll is reckoned for a Diars Trial, and at London they take four Quintalls of
112 ll for a Trial, to know how many short Clothes of 24 yeards it will dye,
which is commonly of Islands Woad from Saint Michael 7 Clothes: And at Thouloze
they account that Woad of 36 Frankes, or about 4 pound sterling, dies 13
Clothes.

Cane in France they measure by a Tub, containing 8 Measures or Sackes, every
Measure 120 ll, is the Coope at Antuerp 1050 ll, accounted for a Trial, but is
far inferior in goodness to Thouloze Woad.

Eldfoord in Germany, there one great Drifatt of 1200 ll is a Trial.

Hoppes were wont to be sold by the Measure, but now it is done by weight,
namely the hundredth, or by a Skippound of Amsterdam of 300 ll, which coming
much into England from the following places, is worthy the observation, albeit
English Hopps are the best.

The Skippound of 300 ll of Amsterdam is -- Bridges 13 Hoett, but now measured.
Gaunt 23 Halsters. Delft 40 Achtelings. Schoonhouen 37 Achtelings. Vtrecht 13
Muddes. Bolduc or Hertogenbosh, 8 Hoet. Harlem 2 Hoet. Hamborough 1 Wispell.


The Measure of Sea-Coale.
THis measure must of necessity be taken upon the Chalder of New Castle,
where the greatest quantity of Coals is found: They measure there by the
Chalder filled up, whereof 7 Chalders make one Last, and is measured with
giving twenty one for twenty, the correspondence is;

The Last of New Castle of 7 Chalders, is -- London and Yarmouth 10 Chalders.
Roan 100 Barrels, giving 104 for 100. Bridges and Ostend 100 Measures for Oats.
Dort 12 Hoet, also by Waighes of 144 ll of 24 Stones of 6 ll. Gaunt 144 Sackes,
or 24 Muddes. Alst 200 Muddes. Antuerp 175 Vertels. Condet 44 Muys, the 80 make
a Cherke. Zealand 68 Herring Barrels. Middleborough by Weigh of 180 ll.
Amsterdam 13 Hoet of 38 Measures.


Rules to know the goodness of Sea-Coales
1 TAke your Coal and hold the same over a candle, or rather over a flaming
fire, and if the Coal do melt (as it were) drop or fry, then it is
undoubtedly good Coal; for this is an argument of his fattie and sulphurious
nature, which ministers store of food for the fire. But if the same grow hard
and dry over the flame, it is a sign of a lean and hungry Coal, and such as
will not cake or knit in the burning.

2 The brightness and glistering of the Coal, both within and without, is
some argument of his goodness, albeit that some kind of bad Sea-coale, newly
dug out of the Mine, and brought dry in Summer time, will both show and
break fair, but most commonly if it break in the color or luster of Pitch,
it proves a good Coal to the buyer. But without all question, if the same
be of a dark, duskie, and dead earthly color, it is utterly unprofitable for
him that shall spend it.

3 The best and most assured proof (except the making of a fire with them,
wherein no man of any sense can easily be deceived) is the lightness of the
Coals in weight. This weight, as in many other bodies, so especially in water,
does either argue his pureness or impuritie; for the lighter and cleerer
waters are ever held the better and more wholesome, as least participating with
earth: now by the weight of half a Pecke of the good ones kept by you, trial
may be made at all times, for bad Coal is much displeasing to all men.

Of the Weights and Measures of England.
COncerning weights, for difference in the ounces and the pounds, we are to
observe the Troy weight, Troy weight.
which has but twelve ounces to the pound; and Auoirdupois weight, which has
sixteen ounces to the pound, which are lesser ounces; for these 16 ounces make
but 14 ounces and one half, and two penny weight of the ounces Troy, used in
the Mint, where 136 ll Auoirdupois Subtle weight, is but 100 ll Subtle Troy
weight. So accounted in the last Copper monyes, of pence and half pence made
for Ireland. Auoirdupois weight.


The Troy weight serves only for Bread, Gold, Silver, and Electuaries,
accounted eight pound to the gallon, and so by computation sixteen pound to
the Pecke, 32 ll to the half Bushel, and 64 ll to the Bushel.

The Auoirdupois weight serves to weigh Butter, Cheese, Flesh, Tallow, Wax,
and every other thing which bears the name of Garbell, and whereof issues a
refuse or waste. So 7 ll of this weight to the gallon for Wheat, is 14 ll the
Pecke, 28 ll the half Bushel, and 56 ll the Bushel.

Correspondence of the said weight.
The 7 ll Auoirdupois weight, are one hundredth and two ounces Troy weight,
according to which rate the quarter of Wheat must weigh 448 ll Auoirdupois; and
14 ll Auoirdupois, and 16 ll 11 ounces Troy, do justly accord, or 56 ll
Auoirdupois, and 67 ll 8 ounces Troy: where note that one penny starling, is
the twentieth part of an ounce Troy, the half penny and farthing accordingly.
And that 7 ll 12 s. starling is 84 ounces and one half, and two penny weight
of Troy. And 6 ll 18 s. starling, is 82 ounces 3 quarters of an ounce, and one
penny Troy. From the which 2 Assizes, the white wheaten and household breads are
calculated and drawn.

The measure drawn from the Troy weight.
For the wet Measure is also drawn from the pound weight Troy, both by land and
within shipboord, as also all manner of Corn and grain, that is to say, The
weight of twelve ounces Troy in wheat, do make a concaue or hollow measure
named a Pint, and eight of the same pintes make a gallon of Wine, Ale, Beer,
and Corn, according to the Standard of his Majesty's Exchequer, and the Acts
of Parliament 11 and 12 H. 7. But for the water Measure within Shipboord, there
is allowed ten gallons to the Bushel, which contain five Peckes.

The content of Caske.
From this Troy weight and measure, is drawn also the Assize for the quantity
and true content of all manner of Caske, lawful and vendible within the Realm
of England, that is to say, Every Hogshead to contain threescore and three
Gallons; every Tierce four score and four Gallons; every Pipe 126 Gallons,
and every Tun 252 Gallons.

Salmon, Herring, Eeles. Soap measure.
There is also a measure called Salmon Butt of 84 gallons: so the Barrel of
Salmon 42 Gallons, the half 21. The Herring Barrel is 32 Gallons, and the
Eele Barrel 42 Gallons, and the half and Firken of both these must hold
accordingly; the Soape Barrel 32 Gallons.

The weight of Cheese and Butter.
There is also the true weight of Cheese and Butter, called the weigh, which is
112 ll Auoirdupois to the hundredth: so the two hundredth is 224 ll, containing
32 Cloves, and every Cloue 7 ll: so the weigh of Suffolk Cheese is 256 ll
Auoirdupois weight: but the weigh of Essex Cheese, is 336 ll.

The Sack of Wool.
The Sack of Wool is 364 ll weight of Auoirdupois, two Weighes of Wool make a
Sack, and 12 Sackes make a Last. But a Last of Herrings contains ten
thousand, A Last of Herring.
and every thousand contain ten hundredth.

Load of Lead.
The Load of Lead is 175 ll; the Fother makes nineteen hundredth and one half.

Concerning MEASVRES.
Yeard.
THere is a yeard derived from the Grains of Barley. Three Barley Corns in
length make an inch, and twelve inches one foot, and three foot to the yeard,
and 16 foot make a Pole or Perch to measure land withal. Pearches.
Albeit this Perch does vary in some places, being 18 and 21 foot. Of these
Pearches 40 in length and 4 in breadth make the Acre of land or wood. Acre of
land.
Whereupon Pliny lib. 2. cap. 23. deriueth Stadium to be a Furlong, Furlong.
which contains 125 Paces, every Pace 5 Foot, the Foot is to contain 4
Palms, and every Palm 4 Fingers breadth.

The breadth of silk Cypers, bending and Curld.
No. 6 is 3 Nails broad, no. 8 is 3 Nails, Breadth of Cypers.
and no. 10 is of a yard broad, no. 12 is 5/16 of a yard, no. 14 is of a yard,
no. 16 is 7/10 of a yard, no. 18 is a yard broad. Note in all plain Cypers
they abate 10 upon the hundredth, and so bring them from Braces into Flemish
Else, and in the curld they abate 25 per cent. and in bending 16 in the
hundredth.

Genes silk by the Paune of 104 to the hundredth is 26 yards English. Of silk
wares.


Bolonia silks by Braces the 100 are 89 Flemish Else.

Florence silk by Braces the hundredth 81 Flemish, and 61 English.

Luca by Braces the part of a Flemish Elle, or of a yard English.

Venice by Braces the 100 are 95 Flemish, and 71 yards so Norenborgh.

Seuill by Varres the 100 is 123 Flemish, and 92 yards 74 Else.

Roan by Else the 100 is 125 yards, and 157 Varres of Spain. And the 110
Else English is 135 Varres of Spain.

The 100 Else Flemish is but 60 Else English.

There are 8 Bushells in a Quarter, Corn measure as before.
five Quarters to a Tun lading, and ten Quarters a Last, but always 10 or 10
for a Last of Holland.

Salt forty Bushels make a Weigh, Salt.
water measure of ten Gallons.

At Plymouth they measure by a Bushel, alien measure, whereof 24 make a Tun,
and eight make a Quarter, so three Quarters make one Tun, and every Bushel
is eighteen Gallons: so that a Tun of Salt at Plymouth is bigger than a
Weigh of London by 32 Gallons.

The Measures of Lands.
THe measuring of Lands in distance or length extending to miles, or the
partition of Lands by Measures, Acres, Arpentiers, Bunderen etc. is done by a
Measure or Road, which is divided in 10, 12, 14, 16, or 20 Foot: and the Foot
is divided in a certain number of Inches, 10, 12, or 16, which are also
differing in bigness.

Digitus or Finger, is in breadth 4 Barley corns laid close together.

A Thumb or Inch is 6 Grains or Barley corns, making two of them three.

Ouncia is 3 Fingers or 2 Thumbes.

Palma (in Greek Doron) is 4 Fingers, is the 24 part of a man's stature.

Lichas or Dichas is a Span of a hand with the Thumb and forefinger, or ten
Fingers; sometimes taken for two Palms which is eight Fingers.

Orthodoron in Greek is the length of a man's hand, or 11 Fingers.

Spithama or Span with the Thumb and the little Finger is 16 Digiti or
Fingers, also Greciaries 12 Fingers, is 3 Palma in Latin Dodrans.

Pes a Foot is 16 Fingers or 4 Palms, or the of a proportionated man's stature.

Pigme is 18 Fingers, so a Pigme is a tall fellow.

Pigori is 20 Fingers, called Cubitus, from the elbow to the fingers doubled.

Cubitus is 24 Fingers, or 6 Palms, is of a man's stature or Sesquipes 1 Foot,
or 2 Dodrantes from the elbow to the point of the longest finger.

Gradus a step is two Foot, or 32 Fingers, as between both feet distant.

Passus simplex is 2 Foot, half a remove of the body.

Passus is a Pace, with 2 legs making from the heel to the toe 5 Foot.

Orgia or a Fathom, is 6 foot, in Latin Vlna or 4 Cubicos.

Stadium is Aulus of 125 Paces of 2 foot, is 312 foot. Greece 100 Paces was the
running of one man with one breath, as Hercules did.

Diaulus is 2 Stadia Hippicon, 4 Stadia the running of a horse.

Dolicos is 12 Stadia, about the sixth part of a Dutch mile.

Signs, or Scena, or Funiculus in Egypt is 60 Stadia, is an hours going, and
every man did draw the line going up by boat.

Stadmos was a Posts journey.

Miliare vel Leuca are diverse. But a Flemish mile is 1400 Roads.

Gradus Geometrorum, wherewith the world is measured round about, is 15 miles,
so the world is 360 Gradus, in toto 5400 miles, or at 4 miles for one
Geometrical mile, is 21600 miles.

The most commodious measure and more usual is the Road of 14 foot, rather
than our perch of 16 foot, and one hundredth of these Roads are called a Line
of land, and three line make a great Measure of land, so called by the name
Measure, whereupon we now proceed.

A Line of land, lying one foot broad, the length of a mile, and a plough going
one foot broad may be accounted to go a mile, the land square 100 foot for a
Road, and the Line of land one Road broad is 10600 foot.

A Line square is 10 thousand Roads, or 33 Measures as aforesaid.

For a Measure is 300 Roads, and square 17 Roads, containing 58800 Foot.

This Road is called in Germany Pertica making there 15 Foot, and in Flaunders
accounting 1400 Roads for a mile is 10600 Foot in length.

A way one Road broad, is called a highway for passengers Pedanticall.

A mile in length contains 4 Measures of land: the way of a wagon is
accounted 9 Measures.

Some in Flaunders do reckon 1000 Roads for a mile, but is of 20 Foot the Road.

Miliare was the distance or marching of a camp, without baiting, called
Rastrum or Rastas, was 4000 paces.

The difference between miles is not to be reconciled, every country having
their own computation, and that differing in most places within themselves.

In Saxony a mile is 4000 Paces, in other places in Germany 5000 Paces.

In France they call them Lieux or Leucas, and in a parleament there it was
appointed to be 1000 turnings of the wheels of a Wagon, whereof the foremost
made wheel was 12, and the hindmost 18 foot, which between was adjudged upon
15 Foot, is of a Dutch mile but.

In Spain one Dutch mile makes one mile and one half.

In England 4 of their miles to one Dutch mile, being there 1000 Paces.

In Italy 1000 Paces, whereof the 3 is a Duch mile.

Florence 3000 Braces for a mile of 6 Roads, is 1300 Roades.

Holland 2000 Roads is 5 Holland miles for 4 Flaunders miles.

In Egypt their Cubitus Geometricus is 6 of our Cubits, they reckon by Scena
which is a Spanish mile.

Persia Parasangia of 30 Stadia or Funiculi, they measure with 24 fingers the
cubit, and Cubicus Regius is 27 Fingers.

The Romans did use the Finger, Palm, and the Foot making four Palms.

In the measuring of lands and ways, diverse measures were by the said Romans
divided into 12 ounces, and the ounce in 24 scruples, and so they called a foot
a pound, and 2 foot Dupondium.

The Emperors tables were four foot square every way, yet in use in Germany
and the East-countries; but in England, France, and the Low Countries are
longer than broad, is to sit 16 persons every where.

Iugerum is used as a measure in Castilia and about Rome, being an old measure.
Iuger quasi Iunctus being one days labor of two oxen at the plough, vno iugo
Bovum, was the space of 240 Foot, broad 120, containing 28800, which is
correspondent to one half great Measure of land, wherein they did also use
many divisions and subdiuisions according to the pound weight.

Of the nature and diversity of Colors.
ALbeit that colors are not comprehended in themselves under weight and
measure, yet because the quantity of the stuff whereby things are dyed, are
done by weight, as you may note in the precedent observation of Woad; and for
that merchants may give the better judgment of colors, knowing the nature
thereof, I have thought good (for varieties sake) to entreat thereof.

The nature of all colors is confined between White and Black, and the
original colors proceeding and relating to the middle of them, which is
Green, for so experience has taught us in progress of time, by long
observation, wherein by Art I have found the truth by variation without the
mystery of dying, more certain than Aristotle or other Philosophers by reason
have conceived, according to the Theoricke part by them described, which by the
Practicke part I am assured of by experience as aforesaid.

The original or primarie colors are seven, as complete in number, and all
other colors are mixed and derived from them according to the order following.

Albus, White easily converted by decay of nature. Flanus, Yellow easily
converted by decay of nature. Puniceus, light Red, is neither Blew nor Purple.
Viridis, Green, apt to be made into Blew. Purpureus, Purple easily turned to
Black. Caruleus, Blew easily turned to Black. Niger, Black, the true ground
whereof is Blew.
All colors are light or obscure, Lucida vel Opaca, and they all (except
Black) may be called light, as more or less partaking thereof.

In White is most light, and shadow or darkness least or none at all. In Blew is
the contrary, most shadow and less light. In Yellow is inward light and less
obscurity. In Purple is the contrary, inward obscurity and less light. In
Green, is equality of light and darkness. In light Red, is more light than
obscurity.
So that for too much want of obscurity comes whiteness, and for too much
want of White or lightness, comes blackness; and a cloth dyed Yellow being
put into the Blew woaded vessel, makes an excellent Green.

There was light and darkness before the Planet of the Sun was created,
albeit the distinction between day and night is ascribed to the Sun. Now the
Moon has no light, but what the Sun does impart unto her, and the colors
of the Rainbow in the day time, being produced by the four Elements, do
approve these colors to be so in nature, whereof the Philosophers have given
a reason accordingly. But considering the curiosity of them, and especially of
Aristotle, it is strange unto me that they have not made mention of the colors
of the Rainbow in the night time, when the Moon is at full, and opposite to
the Sun, which colors nevertheless take a reflection upon the clouds and
obscurity of the night, far differing from the color of the Rainbow in the
day time upon the declination of the Sun; insomuch that albeit all colors must
be discerned by light, and so judged accordingly, yet their operation does
differ very much, as may be showed. The property of all colors is to be
subject to the air and Sun, and all of them do vanish; but in the black it
is least seen, and is also the surest, having his ground upon the blew; so it
be a blew substantial of Woad or Indico, which is the extraction of the Herb
Glaustum, or Anill, in the East and West Indies like unto our green Woad; but
the leaves of it are round and not long, howbeit the climate and ground make
the maine difference.

There was of late years, two great controversies at the Council Table: the
one concerning the dying of Black-silke, Dying of Black silk.
called London Dye; the other concerning the use of Log-wood, being a false
glorious color.

Concerning the London dye of Silk it was proved, that one pound of 16 ounces
was by sophistications of additements augmented to 32 ounces, and forty
ounces: which fraud comes to pass, by reason of the gummy matter or
substance whereof the silk was not purged for black dye, as it is in colors,
whereby it made such an increase in weight. To prevent this abuse, a
Corporation of Silke-men were made; and nevertheless, forasmuch that a
reasonable increase of 8 ounces, does look fairer, and can be better used,
there remained a tolleration of this increase in London. The way to find out
the fraud was by controlling the weight by measure, which by convulsion
becomes contracted: so that if the silk being purged decreaseth 16 ounces to
13 and 12, will moderately have afterward some increase; then this silk being
measured by the yard in Skeanes, and marked with Leads, and so delivered to the
Dyar, must be received accordingly without such contraction and decrease of
length, by the increase of weight, these two controlling each other.

The indifferent course therefore, is the golden mean; Dying by the help of
Logwood.
so is it done concerning Log-wood, being good cheap and fit for dying of a
fair color, although vanishing, serving for the poor people, wearing couse
Stuff, or using things of small value: that notwithstanding that the use of it
was prohibited, as well as the importation, yet now of late there is a
competent quantity admitted to be used by Letters Pattent, and Proclamation.

A Table of the Standard, for the true making of Woollen Clothes, according to
the Weight and Measure declared by the Statute made in the fourth year of his
Majesty's reign of Great Britain, etc.
THe Sack of Wool appointed by King Edward the third, is distinguished
according to the Lunare year of 13 months, of 28 days, making in all 364
ll, or 365 ll, for so many days in the year; the Todd of Wool being 28 ll,
for so many days in the month; and 13 Todds for so many months in the year;
every Todd containing four Nails, and every Nail being 7 ll, for the seven
days of the week.

This Sack of Wool is accounted to make 4 Standard Clothes of clean Wool,
called Sorting-clothes, waighing 60 ll the Cloth, and being 24 yeards long, of
6 quarters broad or thereabouts, within the remedy or allowance of 2 ll weight
upon a cloth.

In the weight is to be observed, that the clothes be well scoured, thicked,
milled, and fully dried.

In the Measure likewise, that the same be measured by the yeard and inch,
within the List, concerning the breadth, according to the said Statute made of
all the several sorts of Clothes made in diverse Shires, Viz.

Broad. Weight, and Measure. Kent, Yor. and Read. clothes of 6 quarters 86 ll
30 and 34 yeards. Suffolk, Norffolke, and Essex of 7 quar. 80 ll 29 and 32
yeards. Worcest. Covent. and Heref. of 6 quar. 78 ll 30 and 33 yeards. Wilts.
Glocest. Oxon. Summers. of 7 quar. 76 ll 29 and 32 yeards. Suffolk sorting
Clothes broad 6 quar. 64 ll 23 and 26 yeards. All sorting Clothes of diverse
shires 6 q. 60 ll 24 and 26 yeards. B. Cloth, Tauntons, Bridgewaters and
Dunstars -- of 7 quar. 30 ll 12 and 13 yeards. Broad and narrow of Yorkshire of
4 quar. 30 ll 24 25 yeards. Deuon. Kerseys and Dozens -- of 4 quar. 13 ll 12 13
yeards. Check. Kerseys, straict and plain grayes 4 q. 24 ll 17 18 yeards.
Ordinary Penistone or Forests 5 quar. 28 ll 12 13 yeards. Sorting Penistones of
6 quar. -- 35 ll 13 14 yeards. Washers of Lankyshire and others -- 17 ll 17 18
yeards. Clogware, Kend. Karpnuales at pleasure, 20 at the lest.

The manner of making of all Woollen Clothes, and workemens orders, with the
viewing, searching, and the forfeitures or abatements, may at large be seen by
the said Statute: being an Epitome of all former Acts concerning the indraping
of Wools, appointing wherein Flocks, Thrums, or Lambs wool may be put.

Observations concerning the said Weight and Measure of Clothes in general.
THat all Substantial things, either dry or liquid, are by Divine providence
subject and governed by Number, Weight, and Measure.

That Weight and Measure do control each other, and that Number gives
denomination to them both, to discern truth from falsehood, as aforesaid.

That the weight of a Cloth is more to be regarded, than the Measure, because
the weight contains substance; which is abused by stretching it in measure.

That according to the Standard of Clothes, there must be allowed or accounted
two pounds and one half of Wool, to make one yeard of the abouesaid Clothes.

That the Statute of Clothmaking, has had a consideration to make an allowance
or abatement for Draped, Dressed, Rowed, and Sheared Clothes, which is five ll
in a Long-cloth, and four ll in a Broad-cloth, besides the remedy of two ll.

According to this Rule, his Majesty's Custom for Cloth and Carseyes, etc.
ought to be paid, equalizing the said Custom of Cloth, with the Custom of
Wool, according to forty shillings the Sack, paid in the time of Queen
Mary; which is to be done according to the weight, and not according to the
measure, as heretofore has been partly done. And the weight will cause
Clothes to be better made, according to the Statute whereunto the Reformation
must be reduced, which will be beneficial.

Benefits which will arise by the true making of Clothes in England, according
to the Statute made in the fourth year of his Majesty's reign of Great
Britain.
THe Cloth of the Realm shall recover his former estimation, which every
Merchant (weighing his Clothes) will cause to be observed, according to the
said rule and proportion between weight and measure, whereby the stretching
and falsifying of Cloth will be controlled and prevented, especially if this
demonstration (here set down) shall direct the buyer of Clothes. And the like
may be made for Carseyes and all other woollen commodities, according to the
said Statute.

The Cloth being truly made, will be more vendible beyond the Seas, where many
complaints are daily made of the false making thereof; which the Clothier
cannot but know, upon so many Certificates for Tare as are abated of them to
their loss: every Merchant looking more to buy good cheap, than to buy good
Cloth, feeding false making by it, which comes to pass more by ignorance
than otherwise.

The Clothier finding the Merchant by these means able to control him, will
endeavor to make true Cloth, and the Officers to survey it will be more
careful, and not send the Clothier their Leads and Stamp, and so they be
paid, never look to take pains to view the Cloth; hereby traffic will
increase for the general good of the Realm, and his Majesty's Custom will be
duly paid, according to the said Statute, and all will tend to the glory of
God, and honor of the King, in all Equity and Justice to be observed in all
well governed Commonweals.

Weights and Measures control each other.
We may perceive by the contents of this Discourse, how weight and measure does
control each other: compare your measure of Corn with the weight, as before is
declared; your length of Clothes with the weight as aforesaid; nay your wet
Measures, with your dry Measures of all things of that nature, and experience
by observation will teach you to distinguish truth from falsehood, and how to
know the goodness of things; if Spices become light, then the weight will show
it, because the substance is dried up; which to prevent is wisdom and no
deceit: For as the Element of air is the cause of putrefaction, so the
excluding of the same in many things, is a preservation, and so is likewise the
preventing of dryness. But to end this Trial of measure and weight, let us
observe the Italians by weighing and measuring of their Silk wares. A yard of
Satine weighs four ounces, being truly made, and if it be above, they take
the same to be ouergummed, and not truly made, and so if i^ weigh less.

CHAP. V. Of the three Essential Parts of Traffic, namely, Commodities,
Money, and Exchange of Money by Bills of Exchanges.
ALL the traffic and commerce between Nation and Nation, or man and man, is
performed under three Simples, which are properly the Essential parts of
Traffic: Namely, Commodities, Money, and Exchange for Money by Bills of
Exchanges: which is effected by Number, Weight, and Measure, according to the
former observation.

A Tripartite Exchange.
And herein is to be considered a Tripartite Exchange, That is; Commodities for
Commodities. Commodities for Money, and Commodities for exchange of Money, by
Bills of exchange.


For some Merchants do negotiate all for Commodities, others all for Money, or
Exchanges, or for all three or any of them which yields them most benefit and
gain: and herein is their particular profit, or Priuatum Commodam, more
respected than the general good of the commonwealth, whereby corruptible and
unnecessary commodities are given for Staple wares and durable commodities, to
the impouerishing of kingdoms and commonweals. And not only is this
commutation or exchange abused in kind, but also in the price, paying too dear
for the one, and selling the other too good cheap: whereby comes an
ouer-ballancing of Commodities in price and quality, and not in quantity;
whereby in effect, Ouer-ballancing of Commodities.
Moneys are given to boot, and as it were over and above the reasonable
estimation of things; and herein is the course of Exchanges by Bills
predominant, and ouer-ruling both the course of Commodities, and Money, as
shall be at large demonstrated hereafter.

For the said three essential parts of Traffic are properly the Body,
Soul, and Spirit of Commerce, The Body, Soul, and Spirit of traffic.
and have their opperation accordingly.

The first as the Body vpheld the world by commutation and bartring of
Commodities, until Money was devised to be coined.

The second, as the Soul in the Body, did infuse life to traffic, by the
means of Equality and Equity, preventing advantage between buyers and sellers.

The third, as the Spirit and faculty of the Soul (being seated every where)
corroborateth the vital Spirit of traffic, directing and controlling (by
just proportions) the prices and values of Commodities and Moneys.

True it is, that this Spirit and faculty of the Soul, namely the Exchange
for Money, takes his original from the Soul, which gives life to the body
of traffic; that is to say, The exchange for Moneys by Bills of Exchanges, is
grounded upon Moneys, and Moneys were invented and made by common consent to be
the rule and square to set a price unto all things, and the right and true
judges of them; and is therefore called Publica Mensura, Money the public
measure at home.
or the public measure between man and man. But since the manner of Exchange
was invented between nations and nations, or country and countries, Moneys
did only remain the public measure within the realms or commonweales of
every country, between man and man, according to the valuation of Princes
and States imposed upon Moneys: and the Exchange of Moneys by Bills became
Publica Mensura between us and foreign nations, and between all nations in
the course of commerce, Exchange for Moneys the public measure between
nations.
according to which Exchangeal Commodities are bought and sold. And albeit that
the abundance or quantity of Commodities, and the many or few buyers, or the
scarcity of Commodities, causes the prices of Commodities to rise and fall;
and likewise that plenty of Money makes things dear, and scarcity of Money
makes them good cheap, as a property inherent unto Money as a true measure:
yet we must observe in true order, That both Commodities and Money are Passive,
Commodities and Money are things passive.
since the exchange was invented, which is only Active, and that in countries
where all the essential parts of traffic are used. But howsoever, the Maxim
is to be observed in the avoiding of the said ouer-ballancing of Commodities in
price and quality. Marcus Cato therefore says advisedly: Oportet patrem
familias esse Vendacem, non emacem.

A prince therefore (as the father of the commonwealth) ought to be a seller
and not a buyer, which comes to pass when the expenses of his commonwealth
do not exceed his incomes and revenues: this to be effected by keeping a
certain equality in the traffic betwixt his kingdom and foreign nations.
Natural riches Artificial riches.
For riches being natural, or artificial, and both subject to Number, Weight,
and Measure, requires a certain equality in the true co^mutation of things
between us and other nations. Justice distributive and commutatiue.
And justice being distributive and commutatiue, every man of judgment
knows, that this part is comprehended under justice commutatiue; and that all
traffic consists of the land Commodities* Land Commodities. Sea Commodities.
and of the Commodities of the seas, and lastly of the Commodities of other
countries and nations. For God caused Nature to distribute her benefits or his
blessings to several clymats, supplying the barrenness of ^some things in one
country with the fruitfulness and store of other countries, to the end that
interchangeably one commonweal should live with another.

These Aphorisms or selected points are of great importance: for (as is noted
before) gain being the scope of all merchants, is procured without regard had
to the commonwealth; the wealth whereof cannot properly decrease but three
manner of ways, Proper causes of the decrease of wealth in a State.
namely by selling our home Commodities too good cheap; by buying the foreine
Commodities too dear; and by the transportation of Monys in specie, when the
exchange of monys does not answer the true value of it, by Bills of Exchanges;
as shall be plainly demonstrated.

Exchange the Rudder of traffic.
For this Exchange is the Rudder of the ship of Traffic, fastened upon the
Parallel of the keele of Equity, which does rule and direct the said ship upon
all the variations of the Commodities of all countries. Many men knowing that
the Rudder does govern the ship, can notwithstanding give little reason of the
cause of it, but admire to see so small a piece of timber have so great an
operation; yet no man is so foolish as to attribute that power unto the sails
or any other appurtenances of the ship, or to the maine body of it called the
hull of the ship. Great is the error therefore of those that will ascribe any
effectual operation to the quantity of Commodities, albeit there was a
traffic and commerce without either Money or Exchange for Money, when the
course of it was like a ship sailing without Rudder or Compass.

Money may well be compared to the Compass, Money as the Compass of a Ship,
and Exchange the Rudder.
having so many variations upon the several standards of the coins of all
countries, and changing continually from time to time in valuation; Princes and
Commonweals taking advantage one against another, either to draw treasure
into their Kingdoms and Territories, or to advance the price of their country
Commodities. And Exchange may properly be compared to the Rudder of a Ship,
which commands the directions of the Compass accordingly, and so does the
Exchange command the course of Money: for let the standards of Moneys be
altered either in weight, finenesse, or valuation, the Exchange by altering the
price (with great facility) according to equity is able to meet and overrule
them all, as shall be declared in the progress of this book.

The learned have determined, Principles or Axioms what they are etc.
that no argument or disputation is to be maintained with those that will deny
Principles, which by reason and common consent are indisputable, and stand of
their own authority: for by an undoubted Principle or Axiom we know, That
the whole is bigger than his part, that two is more than one, and that two
equal things being equally divided into a third, are all equal.

The knowledge of the premises is so naturally and visibly engraffed in the
mind of man, as no doubt can be admitted: nevertheless there are men so
intoxicated in their judgments, that being once possessed of an imaginary
conceit, they will never be removed; as he was who asked of his friend, What he
should do with a heap of stones and trash to be rid of it? and was answered,
That he should dig a hole in the ground and bury them; and when the other
demanded of him, what he should do with the earth he should dig out? he told
him he should make the hole so much bigger to put them in both, and he could
never be recalled from this conceit, even in natural and substantial things
to be felt, seen, and handled; insomuch that experience shows, that digging
an hole, one shall hardly put in the same earth again, without cramming and
labor, much less the other.

The Pithagorians doctrine lately revived by Copernicus, touching the
situation and moving of the bodies Celestial, denying the stabilitie of the
earth, may in some measure be admitted argumentandi gratia; for they set forth
some Astronomicall demonstration, Copernicus his opinion of the motion of the
earth.
albeit imaginary, and declare some reasons agreeable to experience, namely
that the Orb of the fixed Stars is of all other the most highest and
farthest distant, and comprehends the other Spheres of wandering Stars. And
of the straying bodies called Planets, the old Philosophers thought it a good
ground in Reason, that the nighest to the Center should swiftliest move,
because the Circle was least, and thereby the sooner ouerpassed, and the
farther distant, the more slowly: and upon this consideration, because of the
swift course of the Moon, they did conclude, that the whole Globe of Elements
was enclosed within the Moons Sphere, together with the earth as the Center of
the same, to be by this great Orb, together with the other Planets about the
Sun turned, making by his revolution one year; and whatsoever seems to us
to proceed by the moving of the Sun, the same to proceed indeed by the
revolution of the earth, the Sun still remaining fixed and immovable in the
midst. Aristotle of the stabilitie of the earth.
But Aristotle his reasons are generally approved, to prove the earths
stabilitie in the middle or lower part of the world, because of gravity and
leuitie, the earth being (of all other Elements) most heavy, and all ponderous
things are carried unto it, striving (as it were) to sway down, even to the
inmost part thereof, with many other reasons made disputable by some, because
the Planets and Stars are far above us. But to deny the Principle of
Exchange and Money as aforesaid, may be refuted and proved to be so plain an
error, as we see the hand or Index of a dyall to be the thing active, which
shows the hour, and the letters are things passive and immovable in the
action; and so are Commodities in the course of*trafficke, where Exchange is
used.

Right merchants are taken to be wise in their profession, for their own good
and benefit of the commonwealth; for of the six members of all the governments
of monarchies and commonweals, they are the principal instruments to increase
or decrease the wealth thereof; as may appear by the description of the
following royal banquet of Great Britain. The royal banquet of Great Britain.
The king of Great Britain considering that all commonweals are furnished
with Divine service, Arms, Laws, Riches, Arts, and Sustenance, and that the
managing of these six things requires six manner of persons, namely,
Clergymen, Noblemen, Magistrates, Merchants, Artificers, and Husbandmen
(which jointly are the members of all commonweals) was graciously disposed to
inuit them all unto a royal banquet, where (after many pleasing discourses
concerning hunting, and having proved by many examples, that the most renowned
princes delighting in that royal sport, have always been the best wariers)
his Majesty was pleased, that every member of his commonwealth as aforesaid,
should in one only word express the property of his profession or calling;
whereupon the Clergymen did say, we instruct; the Noblemen, we fight; the
Magistrates, we defend; the Merchants, we enrich; the Artificers, we furnish;
and the Husbandmen, we feed. The king answering, used these or the like
speeches: We do very well approve your declarations in this brief manner,
recommending every one of you to discharge your duty accordingly, Comparison
and property of the body to the head, so between the king and his subjects.
with a remembrance, that we (as your head) must make the body of the
commonwealth complete: for the office of a king toward his subjects, does
very well agree with the office of the head, and all the members thereof. For
from the head (being the seat of judgment) proceeds the care and providence
of guiding, and preventing all evil that may come to the body or any part
thereof, the head cares for the body, so does the king for his people: and
even as all discourses and directions flow from the head, and the execution of
them belongs to the members, every one according to their office; so is it
between a wise prince and his people. And as the head by true judgment may
employ the members in their several offices being thereunto sufficient, or
being defective may cut them off, rather than to suffer infection to the rest:
even so is it betwixt the king and his people, for as there is always hope of
curing any diseased member by direction of the head, so long as it is whole;
and by the contrary, if it be troubled, all members are partakers of that
trouble; so is it between the king and his subjects, who is therefore called
Parens patriae, Parens patri^
who like a father of the great family of the commonwealth, does study for
the welfare thereof.

The Lord Chancellor making a general answer, did acknowledge his majesty to
be the right and supreme head, without which the body was to be esteemed as a
dead trunk, for said he, the royal Scepter of a Monarchy, guided with good
and wholesome laws, does far exceed all other governments, Aristocratia.
Democratia.
which properly are called Aristocracies and Democracies.

Aristocracie is the government of the less number of people of a
commonwealth in soueraingtie, and Democracie (being contrary unto it) is the
greater number of people governing. Monarchy the best government.
Whereas a monarchy is a commonwealth where one sole prince has the absolute
government, here the peace, unity, concord, and tranquillity of subjects
consists by means of one head, by whose power commonweals are fortified,
virtue thereby being united and more corroborated, than if it were dispersed
into many parts, which give occasion of strifes, turmoiles, and controversies
by the divided powers and emulation of greatness: when as one person
(imitating nature) does govern (as the head) all the parts and members of the
body, for the general safeguard and weal public.

Hereupon replication being made by the King; fault was found of the general
dearth of all things within his Realm, without any scarsitie of the said
things serving for the back and belly, which we do attribute unto you
Husbandmen, said the King, Food dear and no dear^h
for food is dear, and yet there is no dearth. The Husbandmen did excuse
themselves, and laid the fault upon the Noblemen and Gentlemen for raising of
their rents, taking of Farms into their hands, and making of Enclosures.
Nobleme^ and Gentlemen did impose the cause upon Merchants and Artificers for
selling things dearer than in times past, which caused every man to make the
most of his own, according to his profession; wherein the Artificers were
easily dispensed withal, considering their labors, and Workemens wages,
buying also al things dearer. So that the fault did wholly remain upon the
Merchants, who have the sole disposing of all Commodities exported and imported
for the good or hurt of the Commonwealth; which caused the King to enter into
consideration of the aforesaid three Essential Parts of Traffic, namely,
Commodities, Money, and Exchange for Money by Bills of Exchange.

And ingeniously perceiving, that the vital spirit of traffic did consist in
the matter of exchange for monyes, because the same is the public measure
between Nation and Nations, and that gain was the radical moisture of
commerce, which had his effectual power in Exchanges: his Majesty thought
good to call diverse Merchants to the consultation of this business (being
within their element) to hear their opinion how to remedy the said
inconvenience.

Three manner of Merchants.
Whereupon his Highness observed three manner of Merchants: The first (which
were the greatest number) were ignorant of the fundamental reasons of
Exchanges, and being carried with the stream, never took notice of it, but
were guided therein by ignorant Brokers of Exchanges, according to the rule of
foreign Nations, The second sort of Merchants, were those that did altogether
practice to make a benefit by Exchanges and Transportations of Moneys, and
never did deal in Commodities at home or beyond the Seas, and these would not
confess that there was any abuse committed by exchange. The third sort of
Merchants (being the smallest number) were men of wisdom and experience, and
yet they found the matter of Exchange to be a mystery, until examination of
the properties thereof, and then (like good Patriots) they took a care for the
welfare of the Commonwealth. The first sort, he did not regard because of
their ignorance: The socond sort he did compare unto Vinteners, Offenders unfit
to make Laws.
who are not fit to be called to be Assistants in making of Laws against
drunkenness, and so rejected them: But the third sort he did embrace as
worthy Counselors to reform abuses; and some of these were of opinion, that
by reason of the Base Money coined in the latter end of the reign of King Henry
the 8, all the foreign commodities were sold deerer, which made afterward the
Commodities of the Realm to rise at the Farmers and Tenants hands, and that
the same was made deerer through plenty of Money and Bullion, Inhaunsing of
Silver alters the price of things.
which came from the West Indies; and especially, because an ounce of Silver
was inhaunced by the said King, from forty pence, to forty five pence, and
afterward in process of time was valued at threescore pence, and that the
operation of the said alteration does still continue. Others said, that the
prizes of things being risen, was of no great moment, because it was by
denomination, and not really; for that which was called forty before, was now
termed threescore, according to the coins of Silver valued by the ounce, as
aforesaid. But the wiser sort did go further, and comparing the prizes risen
of foreign Commodities, far more than the prizes of our home Commodities,
they did acknowledge, that there was an ouer-ballancing of commodities, and
found that the course of Exchange for Moneys was the efficient cause thereof:
For they did observe, that as the elements are joined by Symbolization, the
air to the fire by warmenesse, the water to the air by moisture, the earth to
the water by coldness; So is Exchange joined to Monyes, and Monys to
Commodities by their proper qualities and effects, whereby it did appear unto
them;

First, that our Money being undervalued in Exchange, causes the price of our
home Commodities to be abated, and to be sold better cheap in foreign parts,
and is also the cause that our Monyes are exported.

Secondly, the Monyes being transported, takes away the lively course of
traffic of our said Commodities, and causes young Merchants to run by
Exchanges upon Bills to maintain their Trade, paying great Interest for
money, which they cannot take up by their single Bond, as they can do by Bill,
taking up the same by Exchange without Sureties.

Thirdly, this causes young Merchants and others to make rash sales of their
Commodities beyond the Seas, to pay their Bills of Exchanges, whereby they
overthrow the Markets of others, an^ make them sell better cheap. So on the
contrary, the coins being ouervalued in exchange, and also inhaunced beyond
the Seas, caused the price of foreign Commodities to increase, more than our
native Commodities; and our Merchants are compelled (of course) to make return
thereby, because they cannot import those ouervalued monyes, but to their
exceeding great loss. And by exchange they find few Takers, unless it be our
young Merchants, which do consume their estates by Exchanges, and Rechanges.
For of the said three Essential parts of Traffic, Causes of the
ouerballanceing of Commodities.
we have but the use of one (as they observed) which is the buying of foreign
Commodities to make returns, increasing therein the consumption of the said
wares, and not our own monyes remaining hereby plentiful beyond the Seas; the
rather for that Bills of debt are (as ready money) passing between man and
man causes with them a lively course of Trade, whereby their Commodities are
advanced in price and sale; neither are they compelled to sell them but at
their price, because they find money at interest, at five and six in the
hundredth.

This plenty of money is daily increased by our Merchants trading Spain and
all others, who do divert the Royalls of Spain from us, because of the
inhaunsing of monyes beyond the Seas, where they have 25 upon the hundredth
gain, when with us they make but 10 per cent.

This gain is practiced by exchange, and would otherwise be but imaginary,
as shall be declared hereafter; whereby we shall find that the said Exchange is
still predominant, and ouerruling the Monyes and Commodities.

CHAP. VI. A Geometrical Description of the World, especially of EVROPE,
Measured by Millions of Acres of ground, upon the Map.
The Measure is one Million, or ten hundredth thousand Acres.
THE Circumference of the roundnesse of the whole Globe of the world, composed
of Water and Earth, is accounted to be 5400 Geometrical Miles, or 21600
ordinary Miles. But whereas the Miles in all Kingdoms and Countries, and
almost in every Province or Shire do differ. I have thought convenient to
admit one measure of one million of Acres of ground, to measure the whole Globe
thereby according to the Map, which is not only intelligible unto al men; but al
merchants also may have use hereof. For by the number of the millions of Acres,
comparing one Kingdom unto another, or one Country unto another Country,
they may know the bigness and spaciousness thereof, which we have
particularly observed in Europe, with a distinction also of the Dominion of
Princes in these several Countries known by the name, France, Italy, Germany
and others, which many times falls into consideration upon singular occasions.

This Globe of the world, is divided to be two third parts Water or Seas, and
one third part Land: and of this Land there is one third part not inhabited,
and the other two third parts are, as follows.

The whole Circumference, by the aforesaid measure is, 19, 803, 575000, which
is 29 milliars, 803 millions, 575 thousand Acres, and the milliar is ten
hundredth millions. A Milliar is ten hundredth Millions.
So the part water is 19 milliars, 869 millions, and 50 thousand acres of
ground answerable: and the other part third is 9 milliars 934 millions, 525000
acres.

Hereof deduct part not inhabited, which is 3 milliars, 311 millions, 508
thousand acres; So rest 6 milliars 623 millions 17 thousand acres of land
inhabited, whereof follows a particular distribution.

First for Europe or Christendom.
England contains 29 millions, 568 thousand acres.

Scotland contains 14 millions, 432 thousand acres.

Ireland contains 18 millions. So these three Kingdoms, with all their
dominions of lands and Islands adjacent, under the Diadem of King James,
contain 62 millions of acres of ground, etc.

England is by this computation accordingly with the dominion of Wales, and all
Islands thereunto belonging, the thousand part of the whole Globe, or the 222
part of the earth inhabited, or the 333 part of the whole earth; and Scotland
may be full the one half of this computation, that is, the 444 part of the
earth inhabited, or the 666 part of the whole earth: and the Monarchy of great
Britain, and the Kingdom of Ireland is the 480 part of the whole Globe,
unnecessary fractions in cipher omitted.

The body of the Sun is 166 times bigger than the whole Globe of the world,
and so accordingly for the seas and earth, as aforesaid.

The 17 Provinces of the Low Countries.
Contain 10 millions, 797 thousand acres, whereof

The reconciled provinces with Spain, contain 7 millions, 197 thousand acres.
The united provinces under the States contain 3 millions, 599 thousand acres.
The Kingdom of France divided into 32 provinces contains in all 82 millions,
879 thousand acres.
The kingdoms of Spain (being eight in number) contain as follows.

m. Castile 25 Millions 730. Andalusia 2 millions 425 Granado 2 millions 128
Navarre 1 million 458 Leon galisia 9 millions 124 Arragon 13 millions 104
Biscaye 3 millions 412 Portugal 10 millions 154

In all containing 67 millions, 535 thousand acres.

ITALIA.
Under Spain.

m. Naples 11 millions 704 Lombardie 1 million 640

Under Venice.

m. Treuisana 2 millions 584 Verona 0 millions 480 Frioul 1 million 047 Mantua
0 millions 480

Under Rome.

m. Liguria 1 million 415 Romagnia 1 million 085 Latium 0 millions 480 Hetruria
0 millions 540 Sauoy 1 million 910 Piedmont 1 million 160 Toscana etc. 4
millions 785 Suria and Florence 480 Marca 1 million 412 Ancona Parma 0 millions
885 Sicilia 3 millions 113 Cypres 1 million 601 Candia 2 millions 060 Corsica 1
million 395 Sardegna 4 millions 089

Containing in all 44 millions, 257 thousand acres.

GERMANIA.
m. Saxonia 3 millions 484 Misina 3 millions 249 Turnigia 1 million 093 Lusatia
2 millions 572 Bauaria 3 millions 249 Helsatia 3 millions 644 Heluetia 12
millions 328 Basle 0 millions 842 Swebourgh 2 millions 109 Salsbourgh 1 million
063 Trier, Ments, 4 mill. 237 Spiers, Strasbourgh, and Worms. Iuliers 0
millions 348 Cleave 0 millions 258 Westphalia 2 millions 300 Osnab 0 millions
358 Silesia 5 millions 706 Bohemia 7 millions 024 Austria 6 millions 121
Morauia 4 millions 114 Pomerania 3 millions 249 Brandenbourgh 6 millions 208
Machalbourgh 2 millions 107 Franconia 6 millions 361 Tiroll 3 millions 249
Carinthia 1 million 588 Stiria 1 million 779 Palantine Rhene 4 millions 361
Wirtenborgh 1 million 223 Embden 0 millions 230 Oldenbourgh 0 millions 449
Liege 0 millions 548 Coloigne 0 millions 215

Containing in all 95 millions, 646 thousand acres.

Prussia -- 10 millions 240 thousand acres.

m. Russia 9 millions 607 Volhimia 5 millions 762 Massouia 1 million 916
Liuonia 34 millions 115 Poland 19 millions 205

Heretofore named Polonia, containing in all 80 millions m. 845.

DENMARK.
m. Denmark 10 millions 426 Norway 28 millions 492 Holsten 1 million 065
Ditinars 0 million 337

Containing in all 40 millions, 326 thousand acres.

SVVETHEN.
Sweathen 57 millions 430 thousand acres. Finland 7 millions 531 thousand.
Gothia 20 millions 936 thousand.

Containing in all 85 millions, 897 thousand acres.

Part of Russiia or Moscouia and Situam under Europe, 232 millions 558 thousand
acres: so that whole Europe or Christendom does but contain 802 millions 740
thousand acres, EVROPE.
which is not the 12 part of the whole earth.

Hungary, Dalmatia, Transyluania, and all Turkey 385 mill. m. 367. Moscouiae
Pars 128 millions, 817 thousand acres. Tartaria 299 millions, 110 thousand.
ASIA.
Persia 385 millions, 367 thousand. Calicut and East India 587 millions, 200
thousand acres. Africa contains 1541 millions, 883 thousand acres. AFRICA.
America contains 1152 millions, 400 thousand acres. AMERICA.
Noua Hispania 1349 millions, 133 thousand acres.
Summa totalis of the inhabited parts of the World, six Milliars, six hundredth
and twenty three Millions, and seven ten thousand Acres of Land, Vt supra.
THE use of this description, to know the bigness of one Country compared
unto another Country, is, for example: England contains twenty nine
Measures and odd; Bohemia containing seven Measures and odd, is the fourth
part of England, or thereabouts.

The seventeen Provinces of the Low Countries, being ten Measures and odd,
is the third part of England, or thereabouts.

The Monarchy of Great Britain, being forty four Measures and odd, is as
big as all Italy, and the five Islands of Sicilia, Cyprus, Candia, Corsica, and
Sardignia, and is also more populous. And so for all other Countries; insomuch
that England only containing twenty nine of those Measures, or Millions, 568
thousand Acres of ground; if we deduct the five Millions, and 568 thousand
Acres for wild and waste grounds and Highways, One penny an Acre, is one
hundred thousand pounds in England.
there will remain four and twenty Millions of Acres, which at one penny an
Acre, amounts to one hundredth thousand pounds, a matter little sensible.

Here may Microcosmos, the little world Man, behold how little the great world
is, which is made for him as a Tabernacle, where he has no abiding place, but
trauelleth as a Pilgrim toward the Celestial habitation, with a thankful
mind and remembrance of the mercy of God, who has been mindful of the Son
of Man, and made him lower than the Angels, to crown him with glory and
worship, Psalm. 8. Thus much I thought to demonstrate unto Christian Merchants
touching the world, before we entreat of the commodities, whereby traffic
and commerce is by them and other Nations maintained, according to the ancient
Verse: Currit Mercator ad Indos, -- as appears in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Of the Commodities of all Countries whereby commerce is mainetained.
Corporum tria sunt genera.
ALbeit that the aforesaid Doctors of the Civil Law have declared that there be
but three kind of bodies of things, namely,

1 Quod continetur vno spiritu, vt homo, lapis etc. which is contained of one
spirit, as man and a stone, or such like.

2 Quod ex pluribus inter se, coherentibus constat, vt edificium nauis etc.
which consists of many things joined together, as a building, a ship etc.

3 Quod ex distantibus constat, vt corpora vno nomine subiecta, veluti populus,
legio, grex, etc. which consists of distant things, as many bodies under one
name, a People, a Legion, a Flock, and the like. Yet this difinition is not
complete, concerning the body of traffic and commerce, consisting of Body,
Soul, and Spirit, namely Commodities, Money, and exchange of Money by Bills of
Exchanges, as aforesaid, which are to be described in order. And because
Commodities, like unto the Body, vpheld the world at the first by way of
commutation and bartering of them according to necessity and usefulness:
Therefore may it be thought convenient to set down in this place, the
particular commodities of all Countries, and (of some of them) their values and
estimation, by means whereof Traffic and Trade is established and
maintained, that thereupon we may proceed accordingly.

Verily in the estate of Innocence all things were common; but alas this
community of things endured but a while, and now by reason of our natural
corruption, and pronenesse to wrong one another, there is an absolute
necessity of propriety and several possession, which is consonant to the Law
of God, as well as founded upon the Law of man, and consent of Nations; it
being the voice of secondarie Nature: This is my house, this is my town, and
this is my servant, etc. whereby Meum and Tuum is distinguished.

The reuocation of this communion of things, is the nerves and bond of humane
Society, and the mother of labor and diligence. Who would Till the ground if
he hoped not to taste of the crop of it? Surely all would be waste and
desolate, if men were to plant and build for every body, that is nobody. We
see by experience, that the strongest would deprive others of the use of
things, unless the law did interpose her authority, which is two fold, namely
Paterna and Politica effected by the fathers of families, and magistrates. And
herein is no other equality to be found concerning things, but a mutual
voluntary estimation of them according to the use and behoof of the said
things. And the proverb is true, That goods held in common, are (as it were)
no bodies goods, and not manured as they ought to be, whereupon Plato in his
second Commonwealth (upon better consideration) did revoke his former opinion
of the community of goods, and used to say, That no man was a gayner but
another became a looser, which had an over great regard to the property of
goods, and if there were no property of goods, all traffic would cease.

Nevertheless, the Equality and Equity in the course of Commerce must be
observed, to avoid the ouerballancing of commodities, as in the precedent
Chapter is mentioned, which requires a third consideration of an other kind of
equality. For as we have noted with Aristotle, Riches is either Natural, or
Artificial.

The Natural riches, as Lands, Vines, Forests, Meddowes, and the like.

The Artificial, as Money, Gold, Silver, Cloth, and all other Manufactures and
household Stuff.

Now as this Artificial riches is proceeding of the Natural riches, and that
both these do receive their price and estimation by money: So reason requires
a certain equality between them, which we find to be defective, which is
concerning the price of lands.

To prove our Assertion, we can hardly make this inequality appear, albeit
we do find the want of the treasure transported from us into the parts beyond
the Seas. For it befalls unto us concerning monyes and wealth, as it does to
a General of a Camp of ten thousand supposed armed men, whereof muster being
taken at several times, and upon several days, all of them are found to be
armed, because they lend their Armor to each other: whereas, if they were all
mustred in a day, and at one instant, a great part of them would be found to
want Armor. So the like want of monyes and wealth would be found if rich men
were examined, for their personal estates upon any urgent occasion. And now
let us examine the commodities of all countries, beginning from the East and
ending in the West.

Of the goodness and value of East India Commodities.
THe Merchants Trade for the East Indies, took beginning in England, in the
year 1600; At which time Spices and all other Commodities were bought for the
prices hereafter declared, translated out of the Portugal tongue, with my
additions and observations concerning the goodness of those Commodities.

Cloves.
Cloves growing in the Islands of Moluccos, being clean of Stalks, by the
Portugal called Fusties, Fusses.
were sold for fifty Pardaos the Kintal or the 100 weight of 112 ll
correspondent with our London quintal, or hundredth, accounting the Pardao or
Ducatt at 5 ss, is about 27 pence the pound. There is another leaner and drier
sort of Cloves, called Crauo di Bastao, which is sold for 25 ducatts, which the
Portugalls do mingle many times: the difference is half in half in price,
and the pound at 13 pence.

Mace.
Mace, being of a fair color and large, which grows upon the Nutmegs, and is
had also in the Island of Bantan, was sold for 74 Ducatts the hundredth, which is
40 pence starling the pound.

Nuttmegs.
Nutmegs in the said places were sold for 15 Ducatts, is 75 ss the hundredth, and
the pound weight eight pence starling.

Ginger.
Ginger, being dry, from Calicout, called Belledin, or ash color Ginger, at 9
Ducats the hundredth, is 45 ss, and the pound at 5 pence or thereabouts.

There is an inferior sort called Mechino, of six Ducatts the Quintall.

Ginger in conserve, at 13 Ducatts, is about 7 pence the pound.

Sinamon.
Sinamon of Zeilan, growing in that Island, was sold at thirty five Ducatts, and
the Sinamon of Malabar, called De mato, for ten Ducatts, whereby the pound of
the best is about 19 pence, and the other about 6 d.

Pepper.
Pepper of Calicut, Malabar, and the Island of Sumatra, at 10 Ducatts the
hundredth, bought by the baser of four Quintalls, comes to 6 d. the pound

Long Pepper.
Long Pepper was sold at 25 Ducatts the hundredth, is the pound 15 pence.

Benjoin.
Benjoin de Boninas at 55 Ducatts, and the other sort of Caregasan at 48
Ducatts, is the pound at 2 ss 5 pence, and 2 ss 2 d. or thereabouts.

Campheir.
Campheir of China was sold at 40 Ducatts, is 10 ll, and the pound about 22 d.

Indico.
Indico of the better sort, called Carquez, 40 Ducatts, and the common sort of
Aldcas 30 Ducatts, and the richer sort of Aldcas, 70 Ducatts the hundredth,
which is the pound 22 d. 18 d. and 3 ss or thereabouts. This rich Indico is as
good as that of the West Indies of Guatimalo, West Indies Indico.
and better than (Laurea alias Lahora) coming from the said West Indies,
whereof there was wont to come another sort, called Indico Campeche, which was
an extraction of Logwood, Uncertain Trade for In^ico.
being ouerlight and frothie without substance, which did swim upon the
water, whereby this manner of trial is uncertain, and only the Cowpe must
find the goodness of Indico by the working of it.

Commodities sold by a weight called Man of 24 ll weight.
China Silk 76 Ducatts. Silk in pieces 86 Ducatts. Silks.
Silk of Lancan 40 Ducatts. Silk of the Eagle, the best 35, and the common 26
Ducatts.

Lacre or Hard-Wax, sixteen Ducatts the Man. Soft-Wax, Hard-W^x.
four Ducatts.

Commodities sold by the Bar of 15 Rooues or Arrobas of 28 ll.
White Sandalo, the 20 pieces, 160 Ducatts. Red Sandall wood, Wood of China.
fifty Ducatts.

China Wood 180 Ducatts, Ebony Wood 200 Ducatts.

Commodities which are sold by the Ounce.
Ambre greis 13 Ducatts, is 65 ss. Black Ambre 3 Ducatts, Ambre.
or 15 ss the ounce.

Musk in Coads at 2 Ducatts or 12 ss 6 pence the ounce. Musk.


Bezar Stones are sold according to their bigness more or less. Bes^aar
stones.


Commodities sold by the score of twenty pieces, as Calico Cloth, etc.
CAlico Cloth of the places following, called by several names. Calico cloth
o^ diue^s places.


Canequins fine of Cambaya 60 Ducatts, is 3 Ducatts, or 15 ss the piece.

Canequins ordinary of the same place, 40 ducats is 10 ss the piece.

Teadas 20 Ducatts, is 5 ss the piece. Dotins, 25 Ducatts. Bancais ten, etc.

Cotonias for Friars, twenty four Ducatts: and ordinary at twenty Ducatts.

Calico Cloth Dosinde, called Iourins fine 70, and ordinary 45 Ducatts.

Calico Cloth of the coast of Canaor, called Beatillas, fine 26 Ducatts, and
the ordinary 20 Ducatts. Pacharins 25, and Berames 30 Ducatts.

Calico Cloth of Vengala, of two places, called Cassas fine, 100 Ducats, the
ordinary Cassas 70 Ducatts, Soto pazes, 25 Ducatts, and Beatillas 100 Ducatts.

Chaictares fine, 40 ducatts; ordinaries 25, and cassas of 60 ducats.

Calico Lawne made of Nettles ^/4 broad, Calico Lawne.
and eighteen yeards long, is of diverse sorts from threescore Ducatts to one
hundredth twenty and above.

All kind of Druggs differing much in goodness, Druggs.
must be bought accordingly, as Mirabolanes, called Emblici, Belirici,
Citrici, and Indij.

Tamarinds, Calamus, Aromaticus, Spicanardi, Oppium, Cassia, Mirrhe inanse,
Aloes Cicatrini, and Tutia, Rheubarbe, and the like; Lignnm Aloes, Saunde^s,
Borax or Atincall, and many other commodities.

All which Spices and Druggs are to be Garbled, for the better and wholesome
use of man, for as liquid things in Nature, become sour; so dry things become
bitter in nature, whereupon the Garbellers office was established and granted,
The office of Garble^ship. A^no 1309.
first in England by King Edward the second, unto some sufficient persons, at
the suit of the Pepperers, now called Grocers of London, which is, in effect to
separate the good from the bad, or pure things from the impure, putting them up
every one accordingly under certain Seals.

Of the weight, goodness, and values of Pearls and Precious Stones.
Pearls and Diamonds, are bought and sold by the Carrat weight made for that
purpose. For whereas Gold is sold by the Carrat of 24 to an ounce, accounting
two Carrats for one ounce of Silver, whereof 12 ounces make the pound weight
Troy. Difference of Carrats weights.
This Carrat weight for Pearls and Diamonds is far lesser, for the 150
Carrats make but one ounce; so that one Carrat of Gold weight weighs 6 part
of a Carrat of Diamond weight, and the like for Pearls, whereof there is a
Measure for Round Pearl made correspondent thereunto, which is also divided
into 4 grains, as the Troy weight is, which grains are of less proportion of
6 to one, and the divisions of small weights are made in and part, albeit the
Troy grains are most commonly used, without this observation.

India weight.
Diamonds are bought in the East Indies, by a weight called Mangear or Mangelin,
weighing two Tare, which ^/3 of a Carrat, for 4 Tares weigh a Fanan, which is
above 2 Carrets.

Rubies are bought by the Fanan, and 11 Fanans make one Mitigall, and 6 of them
make an ounce. But of late years, Diamonds, Rubies and Saphires, are bought
and sold by the Carrat weight.

Diamonds the most perfect, called Nayfe, are found in the Kingdom of Decan
and Narsinga, and the Island of Ziclan, which, as (I say) are sold by the
Mangelin, at so many Pardaos, or Ducatts of 360 Reis, or 9 Royalls of
Portugal; but accounting the Fanan at six pence, and ten Fanans for the said
Ducatt, then the Pardao is five shillings starling.

The Nayfe Diamonds are pointed on both sides, and they do grow upon the Flat
Diamonds, which are in the superficies of the Bourt of Diamonds, and are
impure, commonly beaten therefore into powder for the use of the other
Diamonds, that are cut and polished by the Millne. The Flat Diamonds are
always valued one third part less in price, than the Nayfe are, so long as
they be uncut; but being cut, are of more or less estimation according to
their fashion. Some are fair Triangles, others Flower de Luces, Roses, Hearts,
Columes, Demi Crosses, or other fashions of Poly Angles, and proportions
serving for the members or parts of the bodies of things to be made into many
works and Jewels, as the Iewellers will apply the same, cut with many Fassets
or Squares: But the thick Stones are more certainly known by their weight,
having their Bisallyes complete either in Tables or Points wanting no corners
or due proportion, without spots or sands, burbles, Properties of good Diamonds.
flawes and veins, which sometimes (although it be in little stones) makes
them run 3 and 4 days upon the milne, spending much time and labor to polish
them. It is almost 40 years since I did maintain diverse milnes and cutters of
Diamonds, whereby experience made proof unto me of these things, which are
very considerable. For the water of Diamonds is also chiefly seen in the
cutting and polishing of Diamonds, some being a yellow water, other greenish,
other brownish: but the difference is almost all alike, if they be of one
rock, that is to say, they are like in the parcels as they sell them. The best
waters are whitish, inclining to the blew, which makes the best illustration
and play, as some call it, which sometimes will be found to be admirable in a
thin stone, or feables, as the Portugalls call them: but the fassets must be
industriously wrought, which in great stones of 10 or 12 Carrats makes them to
be Paragons, Paragon Diamonds.
that is to say, in all perfection, and being Piedras de muestra, or stones of
show, will be sold by estimation, as the love and fancy of a man will carry
the same.

In times past all Diamonds above 4 Carrats, rough or unwrought, were the
kings, in the places where they were found; which is the cause that concerning
the values of Diamonds of above 4 Carrats cut, no proportion in price is made
certain between Iewellers, but is left to estimation according to the
abouesaid properties.

Small Diamonds have some proportionable price, rising and falling accordingly,
which were set down at Paris in France, during the reign of the French king
Henry the fourth, by the Iewellers there, as follows.

Crowns of 6 ss every Carrat.
Of 10 stones a Car. 5. Of 9 to a Carrat 5 Of 8 to a Carrat 6 Of 7 to a Carrat
7 Of 7 to a Carrat 7 Of 6 to a Car. 8 Of 6 to a Car. 8 Of 5 to a Car. 8 Of 5 to
a Car. 8 Of 4 to a Car. 9 Of 4 to a Car. 9 Of 3 to a Car. 9 Of 3 to a Car. 10
Of 2 to a Car. 11 Of 2 to a Car. 12 Of 2 gr. the piece 12 Of 2 gr. the piece 13
Of 2 gr. the piece 14 crowns the Car. Rough Diamonds called Bruits.
Of 3 Grains 16 the Carrat. Of 3 Grains 17 Of 3 Grains 18 Of 1 Car. the
piece 19 Of 4 Grains 19 Of 4 Grains 20 Of 4 Grains 21 Of 5 Grains 22 Of 6
Grains 24 Of 7 Grains 26 Of 8 Grains 30 Of 9 Grains 34 Of 10 Grains 40 Of
11 Grains 45 Of 12 Grains 50 Of 16 or 4 Carrats 60

By this estimat it appears that a Diamond of 4 Carrats brute or uncut, is
set down 60 French crowns, which is 18 ll sterling: for it is uncertain what
may be diminished of the weight by the workmanship of it. Diamonds cut and
polished.
So that in the Stones cut and polished there is more certainty; whereof the
price was likewise proportionably set down as follows.

Of a Grain 20 shillings ster. Of of a Grains 25 Of one Grain 40 Of 1 Grain
50 Of 1 Grain 60 Of 1 Grain 80 Of 2 Grains 100 Of 2 Grains 120 Of 2 Grains
150 Of 2 Grains 9 ll 0 0 Of 3 Grains 12 0 0 Of 3 Grains 16 0 0 Of 3 Grains
20 0 0 Of 3 Grains 24 0 0 Of 4 Gr. or one Carrat 30 0 0 Of one Carrat 33 0 0
Of 1 Carrats 36 0 0 Of 1 Carrat 40 0 0 Of 2 Carrats 60 0 0 Of 3 Carrats 100 0 0
Of 4 Carrats 200 0 0

All which prices may alter from time to time according to the use of precious
Stones, upon accidental causes of the marriages, of Princes and great
personages, to be done proportionably. As if the Diamond of a Carrat should
rise 20 in the hundredth, then all the other sorts accordingly; and so also in
the falling of the price by greater quantities.

Diamonds of yellow water (which give luster extraordinarily by candlelight)
are more in request in Germany and some places in Italy, where the brown
Diamonds are also desired. But in England and France they are worth part less
(which is according to the above said prices that Diamonds are now worth with
us also.) The Diamond of a full Carrat being a perfect Table, and yellow, is
worth 20 ll sterling.

The pointed Diamonds, which (in regard of their natural proportion, having
less wast in the cutting) heretofore sold better cheap than the Table
Diamonds, are now deerer and more esteemed.

About this time of the abouesaid estimation, these Diamonds of the Sorts
following, Brute Diamonds at Lixborne.
were bought rough or brute at Lixborne.

ll. s. d. Of 10 pieces to a Carrat 1000 reis or 0 12 6 the Carrat. Of 9 to a
Carrat 1200 reis 0 15 0 Of 8 to a Carrat 1400 reis 0 17 6 Of 7 to a Carrat 1600
reis 1 0 0 Of 6 to a Carrat 1800 reis 1 2 6 Of 5 to a Carrat 2000 reis 1 5 0 Of
4 to a Carrat 2400 reis 1 10 0 Of 3 to a Carrat 3200 reis 2 0 0 Of 2 to a
Carrat 4000 reis 2 10 0 Of one Carrat nayfe 6000 reis 3 15 0 Of one Carrat flat
stones 5000 reis 3 2 6

The cutting of them was 10 and 12 ss for every Carrat in those days.

There is a rule for cut Diamonds above 5 Carrat. A Diamond of 10 Carrats is 10
times 10: which is 100, so at 25 pound a Carrat, is worth 2500 pounds.
To multiply the weight of them within it self, and then by the price of one
Carrat to value the same, as in the margent appears by the said rule, after
25 ll the Carrat.

Rubies are found for the most part in a river called Pegu, being of the best
kind and finest, and are called Nuncuplo, of a high color without any spots,
and clean, Rubies.
also the hardest and coldest upon the tongue as the Indians say.

They are sold by the Corcia or score, of 20 pieces, by a weight called Fanan.
The Rubie of one Fanan for 10 Pardaos or Ducatts, is 50 ss ster. If they be not
perfect, the price must be considered, as in the Island of Zeilan, where great
quantities are found of a fleshie color, esteemed but in value, called by the
Indians Manecas, which being mundified by the fire are made Carbuncles.
Carbuncles.


There is also found in Pegu, another kind called Spinella with us, Spinella.
and by them Caropus, esteemed at half the value of Rubies. And in the like
estimation were another kind found in Balassia and so called, Balassia.
much like unto the color of a rose.

Saphires in the Island of Zeilan, the hardest are best, Saphiers.
and of azure color.

Topasies in the same Island, of color like beaten gold, Topasies.
the hardest are best, and were sold for their weight in gold in times past.

Turqueses found in Malabar, Turqueses.
being of Turquers color by the day time, and by night by the light green:
they grow upon a black stone, whereof those retaining some little black
veins, are the better.

Iacinths (in the Island of Zeilan) are tender yellow stones, Iacinths:
and have commonly pimples or burbles in them.

Emeralds or Smaragds (being hard and green stones, Emeralds.
found in the country of Babylon, and other places of India) were of great
estimation before the quantity discovered in the West Indies, many of them are
counterfeit: But by looking on them curiously toward the light, the
counterfeitnesse appears by certain burbles, like as the glass does; which
is not in the true stones, although certain beams appear, which true stones
being rubbed on the touchstone, leave the color of gold, and the counterfeit
the color of copper, for they are made of an extraction of copper.

The ancient Philosophers have determined that Sulphur and Mercury (being the
originalls of all metals) are engendered of vapors and exhalations, Original
of precious stones.
and the like origin they ascribe unto all Precious Stones: which caused
Artists to take the same into their consideration both for the said Stones, as
also for Gold and Silver, whereof I do entreat more in the Chapter of Mines
Royal etc.

All these stones being out of request with us, are to be bought for Russia and
other places, as the buyer finds cause.

Pearls of all sorts are most found in the West Indies, which are Occidentall,
East India Pearls.
and yet bear the name of Oriental Pearls which come from the East Indies,
and although they have more luster, they are of a brownish color, and somewhat
inclining to the yellow, and therefore of less estimation and price, which at
the beginning of our East India trade was as follows.

ll. s. d. Of one Carrat 1 Pardaos is 0 7 6 Sterling. Of 1 Carrat 3 Par. 0 15 0
Of 2 Carrats 6 Par. 1 10 0 Of 2 Carrats 8 2 0 0 Of 3 Carrats 12 3 0 0 Of 3
Carrats 16 4 0 0 Of 4 Carrats 20 5 0 0 Of 4 Carrats 25 6 5 0 Of 5 Carrats 30 7
10 0 Of 5 Carrats 35 8 15 0 Of 6 Carrats 40 10 0 0 Of 6 Carrats 45 11 5 0 Of 7
Carrats 50 12 10 0 Of 7 Carrats 60 15 0 0 Of 8 Carrats 70 and 80 20 0 0

Aliofar, which is small Pearl sold by the Iuera, or Sorts which comes from
the fishing of Comorin, worth The 1 Iuera 330 reis The second 180 The third 80
The fourth 18 The fifth 8

West India Pearls. Anno 1587.
And above this weight there is no proportion observed, but it is mere
estimation, as is noted in Diamonds, especially in the West India Pearls,
being of a clearer white water inclining toward blew, whereof I bought a great
quantity of sir Francis Drake knight, which he brought from Carthagena, a
city of the Island of Santo Domingo, being all vnholed and brute, of several
sorts, called Rostillo of 40 ss, the ounce, half Rostillo of 30 ss, Cadenilla
of 4 ll the ounce, half Cadenilla 3 ll, Pedraria of 60 and 80 pieces in the
ounce 7 ll, and half Pedraria of 100 to 110 pieces in the ounce 5 ll. Also
great vnproportionated Pearls called Barocos, according to estimation and
goodness, as these prices were made at Paris, and when they are holed or
boared and stringed up in four sorts, called Entreneto, and put into boxes,
then they are sold one with another according to their sorts, for 4 or 5 ll the
ounce: diverse flat Pearls serving for buttons, Round Pearl
put upon papers are sold by the piece according to their bigness and
fairness. Seed Pearl to stamp for Apothecaries at 8 and 10 ss the ounce.

Round Pearls of all sorts of this water, valued at Paris as follows.

Of a Grain 2 Solz tornois 2 d star. Of ^/4 Grains 2 2 d Of 1 Grain 4 4 d Of
1 ^/4 Grain 6 7 d Of 1 Grain 10 12 d Of 1 Grain 13 is 15 d Of 2 Grains 16
19 d Of 2 Grains 18 21 d Of 2 Grains 30 3 ss Of 3 Grains 40 4 ss

Of 3 Grains 50 solz 5 Of 3 Grains 60 6 Of 3 ^/4 Grains 70 7 Of 4 Gr. Carrat
80 8 Of 4 Grains 90 9 Of 4 Grains 100 10 Of 5 Grains 120 12 Of 6 Grains 240
24 Of 7 Grains 460 46 Of 8 Gr. is 2 Carrats 60

Pearls of a Carratt are worth now ten shillings, and the other sorts under
the same, or above it, accordingly. I had 1600 of a Carratt, which were sold
for 9 ss and 900 of two Carrats, sold for 36 shillings, and many fair
pendants, whereof no price can be made in certainty, they must have the due
proportion of a Pear, and be of excellent water.

Yellow Pearl, is not worth half the price of the East India brown Pearl,
albeit they be a little helped to make them whiter, for the Proverb is true,
Quod natura dedit, nemo tollere potest; but if they be yellow accidentally,
then they will become very fair by the remedy following.

Take two ounces of white Argall or Tartar, and one ounce of Mercury
sublimate, and 1 ounce of Allome, put them together into a clean pipkin or
leaded pot, pour upon it the best Aqua vitae you can get, and bind your
pearls into a clean clout, and hang them in the pot, and so let them stand
over the fire one hour, not touching any part of the pot, and they will be
fair and white.

If they be great round Pearls they may be scaled, for naturally the Pearl is
like unto an Onyon, scaling one upon another. I remember that a friend of my
acquaintance, called Mounsieur Hellman told me many years since, that during
the minority of Philip the third, late King of Spain, he showed unto him two
excellent great round Pearls, which he valued at ten thousand ducatts, or
three thousand pounds: which the young Prince took in his hands, saying,
Bocado por un Roy (A morsel for a King) and swallowed them down one after
another. The Merchant made account to receive money for his Pearls, but he
could not, and was glad within two days after to take his Pearls again,
which by the heat of the stomach were become yellow; coming to Antuerp, a
certain Jew undertook to take off the upper scale, and so they were exceeding
fair again, but diminished: they were afterward sold to the great Turk for
above two thousand pounds starling.

Thus much for Oriental and Occidentall Pearls, where note that the weight
for Pearls in Seuill, is lesser than the weight of Lisborne by eight in the
hundredth: the climate in the East is hotter than in the West, and the water
more faltish, which causes the diversity of colors.

In Scotland are many times found pretty store of Pearls, and the climate
being colder, makes the color of them to be dim, albeit I have seen some
very fair, and pendants also. The small Pearl is also very wholesome in
medicinable Potions.

Of the Commodities of Great Britain.
England.
THe Commodities of Great Britain, containing the Kingdoms of England and
Scotland and the dominion of Wales, are rich, and Staple wares, and very
abundant, with a continual increase, namely:

Woollen Clothes of all sorts, broad and narrow, long and short, called and
known by the names of several Shires, being 250 thousand Clothes made
yearly, besides the new Draperies of Perpetuanaes, and the like commodities.

Tin, wrought and unwrought, above twelve hundredth thousand pounds yearly.

Lead transported and used, above eight thousand Fodders every year.

Allomes made in abundance, above seven hundredth Tons yearly.

Copperas made according to the quantity used, some 250 Tons yearly.

Iron of all sorts, setting 800 Furnaces on work.

Iron Ordnance, or cast Pieces, according to occasion made.

Wools and Woolfels, and Calfe skins in great quantity, and Conie skins.

Stockins of all sorts of Silk, Wool, and Yarnsey, Yearne and Woolls.

Buffins, Mocadoes, Grograines, Sattins, Calamancos, Veluets, Worsteds, Sarges,
Fustians, Durance, Tukes, and all other Norwich wares and Stuffes.

Saffron the best that can be found in any country.

Glass and Glasses of all sorts, Venice gold, Sea-coale, and Salt.

Scotland.
Scots-coale, Wheat, Barley, and all kind of grains in both Kingdoms.

Linen Cloth, and all Ironmongers wares, Hides, Tallow, Leather, dressed and
undressed, Train Oil, Salmons, Pilchards, Herrings, Hake, Conger, Red-Herring,
Hops, Woad, Butter, Cheese, Beer, Saltpeter and Gunpowder, Honny and Wax,
Alablaster, and many other Stones.

The Commodities of the Kingdom of Ireland, are
Ireland.
VVOolles, Felles, Yarne, Furs, Flax, Linen Cloth, Hides, Tallow, Hemp,
Honny, Wax, Herring, Cods, Hake-fish, Salmonds, Eeles, Ruggs, Mantles, Irish
Cloth, Pipestaues, Iron, and Lead, Wheat, and all kind of grain, Salt-beefe,
Butter and Cheese, and many Manufactures.

The Commodities of the Kingdom of France, are
WInes, Prunes, Canuas, Linen cloth, Salt, Veluets, Raw silk, France.
and diverse stuffes of Silk, Buckrames, Boxes with Combs, Paper, playing
Cards, Glass, Grain to dye, Rozen, Wheat, and all kind of Grain corn.

The Commodities of Spain and Portugal, are
WOols, Madera Sugar, Almonds, Wines, Oils, Anny-seeds, Spain and Portugal.
Anchoues, Bay Berries, Bariglia, Figs, Raisons, Traine-oyle, Iron, Oranges,
Leamons, Sumacke, Saffron, Soape, Coriander, Cork, Licoras, Woad, and the
commodities of the West Indies, Sugar of Brazill, Fernandebucke Wood, Tobacco,
and other commodities.

The Commodities of Italy, and certain Islands.
VEnice Gold, Veluets, Sattines, Cipres, Silks, Italy.
Cloth of Gold and Silver, Cottones, Fustians, Wines, Currants, Cloves, Rashes,
Rice, Sarcenets, Raw Silk, Allomes, and Vitrioll, Glasses, and other
Manufactures.

The Commodities of Germany and places adjoining.
WOolles, Argall, Steel, Latin, Copper, Yron^, Germany.
and all kind of Manufacture made of them: Copperas, Allomes, Lead, Fustians,
Paper, Linen cloth, Quicksilver, Bell-mettall, Tin, Renish Wines, and
Mather.

The Commodities of East-land, and thereabouts.
AShes, Bowstaues, Cables, Canuas, Buffe-hides, Flax, Hemp, Eastland.
Honny, Wax, Stock Fish, Spruce Iron, Match, Wheat, Rye Meal, Woolles,
Waynscott, Pitch and Tar, and Linen cloth, Cordage and Ropes.

The Commodities of Denmark, and Norway, and Sweaden.
WHeat, Rye, Woolles, Deals, Clap-boord, Pipe-staues, Denmark, Norway and
Sweaden.
Masts, Waynscot, Copper, Timber, Fish and Furs, Allomes in some places.

The Commodities of Russia.
Russia.
TAllow, Hides, Caueare, abundance of rich Furs, Black Fox, Martins, Sables,
and the like: Honny, Wax, Cables, Ropes and Cordage.

The Commodities of Barbary.
Barbary.
GOat skins, Almonds, Dates, Aneale, Gum, Feathers, Saltpeter, Gold
plentifully: and from Guynea, Hides, Oliphant teeth, and Grain.

The Commodities of the Low Countries.
Low Countries.
TApestrie, Battery work, Steel, Cambrickes, Lawnes, Hoppes, Mather, Butter,
Cheese, Grograines, Bozatoes, Chamblets, Mocadoes, Brushes, Tape, Linen cloth,
Pots, Bottles, Wheat, Rye, Salt, Chimney backs, Blades, Horses, Soape, Fish,
Herrings, Cods, Ling, and many things, as Diaper, Smalt, Hoopes of Iron.

The Commodities of the West Indies.
FRom the Low Country beginning the West India Trade, let us set down the
commodities of it, seeing that the States of the united Provinces have made
lately a Society of Merchants, bearing date the ninth of June 1621, wherein
other Nations may be aduenrors, as by their letters Pattents appears;
prohibiting all other their subjects or inhabitants, that they shall not trade
from the said countries, nor out or from any other kingdom and country
whatsoever, Letters Pattents for the West India Trade by the States, etc.
unto the coasts and countries of Africa, from Tropicus Cancri, along to the
cape of Bona Speranza, neither in the countries of America, from the South end
of Magellanes le Mary, and other straits, to the straits of Anian on every
side, Noua Guinea included, upon forfeiture of the ships and goods and all
their possessions, within their jurisdiction and command, and arrests of their
persons, unless they be of the said Company made and established for the West
India Trade.

Gold and Silver, Cucheneale, Sugars, rich Indico, Donnigo Ginger, Pearls,
Emeraulds, Hydes, Campeche or Logwood, Salsaparilla, Tobacco, Canafistula,
Cocos-wood, Lignum vitae, Cottonwooll, Salt, and some other druggs for Physic
or dying of Stuffes. And this may suffice for a declaration of the principal
commodities of most countries.

CHAP. VIII. Of Commutation or Bartring of Commodities.
WE have compared Commodities unto the body of traffic, which did uphold the
world by commutation and Bartring of Commodites before money was devised to be
coined, whereof we are now to entreat. For commutation, barter, or trucke of
Commodities was first effected in specie, by delivering one Commodity for
another according to the commodious and behoofull use of man; so that one did
deliver so many measures of Corn for so many measures of Salt, as was agreed
upon; another so many pound of Wool against so many pound of Pepper, Sugar, or
other commodities; an other so many pieces of such a commodity for such a
commodity; or so many Hides for one bar of Iron, or so many pieces of Silver
uncoined, but weighed and exchanged, as yet is used in some places of America,
Barbary and Guynea, and other countries. This may be properly called an
exchange of commodities, or rather a permutation of commodities; albeit the
Ciuilians, when there is scarcity of Gold and Silver in a country, and when
the commodities in value surmount the money paid for them, they do call that a
permutation, and deny the same to be an emption by their distinctions; how
soever, this manner of commutation or barter was made by number, weight and
measure of commodities in kind: but moneys being invented and valued by the
public authority of princes according to their several stampes or coin,
and by common consent made Publicae Mensura, or the public measure to set a
price upon every thing. This commutation, barter, or exchange of commodities
for commodities, was, and is (since that time) made according to the rule of
money, whereby every man setting a price unto his commodity, does sell and
barter the same as he can, with a respect of the necessary use or request had
of the commodity, and of the quality and goodness of the same, being either
corruptible commodities, or staple wares more durable, whereby all metals and
minerals came into greater estimation, and the purest was most valued and
esteemed, even in the very traffic by commutation when moneys were not
coined, and commodities were dispersed by commerce between nations by an
interchangeable course, supplying each others occasions and necessities,
according to the use of commodities.

Commutatio negotiatiua.
This commutation is called Negotiatiua, because things are commuted for to sell
again by way of negotiation, which is either by selling or delivering
commodities for commodities in specie, as aforesaid; or by the rule of money in
buying and selling the same at a price agreed or concluded upon between the
parties contracting for the same: In the estimation whereof we are to have a
due consideration, That riches being natural and artificial, and both valued
by money, there is required a certain equality in the said estimation,
proceeding of the consideration between this natural and artificial riches.

And as there are three temporal things for the behoof of man, namely Food,
Houses, and Apparel: so must we account all the things serving thereunto
accordingly, and the scarcity or plenty of those things also according to the
use of them; having always a regard and care not to pay too much for the
things serving for the belly, (especially such as in some sort may be spared
or forborne) and not to sell too good cheap the things serving for the back,
or in effect to barter them for superfluous things, always admitting civility
(which albeit that men account that civil, which is according to the manner of
every country as the proverb is, countries fashion, countries honor:) yet
reason must rule herein, with a due consideration of Gods good creatures and
gifts, which cannot be done without an vnfatigable industry, both in
discerning the variety of them, and in observing their infinite number and pure
creation; in which regard precious things have their estimation, so that the
same civility must be reduced to the good of the commonwealth, and for the
upholding of the same, living together in christian society, giving so far
place unto reason, that every man may endeavor himself for the preservation
of the weal public, and conceive generally, that other nations (not endued
with so much reason) are always inferior unto us in that regard, even
considering all men alike in an estate of politic government. Who sees not
then that without any cause of admiration, some men do wonder at the
simplicity of Brasilians, West India, and other nations, as they of Barbary,
or Africa, in giving the good commodities of their countries, yea Gold, Silver,
and precious things, for Beads, Bells, Knives, Looking-Glasses, and such toys
and trifles? when we our selves commit the same, in giving our staple wares
for Tobacco, Orenges, and other corruptible smoking things, or superfluous
commodities bought at dear rates, to the loss of the commonwealth: whereby
comes an ouer-ballancing of foreine commodities with our home commodities,
which draws away our treasure and ready moneys to the incredible loss and
impouerishing of the realm.

This commutation negotiatiua ought to be the study of Politicians or
Statesmen, as a principal matter of State for the preservation and
augmentation of the wealth of their Commonweals or Monarchies, where they sit
to direct the ship of traffic; as skillful Pilots observing all accidents
which happen to the three essential parts of trade and commerce already
declared, and to be amplified in our description of this customarie Law of
Merchants.

This Study consists in two points, namely in the consideration of the value
of the things commuted or bartered between country and country, according to
their use; and in the charges of manufacture of those things, and the
manufacture of other things exchanged for the same by way of traffic and
commerce.

Worthy of commendation was the Mayor of Carmarthen town in Wales, The due
commendation of the Mayor of Carmarthen.
who (perceiving the Spaniards to import Oranges and Lemons, and to sell them
continually for ready money, and to export the same without buying any of
their country commodities being Staple wares, and theirs very corruptible and
many times half rotten) caused a proclamation to be made, That no man (for the
space of three days) should buy any of those Oranges and Lemons: and within
that time they were all spoiled, and so the Spaniard went home by weeping
cross, and afterward sold his Oranges better cheap, and bought commodities
for his return.

Touching the price of manufactures, the labor and charges of workmen is to
be considered on either side, and what the commodity may be in the wearing or
use thereof, and to what purpose or profit the remainder may be employed. As
for example, If silk Lace be imported, after the wearing it is nothing worth:
If Venice Gold and Silver be imported, there will remain about the one half
in Silver, albeit the same be sold dear unto us; which is very tolerable, if
other of our manufactures, or Cloth, be exported for the same, whereby the
people are set on work to maintain a common society. But when Tobacco is
imported, Hindrances by Tobacco etc.
and leaves nothing but smoke, which is not only bought at dear rates, and
does hinder importation of Bullion or Ryals of Plate; but is also the cause
that our home commodities, as Cloth, Bays, Perpetuanoes, and Says, are sold
to loss by the buyers of Tobacco; which causes the price of our commodities
to be abated, and the realm to loose above forty thousand pounds yearly by
this negotiation of barter: Statesmen therefore might in this particular, take
some course that every man should not make employment in Tobacco in Spain, or
beyond the seas, but that the licensed buyers thereof should make over so much
money by exchange as were needful for a competent quantity, to be proved by
good and true certificate that the same has been performed accordingly.

On the other side if Venice Gold and Silver thread, Spangles, and Oes, shall be
thought convenient to be made in England; then (to procure the Silver in plates
cut or uncut to be brought over of the sterling Standard, or so much in Bullion
as may make the quantity required) may be thought expedient, if (in regard of
civil reputation of the kingdom) we will not prohibit the importation of it
by course of traffic.

But considering that after wearing the same with reputation, it leaves almost
the one half of his value. There is no pregnant cause to find so much fault
with it, as some men do. The like consideration is to be had for such
manufactures, whereof the very pieces or rags may be used to some purpose, as
of Linen to make white paper, of fishers nets to make brown paper, of skins
to make glue, of beer leeze to make Aqua vitae and the like.

And here we may not omit how Almighty God by his divine providence rules
many times this negotiating commutation, when the harvest of Corn fails in
one country, and is prosperous in another country, whereby this trade of
barter by the rule of Money, does very much augment, and the price of Corn
becomes to be much deerer: Albeit the price be reasonable, considering the
Fermer may by the cheapnes thereof be made unable to pay his rent. And God, who
does every thing for the best, shows unto us how one nation may have need
and occasion to use the help and means of other nations, and which is more
admirable to be noted, God in the permitting of it, may have some other work in
hand to manifest his glory, or to relieve his children by unexpected means;
As the sending of the children of Jacob into Egypt for the want of Corn to
maintain themselves, does demonstrate unto us. The like may be applied for
Wines, Salt, and other commodities for the sustenance of man, which (although
they be corruptible commodities) may, contrary to our former assertion (by
this accidental or casual extremity) be preferred in estimation of the
Staple commodities, which are durable, and become valued only by Gold and
Silver, which is the cause that Spain and Portugal being subject to have
dearth of Corn, do permit the exportation of Silver and Gold in return of the
prouenue of it and other victuals, Gold and Silver bartered for Corn and
Victuals.
whereby we find that those countries, by reason of the West-Indian treasure,
being from time to time provided with Silver and Gold coin, are nevertheless
most destitute of the same, bartring as it were in effect, their Silver and
Gold for Corn and other provisions; and, having their countries stored with
mere copper Moneys. This treasure passes from them as if it were conveyed by
a channel: and (because of the abundance of their said Copper moneys) is not
so sensible unto them, as it is unto other countries which have not the use of
the like Copper moneys, which is diverse ways to be considered, especially in
the time of wars, when moneys are called to be the sinews thereof, or Nervi
Bellorum, which by mere Copper moneys can never be understood, howsoever
necessary (in some measure) for the commutation of petty bargains and
contracts, whereof more hereafter in handling the matter of Moneys.

To make application of this negotiating co^mutation in the price of
Commodities, it is to be proved by diverse ancient Merchants books, that
within the age of a man, or seventy years, the price of foreign Commodities
with us is far more risen than the price of our home Commodities; which by
way of Antithesis is worthy the observation.

Redding color, and other mingled color Clothes, did cost 9 ll the Cloth
then, when Black Veluets were sold at 10 shillings the yeard; and now the said
sort of Clothes are sold but for 11 ll and 12 ll the Cloth, and Veluets at 26
shillings the yeard.

Pack Clothes white, at fifty pound the pack of ten pieces, Cramosin
Veluets at 12 shillings the yeard. And now Pack Clothes of the same mark, at
ninety pound, and a hundredth pound, and Cramosin Veluets at thirty shillings
the yeard.

Wool the Todd of 28 ll weight, at 12 shillings, Black Satine at 5 shillings
the yeard; Wool now above 20 shillings, or thereabouts, and Satine 15
shillings.

Calfe skins the dozen 5 ss; Fustians the Bale of 40 pieces, at 12 ll the Bale;
Calfe skins now at 10 ss, and Fustians 36 pounds, and Millaine Fustians at 18
and 20 shillings the piece, now at 3 ll and above.

Says of Norwich, at 20 ss the piece and upwards: Messina silk 8 ss the
pound; Says are about 40 ss, Foraine ware^ risen, 3 to, 1.
and Messina and the like silk above twenty six shillings. Northern Carseyes
then 18 ss, Spanish Soape 20 ss, now 50 ss, and Carseyes 22 ss. Seuill Oil,
the Tun 12 ll, now 35 ll, and many times above forty pound.

French Wine at 5 ll the Tun, now 20 ll, or thereabouts. Long Proines 5 ss,
now 15 and 16 ss; Sugar 6 pence the pound, now 14 and 16 pence.

Malmeseyes 5 ll the Butt, now 18 ll and 20 ll; Cotton Wool 4 d. now 15 d. and
diverse other commodities accordingly. So that an angel would have bought one
yeard of Veluets, now three Angels or pieces of gold can be exported for the
same. Ten Angels would have bought a Tun of Claret Wine in England, which is
now sold for above twenty pound, and twenty four pound.

Besides that, our Cloth is better made than in those days, albeit not so good
as it might be made; victual and wages are deerer, and Woad, Mather, Oil, and
colors are extremely risen.

A Merchant might have sent or carried with him one pack of Clothes, white,
broad, or narrow lists, and brought in return one Chest containing nine or
ten pieces of Veluets: whereas now he cannot bring above three or four
pieces in return thereof. For a Redding Cloth sold beyond the Seas, he might
have returned one Bale of Fustians; whereas now for the value of one Bale of
Fustians sold in England, a Merchant must buy and export three Clothes.

A London mingled color cloth, would have bought at Lisborne two chests of
Sugar; now one chest of Sugar will draw two Clothes out of the Realm: So a
Kentish Cloth would have bought at Seuill a Tun of Oil and more; now one
Tun of Oil does counteruaile three Clothes and more, and other commodities
accordingly, giving (as it were) three to one in specie for foraine commodities.

Commutation is compared unto monyes in kind.
Compare this commutation to the monyes inhaunced in the Low Countries, Germany,
France, and some other Countries (which is the same money still in specie for
weight and finenesse, and only the valuation is altered) and you shall find
that within the said time of seventie years, an Angel worth ten s. then, is
now above twenty s^illings; a French Crown six shillings, now twelve
shillings six pence, and all other coins accordingly, or thereabouts: whereas
in England there is no momentarie alteration of the monyes, as hereafter shall
be made more apparent. And the like consideration will also be had concerning
the Exchanges of monyes by Bills of Exchanges.

Some men are of opinion, that selling our home commodities good cheap, makes
a lively trade, augmenteth commerce, and maintains all the dependances
thereupon, by setting the people on work, employing Ships, and augmenting the
Kings Customs and Impositions: But they never consider two principal points
whereby the wealth of Kingdoms and Commonweals increases or decreaseth,
namely:

Inconveniences to sell commodities good cheap.
If commodities imported unto us, be dearer than in times past, as we have
noted, and our home commodities are not sold proportionably in price, but we
will endeavor still to sell good cheap: who sees not that this brings an
evident over ballencing of commodities in price, which is to be balanced by
the treasure and monyes of the Realm.

Again, if our home commodities be sold too good cheap, other nations can
make a trade thereby for other countries, and overthrow the trades of several
Societies of the Realm. We have seen in times past, that the Western color
Carseyes were sold at Norenborough in Germany, to the great loss and hindrance
of the then Turkey trade; and at this present our Suffolk clothes are sold so
good cheap beyond the Seas, at Amsterdam and other places, that they have made
a large trade for Russia and East-land with our home commodities, and thereby
overthrown our trade by preoccupying the Markets, and engrossing the
commodities of those countries aforehand. From Zealand there is a trade
establis^ed for Barbary, with the said clothes sold unto them, thereby
preventing the trade of English Merchants, which yields them but little
profit, and the commodities which they bring in return (as Hydes, Almonds and
other things) are better vented beyond the Seas, where our Merchants are forced
to transport them, and the gold which they bring affords but little profit;
The times and seasons of trade are variable.
so that to make commerce to be a pastime, is neither beneficial to the
Commonwealth, no^ to particular persons. The times or seasons of Traffic and
Trade are mutable and subject to accidents, which is the cause that at some one
time, commodities are well vented, and at another time not; the rash sale is
not the profitablest. Have not we found of late years, that cloth was sold in
greater quantity, and at greater prices, when the Todd of Wool was sold at 32
and 33 shillings, and clothes accordingly, than now when Wool is sold for 18
and 20 shillings* The revolution of things may alter again and revive trade;
if not, procure you to have foraine commodities better cheap, whereof you have
not so much need, as they have of ours. Strive not to vndersell others to the
hurt of the Commonwealth, under color to increase trade: Causes increasing
trade and comme^ce.
for trade does not increase when commodities are good cheap, because the
cheapenesse proceeds of the small request and scarsitie of money, which
makes things cheap: So that the contrary augmenteth trade, when there is
plenty of money, and commodities become dearer being in request.

Concerning the particular barter or truck with Merchants, every man does know
who deals therein, Particular barters.
that this is done with such dexterity, to take advantage in the price of
their commodities one against the other, that commonly either the one or the
other finds himself agreeued: For the ouerreaching therein, is accounted an
usual and ordinary practice, and the commodities thus bartered are
plentiful, and not in request; whereby it comes to pass, that to have good
commodities (which are vendible at all times) there is part given in ready
money, or in Bills payable at short days of payment; whereby many Merchants
are ouerreached, and can have no remedy by law nor equity. Hence the Proverb
is derived, Caveat Emptor; for it is a buying and selling, implying an
advantage intended by both parties, how soever they will seem to color the
matter. So that the Proverb is not to be understood, upon all bargains of
commodities whereby a man becomes a loser; and he that deals in barter must
be very circumspect, and the money given in barter cannot be ouerset: Whereupon
a principal Merchant of London, made once a barter, in hope to ouerreach
another Merchant, and they both being resolved to do their best endeavor
therein, agreed to esteem and value their commodities at a high rate: A
cunning commutation.
but withal the great Merchant, would have the one moitie (of the sum they
should barter for) in ready money, and so the more he did ouerualue his
commodity (which was cloth) the more money was the other to lay out. The
bargain came to one thousand pounds starling, whereupon the party paid five
hundredth pounds in ready money instantly (for all was done in two hours:) and
delivered him also forty half pieces of Lawnes, at a certain price the first
piece, and in every two or three pieces raising the price, as the manner is in
that kind of commodity. The great Merchant had ouerset his commodity or
clothes fifty upon the hundredth, and the other Merchant (that could not
ouerset his money) had valued his Lawnes at a very high rate of three for one
at the least. For all the said forty half pieces of Lawnes were sold for 120
ll payable at two years day of payment, and by the cloth there was not lost
above one hundredth pounds. Hereupon long after the said parties fell at
variance, the cause was by them compromitted unto very sufficient arbitrators,
Merchants, and they did approve and confirm the said Commutation and Barter
to be good, for that the commodity was Merchantable, and they had endeavored
to try their wits to ouerreach each other. And moreover they awarded, the
great Merchant to pay charges, and willed him to remember the old Proverb, He
that buyeth Lawne before he can fold it, will repent before he has sold it.
But these particular commutations between man and man are not hurtful to the
Commonwealth, unless they be between us and foreign Nations in the
plurality of the things commuted between us and them.

A Rule for commutations
To prescribe therefore some kind of Rule in Permutations, let us observe that
there is (in effect) Three kinds of them, and may be distinguished and said
to be, Discreet, Temperate, and Desperate.

Discreet commutation.
The Discreet is, where (without any compulsion, or of course) one kind of
commodity is, either in specie, or according to the rule of money bartered or
delivered for another commodity of another Kingdom; as the bargain was to
deliver Sea-coales of New Castle, into France for Salt, paying the freight on
either side equally between them.

Temperate commutation.
The Temperate Commutation is, where a Merchant does expect a convenient time
for the selling of his commodity, according to the accidents and occasions
offered, and does not overthrow the Market of others (that have the like
commodity to sell) by his rash sale.

Desperate commutation.
The Desperate Commutation is mere opposite unto it, where a man either for
want of discretion, or upon urgent necessity to supply his credit and
occasions, sells or bartereth away his commodities, for other foreign
commodities to return homewards. In all which great discretion is to be used,
and this ought to be a principal study for Societies and Companies to look
unto. Albeit the same is not of such importance, as the buying of foreign
commodities at dear rates, when Merchants strive to engrosse them, upon the
arrival of Ships, as (for Corrints) has happened at Zante and Venice.

CHAP. IX. Of ordinary buyings and sellings of Commodities.
Every man knows that in the buying and selling of commodities, there is an
estimation and price demanded and agreed upon between both parties, according
to a certain equality in the value of things, permuted by a true reason
grounded upon the commodious use of things: So that equality is nothing else
but a mutual voluntary estimation of things made in good order and truth,
Definition of equality.
wherein inequality is not admitted or known. And the seller is to sell his
wares according to the common estimation and course, at such time as he shall
think convenient, unless it be for victuals and munition, wherein necessity
compels him to sell for the general good, by the interposition of the
magistrates by whose authority he can observe no time, but must sell, taking a
reasonable gain for the same: for the estimation is also the greater upon such
occasions and accidents, when the selling of a thing is not according to the
goodness of the nature of the thing, but rather according to the usefulness
of it to mankind; and therein the condition of the thing is to be considered,
which may decay and be subject to corruption in quantity, quality, and
substance, or which is not subject thereunto.

True it is that there can be no rule prescribed or taught how to buy and sell,
which is lawful and unlawful, or just and unjust, by any wise man whatsoever,
because the children of this age are wiser than the children of light in their
generation and calling; which is the cause that some Divines (having written
hereof) do proceed with great moderation, Tho. Aquinas, Scotus, and others.
observing that the transferring of things from one owner unto another, is
effected five manner of ways by private persons.

1 By Donation, which is altogether of free gift, according to the saying
recorded, Luke the sixteenth chapter, Mutuum date, Five means to transferthings
nihil inde sperantes. 2 By Permutation, Do vt Des, I give because you should
give: as the proverb is, Si mihi des, tibi do, si nil des, nil tibi reddo:
Hoc verbum do, das nutrit amicitias.
3 By Emption or buying of things. 4 By Vendition or selling of things. 5 By
active mutuation, or mutual giving or lending of moneys.
Eleven conditions in the buying and selling of things.
And in buying and selling of things, there are required eleven necessary
conditions; First, a consent in the selling; secondly, a power to sell, the
like in the buyer; thirdly and fourthly, consent and power; fifthly and
sixthly, some conditions on either side, agreeing in the transferring of the
thing; seventhly, that the same be honest; eighthly, also lawful; ninthly, and
tenthly to be without unreasonable conditions, to buy and sell the same again;
eleuenthly, that it be an absolute irreuocable bargain. And herein is the law
of nature to be regarded and observed, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris, or do as you would be done unto: Yet if I have occasion to buy that
which another is about to buy, it is lawful and just for me to buy the same.

Three things to be observed in the selling of things.
But to avoid suspicion in selling justly or unjustly, three things are
required; First, the buyer to be expert in the commodities he buyeth; secondly,
that he be not too needy, or constrained to buy; and thirdly, that persuasiue
reasons be ommitted, which cause the party to buy deerer.

The Ciuilians (affirming, that probability to prove the estimation of a thing
is sufficient, whether it be more or less worth) do admit that a man may sell
deerer unto an expert man, than unto a simple man; and to sell deerer than the
thing is worth by common estimation, is adjudged by them to be always unjust:
as also to use reasons and inducements to sell wares the deerer, neither is the
seller to demand or expect any thing above the price agreed upon. And
entreating hereof, they make large discourses, which I do admit to handle for
the reasons aforesaid.

Buying and selling, say they, is done two manner of ways, First that the
thing be so bought, that all power of pretense be avoided, which is giving a
thing at a certain price for the thing: and secondly, that the thing sold be
as a gift for that price, which in substance may be said to be a plain,
absolute, and lawful bargain, sold (as we say) in open market or shop,
Selling in open market or shop.
in so much that there be not a curtain to hide the commodity so bought and
sold: howbeit in all faires and markets in the parts beyond the seas, a
Trades-mans shop, and a Merchants warehouse is taken to be public and open
at the appointed times.

They have also determined, that a seller may not demand a greater price for
the forbearance of his payment or satisfaction of the thing, but he may well
diminish the price, if the buyer do satisfy him the sooner, Payments by
anticipation.
and before the time of payment, by way of anticipation, which nevertheless
rests in his power to accept thereof, or to expect the time. But this is
commonly done (not by abating of the price of the common ditie, because money
has made a certainetie of the total sum of the said commodity) but by
allowance or deduction of the interest of the said money for the time to come
and vnexpired, according as they make their agreement of the price of interest.

To conclude the premises touching buying and selling, we find, that no man in
selling any wares is bound to declare, whether any quantity of the like wares
are to be had or expected when he sells.

CHAP. X. Of Suretiship and Merchants Promises.
Having entreated of the ordinary buying and selling of commodities, either
for money to be paid at some days of payment, or for wares to be delivered by
way of permutation, (wherein many times a third person is interposed, or it
does merely depend upon the parties promise) it may seem convenient to handle
the point of Suretiship and Promises.

For albeit as the Ciuilians say, A bare or naked covenant.
that Nudae pactio obligationem non parit, exceptionem parit, a bare or naked
covenant binds not, but breeds exceptions; this is to be understood upon
contracts, and where no sureties have made any promise: But otherwise if any
merchant do pass his word for another; it makes him liable, as fide inssor to
perform the same, and the act done before is a sufficient good consideration,
and they all agree that bona fides inter mercatores est seruanda, Faith or
trust is to be kept between merchants, and that also must be done without
quillets or titles of the law, to avoid interruption of traffic, wherein his
Suretiship is to be considered according to the promise; for if it be
conditional, if such a man do not pay, then the other to pay the same within a
time, or to save him harmless: it is first to be demanded of the Principal,
and if he do not pay, then the Surety is to pay it without any course of law,
unless he be ordered by the Court of Merchants to perform the same, because
that thereby he may also the sooner recover the same of the Principal for whom
he did give his promise. It is also a custom amongst Merchants, that if a
Merchant be indebted unto another, and thereupon entreats another merchant to
desire the creditor to respit him some time for the payment of it; if then the
said merchant the debtor do not pay accordingly at the time, he shall be taken
pro confesso, and sentence shall be given by the Merchants Court for the
payment thereof, only upon proof made, that he did will another to crave the
said respite of time for the payment. The like is done by the Common law of
England by trial of Iuries of 12 men, upon proof made by evidence produced
before them, that the debtor did crave day of payment, so that they will
thereupon deliver their verdict, and judgment and execution may be of course
had for the same. But if the promise be not conditional, then is he an
absolute Surety, and is to pay the same accordingly, as merchants of credit
always have done.

To become a surety unawares.
A merchant may also be come in the nature of a Surety unawares, or unknown
unto him, as befell unto a friend of mine not may years since at Frankford in
Germany, who during the Mart or Fair, went into a merchants Warehouse to
confer of some business with him, where he found another merchant of his
acquaintance to cheapen some parcel of silk wares with the said other
merchant, to whom this man (as it seemed) was unknown; whereupon the seller of
the said silk wares took occasion to ask my friend whether he were a good man
and of credit, and he answered he was, so the bargain was made, and goods were
delivered unto the said merchant the buyer, to the value of 460 ll, for the
which he made a bill obligatorie, payable the next Fair following: at which
Fair (the party not appearing) demand was made of my friend to make payment
of the said 460 ll, because the party was absent, and withal some doubt was
made of his sufficiency; my friend had not so much as remembered that any such
question was demanded of him, but the party did put him in mind of it by
circumstances, and would be paid of him, he in defense did allege it to be
nudum pactum ex quo non oritur actio, and so not bound to pay the same, as
having had no consideration for it. The opinion of merchants was demanded,
wherein there was great diversity, so that the Civil Law was to determine the
same; and by the said Law according to the title de mandato consilij, he was
adiudge to pay the said 460 ll, and to have the debtors bill obligatorie made
over unto him, A caveat for merchants etc.
whereof he could never recover one penny, although he did pay the whole debt
and damages, for the party became insoluent. This may be a good caveat for
merchants and all men; for if he had said, He is taken or reputed to be a good
man of credit, or, I take him to be so; he had been cleared by the law, and
the custom of merchants.

Considerable promises.
Some promises are considerable, according to reason, as if a man upon a
penalty do promise another not to molest or trouble him; if the other give him
cause of offense to break the same, he incurreth not the penalty; and a
promise made to do a thing is always understood to be for the first time. So
to make a promise that a pawn shall not be alienated, yet it is held by diverse
that the same may be hipothecated unto another, so the pawn be preserved.
Again on the contrary, if a ship-wright do promise to build a ship for a
merchant, and he causes the same to be done by another, here the promise is
broken by the Law, albeit this question is not material, for it is not like
that the building of Ships can be done without contracts in writing, and only
by bare promises. And the like may be said to the greatest part of all the
questions, wherewith the Books of Ciuilians are fraighted; so that for
Merchants understanding, the ancient ordinary Customs observed in the course
of the said Essential Parts of Traffic, is plainly to be declared and
distinguished from litigious questions.

CHAP. XI. Of the Revolution of Buying and Selling of Commodities, by the
course of Traffic.
EVen, as the whole Commerce and Traffic consists of our Land Commodities,
and some fishing on the Seas, and of the Commodities of foreign Nations; So
from hence follows, An efficient Cause of a kind of Revolution in buying and
selling of Commodities: because the commodities of one country growing rank
and abundant, are transported into other countries, in whose steed needful
commodities of those kingdoms and countries and returned thither, which is a
neighbourly lending between kingdoms and countries. For, as is noted, God
caused Nature to distribute her benefits, or his blessings to several
Climates, of diverse things found in some places, that are not in other places;
to make an interchangeable course of the said commodities by way of
merchandising.

This Revolution of Trade, Sundry means for buying and selling.
may be illustrated by the consideration of the several means, whereby the
said buying and selling are effected.

1 The first is, buying with ready money, For ready money.
which is commonly the best, and with most advantage, for commodities are sold
better cheap: wherein the knowledge of the goodness and necessary use is
requisite.

2 There is also a buying and selling of Commodities, For ready money and
paiable at times.
paiable at some limited time or times of payment, or partly ready money, and
partly at times: and the difference of price herein, is commonly above ten
upon the hundredth more or less, as the rate of monyes at interest are in the
places of Commerce, where the said Commodities are sold or bought, and
according to the plenty of money extant, unless the superaboundance of
Commodities do alter the same, especially if the Commodities be perishable, by
Corruption, Time, and Accidents; so that the condition, quality, or goodness
of the commodity is much to be respected: which was the cause that when
commodities did abound at the first, and the wealth of man was described by
cattle and the like perishable things; all kind of metal (as being durable)
was most esteemed, and the purest metal taken to be fittest to make monyes
of, as hereafter shall be amply declared in our second Part.

By Bills of Exchange.
3 There is another buying and selling of commodities, to be paid by Bills of
Exchanges, that is to say, The Buyer gives a Bill of Exchange, or many Bills
to be paid by exchange in another place; as for example one buyeth five
hundredth pounds worth (at London) in commodities, which are accounted in price,
as if he had bought them for ready money, and does give unto the Seller of the
said commodities one or more Bills of Exchanges for Antuerp, Amsterdam, or any
other place, to be paid according to the price of exchange which is made, or
ought to be made, according to the value of the monyes of one Country, and the
value of the monyes of other Countries, by weight and finenesse, as shall be
hereafter declared, and that according to the distance and discrepance of the
time and place, where and when the said monyes shall be paid by the Buyers
friend, Factor, or Servant; and so the said Bill or Bills of Exchanges are
paid accordingly for the commodities so bought.

By money payable in Banks.
4 Another Merchant, having money in Banks, or in the Bankers hands at
Amsterdam, or any other place where Banks are kept, buyeth some commodities in
the said places, and casting up what the same does amount unto; he goes to
the Bank and assigns the Seller of the said commodities to receive so much
money there, and the Bank (accepting thereof) gives him satisfaction in the
payment he makes unto others, according to the manner of Banks hereafter
declared.

By a Letter of Credit.
5 Another buyeth some commodities there, or in any other place beyond the Seas,
and for that purpose he has a Letter of Atturny, called a Procuration, or a
Letter of Credit, either from his Master or any other here at London, or
elsewhere; who upon his Credit, has promised thereby to pay the value of the
said goods in some place beyond the Seas, according to a price of Exchange
agreed upon between the parties here (and the like is done beyond the Seas to
be paid here) which is still according to the value of monyes in both parts,
answerable to weight and finenesse by way of Exchange. And the like is done
between London and Exeter, Plimmouth, Yarmouth, and many other places, upon
the very same and uniform Coin, by Letters Missiue between Merchants here
and there.

For Bills Obligatorie.
6 The most usual buying and selling of commodities beyond the Seas, in the
course of Traffic, is for Bills of Debt, or Obligations, called Bills
Obligatorie, which one Merchant gives unto another, for commodities bought or
sold, which is altogether used by the Merchants Aduenturors at Amsterdam,
Middleborough, Hamborough, and other places. For when they have sold their
Clothes unto other Merchants, or others, payable at 4, 6, 8, or more months;
they presently transfer and set over these Bills (so received for the
payment of their Clothes) unto other Merchants, and take for them other
commodities at such prices as they can agree with the Seller of them, be it
Veluets, Silks, Satins, Fustians, or any other wares or commodities, to make
return of the prouenue of theirs; and so selling those foreign commodities
here in England, they presently buy more Clothes, and continue a Revolution of
buying and selling in the course of Traffic and Commerce, being so (in
effect) as may be illustrated by example.

Suppose A.B. the Clothier sells to C.D. the Merchant one pack of Clothes,
Example of of the Revolution in Traffic.
for the sum of one hundredth pounds paiable at six months, and does
condition with him to make him a Bill in the name of such a man as he shall
nominate unto him: A.B. the Clothier buyeth of D.E. the Gentleman, so much
Wool as amounts to one hundredth pounds, and does intend to deliver him the
Bill of C. D. the Merchant, in full payment of his Woolls, and to cause the
same to be made in his (this Gentleman's) name: But D.E. the said Gentleman,
caused him to make the Bill payable to E.G. the Mercer, and the Mercer is
contented with the like condition to accept thereof; but he caused the same to
be made payable to C. D. the Merchant, of whom he buyeth his Veluets and
Silks; and so in payment of them, he delivered him (by an Intermissiue time)
his own Bill, which he first should have made to the Clothier. And herein you
are to note, that in the buying by Bills, it may be made payable to the
Clothier, or to the Bearer thereof, and so all the parties are bearers thereof,
unto whom the same is set over by Tradition of it only, which by a Retrograde
examination will appear; and this is called a Rescounter in payment,
Rescounter by Bills of Debt.
used amongst Merchants beyond the Seas, and seems strange unto all men that
are ignorant of this Custom, and yet do they perceive a reason for it, and
cannot deny the commodiousnesse thereof.

The Common Law of England, is directly against this course; for they say there
can be no alienation from one man to another of debts; because they are held,
Chooses en Action, and such whereof no property can pass by assignement or
alienation; and many good Lawyers do wish as well as Merchants, that there
were an Act of Parliament made for the establishing of the like course in
England. By reason whereof, let us in the next Chapters handle this matter more
distinctly, and declare the benefits which the Realm will receive thereby, and
all Merchants and others negotiating for great sums.

There are other manner of buying and selling of commodities, by Contracts, and
upon Conditions and Casualties, which are to be declared in their proper
places, whereunto relation may be had hereafter.

CHAP. XII. Of the Transferring or setting over of Bills Obligatorie, between
Merchants and others.
WE have in some measure, in the precedent Chapter, declared the Use and
Custom of Merchants beyond the Seas, in the Transferring and setting over of
Bills Obligatorie, or Bills of Debt, which they give each to others for the
payment of Commodities, bought and sold by way of traffic and trade, it
rests now to speak thereof more amply. For the sincerity of plain dealing
has hitherto been inviolable, The manner of Bills beyond the Seas.
in the making of the said Bills, which every man of credit and reputation
gives of his own hand writing, or made by his servant, and by him subscribed,
without any seal or witness thereunto; and is made payable to such a Merchant
or person, or to the Bearer of the Bill, at such time or times of payment as is
agreed and concluded between the parties, either for money or commodities lent
or bought, and so declared in the said Bill, according to the form hereafter
expressed.

This Custom is much practiced by the Merchants Adventurers beyond the Seas at
Middleborough, Amsterdam, Antuerp, Hamborough, and other places where they do
trade, in manner following, as we have noted.

A Merchant, having many of these Bills, which he has received for his
Clothes sold unto Drapers (or other Merchants dwelling in several towns and
places) will resort unto a Shopkeeper, or another Merchant, commonly
accompanied with a Mediator or Broker, to buy a good round quantity of Silk
wares, The setting over of Bills of Debt.
or any other commodity (which is ordinarily sold payable at some days of
payment either 4, 6, or more months) and having agreed upon the price of the
said commodity, or before; he makes the seller acquainted what payment or
satisfaction he will give him, in Bills of such and such persons, amounting
to such a sum, either little more or less than the commodity does amount
unto; or to take in commodity so much as the said Bills do contain, or do
amount unto; and if there be any remainder due for the commodity, more than
the Bills do amount, the same to be paid in ready money, or upon his own
Bill, payable at such a time as they agree between them, which often comes
to be a great sum. Hereupon all such Bills as are of known persons are
soon accepted of, and of the unknown persons, either himself that is the
Seller, or the Broker, will inquire of their sufficiency, and then likewise
accept of their Bills in payment; and having taken their Bills, (which are made
payable to the Bearer, as we have said) the receiver of these Bills goes unto
the parties, and demands of them, whether they are contented to pay him those
Bills at the time specified therein, according to the manner of merchants for
commodities (which if it be within one month after, it is accounted to be
very good payment:) The Debtor makes answer, that he will pay his Bill to
the bearer thereof accordingly; for if this man will not ride out (as they say)
the time of the payment of the Bills, he may go to another man, and buy other
commodities therewith, as if it were with ready money, the time only
considered: nay more, if he will have ready money for these Bills, Selling of
Bill, Obligatorie.
he may sell them to other merchants that are moneyed men, and abating for the
interest for the time, and (commonly one month over) according to the rate, as
they can agree, and as money is plentiful, they shall have money at all times
to employ in commodities, or to deliver by exchange, or to pay debts withal,
or to carry home in specie, or for any other purpose at their pleasure; which
is commodious for young merchants having small stocks, as also for all men
upon all occasions: for it is properly as money paid by assignation, whereby
very great matters are compassed in the trade of merchandise, the commodities
are sooner vented in all places, General benefits by setting over of Bills of
Debt.
the Custom and Impositions of Princes do increase, the poor and mechanical
people are set on work, men are better assured in their payments, the
counterfeiting of Bills, and differences are prevented; the more commodities
there are sold the less ready money is transported, and life is infused into
traffic and trade for the general good. And herein we see and may observe,
That things which be indeed, and things which are not indeed, but taken to be
indeed, may produce all one effect; and every man is enabled with his own
means and credit, to augment commerce.

This laudable custom (as I said) is not practiced in England; yet sometimes a
Merchant Stranger will accept of Bills of Debt in payment for commodities sold
with advantage: But then the Bill is made new again, and in the Merchant
Strangers name; and this is not without some danger to him that buyeth the
commodity or merchandise for another man's Bill, as Factors may do for their
Masters: for I have observed by good experience, A Law Case about the setting
over of Bills.
that a Factor in London, having sold for his Master (a Merchant of Antuerpe)
some commodities to an English Merchant to the value of seven hundred pounds,
and taken the Merchants Bills payable at six months and six months for it:
his Master of Antuerpe did appoint him to buy Bays ^or these Bills of another
Merchant, which he did perform, and had the value of 700 ll delivered unto him
in Bays accordingly, and the Bills were to be altered in the other Merchants
name for his Bays. Shortly after it fell out that the English Merchant became
insoluent: But before it was publickely known, the Factor brought the Bills
altered (according to the agreement) in the Baye Merchants name, who did refuse
to accept of them, and said the Factor should pay him. The Bills were tendered
with a Scriuener according to their agreement, but still were refused. The time
of payment being expired, the Bay Merchant did arrest the said Factor: the
matter was tried before the Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench by a Nisi
prius in London, by a party Jury of English men and Strangers: The verdict
was found for the Bay Merchant, and the Factor did pay the money, and had no
remedy against his Master. The reason was delivered by the Judge, That the
Common Law in this case requires a Release or Acquittance for the payment of
the Bays to be made to the Factor, otherwise he was still bound by the Law to
answer for the said Bays.

To establish this Custom in England.
This custom might (with great facility) nevertheless be established in
England, and would be very beneficial to the King and the Commonwealth
ingenerall: for albeit that the strict Rules of the Law demands a sealing
and delivery of Deeds, and that the Bill cannon conveniently be made payable
to the bearer of it, or be altered in another man's name as abouesaid, neither
can it be recovered by a Letter of Attorney, which in England is always
reuocable before the fact: Nevertheless, if there were a Register kept of the
passing and transferring of these Bills from man to man, and by an indorsement
thereof also upon the Bill, it might be done with ease, and the bearer of it
should be acknowledged thereby to be the lawful Attorney in Law; and by these
means the indecent Plea of Non est factum would be cut off. And, to prevent
fraudulent dealing, if any Bills should be lost, notice might be given
instantly to the Register (which at Lixborne and Roan is called a
Prothonotarie) by means whereof many questionable parcells or payments are
made apparent, Office of Prothonotarie at Lixborne and Roan.
and the Bills for the most part do remain in the office at the disposition
of the last Assign or Assigns; which is the cause also, that most usually
Bills are made for all things bought and sold between parties and parties,
whereby many payments are made by Rescounter, Rescounter by Bi^ls for payment.
as if it were in bank, hereafter to be declared; for Merchants do meet, and
in a manner iumpe together in their said payments. And hereby also may the
difficulty (for the taking of an Acquittance as aforesaid) be removed, by
entering an acknowledgement of satisfaction before the said Register, at the
time of the transferring or registring thereof. I have taken pains to have
this to be established here: but hitherto things are not rightly understood, as
is to be wished it were, whereby other nations have still an advantage.

CHAP. XIII. Of the nature of Bills Obligatorie beyond the Seas, and in England.
SVch is the sincerity and Candor Animi amongst Merchants of all nations
beyond the seas, in the observation of plain dealing concerning the said Bill^
Obligatorie between man and man, that no man dare presume to question his own
hand; for if he be stained therewith, he is not only utterly discredited, but
also detested of all Merchants: The form of the Bills being as follows,
only Mutatis mutandis.

Form of Bills Obligatorie.
I A. B. Merchant of Amsterdam do acknowledge by these presents to be truly
indebted to the honest C. D. English Merchant dwelling at Middleborough, in the
sum of five hundredth pounds current money for merchandise, which is for
commodities received of him to my contentment, which sum of five hundredth
pound as aforesaid, I do promise to pay unto the said C.D. (or the bringer
hereof) within six months next after the date of these presents: In witness
whereof I have subscribed the same at Amsterdam the 10 of Iulie 1622, Stilo
nouo.

A.B.

In the East Countries, and sometimes in the Low Countries they will put a
seal to it, and then the word subscribed and sealed goes together: but there
is no mention made of any delivery or deed, for that is understood of course,
in so much, that if for want of payment the Bill be put in suit, and the party
adiourned or cited to make his appearance: The Judge (making no doubt of any
such matter) will instantly say to him, My friend, what is the reason that you
have not paid this your Bill to C.D? for to deliver a Writing, or a Bill as an
Called Apocha or Apodissa by the Ciuilians.
Escroll (as we say at the Common Law) is unknown unto all Merchants there,
and the bringer of the Bill (called with us the bearer of it) shall be admitted
to recover the same without any Letter of Attorney, or other Warrant.

Especial notes concering Bills Obligato^ie.
The Ciuil^ Law, and the Law Merchant do, require that the Bill shall declare
for what the debt grows, either for Merchandise, or for Money, or any other
lawful consideration. The words Current Money for merchandise, is, because
that Merchants for diverse respects tolerate commonly the moneys to go current
at a higher rate in the course of traffic, than they are valued by public
authority of Kings and Commonweals: And when the Bill mentions Money, it
is taken to be Money at deposito or interest; wherein is to be observed, That
the interest must be joined with the principal sum, without any
specification, whereby it may be separated or distinguished, because the debtor
shall not pretend to pay the same at his best opportunity and pleasure; as may
(thereupon) be done for money letten for loan, retaining still the principal
in his hands, and paying the interest from time to time, quarterly, or half
yearly: for it is lawful and accustomed, that although one hundredth pounds
were taken up for one whole year, after the rate of ten upon the hundredth; the
Debtor or Taker up of it, may discharge the same at three months, if he will,
paying one hundredth and two pounds ten shillings, unless the Bill made for the
same be made paiable at a time limited, with a penalty of a sum of money,
called by the Ciuilians Poena Canonica, which with us in England is done upon a
Bond, with a forfeiture of half or double the sum of the principal,
wherewith the interest is also joined without distinction, which may not exceed
the rate of ten upon the hundredth for the year, in the computation whereof,
diverse things are to observed, as we shall declare hereafter.

Now if a Bill made beyond the seas be done by two, three, or more persons, as
having bought a commodity as partners together, or taken up moneys together at
interest, wherein they bind themselves all as principal Parties or Debtors;
yet every man is but bound to pay his part. Subscription of Bills Obligatorie.
The like is, if one be bound, and two, or more do put their hand and seal,
and vnder-write, and seal the said Bill as Principals, yet paying their
proportionable parts, they shall be cleared by the Civil Law, and the custom
of Merchants: but if they do simply subscribe, and say we are Sureties, then
they are all bound for the whole, as if the words we or either of us in solidum
were expressed: which is the cause that in all notariall writings (only used
upon questionable matters decided, or to be decided) they do not only bind the
parties with these words, but they do also make a declaration of all
renuntiations of privileges, Renunciation of Privileges, and what they be.
and especially of exceptio diuisionis, and then it is one for all. Exceptio
ordinis and excus sionis, is to meddle with the Suerties before the Principal:
Renouncing the Letters of Adrian the Emperor, for the cessions of goods,
Prolongations of paiments, Vintages, or free Martes, all Constitutions, Canons,
Privileges, or Statutes and Acts of Parliament made or to be made, published
or enacted; and in these cases the debtor is always to be bound with the
Suerties in all Acts or Instruments made before Notaries. Renouncing also the
benefit of Senatus-consultus, or Arrest Velle Joan, for the prerogative of
women, which upon the decease of their husbands do claim their portion
brought in by them in marriage, or their dower, or any thing else that may be
alleged or imagined.

In England, Bills Obligatorie being made payable to the party, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, may conveniently be set over, as
aforesaid; because the lawful assignee shall be of Record, and registered also
upon the Bill, and if there be two or more bound in a Bill, fraudulent dealing
will be also better prevented; for by the Common Law, Acquitance to one
discharges the rest.
if one do release one of his Debtors (by way of acquittance) that is bound
with others unto him, they are all released and acquitted thereby, although
there were never so little paid of the debt; insomuch that a receipt for
parcel of the money received of one of the debtors, being made in full payment
of his part only, does nevertheless discharge them all, as for example by
woeful experience may be demonstrated.

Three Linen Drapers of London, bought of a Merchant stranger 40 pieces of
fine Hollands cloth, amounting to 160 ll, and gave their joint Bill for the
payment of it at six months: one of them became insoluent, and being
imprisoned, made a composition with the Merchant for eight pounds, and
thereupon had a general acquitance made to him only. Shortly after, the other
two Linen Drapers, being somewhat pressed for the payment, and engaged for the
other, they did plead the other man's general acquitance, which was but a
receipt made of the said eight pound, expressing that is was in full of his
part; and nevertheless upon trial in Law, it was adjudged to be a sufficient
discharge for them all, in nature of a general acquitance. These observations
at the Common Law, and such like Book cases as I have put down, I hold to be
necessary for Merchants to know, albeit we handle the Law-merchant in this
Treatise, and not matters of the Common Law. If you take beyond the Seas any
Bill Obligatorie for money delivered upon two or three lives, or for wagers or
lays, which are conditional, Bills Obligatory upon two or three lives.
let the party be put to prove: if upon proof of lives, make the Bill
payable at a day certain, unless one of the parties were dead: whereby the
party is bound to pay, or else to prove the decease of the one: on the
contrary, if you make the Bill to be paid, if they be all alive or living,
then must you prove they be living. To conclude, Abundans Cautela non nocet.
Finally, if a Bill be thirty years old, and never demanded or questioned, it
is void by the Civil Law, and the Law or Custom of Merchants does not take
any knowledge thereof.

CAHP. XIIII. Of Letters of Credit and Blankes signed.
THE Credit of Merchants is so delicate and tender, that it must be cared for
as the apple of a man's eye: Hence it does proceed that Letters of Credit are
had in such reputation, that the giver of them will be well advised before he
do make them; and the party to whom they are directed, will be careful to
accomplish them, for it does concern both their Credits: The giuers Credit of
the Letters, will be had in question of insufficiency, known to the other
that he does not accomplish them, or he that does not perform them may be
thought to be weak and to want means to do the same. Definition of Letters
of Credit.
To make Letters of Credit, is properly a Participation of Credit to another,
which is performed as follows. A Merchant does send his friend or his servant
(either within the Land or beyond the Seas) to buy some commodities, or to take
up money for some purpose, and does deliver unto him an open Letter, directed
to another Merchant, requiring him that if his friend such a one, the Bearer of
that Letter (being either his friend or servant) have occasion to buy
commodities, or to take up monyes to the value of so many hundreths, or so many
thousand pounds in that place or thereabouts; that he will either procure him
the same, or pass his promise, Bill, or Bond for it, and he will provide him
the money, or pay him by exchange, or give him such satisfaction as he shall
require: the party to whom this Letter is directed will accordingly do his
endeavor and perform the request of the other, and keep the Letter for his
assurance or security, and what he does thereupon undertake, is made apparent
by such Writings or Evidences as he takes of the said Bearer of the Letter,
that thereupon he may be well dealt withal accordingly. But if it should
fall out, that for some known cause to this party, he does not accomplish his
request contained in the said Letters of Credit: Then the Bearer of the same
keeps the said Letters, and returns them unto the giver, without any other
proceeding; Protests for the nonperformance of Letters of Credit.
unless it be in case where this party is a debtor to him that gave the
Letters of Credit, and then he must take witnesses of it, and with a Scriuenor
or Notarie make a Protest against him, protesting to recover of him (by all
lawful and convenient means) all the damages, charges, and interest, which
he or any other shall sustain thereby, by reason of the nonperformance of the
said Letters of Credit, and that in time and place as occasion shall serve;
which Protest is a sufficient mean amongst Merchants, and before any Judges of
the Civil Law, to recover the same, upon proof at all times accordingly. But
if the party to whom these Letters of Credit were directed do make a
reasonable answer for his excuse, and requires the Scriuenor to put down the
same in the Act or Instrument of the said Protest; then is the cause considered
withal, and the losses and damages may fall upon another: for if the giver of
the said Letters of Credit, were a debtor to the other that did receive them,
to be paid by them, either by commodities to be bought, or monyes to be
taken up, as aforesaid; then the said Protest may serve the receiver of the
said Letters of Credit to recover his damages of him that gave him the same:
wherein the Magistrates will have a great consideration, as a matter whereby
the Commerce is interrupted, which is the cause also that men must be advised
on the other side, not to be too rash to affirm the goodness or sufficiency
of another man's Estate, Credit, or Reputation, whereby a third man becomes a
loser, loss being the greatest hinderer of Traffic and Trade. The Ciuilians
therefore have a Title in their Laws, which is strictly observed, as you shall
understand hereafter.

The Signing of Blankes, is also a Custom amongst Merchants, whereby they
strengthen the cred^t of their Factors or Servants in the like occasions, which
is a matter of great confidence, Great confidence among Merchants.
considering the easy transferring of B^lles already spoken of. For a
Merchant setting his name to a Blanke paper, his Factor or Servant has an
ability to wrong his Master many ways. Therefore such as are provident, do
restrain that power by certain Covenants or Declarations, and yet the same
(being known unto the parties that do make use of the said Blankes) might
become scrupelous thereupon to be well dealt withal, howsoever, we see what
honest and plain dealing is used amongst Merchants, and what adventures they
bear to compass their businesses. A Merchant of Antuerp will send his Servant
at Amsterdam to buy him 500 Last of Corn, upon advice he has that Corn is
spoiled, or the Harvest fails in Spain, Portugal, and other places: and
because he is uncertain what his Servant can effect, doubting that other men
might have the like advice, and prevent him; he delivers Blanke paper by him
subscribed, with order to his said Servant, that he shall upon such an
occasion, write his Letter upon the said paper to such a man, his Factor at
Dansicke in the East Countries, to buy for him the quantity of Corn which he
cannot buy at Amsterdam, and shall date the Letter, as if himself had written
the same. The Factor of Dansicke does presently perform the Commission given
him, and so the business is accomplished. complished. But in this the
confidence may be as great, as in the making of Bills Obligatory, and yet the
adventure far inferior thereunto; for upon these Blankes, there is an
Addition to the name, or a Precedence in words, namely, Your loving friend, A.
B. etc. which is impertinent, and not to be used in Bills of Debt. Herein we
may consider a necessity to give Blankes, not only because of the Masters
Credit requisite; but also because of the uncertainty in the finding of the
quantity of Corn which was to be bought.

CHAP. XV. Of Letters of Attorney, or Procurations and Transports, or
Conueyances.
A definition of a Letter of Attorney, etc.
A Letter of Attorney, is an Act publicly done before a Notarie or Scriuenor,
whereby one man gives power and authority of himself unto another man, by
way of Deputation to do, execute, and perform for him any lawful thing,
which he himself (being the Constituant) might or may (as well present, as
absent) do, conclude, and determine in all causes Civil and Politic; with
power also to Substitute one or more persons to do the same under him, in the
said first Constituants name; and to swear in the soul of him, if cause so
require: albeit the said Letters of Attorney do differ in the manner and
form, as well as in the Substance, which must be observed. They are called
beyond the Seas Procurations, to procure or effect that which a man would have
commonly in an other place, and in matter of Authority for Law Causes, they
go one deg^ee further than Letters of Credit, because the Law does require the
same, to the end that the Authority or Power of the party Constituted, may
publicly appear: wherein a Letter Missiue is not sufficient, as the same is
in things concerning the ordinary course of Negotiations and dealings between
Merchants, which by the Law-merchant are of great validity.

Procurations generally, or for the most part, contain the word Irreuocable;
P^ocurations irreuocable.
implying that Power given should endure for ever, and so it is taken beyond
the Seas. But by the Common Law the words are used, Pro forma, and a
Procuration or Letter of Attorney, is reuocable at all times, unless it be
that the said Letter of Attorney do contain a Transport of some thing which is
conveyed thereby: As if a man do constitute another for the recouvering of
certain moneys for the parties own proper use, without account to be rendered
for the same, and the said party has recovered the said moneys by virtue of
it. This Letter of Attorney cannot be revoked to any purpose, the effect being
fully performed which was the cause thereof. So beyond the seas, if you make a
Letter of Attorney to a Procurator in Law, to follow a cause for you in Law,
although the same be made irreuocable, yet upon good cause you may revoke the
same, and appoint another to follow the cause: but it is commonly done with
leave of the Court where the cause is consisting or depending, and because the
intimations and citations are to be done at such times as the cause may
require, the nomination of some place, as it were to choose a Domicilium must be
done, Procurations with a limited power.
but the power may be limited. An Attorney may have authority to convict a man
by law for the recovery of money or goods, and to proceed to execution by
imprisoning of the Debtor; yet he shall have no power to release him out of
prison, without further authority; so in the receiving of goods or money,
wherein every man is to use his discretion, as the cause may require.

A Merchant may also make a Letter of Attorney to a Notarie beyond the seas,
and thereby to give him power to make any insinuation, or intimation, or
protest, against any other Merchant there, to serve him in all occasions or
occurrences concerning the matter in question. For a Procuration is beyond the
seas of that validity, that the party who has the same, and is the
Procurator, is taken in law as absolute as the Constituant, and many sundry
proceedings may be used against him accordingly, by Citations, Intimations,
Protests, Recoueries of goods delivered formerly, and recalled back again, or
the value thereof upon any Attachments or Sequestrations, which cannot be done
against a man's Factor or Servant: A caveat for Procurators.
therefore they that have Procurations are to be careful of the dispossessing
of themselves of any goods, or moneys received, to be cleared by the Law, which
happens commonly of goods taken upon the seas, or sequestered in any Harbor,
by virtue of a Letter of Attorney or Procuration.

The Ciuilians entreating of Procurations or Constitutions under Titulas
Mandati, have well observed, The original of Mandata.
that commandments have their original from friendship, or out of authority
of office and place, and that the same are diligently to be executed and kept:
and hereupon they have also noted diverse questions and propositions, Nos igitur
pauca tractabimus adrem, de qua agitur, pertinentia.

A.B. willed C.D. his debtor to pay unto E.^. one hundred pounds which he did
owe him, C.D. did not pay the said money, but promised to pay the same.
Queritur whether C.D. has performed the commission or commandment given him,
and whether he be discharged of the debt; as also whether this order or
commission can be revoked. A.B. owing the like sum to E.F. Herein C.D. has
not performed his commission, which was to pay, and not to promise the payment
of the hundredth pounds, and therefore the said Commission might be revoked, and
C.D. was not discharged of the debt, for the matter was entire, and all entire
Commissions are reuocable. Mandatum enim re integra, reuocari potest, and res
est integra, and si stipulatio promissioue interuenerit cum id non mandauerim.
For if C.D. should break or become insoluent, E.F. would come to A.B. his
debtor, to have satisfaction for the said money, and C.D. was not discharged of
the debt owing unto A.B. But if E.F. had taken his promise for payment, then
upon proof made of it, the case is clear.

It is a question also, whether a Procurator having commission to receive
moneys which were owing or lent, and to give an Acquittance for the same; and
receiving the money without making an Acquittance, have performed his
commission: And the answer is, That he has not performed the same, because he
made no Acquittance, as he was willed to do, Aliud est enim confessio, aliud
numeratio. Albeit the Acquittance did not concern the Procurator, but the
party who repaied the money.

Another case they handle at large, Bartholomew did make and constitute
Nicholas to be his Procurator or Agent, in the buying of commodities, to the
value of five thousand crowns; and he the Constituant to be answerable for the
price and total sum of five thousand crowns: and withal giving full power
and authority unto the said Nicholas, that his procuration shall be good and
available, during the lives of the honest persons Gerome, John, and Angel, of
whom the said Constituant had his Commission, and that they also together and
apart insolidum should be bound for the performance, and himself also.
Nicholas the Procurator by the commission of Jerome, John, and Angel, as also
of Bartholomew, caused by an Instrument (or Act past before a Notarie) the said
parties to be named in the contract, and thereby binds them unto Titus and
Meuius, for the commodities bought of them to the value or sum of five
thousand crowns. But Bartholomew is not named in the article whereby the other
parties are bound in the covenant; whereupon some would conclude, that for want
of form Bartholomew was not bound to the payment, although by commission of
the other three he had constituted and made Nicholas to be the Procurator. In
Procurations the will of the Constituant is to be regarded.
The rule in Law being, Quod vna determinatio respiciens plura determinabilia,
aqualiter terminare debet. And herein is the intention and will of all the
contractors more to be regarded than the conceit of words, which causes
Merchants to be accounted cauillors, and to lose much of their credit and
reputation.

It is also a custom amongst Merchants, that if the Master (knowing that his
Procurator has exceeded his Commission) be silent, the same is taken for a
consent; the rather because Procurations (commonly running in general words,
whereby Factors are directed) do comprehend all things which (of course) are to
be done touching moneys or payment of exchanges for moneys.

The question therefore to know whether a Procurator (having commission to sell
commodities, or to let them to hire at a price) has authority to receive the
money or hire, may be thought friuolus: for the buyer in matter of sale of
commodities in market ouert, has no regard to the Procurations or Commissions
given to the seller of the said commodities.

The like may be understood in this question following, Whether a Merchant
(selling Cloth unto an Abbot to cloth his Friars or Monks) shall not be
satisfied and paid for his cloth, although the Abbot did divert and employ the
same afterward to another use? For the use is no matter to be regarded by the
Merchant, but the payment of his Cloth. If a man buying Paper for the printing
of a book, does not print the book, and sells the Paper unto another
Merchant that is no cause but he must pay for the Paper, whereof no man ought
to make doubt.

If a Merchant makes a Procurator, Doubts in procurations by whom to be proved
etc.
or by letters gives credit to negotiate some business with another Merchant;
if this Merchant do take exception to the procuration and letters, and makes
doubt whether the party that brought the same be the right man: the Procurator
is not bound to make any further proof; but the party excepting against him
is to make good his assertion, and to prove the same by the Law and Custom of
Merchants.

Another question is moved, whether a Merchant that has commission to receive
a sum of money, and to pay the same unto another, and besides to pay the
interest due unto the party to whom he paid that money, is bound to prove
what interest he paid, and to whom he paid that interest or use money: it
seems Prima front, that the Merchant is bound to name the party to whom he
paid the said use money; and yet there is doubt made whether he should pay it
without he were compelled thereunto as a thing unlawful; and therefore the
Commission or Order the Merchant had, is not to be contradicted, but must be
allowed without any other proof, for this question is so resolved by the
Ciuilians, and where the proof is not needful, there the nomination of the
persons to whom it was paid is to no purpose, according to the rule Qui non
tenetur probare, non tenetur nominare.

It is also worthy the observation, Commissions subject to Arbitrators.
that generally all Ciuilians do concur in opinion, That when Merchants by
their Letters or Commissions use these or the like words, Let all things be
done as shall be thought most expedient or convenient, that the said
Commissions or Directions are to be left to the interpretation of Arbitrators
when any question arises; which is also in many more questions concerning
Merchants noted in most of their Law books: hereof we intend (God willing) to
entreat more amply in the next chapter concerning Factors and Servants, and the
Commissions given them, etc.

The ordinary rule of Procurations in things complete and not effected, is
understood to end with the death of the Master or Merchant that gives such
procurations, albeit there are many exceptions: for a Procuration may be made
to endure after his death, Procurations to continue after death etc.
which kind of Procurations the Florentines and other nations confirm by their
last wills and testaments, which nevertheless are to be understood that the
state of an heir be not impaired thereby, wherein the Law interposeth her
authority. And for a general rule in all peremptory and absolute
Procurations or Commissions, it must be known that the like authority is used
to prevent many inconueniencies, having a vigilant care that equity be
maintained.

And that all Merchants or Procurators for Merchants, are to accomplish the
lawful Commissions given them, and means thereunto being provided, or else to
answer the damages which the parties shall receive by the default thereof.
Those therefore that without any Commission do undertake things which bring
losses unto the parties are much to be blamed, and by a fuller measure to
answer for the same, or to make by gain a recompense for the losses, as
occasion serves.

De Constituto.
Some that have written de Constituto have moved questions, Whether it be
lawful to take penalties or forfeitures, if the Constituant do bind himself
to perform or else to loose a certain sum of money? Others, whether a
Commission shall be executed by an ordinary messenger? Others, whether it be
convenient to use the words, You shall give him full credit and trust in what
he has undertaken to do? How long the Commissions shall endure, if there be
no time limited? and the like questions: which upon due consideration are
easily resolved, and (in my opinion) impertinent to trouble Merchants with
them. Such only as are material shall be handled in the following Chapter. (*)

CHAP. XVI. Of Factors and Servants, and Commissions given unto them.
THE difference between a Factor and a Servant consists chiefly in this,
That a Factor is created by Merchants Letters, and takes Salarie or provision
of Factoridge: But a Servant or an Apprentise, is by his Master entertained,
some receiving wages yearly, and some others without wages. a Factor is bound
to answer the loss which happens by ouerpassing or exceeding his
Commission; whereas a Servant is not, but may incur his Masters displeasure.
For albeit that the Spanish Proverb is Quien Passa commission, pierde
Provision, that he that exceeds his Commission shall lose his Factoridge.
Alteration of the case with Factors.
The case is altered long since by the Custom of Merchants, and now it is
Sub^lca lo paga, his purse does pay for it. Factors therefore must be very
careful, to follow the Commissions given them very orderly and punctually; and
because Merchants are not able to prescribe every thing, so exactly unto their
Factors as is convenient, it behooves them to make good choice of the persons
which they do employ, for their welfare depends upon Traffic; otherwise,
the Factor grows rich and the Merchant poor, because his gain of Factoridge
is certain, howsoever the success of Merchants employment does prove. But
having a good Factor, which word (Good) implies all and more than an honest
Factor, who may be honest and nevertheless simple in his proceedings, and
others also may be wise and not honest. This Good Factor therefore may be
trusted, Ample Commissions with an addition.
and all Commissions given unto him may be ample, with addition of these words,
Dispose, do, and deal therein as if it were your own; and this being so
found; the Factor is to be excused, although it should turn to loss, because
it is intended he did it for the best according to his discretion, which is
and ought to be the truest director, making a conscience to see their Masters
loss, if they can prevent it: but being limited to the contrary, they can but
grieve, when their counsel and advice does not take place, either in the
selling of commodities in time, foreseeing a greater loss, or buying some
commodities dear over hastily, as also in keeping a commodity without
purloyning the same; A Passionate Commission.
sometimes upon a passionate humor, as a Merchant of Amsterdam did of late
years to his Factor in London, for being a loser by some Spanish Wines, by
writing in these words, My will is that upon the receipt of this my Letter, you
go to the next Ironmonger and buy a Hammer, and run into the Sellor, and
strike out the heads of all the Butts of Wine, and let it run into the Sellors:
For seeing the devil has eaten the horse, let him have the bridle too. The
Factor did herein use his discretion and kept the Wines, which he afterward
sold to benefit; for he remembered that losers have leave to speak.

Difference by Law between a Factor and a Servant.
Factors do deal most commonly for diverse men, and every man bears the
hazard of their actions; but if a Servant do deal for others by his Masters
direction, and they break, the Servant can be no loser, for he is taken to
have no other credit but his Masters, which is the cause that Intimations,
Citations, Attachments, and other lawful courses are executed against
Servants, and take no place against Factors unless they have Procurations. Now
let us set down such observations as Factors ought to know.

Observations concerning Factors.
IF a Factor do sell at one time unto one man several parcells of commodities
or goods belonging to diverse men's accounts, to be paid jointly in one or more
paiments, without any distinction made by the buyer for what parcels he pays
any sum in part of payment of the said debt, weekly or monthly, as
shopkeepers do* then is the said Factor to make a proportionable distribution
of the moneys so received upon every man's account, Commodities bought and sold.
according to the sum that every man's parcel did amount unto, until all be
paid: and if any loss does happen, or that all be not paid, the said loss
is to be distributed upon every man's account accordingly.

If a Factor do sell afterward more goods to the said man, or any other who is
already indebted for other commodities formerly bought, as aforesaid, be it
for his own account, or other men's accounts, and in the Interim receive some
more monyes in part of payment and account between them; then is the said
Factor to distribute the said monyes as before, until the said old and
precedent debt be first paid, unless there were cause of controversy for
them, or that the payment were indorsed upon the Bill made for the later goods
sold unto that man: for that Bill may be transferred or set over unto another
man, and so is not he the receiver of that money, but the other man.

If a Factor do sell goods to another man payable at time for his own
account, and rcieveth the money for the same at the time of payment, and in the
mean time lets other men's monyes remain in that man's hands unpaid, for
goods by him formerly sold; this Factor is to be answerable for that money unto
those other men, although he should never recover one penny of it. For he
cannot (without fraud) bear with the non-payment of other men's moneys after
they be due, and procure the payment of his own money, to another man's loss
and prejudice.

In like case, if a Factor do sell unto a man certain goods of another man's
account, either by it self or amongst other parcells, and this Factor gives
not advice to the owner or proprietarie of the sale of the said goods, but
afterward (having had more dealings with that man in selling of goods and
receiving of monyes) this man becomes insoluent; The Factor is to make good
that debt for the said goods so sold, because he gave no advice to the owner
of the sale of the said goods at convenient time, even as if he had sold those
goods unto a man contrary to the Commission given unto him; for the Salarie of
Factoridge binds him thereunto.

If a Factor by order or Commission of a Merchant, do buy any Commodities
above the price limited unto him by the said Merchant, or that they be not of
that sort, goodness, or kind, as he is willed to do: This Factor is to keep
the same for his own account, and the Merchant may disclaim the buying of
them. The like he may do, if the Factor (having bought a commodity according
to his Commission) do ship the same for another place than he has Commission
to do.

If a Factor do sell a commodity under the price limited unto him; he is to
make good the loss or difference of the price, unless he can give a
sufficient reason of his doing so: wherein he is to consider the disposition
of the Merchant for whom he deals, as is before noted.

If a Factor buy commodities according to his Commission, and afterward the
price of them rises, and thereupon (fraudulently) he ladeth them for another
place, contrary to his Commission, to take the benefit thereof: in this case
the Merchant shall recover damages against the Factor by the Custom of
Merchants, upon proof made thereof.

If a Factor, by the advice of a Merchant, do buy a commodity for that
Merchants account, with the said Merchants money, or by his credit; and the
Factor gives no advice of the buying of it to the said Merchant, but does sell
the same again for his own benefit and gain: the Merchant shall recover this
benefit of the said Factor, by the Office of Prior and Consulls, according to
the Custom of Merchants, and shall be moreover amerced for his fraud.

If the Factor do sell another man's commodity to a man discredited, who cannot
usually (as before) buy commodities at the ordinary price as other men, and it
falls out that this man breaks; the Factor shall pay for the said goods, as
shall be thought they were worth, unless he can prove that he was ignorant
of the parties weak estate and credit, or that he sold him goods of his own
account also, which argues plain dealing, or that he had Commission of the
other man to deal for him, as if it were for his own proper goods, as has
been declared. And yet in this case he cannot barter any of the said
commodities for other commodities, Batter.
but he must have express commission and order for it from the Merchant;
neither can he transfer or set over any Bills Obligatorie in nature before
declared: Bills of Debt.
For albeit this manner of Commissions given to Factors is very large, yet it
contains certain restrictions and limitations, in every Merchants
understanding.

If a Factor shall by a false Entry in the Custom house, either unawares or
of purpose, Customs.
conceal part of the Custom without consent or priuitie of the Merchant,
whereby the goods become forfeited to the Prince; the said Factor shall bear
the loss of them, and answer the value thereof unto the Merchant, as they did
cost, if it be for goods to be transported; or as they might have been sold, if
it be for goods to be imported.

If a Factor or Merchant, do color the goods of Merchant Strangers in paying
but English Customs, (although he did bear the adventure of the Seas for the
said goods) he runs into a Praemunire, and forfeiteth all his goods unto the
King, and his body to perpetual imprisonment.

If a Factor, by a Letter of advice, or by an Inuoyce of commodities which the
Merchant sends, do make a short entry into the Custom house, the goods not
entered shall be lost, but the Factor cannot be charged with the same.

If a Factor make return unto a Merchant for the prouenue of his commodities
sold, Prohibited commodities.
in prohibited goods which may not be exported, and have no Commission from the
Merchant to do the same; he shall bear the loss of those goods, if they be
seized upon for the King, or taken as forfeited: But if it be upon commodities
to be imported, the Factor is in no fault; howbeit he ought to give advice
unto the Merchant, what commodities are forbidden to be imported, or exported,
according to the pleasure of Princes, which are absolute governors in their
Havens, Harbors, Ports, or Creekes.

Monyes.
If a Factor commit any unlawful Act, by the direction of the Merchant, be it
for the transportation of Gold or Silver into the parts beyond the Seas, or
otherwise* and if it happen thereupon that the same be taken, the Merchant
bears the loss: and yet the Factor is subject to pay treble damages by the
Law, if it be followed within the year; or may be fined for the same in the
Starchamber, although it be many years after.

If a Factor do pay money for a Merchant (without Commission) to another man,
it is at his apperill to answer for it. And if he deliver other men's money at
interest, and take more than the tolleration of the Statute (which is ten in
the hundredth by the year) whereby the said Statute against Usury takes hold
of him, and the money is lost; the said Factor is to be charged therewith, and
to make good the money unto the Merchant.

If a Factor (having received other men's goods or monyes into his custody) be
robbed of the said goods and moneys, he is to bear the loss, Lost goods.
and to make good the same to the Merchant: But not in case where the
unmerciful Elements of Fire and Water shall destroy the said goods or moneys,
or where a Town is sacked or pilled; which is always to be borne by the
owner or proprietarie of the same.

If a Factor buy a commodity, Damnified Commodities.
which afterward becomes damnified by some accident or casualtie, whereby
the Merchant (for whose account he bought the same) becomes a looser; that
Factor is not to be charged with any part of the loss: But if the commodities
were damnified before, then he is to bear some part of the loss, although it
happened to be known afterward. A Factor bought for a Merchant of Amsterdam
one hundredth tons of Allomes, which came from Ciuita Vecchia, laden with some
Candia Oil, whereof some part was spilled upon the said Allome* afterward the
same being mingled together, was sold and transported to Amsterdam, and there
sold to the dyers of Harlem, Amsterdam, and Roterdam; who using the same, found
their cloth stained in diverse places; (for where the oil touched, there the
color could not take) so that they became great loosers, as appeared by diverse
testimonials. The Factor did thereupon demand reparation of damages of him who
sold him the allome; and the Merchant did the like of the Factor, for there was
above 300 ll lost: whereupon the matter was much debated amongst Merchants both
here and beyond the seas, and they did deliver their Parecer or opinions in
writing, The Parecer of Merchants.
and being found that the Factor had knowledge that some oil had bin spilled
upon the allome, and nevertheless bought the same, he was adjudged by the
sentence of Merchants, to pay the one half of the said loss, and the other
half was borne between the dyers and the Merchant of Amsterdam: and he that
sold the allomes, was cleared and fully paid; so that in these cases the
circumstances and accidents are to be considered.

If a Factor do receive money for other men's accounts, Loss by money.
which afterward are decried, or some loss does happen by exchanging the
same, be it upon Copper moneys, or light Gold taken for merchandises sold;
every man is to bear that loss proportionably according to his sum, and
the Factor is to sustain no damage thereby, unless it were for false coin by
him received, which he is bound to know.

Letters of Credit.
If a Factor be required by a Merchants Letter of Credit, to give credit unto
others, he must look very precisely to observe the same accordingly; which
Letters of Credit are either ample, or restrained to certain conditions and
limitation of time, place, persons, sums, and many other circumstances: if
they be ample, then is it dangerous for the giver of the said Letters of
Credit, and may also procure a loss to fall upon the Factor; wherein
consideration must be had both ways. Suppose A. B. of London, writes his
Letter unto C. D. of Antuerp in these words; If E. F. of Amsterdam, or any
other of my friends there, draw by exchange upon you any Sums of money; it
may please you to follow his and my friends order: I will be your warrant for
all, and have a care that all shall be accomplished orderly. C.D. of Antuerp
the Factor in this case, Exchange and Rechange.
does accept from time to time many Bills of Exchanges, and paid them
accordingly, and takes up the money (by the direction of E.F. of Amsterdam) for
Spain and other places; and so continues the same for a long time, by way of
rechange from one place to another, upon the said credit of A.B. of London. At
last this Factor. C.D. becomes suspicious, because of this long continuance
of money by exchange and rechange, and writes unto the said A.B. of London, to
know whether he is contented to continue his former credit by him given to E.
F. of Amsterdam? A. B. continues the same, but with a limitation to a certain
sum, Limitation of Letters of Credit.
not knowing what sum of money the said C.D. was engaged for the said E.F. of
Amsterdam; for C.D. gave him no notice of it at that time: hereupon it falls
out, that E.F. of Amsterdam becomes insoluent, and being much indebted unto
C.D. the Factor of Antuerpe; this Factor requires his satisfaction at the
hands of A.B. of London, according to the former Letter of Credit. A.B. does
answer, That he had restrained and limited the said Credit to a certain
sum, which indeed did cut off all former matters, seeing C.D. gave him no
notice of the moneys owing before, and A.B. was only to answer for the money
which was taken up by the second Letter of Credit, according to the sum
limited, otherwise A. B. had been cleared of all. But if C.D. did continue
those monyes by exchange and rechange, upon the credit of A. B, and the Factor
(with whom he had correspondence) does become insoluent, and thereby C.D. the
Factor is damnified and pays the monyes running by exchange, or is bound to
pay the same: This Factor is to be saved harmless by A. B. because he took
up or caused to be taken up, The Efficient Cause always to be regarded
the said monyes originally: So that his Credit was the Efficient Cause of it,
and the Factor is to be regarded herein, in all reason.

If a Factor do accept Bills of Exchanges of a Merchant, with order to
Rechange the same again upon him, or to take it up by exchange for another
place or places, where he the said Factor shall find it to be for the most
benefit of the Merchant: if this Factor take up the same according to his best
skill and knowledge, although it be found contrary to the Merchants intention,
the Factor is not to be charged, and the Merchant is to save him harmless for
the principal, with exchange, rechange, and all charges of factoridge.

If a Factor do make over money for another man's account by exchange unto
another man or Merchant, before he have notice that this Merchant is broken,
and the Bills of Exchange are not due: this Factor has authority to
countermaund the payment of this money, although the party (upon whom the Bill
of Exchange is directed) had accepted the same. And if the said party should
pay the same before it was due, he is to repaie the same again to the said
Factor, as having paid it in his own wrong, contrary to the custom of
Merchants in exchanges.

If a Factor do freight a ship for some voyage to be made, Fraighting of ships.
going and coming, for a Merchants account, and by his Commission or order,
whereof a charter party of fraightment is made by Indenture between him and the
Master of the ship; this Factor is liable for the performance thereof, and to
pay the freight and all things accordingly. But if the ship be only fraighted
outward, and the Factor ladeth the same with some goods, then these goods are
liable for the freight, and the Master can demand nothing of the Factor by the
charterpartie, but must look to be paid by the party that receives the
goods, according to the Bill of lading; whereby it is conditioned, Bills of
lading.
that the freight shall be paid upon the receipt of the said goods. And so is
it also if a ship be fraighted to go to diverse parts, as it were bound from one
place to another, and to be free in the last place of his discharge: for the
Master must still have an eye to be secured by goods, unless there were an
express Condition made in the charterpartie, to the contrary, or that the
ship were fraighted by the Great for a certain sum of money to be paid by
an agreement.

If a Factor do freight a ship for another man, or for his own account, and
when it comes to the place appointed to unlade, there are no goods to relade
the same, or there wants money for the lading thereof; if the Master do not
stay out all his days of demourer agreed upon by the charterpartie of
fraightment, Protest for not lading.
and make a protest against the party (that he was consigned unto) to give him
his lading within that time, but comes away before that time be expired, and
although he makes a protest, for that he is not laden: yet the Factor is to
pay him no freight at all, unless (for the freight outward) it were
conditioned by the charterpartie. But if the Master do stay out his time, then
the Factor is to answer the freight, although the Master had laden his ship
with Salt for his own account: for if the said ship had bin laden only with
Salt by the Merchant, which (it may be) would not pay half the freight, yet
the Factor or Merchant may at their pleasure abandon the same to the Master for
his freight, Goods to be abandoned for the freight.
and the Master can demand no more of the Factor by the charterpartie. But if
the Master do take in Salt, and ladeth his ship by his own means, before the
days of demourer are expired, and that by some condition made with the Factor,
he may claim freight; then the Factor is to have the benefit of the Salt in
defalcation of the said freight.

If a Factor do freight a ship for a Merchant, and afterward the said ship is
taken to serve the king for some few days, within the time agreed upon for the
lading; and hereupon the Merchant disclaimeth the fraighting of the said ship,
albeit the Factor did proceed to lade the same: In this case the Factor is not
to bear any loss; but what damage shall be adjudged to the Master, the
Merchant is to save the Factor harmless of it.

If a Factor do hire a ship by the month for another Merchant, or for his own
account, and ladeth the same being ready to depart, afterward the king makes
a general Embargo or restraint upon all ships for a time; the Master cannot
demand any freight of the Factor for and during the said time of arrest. And
if the ship be unladen again, and employed in the kings service, the Factor is
free of all agreements or covenants with the Master.

Money given for fraighting.
If a Factor do receive a sum of money of the owners of a ship, in
consideration that he fraighteth the said ship for a voyage, promising to repay
the said money at the return of the said voyage: if the said Factor have
fraighted this ship for another man's account, this Merchant is to have the
benefit of this money during the time; and if the Factor conceal the same, he
is to repair the damage thereof, which is to be considered both for the
interest, and adventure of the seas, for the said owners bear the same: and it
is supposed that the Merchant would have assured so much the less, or (by
employing that money toward the lading of the ship) he should disburse to much
money less to make the said voyage, and it may be thought, that in regard of
that money, the freight is made the greater, whereof the said owners of the
ship have had a consideration by disbursing the same.

Assurance.
If a Factor be required to make assurance for a Merchant upon a ship or goods
laden for a certain voyage, and have moneys in his hands to pay for the Premio
or the price of assurance; and this Factor does neglect the same, and gives no
notice of it to the Merchant, who might have made assurance in another place;
and the said ship or goods do perish at the seas: this Factor is to answer the
damage, unless he can give some sufficient reason for the nonperformance of
the said order or Commission.

Composition made without order.
If a Factor having made assurance upon goods laden, which afterward are taken
by the enemy, makes any composition with the assurers for the same, without
order or Commission for it; he is to answer the whole assurance to the
Merchant. A Merchant caused a ship to be fraighted and laden with commodities
for Constantinople by a Factor of London, himself dwelling at Antuerpe, and
being a subject to the king of Spain in the late wars, caused 2000 ll to be
assured at London upon the said goods; the ship and goods was taken by the
Galleys of Sicilia and brought to Palermo, where it was proved that the goods
did appertain to the King of Spain his subjects; but that there was 2000 ll
assured at London by English Merchants, (their enemies in those days)
pretending thereupon to take the said goods for forfeited, or so much of them
as should amount to the sum so assured. Hereupon the Assurers (having
intimation from the Factor of it) desired to make some composition to avoid
that danger, whereby the goods also might be sooner cleared, and the
possession obtained for the owner and proprietarie thereof, which was the
Merchant of Antuerp, wherein expedition was required: The Factor (in regard of
the said expedition) did not stay to receive an answer from the Merchant what
he should do, but makes a composition with the assurors, for 60 pound for
the hundredth pound, to be paid instantly. The goods were afterward all
recovered, whereof so much as had been assured, was formerly relinquished to
the assurors, for the Merchant would not condescend to make any composition
with the assurors: So that the Factor did bear the adventure to lose 2000 ll,
for some 1200 ll which he had received, if the goods had not been recovered;
and therefore the said Factor took to himself the benefit of this
composition, by the advice of the experienced Merchants.

If a Factor by error of account do wrong unto a Merchant, Accounts.
he is to amend and to make good the same, not only for the principal, but
also with the interest for the time. So on the contrary, if a Factor for his
own wrong, have forgotten to charge the Merchants account, with some parcells
paid out for him, or made over by exchange; the Merchant is to answer for it
with interest for the time. In these precedent observations, are comprised all
other cases of differences which may happen between Factors and Merchants.

CAHP. XVII. Of the beginning of Sea Laws.
Having in the former Chapters methodically entreated (as also in this
hitherto) of the matters therein intended, nevertheless according to the
Contents of them, the matter being of several natures runs promiscuously,
but in the end will perform the work. For as the roundnesse of the Globe of
the world is compounded of the Waters and the Earth: So this work of the
Law-merchant cannot be complete, without the Sea Laws; so called (Laws)
because they are written and known; for without Navigations, Commerce is of
small moment, so that the Land affairs shall be intermixed with Seafaring
matters accordingly.

Some do attribute the first making of Sea Laws, to the Pheniciaus and
Carthaginians, because Pliny does ascribe the Art of Sailing unto them. But by
the most ancient Records, the Beginning must be from the inhabitants of the
Island of Rhodes, Rhodian Law.
situated within the Mediterranean Sea, who were most famous for shipping and
sailing, (as Strabo has written) and surpassing all Nations in knowledge of
equity in Maritime causes: and the Mediterranean Sea was for above one
thousand years only ruled by their Law, called the Rhodian Law, although
augmented with some additions of the Romans. At last (as some have recorded)
when all sorts of Laws, by the euersion and lacerating of the Roman Empire
were in a manner buried, the Rulers of Rome in the year 1075 made new Sea
Laws and Statutes, and so did every chief Seafaring Town upon the said
Mediterranean Coast, adding thereunto other ordinances. So did they of
Marseilles, in the year 1162; Genoa in the year 1186; they of Peloponessus
called Morea, in the year 1200; the Venetians, in the year 1262; Constantine
1270; James King of Arragon the said year; Peter King of Arragon 1340; and
they of Barselona 1434: Which Laws are collected and extant until this day.
But on the great Ocean Seas, The Law of Oleron.
the first Laws were made by the inhabitants of the Island of Oleron, situate
on the Seacoast of France near Saint Martin de Rea, against the River of
Charante, which was called Le Roll d' Oleron: by which the controversies on
that Coast were determined, and the said Laws were afterward dispersed and
brought in use in England and the Low Countries; whereupon diverse Statutes both
in England and Scotland have been enacted for Seafaring business; and in like
manner diverse ordinances in the Low Countries, especially since their fishing
trade began.

Edward the third, King of England, caused (with the advice of diverse men of
knowledge and experience in Maritime causes) diverse Articles to be set down,
Admiraltie Court in France.
and these were enrolled and obeyed for the government of the Admiral Court:
and the French King, John, made his Contracts with King Edward accordingly,
concerning the fishing trade, as by the Records extant in the Tower of London,
(where I have seen them) may appear.

Francis the French King, and Henry the third of France, have made some
Statute Laws concerning the Courts of Admiraltie; but the substance of all
does concur and agree with the Laws of Oleron, whereof we shall entreat more
hereafter.

Frederick the second, King of Denmark, at a Parliament holden at Coppenhauen
in the year 1561, has abridged, as also set down certain Acts or Statutes
for the ruling of Sea matters, but for the most para agreeing also with the
said Laws of Oleron; which you shall find in this Treatise set down upon
every occasion offered unto me, to make application of them in the Chapters
following.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the manner of Proceedings in Seafaring Causes.
ALl controversies and differences of Seafaring Actions, or Maritime Causes,
ought to be decided according to the Sea Laws, which took their beginning
from Customs and observations; and from them is the interpretation of the said
Law to be taken: and if any Case shall fall out that was not known before,
neither written down and authorized as a Law, then the same is to be
determined by the Judge, with the opinion of men of experience and knowledge in
the said Seafaring causes. And herein is all convenient expedition required,
that the matter may be summarily and briefly determined, especially in case of
shipwreck; wherein delays or protractions in Law, is a cruelty to vex such
afflicted persons.

Therefore to prevent appellations, present execution and restitution of goods
is used in causes of spoil, upon caution first found by the spoiled, to
satisfy the condemnation to the Judge, if there be just cause found of
appellation; Witnesses in causes Maritime.
and to this end also it is permitted that witnesses of the same Ship may be
examined, although the adverse party be not called thereunto, Merchants and
Mariners sailing together in one Ship, may bear witness each to other, and
Mariners against the Master when they are free and out of his command.

The plaintiff is to find suerties to pay costs and damages, if he do fail in
his proof; and the defendant is to be put in caution to satisfy the sentence,
Iudicio cisti and iudicatum solui.

If the defendant do stand out, or commit a comtempt by not appearing for to
defend himself or his Ship, or things challenged, the Judge of the Admiraltie
may (after four defaults entered) deliver the possession of the said Ship or
any other thing, or part thereof, to the plaintiff, putting in sureties for one
year and a day: and if the party appear not within that time, then the
property is finally adjudged to the plaintiff. And if he do appear within
the time, offering to pay the expenses, and putting in caution to obey and
perform the definitive sentence, he shall be admitted. But this caution or
suerties are liable absolutely for all from the beginning, and cannot be
discharged, as a Bail may be at the common Law, Difference between caution in
the Admiraltie, and bail at the Common Law of England.
bringing in the party at convenient time. Summons and Citations are not
needful, where the ship or goods in question are forthcomming; but may be done
in the same place where it lies, or the goods are found.

If any man be arrested or troubled for the like matters, he is presently to be
discharged upon suerties, and especially Mariners, because they shall not be
hindered of their voyage; which he may do with so much goods or the value
thereof, as he has within shipboord, at the Judges discretion: for it is
intended that otherwise traffic and commerce is interrupted.

CAHP. XIX. Of Buying and Selling of Commodities by Contracts.
THE buying and selling of commodities by contracts, may be distinguished
three manner of ways, namely, Regal, Notariall, and Verbal.

The Regal contracts, are made between Kings and Princes and Merchants, which
caused the Kings of Portugal to be called, Royal Merchants. For whereas the
Venetians had the trade for Spices and other commodities of the East Indies;
Regal contracts, called by the Ciuilians Solemn.
the Portugalls upon the discovery of those parts by Navigations, did bereave
the Venetians of that trade, as (by the reuolutions of time) other Nations have
almost compassed that trade of Spices, and taken the same from the Portugalls.
The Kings of Portugal had always the one moitie of the Pepper by way of
contract, and for that they would contract again with the Germans, or other
principal Merchants of other Nations and of their own, to deliver the same
upon a price agreed, upon the arrival of the Carrackes at Lixborne, according
unto which it was sold again with reputation to other Merchants, and dispersed
into diverse countries; and so was it also done for Cloves and Mace, and
sometimes for Indico, and the payments were made by assignation in the Banks
of Madrill, Lions and Bizanson, and sometimes at Florence and other places;
hereupon was the Contraction-house at Lixborne erected and named accordingly,
where the said Spices and commodities are brought and sold again.

Such are the contracts which the King of Spain does make with Merchants for
the provision of Corn for his towns in Africa upon the coasts of Barbary, as
Ceuta, Mosegam, Tangere, and other places, the payment whereof has been made
again by Pepper upon some especial contract, and the Merchants have thereupon
also made other contracts with Merchants of the Low Countries to deliver them
that Pepper at Amsterdam, and to take Corn in payment: But the case is since
altered by the incorporating of the East India trade.

Such were the contracts made by the French king Henry the third, with the
great Merchants of Italy, called Le graund party, for Salt, which they by
authority did ingrosse for the king, and brought also from other countries by
sole permission, causing every household in all France to take a proportion
yearly, or to pay for it whether they had occasion to use it or not, which was
an Italian invention; and for this they paid by contract unto the king six
hundred thousand pounds sterling (being two millions of French Crowns) yearly.

Such were the contracts which Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, made with
Merchants of London, for the provision of victuals and apparel for the
soldiers in Ireland during the late wars with the Earl Tirone, which did
amount to very great sums of money, insomuch that the several contracts for
apparel came to ninety six thousand suits of apparel, as I have seen by
the Records and Accounts extant in his majesty's Court of Exchequer. All these
and such like contracts are made by commissions granted for that purpose to
some great officers of the kingdom, who have thereby authority to contract
for the same with Merchants or others.

Notariall contracts have partly dependence upon the same, Notariall contracts
called Public.
for when those Merchants (which have contracted with Kings or Princes) are to
provide suddenly those things which they have contracted for, or to dispose of
the commodities which they have bought or engrossed into their hands: Then they
deal with other Merchants either to provide them of the said commodities, or
to sell them such as they have bought: and these contracts are made by public
Acts and Instruments before Notaries, to the end that all things agreed upon on
either side may be duly accomplished: and in these great contracts beyond the
seas, the paiments are (the most part for great sums) made in Banks also,
because of the commodiousnesse of it, as you shall note hereafter. Besides
this, many Merchants do make contracts, and pass them likewise before
Notaries, or Scriueners, because that things contracted for may require time to
effect them. As for example, a Merchant aduenturer sells unto a Merchant of
Middleborough two or three hundredth Clothes of known marks (whereby the
goodness is also known) at a certain price, the pack of ten Clothes, to be
delivered at Middleborough from time to time during the space of six months,
and the Middleborough Merchant does agree that (for the payment of these
Clothes) he will send to the Merchant aduenturer Linen cloth, and diverse other
commodities to be sold in London to pay himself as aforesaid, which
commodities are also sent from time to time within the compass of the said
time of six months, and the reckoning between them shall run accordingly:
hereupon a contract is made in writing before a Notarie public, and therein
diverse conditions are to be specified and observed. Conditions of a Merchants
Contract.
First it is agreed, that concerning the price of the Clothes sold, amounting
to such a sum sterling money called lawful money of England, there shall be
given for every twenty shillings or pound sterling so many shillings and
pence as they shall agree, according to the price of exchange amongst
Merchants, and these are shillings and pence Flemish money, whereof there is 35
or 36 shillings, or 35 shillings and six pence, or 36 shillings and eight pence
given or allowed in account between them for twenty shillings sterling, and
so after the rate for so many hundredth pounds or thousand pounds as the Clothes
may amount unto. Secondly it is agreed, that the Merchant aduenturer shall
bear the adventure of his Clothes, and deliver them upon his adventure,
charge, and danger of the seas, with all casualties, unto the Middleborough
Merchant within the town or warehouse of the Merchant there; and likewise that
the Middleborough Merchant shall bear the adventure of his Linen Cloth, and
other commodities, answer the Kings Customs, and all charges incident upon
the said commodities, until they be freely taken up into the Merchant
adventurers warehouse here. Thirdly, it is agreed between them (these
foreign commodities being sold paiable at times of payment) that if any bad
debts should be made thereby, either the Middleborough Merchant is to bear the
loss thereof, or else the Merchant aduenturer does take the hazard and
adventure of it upon him, for the consideration or allowance of double
factoridge, or two upon the hundredth. Fourthly, it is agreed between them,
that if the payment of the commodities of the Middleborough Merchant be not
made within the time of six months, according as the Clothes were sold; then
the Merchant aduenturer is to have allowance for the money by him not received
within the time after the rate of ten upon the hundredth for the year.
Lastly, (because the Merchant aduenturer takes pains in the selling of the
Merchandise and Commodities of the Middleborough Merchant to pay himself) it
is also agreed upon, that the Merchant aduenturer shall have allowance of
factoridge for it, after the rate of two pro Cent. which he should have given
unto another Factor to sell the same for him. This is the substance of a
Merchants Contract, wherein it seems all things have been well considered
and agreed upon; yet the principal matter for good and sure dealing is
omitted, Defective contracts.
which is not only to covenant that the Middleborough Merchant shall send him
good and merchantable wares or commodities to make money of, or to sell to good
Customers that will make him good payment, but especially, that the Merchant
aduenturer shall not be compelled to send him more clothes than the value of
the commodities received shall amount unto from time to time. And further, if
he do not send him within the time the quantity of commodities requisite to
pay himself for so many Clothes; The said Middleborough Merchant shall pay him
the damages sustained by the imploiment of his money in Clothes, or a certain
sum of money agreed upon between them for the nonperformance thereof.

In like manner a London Merchant does contract with a Merchant stranger here,
and buyeth of him a certain commodity, whereof the goodness is commonly
known by the mark, or otherwise by the Fabrica or making, as Veluets, Satin,
Silks, Fustians, and other commodities to be here delivered unto him by such a
day, or within so many months, at a price agreed upon between them, with the
manner of payment, and other conditions agreed also; hereupon likewise passes
a Notariall Contract which is performed accordingly. But put the case, That the
price of the said Veluets and Silks by some accident or occasion does fall,
and the London Merchant does repent himself of his bargain and contract, and
now some of the said foreign commodities are come from beyond the seas, and
arrived within the river of Thames, whereupon the Merchant stranger gives
notice unto him of it, and the London Merchant seems unwilling to receive the
said commodities, and is constrained either by a Scriuener or with witnesses to
offer unto him the said commodities according to their contract: Tendering of
commodities sold by Contracts.
here note that this offer or tender so made is of no validity or effect in
Law; for until the Kings Custom is paid for the said goods, and that you
have received them into your power or custody, you can make no lawful offer
of them. Moreover, if you have paid the Kings Custom for them, and have them
in your custody and power, and do make tender of them before the time; yet the
Law is not satisfied herein, but you must tender them also upon the last day of
delivery, because the damages to be given unto you by Law must take a certain
ground upon the limitation of time, and not upon casualties; for it might fall
out, that the price of the said commodities should rise within that time, and
you might sell them for a greater gain, and by that time of the last day of
your delivery they might be fallen again in price, and you might have
provided another parcel for the same, so that both by the Common law and the
Law Merchant you are to make your tender upon the very day by a Scriuener, or
with competent witnesses, whereof I have seen sufficient trial in Law. And
according to these two examples, you may judge and consider of all other the
like contracts we call Notariall.

Verbal contracts called Private.
Verbal contracts are made between party and party, or by means of Brokers
or Mediators, and that only by word without writing. Such are the daily buying
and selling of commodities either for ready money, or payable at some days of
payment, wherein the mediation of a Broker is most necessary: For as it would
be troublesome to use Scriueners in every bargain; so is it commodious to use
the means of Brokers, the commodities are not only bought and sold with more
credit and reputation, but all controversies which do arise by misaduenture or
otherwise are sooner determined, and a sworn Broker is taken as a double
witness, if he do produce his book, with a Memorandum of the bargain, as
the same was agreed between both parties, whereby many variences are
reconciled, and differences (like to fall out) are prevented.

The most beneficial contract.
I had almost forgotten the most memorable contracts that ever were, whereby the
Philosophers Elixar or stone is found, turning Lead, Paper, and Ink into Gold
and Silver, which is the contract of Popes for their Crusadoes or Bulls,
whereof there are certain contractors, who for a certain sum of money
yearly to be paid, do receive authority to disperse the said Pardons or
Bulls into the West Indies, Perou, Noua Espagnia, and all those quarters of the
world, and every reasonable soul must have one of them yearly, and that this
is the most beneficial contract I prove thus.

In the year 1591 Pope Sixtus Quintus caused two ships to be laden out of
Spain for the West Indies as aforesaid, with some 100 Buts of Sackes, 1400
little Chests containing each of them three ordinary small Barrells of
Quicke-siluer weighing 50 ll the piece, to refine the Silver withal in the
said Indies: and moreover with a great number of Packes of the Printed Bulls
and Pardons granted at that time, to make provision against the Heretics;
Forasmuch that the great Armada of the year 1588, had so much exhausted the
treasure of Spain. These two ships were met withal at sea by Captain White
(who was laden and bound for Barbary) and brought into England by him, where
the commodities were sold: but the Popes merchandise (being out of request)
remained a long time in Warehouses at the disposing of Q^eene Elizabeth;
until at last at the earnest request of her Physician called Docter Lopes, she
gave all the said great quantity of Bulls unto him, amounting to many
thousands in number. This courtly Merchant (falling in communication with an
Italian knight, who had been a Merchant) did conclude with the said knight to
make a partable voyage between them, and to send those Bulls into the
West Indies, and accordingly a ship was fraighted and laden with the said Bulls
and some other commodities, and did perform the said voyage to the Indies: but
no sooner arrived, the Popes Contractor for that commodity did seize upon all
the said Bulls, and caused an information to be given against them, that they
were infected, having been taken by Heretics; it was alleged that they were
miraculously saved, but lost they were and confiscated, and so covetousness
was well rewarded. But returning to prove this beneficial Contract, The Pope
his Merchandise.
I was at the time of the taking of the said Bulls willed by authority, to
make and estimate what the lading of these two ships might cost, and what they
might have been worth in the West Indies, according to the rate of every Bull,
taxed at two Royalls of plate, and some four and some eight Royalls according
to their limitation, every one being but one sheet of paper; and by computation
the lading did not cost fifty thousand pounds, and would have yielded above
six hundredth thousand pounds: for these contracts are fervent and full of
devotion, containing also a commandment that their beds should be sold,
rather than any one should be without a Bull, for the safety of the soul was
to be preferred before the health and ease of the body.

Now before we entreat of extrauagant Contracts in the buying and selling of
commodities in some places, it will not be impertinent to note the observations
and opinions of Ciuilians concerning Merchants Contracts, which they have
distinguished to be Solemn, Public or Private, as in the Marginall notes is
before declared, to the end all controversies may be avoided in the said
Merchants Contracts.

The Ciuilians writing, De Contractibus Mercatorum, Merchants Contracts are to
be plain.
or of Merchants Contracts make many distinctions: but the conditions agreed
upon between them, are chiefly considerable, and to be well declared to avoid
ambiguitie and constructions, and reciprocal things to be performed on both
sides, which binds them better; so that if a Contract be broken, whereby the
one party is damnified for the want of his money or goods not delivered,
whereby he can make no benefit, and is hindered in his trade by Lucrum Cessans
or not getting, the other party may justly demand recompense for the same,
especially if he be a merchant, otherwise some Ciuilians make the same
questionable, as Fishermen, Fowlers, and Hunters, which say they cannot demand
any loss for want of their own, because (by their professions) they are
uncertain, whether they shall catch or take any thing by their Art.
Nevertheless the Merchants Court has an especial care to perform well with
Fishermen, Fishermen are to be respected upon Contracts.
and that with all expedition of justice they may be dispatched to follow
their trade, without any intermission of time.

This damage sustained by Merchants or others, The first damage upon Contr^cts
to be regarded.
for the non performance of Contracts, cannot be demanded by a continuance of
time, running Ad infinitum, during the matter in question: but must be
demanded according to the first damage received, as the party can duly prove
the same, either by witnesses or upon his oath, as the cause may require.

Therefore when Merchants are contending in any Courts of Equity or Law, where
they are delayed for many years in continual suit at their great charges:
Then it tends to the interrupof trade and commerce in general, and the
overthrow of the parties in particular, whereof the Law of Merchants has a
singular care to provide for, and therefore does many times (though not without
danger) admit the proof to be made upon the parties oath, if witnesses be
absent.

Penalti^^ upon contracts.
The penalties or forfeitures upon any Contract limited and expressed, be it
Nomine Poene or otherwise, are therefore much to be considered of in equity
to make them stand, and to be effectual for the mainetenance of Faith and
Credit between Merchants, and they are consequently much approved by all
Ciuilians, and by their Law allowed.

In all Contracts, made for a copartnership in providing of a joint Stock, is
to be observed, that the one or some of them do not defraud the other. Also
it is approved, that they may sell their adventure to others, and the buyer is
to take the account according to the Contract, Observations in partable
contracts.
for the account given to other partners in Societies, does always bind the
buyer proportionably in these adventures, and the parties dying, the widow or
his heirs are to accept thereof accordingly both by the Civil Law and the
Custom of Merchants. As is well observed by the Society of the Merchants
trading for the East Indies, both in England and beyond the Seas; for it is not
accounted any danger to trust a Society, and to deliver money for trading and
where no damages or adventures be borne, is usurious, as shall be declared
hereafter.

Verbal contracts for money etc.
To enter into consideration of some Verbal Contracts, some Customs are be
observed, which the Ciuilians make questionable. A Merchant does deliver some
money unto another Merchant, to be employed by him in commodities, or to be
put forth to use for both their benefit and profit, without any limitation of
time agreed upon between them; the question is, when this Merchant that did
deliver this money may call for it again; wherein most Ciuilians are of
opinion, that the same cannot be demanded before the year expired, which
seems the more reasonable, if the Law will not allow unto the other party, a
loss sustained thereby by fire, water, or any other casualtie, unless he do
declare and manifest the same within the year. Nevertheless if this money
were delivered to one that makes a continual gain by money, as some
Goldsmiths do, by taking the same for two, three, or more days, and allowing
benefit for it: then it may seem reasonable, that the money may be demanded at
all times upon warning given for the time, without which, no man may be
supposed to be so careless in the delivery of his or other men's money by a
Verbal contract, as the said Ciuilians have surmised.

Again, suppose this money were delivered to a father and his son jointly,
whether the same shall be redemanded of the father and of the son by equal
portion half and half, or of them both* Hereupon they are of opinion, if the
father did receive the money, and that the son be under the government of
the father, then the father is to answer for all: But if the son do (as it
were) govern the father, because he is old; then the son is to answer for
the money. Now the Law-merchant obliges them both to answer for the said
money, unless the son were under years. But this question may be thought
extrauagant, for contracts are commonly Notariall in this case, and between
parteners, Notariall contracts surest.
and where one partener binds another, it is only to be understood to
continue the time of their partnership; whereas to become bound each to other
for so much as shall be found due, is dangerous and full of cauillation. So
that (as before is remembered) every thing is to be plainly expressed, but
especially to be carefully observed between parteners. For the Stock also
between parteners by contract to continue in trade, is to be without
diminution or any other employment to be made, during the said copartenership,
which is limited therefore for a time and not by voyages or employments; the
charges on both sides to be limited: but hereof more upon the title of
Parteners or Companies.

To make these Notariall contracts more authenticke and sure, when due regard
is had of reciprocal actions, to avoid Nudum Pactum, the Bonds made by each
party to other in a sum of money for the performance thereof, are to be
preferred before the limitation of a penalty contained in the contract, albeit
that these Bonds being put in suit, causes the other party to fly into the
Chancerie; but the Merchants Courts proceed herein with more expedition.

There are also certain Merchants contracts, which (in regard of the
conditions) are called Extrauagants, Extrauagan contracts.
because the manner either of buying or selling of commodities, and the payment
made for the same, is rare and but used in some places, which nevertheless are
made in writing by Notariall contract, or by the Brokers Book recorded,
whereof I think fit to make a Chapter apart, touching the commodities sold by
Brokers, as hereafter may appear.

A Merchant in Spain dealing for the West Indies, Noua Espagnia, Terra firma,
or Peru and other places in America, will buy a round quantity of Germany
commodities or manufactures made there, and in the Low Countries, either
Yronmongers wares, as Hatchets, Axes, Knives, Bells, Beads, Needles, Basins,
Candlestickes, Counters, Locks, Nails, and diverse sorts of commodities; and
he is made acquainted by the Inuoice or Cargasson of those goods what they did
cost in the places from whence they came, where the Merchant owner of the said
wares, has augmented his price in the said Invoice, and so the Spanish
Merchant does make him an offer of so many Maluidies for every pounds Flemish,
or Hamborough money, Conditions to be observed in them.
or for every Dollor or other coin whereby the same was bought, according as
the party by his observation is able to judge of the value thereof, by his
often buying of the like: but the payment is agreed upon to be made sometime
after the return of the West Indies Fleet, that is to say, When most Ships
going outward shall return again into Spain, but whether the buyer of those
goods do receive any return of the prouenue of the said goods or not, is a
matter not material to the seller of the goods, for he bears no adventure of
bad Factors, evil pay-masters, or other accidents; but must be paid at the
time agreed upon, according to the ordinary Custom thereof, unless it were
agreed that he should bear the adventure of the Seas for a sum in certainty
in nature of assurance, or upon some unexpected alteration, which might happen
in the said assurance, which is another contract, as hereafter more amply will
appear in his proper place.

Another Merchant selling by contract, some commodities to be delivered at the
return of the said West Indies Fleet, Posito a certain quantity of
Cutcheneale, as the price shall be broken in Spain upon the arrival of the
maine Partida; this Merchant commonly takes a sum of money before hand,
whereof he allows interest for the time, or else he abateth a certain
allowance in the price of the Cutcheneale less than the price, which by
authority and consent amongst Merchants is made, that is to say, If the best
sort called Misteca be set at 40 Ducatts the Ro^ue of 25 ll weight, he shall
abate him after 20 or 25 per 100. Now if the price of Cutcheneale be high or
low, the interest of his money formerly disbursed (by the said abatement) must
needs be accordingly: So that the best advantage is to take the interest
after a rate certain, and the price of the Cutcheneale, as it shall and may
f^ll out, the like may be observed for all other commodities. The Bankers have
found the same by experience, by dealing with the Kings of Spain and
Portugal, when they make Partidos with them to furnish them monyes in their
occasions, by making them to pay exchanges and rechanges for it after a great
rate. And nevertheless, they will be sure to have Pepper or any other
commodity, at a certain rate agreed upon between them, Money payable at the
return of the Fleet.
or else in ready money payable also at the return of the said West Indies
Fleet, albeit they do not bear the adventure of the Silver Bullion or Royalls
of eight, rather admitting a clause, that if the treasure do miscarrie they
shall have their monyes repayed within a certain time and interest of 7 per
100, unless it be they agree for the Pepper belonging to the King, for many
years to be taken at a reasonable price, they bearing the adventure of the
Seas. As the Lords Foulkers of Germany did contract in the year 1592, with
Philip the second King of Spain, whereby they became losers, by the taking of
the great Carracke the Mother of God at the Seas, the next year following. Now
because in the precedent Chapters, we have spoken of a Bank, and the payment
of Bankers: it will not be impertinent to entreat thereof, before any further
proceeding, to the end this matter may be understood of every Merchant and
others.

CHAP. XX. Of Banks and Bankers.
A Bank is properly a collection of all the ready money of some Kingdom, The
description of a Bank.
Commonwealth, or Province, as also of a particular City or Town, into the
hands of some persons licensed and established thereunto by public authority
of some King, Prince, or Commonwealth, erected with great solemnity in the
view of all the people and inhabitants of that City, Commonwealth, or
Kingdom, with an intimation thereof made diverse times, to be upon such a day
in the open market place, where a scaffold is purposely erected, with an
ostentation of great store of money of Gold and Silver, supposed to belong to
these persons or Bankers so established; which is unto them an attractiue power
to persuade and allure the common people to bring their moneys into these
Bankers hands, where at all times they may command it, and have it again at
their own pleasure, with allowing them only a small matter of five upon
every thousand ducats or crowns, when any man will retire or draw his money
into his own hands again: which although it be but in twenty years, yet
during all that time, they are to have no more; so that these persons or
Bankers do become (as it were) the general Servants or Cashiers of that
Province, City, or Commonwealth.

These Bankers, as they have their Companies, Factors, or correspondence in the
chief places of trade in Europe, so must they also keep account with every
man, of whom they have received any money into their Bank, out of which
number, no man of that jurisdiction is almost exempted; but generally all men
are desirous to please them, and to bring their ready money into their Bank,
as also such money as they have in foreine parts. In regard whereof, these
Bankers do give them great credit; for if any man have occasion to bestow in
merchandise or to pay in money 3 or four thousand ducats, and have but one
thousand ducats in the Bank, the Bankers will pay it for him more or less, as
the party is well known or credited, without taking any gain for it,
although it be for 3, 4, 6, or more months.

This seems to be a great commodity (as no doubt it is to men in particular)
but being well considered of, it will be found a small friendship, and no more
in effect, than if a man did participate the light of his candle to another
man's candle: for what is this credit? or what are the paiments of the Banks,
but almost or rather altogether imaginary? As for example, The manner of the
Bankers paiments.
Peter has two thousand ducats in Bank, John has three thousand, and William
four thousand, and so consequently others more or less. Peter has occasion
to pay unto John one thousand ducats, he goes to the Bankers at the appointed
hours, (which are certain both in the forenoone and afternoon) and requires
them to pay one thousand ducats unto John; whereupon they presently make Peter
debtor for one thousand ducats, and John creditor for the same sum: so that
Peter having assigned unto John one thousand ducats, has now no more but one
thousand ducats in Bank, where he had two thousand before, and John has four
thousand ducats in the same Bank, where he had but three thousand before. And
so in the same manner of assignation, John does pay unto William, and William
unto others, without that any money is touched, but remains still in the
Bankers hand, which within a short time after the erection of the Bank,
amounts unto many millions: and by their industry they do incorporate the
same, which may easily be understood, if we do but consider, what the ready
money and wealth of London would come unto, if it were gathered into one man's
hands, much more if a great deal of riches of other countries were added
thereunto, as these Bankers can cunningly compass by the course of the
exchange for moneys, the ebbing and flowing whereof, is caused by their motion
from time to time as in our Treatise of Exchanges is declared.

But some will say or demand, Cannot a man have any ready money out of the
Bankers hands, if he have occasion to use it? Yes that he can: but before he
have it, they will be so bold, as to know for what purpose he demands the
same, or what he will do with it. If it be to pay any man withal, they will
always do that for him, as having account almost with all men; for he is
accounted to be of no credit, that has not any money in Bank.

If he do demand it for to make over by exchange in some other country, they
will also serve his turn in giving him Bills of Exchanges for any place
wheresoever, because they have their companies or correspondence in every
place.

If he do demand it for his charges and expenses, it will be paid him
forthwith, because it is but a small sum, and in the end the money comes
into their hands again.

If they pay out money to any man, that having money in Bank will bestow the
same in purchase of lands, they will still have an eye to have it again in
Bank one way or other, at the second and third hand; so that they once being
possessed of moneys, they will hardly be dispossessed, and their paiments are
in effect all by assignation, and imaginary.

And if they have any money in Bank belonging unto Widows and Orphans, or
any other person that has no occasion to use the same, they will allow them
interest after four or five upon the hundredth in the year, at the most, and
that upon especial favor; for every man seeks to please them, as in matter
where Commodum priuatum bears the rule; for they can easily please men in
particular, in giving them some credit of that great credit which they have
obtained in general.

The money then remaining in the Bankers hands, is employed by them to other
uses and purposes.

First, they do deal with great Princes and Potentates, The Bankers trade.
that have need of money for the maintenance of their wars, as the Geneuoises
and Germans did with the Emperor Charles the fifth during the wars in
Germany, and as the Florentines and others have done with Phillip the second
king of Spain, and also with his son Phillip the third late reigning,
causing him to pay 20, 25, 30, and more in the hundredth, by way of exchange and
rechange, supposed to happen accidentally.

Secondly, they ingrosse thereby diverse commodities into their hands: and
lastly, they carry thereby a predominance in ruling the course of exchanges
for all places, where it pleases them: by reason whereof the city of
Amsterdam (to countermine them) have in the year 1608, also erected a very
great Bank, The beginning of the Bank at Amsterdam.
for the which the said city has undertaken to answer, whereby they are
always stored with money, as appears, that the same is plentifully to be had
at interest at six and seven in the hundredth by the year, and some at five and
under. This custom is now so settled there, that it is as effectual as any law.

Of the breaking of some of these Banks, Bankrupt.
is the name Bankrupt derived: for when Princes do not accomplish with them,
then they cannot hold out, unless they have great estates of their own.
Philip the second king of Spain, in the year 1596, was constrained to give
Facultad Real, that is to say, A Faculty Royal, or Protection.
A Power or Faculty Royal, or a Protection unto the Banks of Madrill, and
all their associates for four years; commanding that all those that had
dealt with them in matter of Exchange, Interest, Contracts, Letters of Credit,
or any manner of ways publickely or secret, and with all their known or
unknown partners, should not be compelled to pay any money to their creditors
until the year 1600: but in the Interim they should at every 6 months
receive interest for their money after the rate of seven pro centum, for the
year; and if any man could not forbear his money, he was to deliver the fourth
part more in ready money, and so accounted together with the interest due at
seven upon the hundredth, the two thirds of all was to be paid him, and the
other third was to continue during his life, with allowance of the said
interest; and this was to be observed in the kingdoms of Castile, Arragon,
Portugal, and the Low Countries, as also in the kingdoms of Naples, Sicilia,
and the State of Milan, and finally in all kingdoms and dominions under him,
(for so are the words) and in all his warlike forces by sea and by land. This
did bring the Banks in great discredit, and the West India trade was much
interrupted by it, and so continued during the said king his life time; and
after his decease, moneys have not been plentiful in Spain, insomuch, that
in the year 1608, his son Philip the third did give the like Faculty Royal
to all men that were to pay money at the return of the West Indies fleet for
one year, paying but 3 pro cent. to their creditors for the forbearance.

CAHP. XXI. Of the Fraighting of ships, Charterparties, and Bills of lading.
HItherto we have been buying and dealing in commodities, and now it will be
time to advance our commerce or traffic, and to freight Ships for the purpose
to transport over commodities. No Ship should be fraighted without a
Charterpartie, meaning a Charter or Covenant between two parties, the Master
and the Merchant: and the Bills of lading do declare what goods are laden,
Bills of lading.
and binds the Master to deliver them well conditioned to the place of
discharge, according to the contents of the Charterpartie; binding himself,
his ship, tackle, and furniture of it, for the performance thereof. Of these
Bills of lading, there is commonly three Bills of one tenor made of the whole
ships lading, or of many particular parcells of goods, if there be many laders;
and the marks of the goods must therein be expressed, and of whom received, and
to whom to be delivered. These Bills of lading are commonly to be had in print
in all places, and in several languages. One of them is enclosed in the
letters written by the same Ship, another Bill is sent over land to the Factor
or party to whom the goods are consigned, the third remains with the
Merchant, for his testimony against the Master, if there were any occasion or
loose dealing; but especially it is kept for to serve in case of loss, to
recover the value of the goods of the assurors that have undertaken to bear
the adventure with you, whereof we shall entreat in the following Chapters.

The persons that are in a Ship may be thus in order, which although they
differ in names in many languages, yet they are all one in effect. The Master
of the Ship, the Pilot, the Masters mate, the Ship-wright or Carpenter, the
Boats-man, the Purser, the Surgeon, the Cook, and the Ships boy. All the
rest are under the name Mariners, all these are distinguished in hires and
fees in all Countries.

The Master therefore does covenant by the Charter-partie, Charter-party
to find a sufficient Pilot, and all other the foresaid Officers and Martiners,
and to provide Shiptycht, Masts, Sails, Roapes, Tewes, Anchors, Ship-boat;
with fire, water, salt, and all things necessary, at his own expenses. And
this Charter-partie so made on the Masters part, does commonly declare that it
is and all things therein contained, according to the Law of Oleron; according
to which Law, Law of Oleron.
if there be no writing made, and but an earnest given, then the Merchant if
he repent, loses his earnest; but the Master if he repent, loses the double
of the earnest.

Again, if the Ship be not ready at the day appointed in the Charter-partie
to go to Sea, the Merchant may not only free himself of her, except he hold
his peace and discharge her not (for then by his silence he seems to consent,
Qui Tacet consentive videtur.
) but also shall recover charges, interests, and damages, except the Master
show some excuse of some pregnant occasion or mischance, which could not be
avoided, and then he loses only his freight, because he has not deserved it.
But if the fault be in the Merchant, he shall pay the Master his damages, or
according to the Rhodian Law, Rhodian Law.
shall entertain the Ship and Company ten days, and if then he stay longer
shall pay the freight of all accordingly; and further shall answer for all
hurt and damages happening by fire, water, or otherwise after the time
appointed. It is true, that the Rhodian Law charge the Merchant in this case
but with half the freight, and the Master with the whole freight if he fail:
Albeit that the Romans inflict the pain of the whole freight upon the
Merchant, especially if he take out his own goods again, for then is the
freight thought to be deserved.

But if the Ship in her Voyage become unable, without the Masters fault, or
that the Master or Ship be arrested by some authority of Magistrates in her
way; the Master may either mend his Ship, or freight another. But in case the
Merchant agree not thereunto, then the Master shall at least recover his
freight, so far as he has deserved it. For otherwise, except the Merchant
consent, or necessity constrain the Master to put the goods into another Ship
worse than his own; the Master is herein bound to all losses and damages,
except that both the Ships perish that voyage, and that no fault nor fraud be
found in the Master.

Admiraltie Cases.
In the year 1587, the like matter was in question with five Ships coming
back without their lading, from Ligorne and Ciuita Vecchia into England,
whereof my self was one of the Merchants that had fraighted them, and did
intend to receive lading there in Allome: But the Gallyes of Don Andrea Doria
intending to surprise those Ships (the Grand Armada being preparing in Spain)
they came all of them away without their lading; some two of these Ships had
lain out all their time conditioned by their Charterpartie, to take in their
lading, and the Masters had Notariall protests against the Factors that they
should have laden them. These were by the Law of Admiraltie adjudged to have
deserved their whole freight. Two other ships having not stayed there their
abiding days, nor made any protest as aforesaid, could not be found to have
deserved any freight at all, although they were laden outward bound. The fifth
Ship had a condition or prouiso in her Charterpartie, That if it should happen
that in her coming back out of the Straits, she should be taken or cast
away; nevertheless the freight outward (which was accounted half) should be
paid, Condition makes Law.
and that half was adjudged unto the Master, and no more, having not tarried
there his appointed time. And if this prouiso had not been, he could not have
recovered any thing; for when Ships are fraighted going and coming, there is
nothing due for freight until the whole Voyage be performed. So that if she
perish, or be taken in the coming home, all is lost and nothing due unto her
for any freight outward, whereof I have also had experience by another Ship.

It is also accounted for a fault, if the Master put forth the Ship to Sea,
either without a skillful Pilot, or without sufficient furniture and
necessaries, according to the ordinary clauses of the Charter-parties, or (as
in the precedent case) that the other Ship in which the goods were last put in,
be not sufficient, or that the Master do in an unlikely time put forth to
Sea.

The Emperors Gratian, Theodosius, and Valentinian, in times past did expressly
forbid that no man should adventure upon the Seas, from November till April,
Sed Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis. Always it is a great fault by
the Law, to put to sail out of any Port in stormy and tempestuous weather.

Item, if a Master set forth his Ship for to take in a certain charge or
lading, and then takes in any more, especially of other men, he is to lose all
his whole freight; for by other men's lading he may endanger the Merchants
goods diverse ways. And in such a case, when goods by storms are cast
ouer-boord, it shall not be made good by contribution or aueridge, Aueridge.
but by the Masters own purse: For if he ouerburthen the Ship above the true
mark of lading, he is to pay a fine.

Item, if a ship do enter into any other Port or Harbor, than she was
fraighted for, against the Masters will, as by storm or some force, then the
goods shall be transported to the Port conditioned, on the Masters charges; but
this must be tried by the Masters oath, and of two of his Mariners, or else the
Master may be in further danger.

If any man compel the Master to ouer-burthen Ship or Boat, he may therefore
be accused criminally, and pay the damages happening thereby.

Item, if a Merchant put in more goods into a Ship than was conditioned, then
may the Master take what freight he please. By the Roman Law it is imputed
for a fault to the Master, if he direct his course by ways either dangerous,
thorough Pirates, enemies, or other evil adventures. Also if he do carry the
Flag of other Nations and not his own, and thereby incur any loss or
damages: For as Packes, Pipes, and all goods, should be marked with the
proper marks of the Merchant to whom they appertain: So should Ships be
discerned one from another by their own Flag.

The ordinary Charter-parties of fraightments of Ships, made and indented
between the Master of a Ship and a Merchant, or many Merchants in fraighting a
Ship together by the tunnage, Fraightings by tunnage.
where every Merchant takes upon him to lade so many Tons in certainety: are
made as follows, Mutatis, Mutandis, which is done before Notaries or
Scriuenors.

A.B. Master of the Good Ship or Fly-boot, called the Red Lion of Ratclife, of
the burden of 120 Tons or thereabouts, riding at Anchors in the River of
Thames, acknowledges to have letten to freight unto C. D. the Merchant his
said Ship, and does promise to prepare to make ready the same within ten
days, to take in such goods, as the said Merchant shall lade or cause to be
laden in her, to make (by Gods grace) with the first convenient weather and
wind (after the expiration of the said days) a Voyage from the City of
London, to the Town of Saint Lucar De Barameda in Spain, and there to deliver
all the said goods, well conditioned, and in such sort as they were delivered
unto him, to such a Merchant or Factor, as the Merchant the fraightor shall
nominate and appoint, according to the Bills of lading made or to be made
thereof; and there to remain with his said Ship the space of twenty days, to
take in and receive all such goods, as the said Factor or any other by his
appointment shall lade into her, and as the said Ship may conveniently carry,
and being so laden, to return back again for the said City of London, and
there to deliver the said goods also well conditioned, to the said C. D. the
Merchant, or his assigns. And the said Master does further covenant with the
said Merchant, that his Ship shall be furnished with twelve able men and a boy,
ten pieces of iron Ordnance, namely, two Sakers, six Minions, two Falcons,
and eight Muskets, with Powder, Shot, and all things necessary, as Cables,
Sails, Ropes, Anchors and Victuals requisite for such or the like Voyage,
etc. And hereupon C.D the Merchant and Fraightor, does likewise covenant with
the said M^ster, or all the said Merchants do covenant with him, every one for
his tunnage as aforesaid, that he or they and either of them, will lade or
cause to be laden (within the days limited) the said Ship, with such and such
commodities accordingly, pesterable wares or goods excepted, Pesterable wares
or commodities.
which are goods of great volume and cumbersome, whereof no true computation
for tunnage can be made: so that the freight of such kind of goods is made
accordingly.

And the said Merchant does further covenant to pay unto the Master, three
pounds or more for the freight of every Tun lading upon the full discharge of
his said Ship, and delivery of the said goods at London aforesaid, accounting
two and twenty hundredth and a half, or so many Kintalls for a Tun; and in
like manner for two Pipes or Butts, four Hogsheads and other commodities rated
for the Tun or Last, as four Chests of Sugar, Six Barrells of any other
commodity for a Tun (as in the fourth Chapter of Weights and Measures is
declared) with Primage, Petilodeminage, and sometimes Pilotage, according to
the accustomed manner in the like Voyages, etc. binding themselves each to
other for the performance thereof in a sum of money, Nomine Poenae, with such
other clauses, conditions, cautions, or other agreements as may be concluded
between them, which being well expressed, preuenteth all those and the like
questions, which the Ciuilians do discourse upon, as the following may be for
an instance.

Questions about Fraightings, and their Solutions.
If a Ship be fraighted by the great, Posito two hundredth Tons for the sum
of six hundredth pounds, to be paid at the return; the said sum of 600 ll
is to be paid, although the Ship were not of that burden.

If the like Ship of 200 Tons be fraighted, and the sum is not (either by
the Great, or Tun) expressed; then such freight as is accustomed to be paid
in the like Voyages, is due, and ought to be paid accordingly.

If the like Ship of 200 Tons be fraighted by the Tun, and full laden,
according to their Charterpartie: then freight is to be paid for every Tun,
otherwise but for so many Tun as the lading in the same was.

If the like Ship of two hundredth be fraighted, and named to be of that burden
in their covenant, and being fraighted by the Tun, shall be found to be
less in bigness, there is no more due to be paid, than by the Tun, for so
many as the same did carry and brought in goods.

If the like ship be fraighted for two hundred tons or therabouts, this
addition ( or thereabouts) is within five tons commonly taken and understood,
as the moitie of the number ten, whereof the whole number is compounded.

If the like ship be fraighted by the great, and the burden of it is not
expressed in the contract, yet the sum certain agreed upon is to be paid
without any cauillation.

If freight be agreed upon for the commodities laden or to be laden, for a
certain price for every Pack, Barrel, Butt, and Pipe, etc. without any
regard had to the burden of the ship, but to give her the full lading: no man
makes doubt but that the same is to be performed accordingly.

If the like ship, or any other (being fraighted by the great for a sum
certain) happen to be cast away, there is nothing due for freight: but if the
ship be fraighted by the tun, or pieces of commodities laden and cast away
and some saved, then is it made question^ble, whether any freight be due for
the goods saved pro rata, albeit there is none due at all: for the Assurors are
not to be abridged herein by any freight.

Hence arise some other questions, Exempli gratia, Whether a Master of a ship
(having undertaken to carry over a family, or certain slaves, or cattle,
and some of them dying in the voyage) shall have any fraught for those persons
or cattle which are dead? whereupon three considerations are incident.

1 If the contract was made for the whole family, slaves, or cattle, then the
freight or passage money is due, and to be paid for all.

2 If it be couenanted, that for every head or passenger, the master shall
have a certainty: then for the dead never coming to the destined place, there
is nothing due.

3 If it do not appear how the agreement was made, but that there is a certain
sum agreed upon; then that agreement being an entire thing, is to be
performed, although some died: the reason is, because there was no fault in the
master, and therefore the rule of Re integra remains good: and if a woman be
carried over and be delivered of a child in the voyage, yet there is nothing to
be paid for the passage of the child which she carries in her arms.

There is an ancient question, Whether a Master of a ship who promised to place
another in his ship, and to expose him in a certain place, can demand any
recompense for the same, he never having placed the party there; but the
party came into the ship, and so went over: wherein they consider the
difference between living creatures and rational, or things dead and
insensible: and diverse other reasons which I omit, for it may well be compared
to the disputation de Lana Caprina, whether the hair of the Bucke be wool or
hair, which puts me in mind of a pretty tale, which for variety of
theme, I here bestow upon merry conceited mariners.

The Poets (having made Caron to be the ferrie-man of hell, A merry tale of
Carons wager.
passing over the souls of an infinite number of persons of diverse
professions) feign, That on a time a Sophister was to be transported, who took
exception at Carons Beard, and by a Sillogisme would prove him to be a Goat,
framing his argument in this manner, A Goat has a Beard which is never kembed,
and you have a Beard which is never kembed, ergo you are a Goat: Caron
answering, did wonder at his conclusion, and took upon him to prove the
Sophister to be an Ass, because that of a comparison he made an argument: for
says he, if you had made a Sillogisme in this manner, A sophisticated
Argument.
That which is Hail is no Snow, Hail is white, ergo Snow is not white; then
there had been some show of Reason. But tell me, what is an Ass? and the
Sophister answered, It was a living creature without Reason, and being
demanded what Reason was, he said, It was to follow and use the good, and to
shun the evil: then Caron concluded upon his own words, and said, Your own
words have proved you an Ass, wanting Reason; for you had no Reason in the
world, whereby you should be guided to follow the good, which is virtue, but
you have followed evil, which is vice, which made you to come hither to receive
the punishment of an Ass, which (being incident unto most mariners coming on
shore) I wish them to remember thanksgiving to God.

And to conclude concerning Fraightments and Charterpa^ties, let us observe,
that equity in all things is to be considered, and especially in sea-fairing
causes, and cauillations are to be avoided, as for example,

A Merchant fraighted a ship with all his furniture by the month, and puts
into her the Master and Mariners, and victualled the same at his charges, and
makes a charterpartie with the owner, promising to pay for the use of the
ship and furniture twenty pound every month at her return into the river
of Thames, and so ladeth in her for the Straits, Equity in seafaring causes
much to be regarded.
and to go from Port to Port in several places with merchandise,: and after
two years, or thereabouts, having taken her lading in Barbary, comes for
London, and by storm and tempest the ship was cast away near Dover, and the
goods were saved; hereupon the Merchant denied to pay the freight monthly to
be reckoned, because the ship did not arrive in the river of Thames, according
to the words in the charterpartie. Herein the owner was much wronged: for the
money is due monthly, and the place is named only to signify the time when
the money was due to be paid; for the ship deserves wages like unto a
labourer, or like a mariner which serves by the month, who is to be paid for
the time he has served, although he dies before the voyage be ended, as we
find daily that the East Indies company pays to their wives or friends, The
labourer is worthy of his hire. The ship is not fraighted by the great, to run
that adventure, which is noted before, neither was she wanting her furniture of
Cables, Anchors, Sails, Ropes, or any thing whereby she was disabled to
perform the voyage, and might be the cause of the casting away: for if it were
so, then there were great cause given to deny the payment of the freight.
Again, where it was alleged, that the said owner has made assurance upon the
ship, for more than the same was worth, and did thereby recover of the Assurors
a benefit toward his loss, this did not concern the Merchant, but the
Assurors: and if the assurance were orderly made, the said Assurors have paid
the same duly, that is to say, If the policy or writing of assurance did
declare, That the owner did value his ship in such a sum; whereof hereafter
you may read in the proper place, entreating of the nature of Assurances. A
Merchant valued one barrel of Saffroh at 1000 ll, having privately put so much
in Gold in the same, the Gold was taken, but the Saffron was delivered, and the
Assurors did pay for the Gold. And the like is for Pearls or other things so
valued.

Item, when Coffers, Packes, or Pipes, and other marked commodities or goods
are delivered close packed or sealed, and afterward shall be received open and
loose, the master is to be charged for it, until a due trial, and that
consideration thereof be had; he must also answer for the harm which Rats do
in the ship to any merchandise for want of a Cat.

The Merchant on the other side, is to be bound by the said charterpartie to
pay the freight of the goods by him laden, either by the Last, Tun, or by the
Pack and Fardel, according to the agreement; accounting for a Last, Tun, or
other thing, after the rate of a Tun lading, wherein pesterable wares which
take a great deal of room are excepted, and must be agreed for, and the goods
laden are liable for the payment of the freight. The Merchant likewise does
covenant to pay Pilotage, if a Pilot be used to bring the ship into the harbor;
also primage, and petilodmanidge to the master for the use of his Cables to
discharge the goods, Pilotage. Primage. Petilodmenidge.
and to the mariners to charge and discharge them, which may be six pence or
twelve pence for the Tun lading, with some other clauses and agreements made
between the said Merchants and Master: wherein it is not a miss to limit a
good sum of money on either side to be paid for the performance of the
charterpartie, and to covenant the same by the said charterpartie, whereof I do
here prescribe but one form, considering the diversities of conditions therein
used, as the Merchant and Master can agree, which every Scriuenor does usually
make accordingly, as in this Chapter is rehearsed. (*)

CHAP. XXII. Of the Master of the Ship his power, and duty of the Master to
the Merchant.
Law of Oleron.
THe whole power and charge of the ship being committed to the Master, requires
a stayed man and of experience, whereunto the Owners are to take great heed,
for his power is described partly by the Owner or setter forth of the Ship, and
partly by the Common Law of the sea; by means and virtue whereof the Master
may, if need be, borrow money in a strange country, with the advice of his
company, upon some of the tackle or furniture of the Ship, or else sell some
of the Merchants goods, provided that the Merchant be repaied again at the
highest price that the like goods are sold for at the market: which being done,
the freight of those goods so sold and repaied, shall be also repaied by the
Master to the Owner of the Ship, as well as the freight of the rest of the
Merchants goods, except the Ship perish in the voyage in this case, only the
price that the goods were bought for shall be rendered, and for no other cause
may the Master take up money, or sell any of the Merchants goods, although it
were in the danger of ship-wrecke.

The duties of a Master of a Ship, etc.
Such is the duty of a Master of a Ship that is provident, that he ought not
to make sail and put forth to sea, without the advice and consent of the most
part of his company, especially when the weather is stormy, otherwise he
shall answer the damages that comes thereby; principally, if he have not
provided an expert Pilot, or if the Ship happen to fall over in the harbor.

The Master shall be punished also by damages, if the ouerloope of the Ship be
vntyth, or the Pumpe be faulty, or a sufficient covering be wanting,
especially for Corn, Victual, and such like commodities.

He is also before his departure to deliver the names of all the persons which
he is to transport, and of his mariners, which with us is but lately
established: and at his return he is to deliver a true Inventory of the goods
of any persons which shall happen to depart this life in that voyage, not only
because his kindred and friends may have intelligence of it, but also because
their goods may be safe and forthcomming for one whole year: of which goods
in the mean time, the bedding and appurtenances may be taken by the Master
and his Mate to their uses, as also such clothing and other things then upon
his body, may be delivered to the Boats-man and the company, who do for that
dispose of the dead body, putting the same into the Sea.

When any goods or merchandises are delivered unto the Master, or his Clearke
the Purser of the Ship, and laid within board, or to the Ships side, both
ways, is at the Masters peril. But the Master is not bound to answer for
such things as are put in his Ship, without his and his companies knowledge;
Ignorance is here a good excuse.
because where men are found ignorant, they are also esteemed not to consent.
But if the Merchant or Passenger keep his goods by himself, as moneys or such
things, in his Coffers, and then find fault to have lost them: then the Master
and Company are to purge themselves by their oath; but if afterward
notwithstanding they be found guilty, the denier shall pay the double, and
also be punished for perjury.

The Master is liable for all damages sustained by bad Hooks, Ropes, Blocks,
or Lines, if the Mariners do give notice of it, and they shall bear their
parts in the damage, and so is he also to answer any damage happening by
unreasonable stowing or breaking of goods, and therein he and his company may
be put to their oath.

Further, whatsoever shall happen through fault, negligence, or chance, which
might be avoided, or if it be done by the passengers or other than himself
and his company, the Master is answerable.

If by the Masters default, confiscation of goods or other damages happens for
non-payment of Custom, Law of Oleron
or false Bills of entries in the Custom House for goods, or for transporting
of unlawful goods, the Master shall answer for the same with the interest.

But concerning the suing for the said goods, the Master may well do it, as
the Merchant may pursue for spoiled goods. And notwithstanding if it shall be
found, that the Merchant is in any fault concerning the goods, as aforesaid;
then if the Master, and four of his company, Mariners, swear no fault to
have been in them, the Master shall be cleared thereby.

The Master is to keep his company in peace, and if any Mariner shall be hurt
in doing service, or by his companion, the Master shall cause him to be healed,
as he who is only answerable for the fact within shipboord, and then by his
authority recover from the other Mariner the charges, and any thing that the
hurt man has lost thereby; except that he who is hurt or lamed, have provoked
the other by evident assault or strokes.

And if a Mariner fall sick, the Master shall cause him to be laid in a
house, with all sustentation necessary and usual in the Ship; but shall not
stay the Ship until he be healed: and when he recouers health shall give
him his hyre, or if he dye shall give it to the wife or nearest friends. But
if a Mariner be not hurt in the Ships service, the Master shall hyre another
in his place who if he have a greater hyre, that Mariner then shall recover
the surplus. And always the Master ought to lend his Mariners if they want. If
through the Masters fault the Shipboat perish, with any Mariners in it, by
spoiled Ropes or otherwise, then shall the Master pay one whole years hire to
the heirs of the drowned.

Item, he ought to give his Mariners Flesh upon Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday,
and upon other days Fish or such like, with sufficient drink; but no meat to
them that sleeps not in the Ship. Nevertheless the quality and quantity of
Mariners food and hires goes diversely, according to the diverse Customs of
Countries, and the conditions made with them at the entering of the voyage,
whereof remembrance is to be kept to avoid discords, which are more dangerous
on the Seas than on Land.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Duties and Privileges of Mariners.
ACcording to the Law of Oleron, Mariners owe all due obedience to the Master,
not only in flying from him in his wrath, so far as they can, but also in
suffering; yet may they after one stroke defend themselves.

In case of rebellion of Mariners against their Master, which is thought then
to be done, when the Master has thrice lifted the Towell from before any
Mariner, and yet he submits not himself: then may he not only be commanded
forth of the Ship at the first land, but also if he make open strife and
debate against the Master, he shall lose his half hire, with all the goods he
has within shipboord.

But if in this strife a Mariner uses any armor or weapons, then should the
rest of the Mariners bind him, imprison him, and present him to the Justice: so
that if any refuse to assist, he shall lose his hire and all things he has
within shipboord. Yea in case any number of the Mariners would conspire, and
force the Master to pass to any other Port than to the which he was fraighted,
they may be accused criminally and punished, as for a capital crime.

And yet if a rebellious Mariner repent in time, and offer amends for a simple
rebellion, and the Master notwithstanding refuse, he may follow the Ship and
obtain his hire.

Mariners ought each one to help and assist others on the Seas, or else he
that refuses loses his hire, and the oath of his fellows shall be a proof
against him.

Mariners in a strange Port, should not leave the Ship without the Masters
license, or fastening her with four ropes, or else the loss falls upon them.
They are also to attend the Ship until she be discharged and ballasted new,
and the Tackle taken down. And if a Mariner during the time of her discharge
and lading, labor not with the rest of the company, but goes idle, and
absents himself, he shall pay a fine to the rest of the company pro rata. In
a strange Country, the one half of the company at the least, ought to remain
on shipboord, and the rest who go on land should keep sobriety and abstain
from suspected places, or else should be punished in body and purse: like as
he who absents himself when the Ship is ready to sail, yea if he give out
himself worthier than he is in his calling, he shall lose his hire, half to
the Admiral, and the other half to the Master. But this especially ought to
be executed against an unworthy Pilot. The Mariner also forfeits his hire, if
the Ship break in any part, and he help not with all his diligence to save
the goods.

If it chance otherwise than well with the Master, the Mariners are then holden
to bring back the Ship to the Port, from whence she was fraighted, without
delay, except it be otherwise provided.

A Mariner may carry as much meat out of the Ship, as he may eat at a meal,
but no drink.

A Mariner may keep either his portage in his own hands, or put forth the
same for freight, and yet the Ship shall not stay upon the lading of his
portage: so that in case the Ship be fully laden before the goods for his
portage be brought in, he shall only have the freight of so much goods.

If a Ship pass further than the Mariner was hired, his hire should be
accordingly augmented, except he be hired a Mareages, mais non a deniers, as
the French man speaks, or by the month for all the year.

If a Mariner run away with his hire undeserved, he deserves the Gallows.

If a Mariner be hired for a simple Mariner, and afterward in the voyage
finds hiring, to be a Pilot or a Master, he may pass, restoring his former
hire; and so it is if he marry.

Mariners are not only to discharge and deliver goods out of the Ship, but
also if no Porters or Carriers be in those parts, to carry the same
themselves for such hire as other workmen should have had therefore.

If it happen a Ship to be prised for debt, or otherwise to be forfeited, yet
the Mariners hire is to be paid, and if she prosper, to receive their pay in
the same money that the freight is paid with.

Lastly, a Mariner should neither be arrested, nor taken forth of a Ship making
ready to sail, for any debt, but only his hire and as much other goods as
he has in the Ship may be arrested for it, according to the value of the
debt, and the Master to be answerable for all; because the Ship is compared to
a man's dwelling house, which is his sure refuge by the Law, except it be for a
sworn debt, or a penalty to the King through some crime.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Office of Assurances, and the Ancient Custom of the same.
Claudius Caesar, the fifth Roman Emperor, by succession of government from
Julius Caesar, who was before the Birth of our Savior Christ, (borne under
Augustus) and the first persecution of Christians was under Tiberius, S^etonius.
and the second (more cruel) under Caligula, whom Claudius did immediately
succeed.

This Claudius did bring in this most laudable Custom of Assurances, whereby
the danger and adventure of goods is divided, reparted, and borne by many
persons, consenting, and agreed upon between them, what part every man will
be contented to assure, make good and pay if any loss or casualtie should
happen to the goods adventured, or to be adventured at the Seas, as also by
Land; to the end that Merchants might enlarge and augment their Traffic and
Commerce, and not adventure all in one Bottom to their loss and overthrow,
but that the same might be reparted and answered for by many.

This Custom coming to the knowledge of the inhabitants of Oleron was
recorded, and by them set down for a Law, and practiced to be observed through
all the Seacoast Towns of France, and yet was first used in England, and
after us imitated by the Antuerpians, and all other Nations there inhabiting
when that City did flourish. And whereas here in London, Lombard Street, then
the Exchange of Merchants.
the meeting amongst Merchants was in Lombard Street in London, as aforesaid
(so called, because certain Italians out of Lombardie kept there a Pawne-house
or Lombard, long before the Royal Exchange was builded by sir Thomas Gresham
knight) all the policies or writings of Assurances which then were, and now yet
are made, do make mention, That it shall be in all things concerning the said
Assurances, as was accustomed to be done in Lombard Street in London; which is
imitated also in other places of the Low Countries. These Assurances are made
in the said Office in the West end of the said Royal Exchange in London, which
are of several natures, as follows, and at diverse and several rates. The
Commissioners for the said Assurances are chosen yearly (or at the least some
of them) in the beginning of every year; And at Roan, at the time when the
Merchants of all nations choose their Prior and Consulls. The chief authority
with us does rest in the Lord Mayor of London, confirmed by an Act of
Parliament in the later time of Queen Elizabeth (as you may understand by the
manner of proceedings for Assurances) for the obtaining whereof, I have sundry
times attended the committees of the said parliament, by whose means the same
was enacted, not without some difficulty: because there was many suits in law
by action of Assumpsit before that time, upon matte^s determined by the
commissioners for Assurances, who for want of power and authority could not
compel contentious persons to perform their ordinances; and the party dying,
the Assumpsit was accounted to be void in law.

The nature of Assurances.
THe nature of Assurances are either upon goods laden or to be laden outward
in such a ship, bound from such a place to such a place. As for example, from
London to Saint Lucar upon Perpetuanoes or Corn, until it be laid on shore
at Civil, which adventure is as well in the small ships, lighters, or boats,
whereby it is carried up to the city of Civil until landing of it, as it was
in the ship whereby the said Perpetuanoes or Corn was transported from London
to Sain Lucar; and any damage either totally or in part, is to be answered by
the Assurors accordingly, and pro rata that every man has subscribed in the
policy or writing of Assurance, as by the said commissioners for Assurances
shall be set down.

Other Assurances are made upon goods laden or to be laden homewards in such a
ship under such a mark, the masters name, and any other circumstances whereby
the said goods or commodities may be known to be the same that are assured; as
laden, or to be laden, by such a man, in such a place, about such a time, etc.
which if it be in any ship that was fraighted outward, may be better
specified, or if it be by letters of advice, it may be described accordingly,
which adventure may also run from the time that the said goods ( posito oils
of Vtrera) were laden into any Vessel, Lighter, or Boat, to come down the
river to Sain Lucar to be laden in such a ship, or any ship (neither naming the
ship nor master) unto the city of London, and the said Oils there laid on
land. But to declare that the Pipes are marked with such a mark, to be laden
by such a man, does much strengthen the said Assurance, to avoid cauillations,
doubts, or controversies.

Other Assurances are made upon goods laden in a ship for a certain place,
which ship is fraighted going and coming; as for Turkey, or any places in the
Mediterranean seas, bound to go into several ports to discharge part of the
lading in one place, and the rest in another place; and then to lade again
homewards in such another place: and all this Assurance is one entire
Assurance, until the ship be returned home, and the goods safely received on
land.

Other Assurances are made upon goods to be sent or laden from one place to
another, and upon the return of the prouenue thereof; as from Lixborne to
Brasile, and back again to Lixborne; or from Saint Lucar to the West Indies,
Santo domingo, Perou, or any other places, and so back again; or from
Portugal to the East Indies, and in like manner to Lixborne again. All which
Assurances are very dangerous, because a man cannot have advice when the
voyages are performed; and it has fallen out, that the Assurors have borne two
adventures for one, the ship making two voyages unknown to the Assurors,
dwelling in remote places.

Other Assurances are made upon the Ship or Ships Tackle, Furniture, and
Keele of the Ships, so called because all is to be bound to the Assurors, and
likewise the Assurors are liable and bound to answer for the whole Ship, as
also for Cables, Anchors, and any Furniture, or part of the same, which is also
dangerous and much subject to Aueridges and other casualties, especially if it
be upon a Ship that cannot drink of all waters, whereunto diverse men may lay
claim; or for some act perpetrated by her in times past, whereby the same may
be called in question, which is the cause that the price of assurance upon
Ships is almost double.

Other Assurances are made upon goods and merchandises sent by land from one
place to another, by the Conductors or Carriers to Venice, Frankford, or any
other places, wherein the goods commonly are declared, and the mark also: and
this manner of Assurance is especially performed by the Conductors, who take
for the charges a certain allowance for every pound weight that the goods do
weigh, and moreover 2, 3, or 4 upon the hundredth pounds in value that the said
goods are esteemed to be worth: and he does appoint a sufficient guard of
soldiers to convey the same by land and rivers to the places intended, which
nevertheless by a stronger power have many times been taken by the Freebooters.

Other Assurances are made upon the lives of men, for diverse respects, some
because their estate is merely for term of life, and if they have children or
friends to leave some part of their estate unto, they value their life at so
many hundredth pounds for one or more years, and cause that value to be assured
at five, six, ten or more for every hundredth pounds, and if he do depart this
life within that time, the Assurors pay the money; as it happened of late, that
one being engaged for sir Richard Martin Knight, Master of the Mint, caused 300
ll to be assured upon the life of the said sir Richard, being some 90 years
of age, and therefore gave twenty and five pro centum to the Assurors: The
ancient knight dyed within the year, and the said Assurors did pay the money.
Also one master Kiddermaster having bought an office of the six Clerks of the
Chauncerie, and taken up money of others, caused for their assurance for many
years together 2000 ll to be assured upon his life after four and five in the
hundredth, until he had paid that money; which is very commodious.

Likewise a traveler undertaking a voyage to Jerusalem or Babylon, delivering
out money payable at his return, will prouidently assure a sum of money upon
his life, either to secure some men that do furnish him with money to perform
his voyage, and to put forth the greater sum, or to leave some means unto
his friends, if he should die and never return. So that this office is most
necessary in all humane actions, and men cannot invent or imagine any thing,
but the value of it may be assured, as you may judge by the former examples.
And herein must be noted, that Assurors are very fitly compared unto Orphans,
because they may endure much wrong, but cannot commit any; for they are to be
ordered and commanded by the Commissioners sentence, and must perform the
same; to which end the Lord Mayor of London (for the time being) has
authority to commit them to prison, if in case they do not satisfy the same
within a time limited, until they do it.

Other Assurances are made, and these are the most dangerous of all, because
they are made upon ships and goods, lost or not lost; which is not only in
regard that a ship known to be departed, does not arrive in many months after
to the appointed place of discharge: but also if any news do come that the
ship and goods is cast away, nevertheless if the Assurance be made with the
words (lost or not lost) the Assurors bear the adventure of it, vn^esse it
can be proved that the party who caused the Assurance to be made, did see the
ship when it was cast away, in this case it is a fraud: as the fraudulent
dealing of him that had a rotten ship, Fraudulent Assurances.
and caused assurance to be made upon her, and caused the same to perish or
sink at the seas, to make the Assurors to pay for his rotten ship which could
not be sold by him.

In the case of Assurances of lost or not lost, I remember that in the year
1583, there was a rich Carracke called the Saint Peter, (coming from the
East Indies for Lixborne) missing a long time, and there was assurance made
upon her in Antuerpe, Roan, and other places, at 30 pro centum. Within three
years after, there came or did arrive at Lixborne a smaller ship richly laden,
which was made of the other ship which was cast on shore in a certain Island,
and thereupon certain controversies did arise between the owners of the goods
and the Assurors, as also the master and mariners. At last it was adjudged at
Lixborne by the sea-law, that the master and mariners should have one third
part, and that the Assurors should come in for so much as they had pro rata
assured, all charges deducted; the ship to be the owners of the former
Carracke: with the like consideration as aforesaid.

Prices of Assurances.
Concerning the price of Assurances or Premio (as the Spaniards call it) it is
differing in all places, according to the situation of the place, and the
times either of war or peace, or danger of Pirates, men of war, or rocks,
and inaccessible places, seasons of the year and such like: and the said
Premio was never less than at this time, for Assurances are made for
Middleborough and Amsterdam at 3 pro cent. the like from London to Roan and
Diepe, Edenborough in Scotland, and Hamborough in East-land: and from London to
Bourdeaux and Rochell, Lubecke, Denmark, 4 upon the hundredth: as also for
Barbary, for Lixborne, Biscay, Ireland, Dansicke, Riga, Revel, and Sweaden, 5
in the hundredth: Civil, Gibraltar, Maliga, and the Islands, 6 and 7: for
Ligorne, Ciuita Vecchia, 8 and 9: Venice 10, Wardhouse 9, Russia 9, Santo
domingo 11 and 12: and for the East Indies 15; nay both for going and coming
has bin made at 20 pro centum.

CHAP. XXV. Of policies of Assurances, and the substance of them, and of
Contributions.
We have partly touched what a policy or writing of Assurance is, by the
nature of Assurances aforesaid, and the dangers and adventures whereunto the
Assurors are subject. But now we are to express them upon the very words
contained in all or most policies of Assurances, namely,

Of the Seas, men of War, Fire, Enemies, Pirates, Rouers, Thieves, Iettezons,
Letters of Mart, and Covenants, Arrest, Restraints and Detainements of Kings
and Princes, and of all other persons, Barratrie of the Master and Mariners,
and of all other Perils, Losses and Misfortunes whatsoever they be, and
howsoever they shall happen or come, to the hurt and detriment of the Goods and
Merchandises, or any part or parcel thereof, etc.

First, the Policy of assurance says, That such a man (of what nation or
quality soever he be) caused himself to be assured from such a place to such
a place, upon goods or, etc. laden or to be laden, in the good Ship called the
Dragon, or etc. of the burden of so many Tons, whereof A.B. is Master for
such a voyage, and to bear the adventures abouesaid. If the person whose name
is used in the assurance, be in time of war taken to be no friend to the
State, there is a danger to pay the said assurance; if (after the subscription
of the assurour) the goods should be arrested and be made forfeited to answer
the same to the Prince, albeit this was by the late Queen Elizabeth
contradicted in the point of honor, as it pleased her of a royal and noble
disposition to say in a case concerning the Portugalls, subjects to her
adversary, Phillip the second King of Spain. For in the year 1589, a great
Ship being taken by certain men of war of London, and brought into Plimmouth
laden with Pepper, Sugar, and other commodities at Lixborne, to be delivered
at Venice; it pleased the Lords of her Highness most honorable privy
Council to deliver unto me all the Letters, Bills of lading, and Inuoyces
which were found in the said Ship (being written in six or seven several
languages) to the end I should make true report of the contents of them, to
know to whom properly the said goods did appertain: in doing whereof I found
that a great part of the said goods did belong to the Venetians, as also to the
Florentines, with whom the said Queen had no quarrel; but that the said goods
were assured at Lixborne by the Portugal Merchants. Hereupon there was a
pretense to make them good prize, and the matter was long debated, and at last
resolved that the parties should have restitution of their goods, the rather
for that the Portugalls were great losers many ways: which was done
accordingly.

The losses which ordinarily, according to the seasons of the year happen upon
the Seas are known: the like is, more or less, with men of war, enemies,
Pirates, Rouers and thieves, L^sses to b^ well considered of, in the behalf of
the assurors.
especially with men of war in times of hostility (as it is in times of
peace by Pirates, Rouers, or thieves) which are assayling thieves: for otherwise
if there be thieves on shipboord within themselves, the Master of the Ship is
to answer for that, and to make it good, so that the assurors are not to be
charged with any such loss; which sometimes is not observed. As fraudulent
assurances and the loss of stolen goods within shipboord, does not concern the
assurors: so likewise the fault of the Pilot is to be considered on their
behalf, by the Laws of Oleron, after that the Pilot has brought the Ship in
sure harbor, he is no further bound or liable: for then the Master is to see
to her bed and her lying, and bear all the rest of her burden, charge, and
danger. So that if before she come into the Port or some safety, either she
or goods perish or be spoiled, Laws against unskillful Pilots.
the Pilot makes good the same; yea if his fault or ignorance be so gross,
that the company sees any manifest and present wrack to all thereby, then may
they lead him to the Hatches and strike off his head.

Moreover, if without apparent danger, some of the skilfullest Mariners deem
that a Pilot is not so skillful, as he makes boast or profession of, then
shall he both lose his hire, and double the same to the Admiral and Master, or
else (by the Law of Denmark) pass thrice under the Ships Keele. And also if a
Pilot hired for a voyage be not ready against the day, he shall not only
pay the Master and Merchants damage or stay; but also the freight that is lost
thereby, except sickness or some very lawful excuse qualify the same.

The like consideration must be had in the contribution made to satisfy
Pirates; for if ship or goods be redeemed from a Pirat, the contribution must be
made by all, because the redemption is made for the safety of all.
Contribution for Pirates.
But if the Pirat be once master of all, and yet take but some special goods,
whether from Ship or Merchant, and not as a contentation for sparing of the
rest: in this case because the remainder is not assured thereby but freely
spared, no contribution is to be made for the taken goods, to charge any
assuror with any part thereof; For oftentimes Pirates take but things at
pleasure and not of mind to spoil. But now adays commonly it is taken and
supposed otherwise, howbeit beyond the Seas the loser of the goods so taken,
bears his own loss unless it be assured. It was so judged by a pack of
Stockings taken (out of a ship of Amsterdam bound for Sanlucar) by the Moors
of Barbary, in the year 1589, and the assurors paid accordingly, who had
assured only upon that Pack: whereas if it had bin cast into an Aueridge to
make all the assurors of that Ship contributarie, the said assurors had been
much eased. Contribution for spoiled goods.
And it is therefore to be observed, and the Law of Oleron is, If by the losing
of any cast goods, or upon any needful occasion the remaining goods be
spoiled, either with wet or otherwise, a contribution shall be made
proportionable for so much as they are made worse.

Again, if it be needful to lighten a Ship, for her easier entry into the
harbor or channel, Contribution for lightening
two parts of the loss fall upon the goods, and the third part upon the Ship,
unless the Ship is more worth than the lading, and that the charge of goods
be not the cause of her inabilitie to enter, but some bad quality proceeding
of the Ship it self, or that otherwise it be provided in the Charter-party,
that the goods shall be fully delivered at the Port couenanted and appointed
for them. Condition makes law, which concerns the assurors also to look
unto. In which case it is also to be observed, That if by occasion of
lightening, the goods which are in the Boat or Lighter perish, the Ship and the
goods remaining on shipboord shall make good the said loss. But on the
contrary, if the Ship and goods remaining perish, after the Lighter is once
safe, no contribution shall be set upon the goods in the Lighter, because it is
a certain rule, That goods are liable only to contribution, when ship and
goods come safe to the Port.

Item, contribution should be for the Pilots fee, Contribution for Pilots.
that has brought the Ship into an unknown Port for her safeguard, as also to
raise her off ground, when the fault is not in the Master.

So is it when two Ships rush and cross one over another, and the company
swear, that it lay not in their power to stay the same, contribution must be
made for the repairation of both their losses; but not so if one of them
perish, for which an Action may be brought against the negligent Master or
Mariner, who did make her loose. And therefore, if such a chance do happen in
the day time by a Ship under sail, against a Ship riding at Anchor; then the
Master of that sailing Ship, shall make good the damage and hurt of the other,
to the uttermost: and the like shall be done, if in the night the riding Ship
do put forth fire and light, or make any crying to forewarne the other.

It also appertains to this Argument; If some sort of goods, as Salt, or
Corn, be laid on heap by diverse parteners in one Ship, without distinction,
and that the Master deliver to any of them their due measure, and before the
rest receive their measures, the remaining Salt or Corn washes or loses; he
that had the hap to be first served, enioyes it fully without any contribution
to the parteners; First come, first served.
because when these goods were put into the Ship, it was delivered to the
Master, Tanquam in creditum, and so he is become owner, as of money lent,
which men are not bound to redeliuer in the self same pieces, but in value or
such like coin, except there be some condition past to the contrary. And
albeit this is not to be imputed unto the Master as a fault, yet if he that
receives a loss thereby, will bring in this as an Aueridge, and charge the
assurors with contribution, it is unjust, for the reason aforesaid; and the
Master must of necessity deliver to one man before another. And therefore in
the next Chapter we will set down the manner of execution for contributions,
otherwise called Aueridges.

Concerning the danger and adventure of Letters of Mart, Letters of Mart.
or Contremart, Sieve ius Reprisaliarum, or Letters of Marque, every one knows
that men having these Commissions or Letters from their Prince, are very
vigilant in all places to surprise Merchants Ships and goods; for in this, one
extremity does enforce another extremity, when a man is oppressed with
robbery; spoils, and violence on the Seas, by men (falsely professing friends)
in such sort, that no petition, intercession, or travel, can procure a man's
right, but that the subject of one Prince has open denial of justice, or
restitution of goods cannot be had at the hands of a subject of another Prince,
nor of the Prince himself, who should suppress injuries and wrongs: Then
(because such unjust dealing do import just cause of hostility and warfare)
may these Letters of Mart be procured, to the end men may have restitution or
recompense of their losses, especially, because these proceedings seem to
denounce a war without any Proclamation, showing unto other Nations the like
distasteful favors as they show unto us, which are allowed to be done by
Customs, Reasons, and also by Statute Law in Scotland, and afterward in
England: The assurors therefore cannot be favored herein.

Detainment of Princes.
The next is Arrests, Restraints, and detainements of Kings and Princes, and of
all other Persons happening both in time of war and peace, committed by the
public authority of Princes, as also by private persons, both ways dangerous.

Privileged Ships.
There are in all Countries Privileged Ships and Boats, serving the Country
or the Prince, which have great Prerogatives, and are free of Impost and
Customs, and not subject to arrests; therefore the assurors are not to care
for them, for they are to serve the Prince: and all Ships are subject to this
service upon command, and if they refuse, their Ships are forfeited by the
Sea-lawes: therefore in these cases the favor of the Admiral is always
required. It is an ordinary matter in Spain and Portugal, to make an Embargo
upon all Ships, at the departure of the West India Fleet, or the Carrackes for
the East Indies; and many times upon other occasions, whereby Merchants Ships
being laden are much hindered, especially, if it be with Wines, Oils,
Raisons, and such like perishable wares. Now if the owner of the goods, shall
think that his wares do perish, lying two or three months laden, or if it be
Corn that may become hot and spoiled; he may renounce these goods or wares
to the assurors, and thereby bring a great loss upon them. Yet nevertheless
he shall not need to abandon the goods, for by the Policy of assurance it is
always provided, That in case of any misfortune, it is lawful for him, A
Prouiso in the Policies of assurance.
his Factor or Assigns, or his Servants, or any of them, to sue, labor and
travel for in and about the defense, safeguard, or recovery of the goods, and
any part thereof. And that the assurors shall contribute, each according to the
rate and quantity of the sum by him assured. So that albeit, that it do
fall out that the goods be not utterly lost when the Ship is cast away, the
assured must recover his whole money; because he has authority by the
Policy of assurance to recover them, or any part of them, as aforesaid, and he
is afterward to yield an account thereof, for so much as does concern every
man ratably: otherwise the assured should be discouraged, if by those means
he should make his assurance intricate and subject to all cauilations, and to
the interruption of so necessary and laudable a Custom, as the matter of
assurance is. Therefore, as in the matter in hand, we have a care for the
assurors, that they should not be deceived by those that cause assurances to
be made: so on the other side, we would avoid to minister any occasion
wh^reupon they might become quarrelsome, but that all should be left to the
Commissioners determination, who are (or should be at the least) best able to
examine the premises.

Now concerning the Arrests of particular persons, Arrests upon Ships.
upon Ship or goods, the assured can make no renunciation to charge the
Assurors with any loss either in the total or part, because upon caution
given to answer the law, the ship or goods arrested are instantly cleared in
all places, either here or beyond the seas, where the arrests are made,
wherein the jurisdiction of all courts for seafaring causes are very careful
to see expedition used.

Barratrie of the Master and Mariners can hardly be avoided, Barratrie of the
Master.
but by a provident care to know them, or at the least the Master of the ship
whereupon the assurance is made. And if he be a careful man, the danger of
fire above mentioned, will be the less; for the ship-boyes must be looked unto
every night and day. And in this case let us also consider the Assurors; for
it has oftentimes happened, that by a candle unadvisedly used by the boys, or
otherwise before the ships were unladen, they have bin set on fire and burned
to the very keele, with all the goods in them, and the Assurors have pated the
sums of money by them assured: nevertheless herein the Assurors might have
been wronged, although they bear the adventure until the goods be landed;
for it comes to pass many times, that whole ships ladings are sold on
ship-boord and never discharged, because they should avoid the payment of
Customs and Imposts, and therefore they will break no bulk, but depart for
some other place. viz. Ships laden with Gascoyne Wines do come from
Middleborough to London, which have been bought by the great, and either the
seller of the Wines does bear the adventure of the seas, or the b^yer. So
every year there are diverse ships which come from Norway laden with
Deale-boords, Plankes, Masts, and the like commodities, which being entered into
the river of Thames for two or more days, will depart again for Spain, or
some places in the Straits, according as they have made their bargain with the
Merchant: in like manner diverse other ships laden with other commodities, upon
the like bargains and contracts, will make further voyages, and not discharge
in the place were it was first intended and named in the policy of Assurance.
Now if after such a bargain made, the ship and goods (either by fire, or any
other misfortune) do perish, the Assurors are not to answer for that loss,
notwithstanding the general words ( And of all other Perils, Losses and
Misfortunes whatsoever they be, and howsoever they shall happen or come, to the
hurt and detriment of the Goods and Merchandises, or any part or parcel
thereof) contained in the policy of Assurance as aforesaid. I hold it also
convenient to advertise the Assurors of a case of mine own experience: In the
year 1589 I caused the ship of Monsieur Gourdan governor of Calais, to be
fraighted for Lixborne, and to return back again to Calais or London: A case
to be considered in Assurances.
the said ship (being arrived at Lixborne) was laden with Sugars, Pepper, and
other commodities to return for London; whereupon I caused six thousand French
crowns to be assured at Roan. It happened that the said ship was cast away
upon the coast of France, in coming homewards, and all the goods were utterly
lost; whereupon intimation being made to the Assurors, I sent to the
Commissioners of assurances at Roan, all my proof concerning the lading of the
said ship, hoping to recover the money assured; but upon examination of the
Bills of lading, declaring truly the quality and quantity of the goods, my
factor of Lixborne (considering the dangerous time of war, and my dwelling in
London) left the place of her discharge in Blanke, and by letters ouerland gave
me notice of it, which was made apparent to the said Commissioners; yet
nevertheless (after the examination of the sea-lawes and customs, and the
Paracer had of all experienced Merchants) it was sentenced against me, and the
Assurors were cleared, and made only a restitution of the money received by
them for their Premio, and yet of that they did abate one half or medio por
ciento, as it were ten shillings for every hundredth pound for their
subscribing to the policy of Assurance, to my very great loss.

To this purpose does appertain another property of Assurances, which
happens, when Merchants cause a greater sum to be assured than the goods
are worth or amount unto when they are laden into any ship which is expected
home wards, making account that their Factors will send them greater returns
than they do: in this case the Custom is, A rare custom in Assurances.
that those Assurors that have last subscribed to the policy of Assurance,
bear not any adventure at all, and must make restitution of the Premium by
them received, abating one half in the hundredth for their subscription, as in
the case aforesaid, and this is duly observed; and so a Law not observed is
inferior to a Custom well observed.

To conclude the point of policies of Assurances, let us note, that of
necessity it is required as a consideration precedent, that the Assurors must
acknowledge themselves to be satisfied of the Premium of Assurance, at the
hands of the assured, or any other who does undertake to pay them: which beyond
the seas is commonly paid within six months, because that Merchants assuring
each to other, may rescounter their Premios, in the accounts kept thereof
between them; for herein is used great trust and confidence between them: and
this appears also by every man's vnderwriting in the said policy of
Assurance, in these words, I A. B. am content with this Assurance (which God
preserve) for the sum of one hundredth pounds. London this 10 of August 1620,
etc. according to the sum and time.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the manner of Contributions or Aueridges.
Having entreated of Contributions or Aueridges in regard of Assurors, now it
behooves us somewhat to speak of the manner how this is executed and
performed; by some called Scot and Lot.

In the case of casting of goods in tempestious weather, for preservation of
life and goods, the master is to consult with the mariners, and if they consent
not, yet the master may cast some goods, if the storm continue: but if the
Merchant be present, let him begin to cast, says the law of Oleron, and next
the mariners, who if they unbesill any part to their own use of that which
should be cast, are to answer the double.

When the master shall come on land, he must (with the most part of his
company) swear that he did cast the said goods, for no other cause, but for
the safety of ship, goods and lines, which are to be cast into an Aueridge or
Contribution upon ship and goods, whether they be burdensome or of small
volume, as money, Jewels or such like, not being weighty; things upon a man's
body, victuals, and such like excepted.

But here arises a question, Whether goods laden above the ouerlope, or
forbidden goods to be transported, shall be answered by Contribution? Sure if
such goods happen to be the cause of any danger or damage, the master shall
bear the loss, and also criminally be prosecuted. But if goods unadvisedly
(without consent of the owner) be cast out on the sudden, the owner may upon
his conscience esteem them to the very value, because the company (by their
rash proceeding) has lost the privilege they had to esteem and appraise the
said goods.

Also any ships gear or apparel lost by storm, is not within Aueridge, and
accounted like unto a workman breaking or spoiling his tools, or ordinary
instruments. The like is for goods cast, which were brought within ship-boord,
without the master or his pursers knowledge.

In the rating of goods by way of Contribution, this order is observed, If they
chance to be cast before half the voyage performed, then they are to be
esteemed at the price they cost; if after, then at the price as the rest, or
the like shall be sold at the place of discharge.

The person (whose goods have been cast) is to be careful to have the same
estimated before the ship do discharge, and to deal with the master for that
purpose. For the law does intend that the goods delivered unto him, are not
only as a pawn or pledge for his freight, but also bound to answer all such
Contributions and Aueridges that may happen; and therefore the master may put
his helping hand thereunto, until satisfaction be made, albeit that commonly
the detaining of other men's goods are not allowed.

Three sorts or manner of goods token upon the sea.
Herein let us now consider of things taken upon the sea, which are of three
sorts: the first we have already noted to be goods taken by Letters of Mart
by, ius represaliarum; the second are taken from Pirates or sea Rouers; and the
third from professed enemies. Touching that which is taken from Pirates, seeing
they be goods which they have wrongfully taken from others, whether they be
found in their own or their successors possession; these are esteemed to be a
just prise or prey to any taker of them, so that account be made of them to the
Admiral. And in case where the taker does find the goods of his friend or
countrieman with the Pirat, it is reasonable that restitution be made, upon
good consideration of the charges and danger sustained concerning the same.

If a ship or goods be taken from a professed enemy, it is to be proceeded in
according to the authority whereby it was taken. But if goods be taken by a
professed enemy, and afterward the said goods are taken again from him, and
the true owner does claim them, it ought to be restored to the owner; for the
law takes these goods to be as received and not taken, yet with good
recompense for them.

But when such goods become a lawful prise to the taker, then the Admiral is
to have his tenth part) according to the offer which Abraham made unto God, of
the spoil which he took of the fine kings) and the remainder of the goods so
taken, is to be proportionably divided between the takers, or according to the
composition formerly made. In these cases there is always a favorable
consideration to be had: which is the cause, that if two foreign nations be at
war, and the one take a ship from the other, and bring her into a port or
road within the bounds of a neuterall nation, alike friend to both; then may
the Admiral of that nation ordain that ship to be restored to her owner, and
the persons captive to their former liberty, even as if she had been brought
back to her own port or country again. (*)

CAHP. XXII. Of the particulars to be observed in Assurances.
THE observations to be considered of in matter of assurances are very
material for every Merchant, and deserve a particular Chapter in this
Treatise, which I have compiled according to the circumstances of the things
themselves, for the assurors benefit.

1 The first I have touched in the Party who causes the assurance to be made,
both for his honest dealing, and whether he be a friend to the State or
Kingdom for the reasons aforesaid.

2 To know the Master of the Ship and Mariners to be honest, and of
experience, to avoid the danger of Barratrie and other accidents.

3 To take notice of the goodness of the Ship, and of her sailing, especially
making her voyage alone, or in company of other Ships: whether she be old or
new built, and the price of the assurance to be accordingly.

4 To know by the Map or Sea-cardes, the distance of the place or country
where the Ship is to sail, and the dangers of known rocks and sands.

5 To have a regard what wind must serve, and the true season of the year,
which makes a difference in the price of assurance; as for example, an East or
North-east wind drives from the land for Spain, which is less dangerous,
and receiving six or seven pro ciento, when a Western, or North-west, or
South-west (driving from thence upon the land) is to give seven or eight pro
ciento: in Winter two in the hundredth more than in Summer, unless it be by
calmes in places dangerous, as now in the Straights for the Turkish Pirates and
without it, the Moors of Barbary, or other thieves. So Ships going for
East-land against Winter, will give two in the hundredth more than in Summer.
The like for Ships bound for several Ports more subject to casualties, etc.

6 To consider of the places of hostility, where the Ship must unlade or
touch, the danger of general or particular Embargos of Ships, the likelihood
of detainements of Kings and Princes.

7 Not to assure for unlawful places of trade, or questionable between
Princes, as Guinea and there about the West Indies; unless a good premio be
given, as in a manner upon adventures lost or not lost.

8 To know upon what kind of goods you do assure, whether upon Wines, Oils,
Salt, Raisons, and such like corruptible and perishable wares, or upon other
Staple commodities, as Clothes, Tin, Lead or Silks, etc. not subject so
ordinarily to Aueridges and contributions as the other.

9 To know what Ordnance and Munition the Ship is provided withal, and not to
assure upon the bottom of the Ship, but with good advice.

10 If you assure upon any particular goods marked, to know whether they be
laden in the bottom of the Ship, and there is danger of wetting and spoiling;
if above in the Ship, there is danger of Pirates, or of casting ouerboord; about
the middle is best.

11 To be advised not to assure, beyond the limitation of your knowledge by
the means of others, or from Lixborne to Brazell, or from Venice to Tripoly,
or such like voyages, whereof you cannot conveniently have notice from time to
time.

12 Lastly, to be provident in the contributions and aueridges, to answer for
no more than is your due to pay, and to have an inspection of the Bills of
lading, if doubt be made of the Commissioners sufficiency or knowledge in
cases of this nature.

The assurance upon the lives of men (whether aged or young, of good qualities
and diet, of disposition gentle or quarrelsome, a traveler or a dweller) being
somewhat extraordinary, every man is best able to consider of it by the
acquaintance of the persons. (*)

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the manner of Proceedings for Assurances, in case of losses.
WHereas the policy of Assurance remaining with the assured, is registered
Verbatim in the Office of Assurances, to the end that if the same should happen
to be lost, yet by the said Register, the party may recover of the assurors
the several sums by them assured; as also because if any news do come of
the casting away of the Ship, the assured may come to the office, and cause
intimation to be made to the assurors, and to every one of them in particular
of such a loss, which is also recorded there accordingly, expressing the time
when this intimation is made, and in cases of assurance made upon lost or not
lost, the very hour of the day is to be set down, whereby (if there were any
fraud) it may sooner be detected. And if the assured does think convenient,
either for that he has almost assured all the value of his goods, or that he
would have the assistance of the assurors, when there is hope of recovery of
any part thereof, or any other cause which may move him: then I say,
Renunciation of goods.
the party assured may make renunciation of all the goods to the assurors, and
he shall come in as an assuror, for so much as shall appear that he has
himself borne adventure of; and the assurors are to be contributaries to the
charges of the pursuit, and they may jointly argee therein and appoint their
servants, or other persons to follow the same; and this renunciation is also
recorded in the said Office accordingly. But if afterward it shall be found,
that the assured has made assurance or caused himself to be assured, for
more than the goods laden for his account did cost; then the last assurors
which have subscribed to the Policy, shall enjoy the benefit thereof, as has
been declared. For by the Custom of Assurances it is intended, that to avoid
cauilations, every Assuror shall be bound ipso facto to the said Assurance,
having a respect to the augmentation of traffic and commerce, according to
the Maxim, It is better to suffer a mischief than an inconvenience; the
mischief being attributed to one or some particular persons, and the
inconvenience to the whole Commonwealth in general.

Hereupon the party assured does procure his testimonialls, witnesses, or any
other evidences concerning the said loss, declaring the manner and place, the
cause, with all circumstances, either by examinations in the said Office of
Assurances, or in the Court of Admiraltie, with all such other proof as by
letters and all other means he can attain unto: Proof of the Assurors.
all which he has ready, or brings into the Office, together with the
Charterpartie of fraightment, if he have the same; the Policy of Assurance,
the Bill of Lading, the Invoice of the goods, the Factors Letter of lading,
wherein the Bill was enclosed, or any other Letters made for the declaration
and manifestation of all the matter in question: which are all examined by the
Commissioners for Assurances, at several appointed days for hearing, procured
by the assured; at which times all the assurors are warned to appear, and
record is made also of their meetings and proceedings. And herein is to be
observed, that it may many times happen, that the assured has caused some
assurance to be made in some other place upon the said goods also: Therefore
the Commissioners (if it be by the assurors required) may examine the assured
thereupon by oath, and then deal therein as they find cause, according to the
Custom of Assurances.

To abbreuiate the questions which the Ciuilians have made, concerning this
argument of Assurances, writing De assicurationibus, I have thought good to let
every Merchant understand, that observing the form of the policy of
Assurances, with the observation before declared, all the said questions will
be prevented, and to prove the same by Demonstratiue Reasons upon every
question alleged, as follows.

An abridgement of Questions of Assurances.
1 WHether an assurance made upon a Ship named, is to be understood of the ship
or of the goods laden therein, or upon both?

Answer, When the name of the ship is expressed according to the said policy
of Assurance made upon the very Keele of the ship of such a burden, there is
no man endued with reason, that will attribute this Assurance to extend to the
goods laden in the same, much less to both, when the Ship is only named and
no goods at all.

2 Whether an Assurance made upon one thousand Hides, laden in such a ship,
from such a place, to such a place be good, without naming the several sorts
of Hides laden therein?

A. In all policies of Assurances the words run General upon the principal
wares, and all other commodities or goods laden, or to be laden by such a man,
for the account of him or any other; and so this (General) includes all
particular things, which when assurance is made upon them are named and
specified, as hereafter is also declared.

3 Whether upon uncertain things to be laden, the assurance be good?

A. When assurances are made upon goods laden, or to be laden, as aforesaid;
the said assurance must needs be of validity, for the word Goods and
Merchandises comprehends all uncertain things vendible: and if it were some
particular thing, it is always expressed.

4 Whether an assurance made upon one Sack of Wool be good, when there is
many Sackes of Woolles in the same Ship?

A. The question is prevented by the Custom of Assurances, which is, that an
assurance made upon any particular goods, must be declared by the particular
mark of the goods belonging to such an owner, or any other; and if there be
more of the said mark, the number therefore is added: and if the number were
alike, the weight may distinguish the same; whereby the one Sack being thrown
over board for safeguard of the ship and goods, may be cast into a
contribution; or being taken by Pirates, the assurors are to pay for it: so this
question is frivolous, as many other are, and breeds but contention to imbibe
Merchants brains with them.

5 The like is when the assurance is made upon commodities or goods without
name, or not naming the number, weight, or measure, but expressing the mark of
all goods laden or to be laden, as aforesaid.

6 Whether the assuror is to have his Premio or Salarie, upon a conditional
assurance, or not?

A. There is no conditional assurance made, but with exception of some
adventures not to be borne by the assuror; which are not comprised in the
policy of assurance, and therefore the Premio is due to the assuror.

7 Whether an assurance made is to be understood of the first voyage which the
ship does make after the assurance is made, and the ship appointed for lading?

A. This is to be understood always of the first voyage, unless there were a
declaration of a second voyage in the policy of assurance, and therefore I
have noted a caveat for assurors to be careful how they cause other men to
assure for them in remote places, not to make them liable to two voyages for
one assurance, nor to be subject to a second voyage when the first is
performed, but to be vigilant in their actions.

8 Whether an assurance made for the tempest of the Seas, be also to be
understood for Thieves or Robbers upon the Seas?

A. The general and ordinary policy of assurance, containing all adventures,
shows, that the assuror is to bear the adventure of both these; and if it
were otherwise in particular, it must be declared: So that this distinction is
vain.

9 The like may be said to the question, Whether an assurance made by
stipulation, be a contract or not? or whether it be couentionall or
conditional? wherein this distinction is of no moment.

10 Whether an assuror (having paid the Merchant for goods lost by him
assured, may afterward, if the goods were found again or recovered) restore
the goods to the Merchant, and call for his money (which he paid) back again?

A. It appears plainly by all policies of Assurance, That the Assuror does
condescend that the Merchant shall have full power and authority by himself
or his Factors and Servants, to sue for therecouerie of the goods, and that the
Assurors shall contribute to the charges pro rata of their sums by them
assured respectively: but the Merchant is not therefore hindered to recover the
money of the Assurors, neither can one particular Assuror have all the goods;
for the Merchant relinquishing the goods to the Assuror, reserueth always his
part therein which he has not assured, which he detaineth in nature of an
Assuror, so that the Assuror has not convenient means to perform the
contents of the question; nevertheless, if the Merchant will, he may buy the
goods so recovered of the Assurors, as they can agree; but then is the question
altered, and not the same.

11 Whether an Assuror is to answer any hurt or damage done to the goods by
Mice, Rats, or any other vermin, especially moaths?

A. By the policy of Assurance that Assuror is to answer for all damages,
detriment, or hurt which shall happen to the goods after his vnderwriting: but
if he can prove the hurt or damage was before done in the warehouse or other
place, he is not bound to answer the same.

12 Whether goods lost in the ship boat, being unladen out of the ship, or
being to be laden into the ship, shall be answered by the Assurors, or what may
be laid to the charge of the Assurors by contribution?

A. This question consists of two points: the answer to the first is plain,
according to the policies of Assurances, where it is specified, that the
adventure shall begin upon the goods laden in any Boat, Vessel, or Crayer to
be laid aboard of such a Ship, or being discharged out of the Ship, the
adventure to continue till the goods be safely landed: but to the second, the
answer is not so plain, because it depends upon the sea-law, and must be
considered accordingly. For as we have noted in the chapter of Contributions,
if by occasion of lightening, the goods which are put into the Boat or Lighter
perish, the ship and remaining goods in the ship shall answer for the same:
but on the contrary, if the ship and remaining goods perish after the Boat or
Lighter is once safe, no contribution shall be on the goods in the Lighter; for
the law is, That the goods shall only be liable to contributions, when ship
and goods are safely arrived to their intended port of discharge: according to
this rule is the Assuror to answer for contributions pro rata of the sum by
him assured.

13 Whether assurance made for pirates, is to be understood also for thieves
which by night steal the goods from the ship?

A. The answer is so evident, that both the one and the other is comprised in
the Assurance, as there needs no other explanation.

14 Whether an Assurance made at one time upon goods to be bought and intended
to be laden, and afterward found not to be bought at the same time, but at
another time, does bind the Assurors to pay the loss?

A. This question is worthy the consideration, and does merely consist in the
observation of time, and not in the buying of the goods, although it be so
propounded; for the time makes great difference in the assurance, as I have
noted before. Goods laden in the Summer are not in adventure comparable to the
Winter when storms and tempests do arise, and therefore are not the Assurors
to be made answerable to this assurance; for the custom herein is clear and
concurring with the Law of Oleron, and therefore not comprised in the tenor of
the policies of Assurances, which is the cause also that Assurors are to have a
special regard to the Masters of ships whether they be vicious or diligent:
for the love of women and wine makes them to loose the opportunity of time; so
that by contrary winds their voyage is retarded, and which was to be made in
Summer falls out to be in Winter, subject to eminent dangers and losses,
whereunto the Assurors become liable, as is declared, whether it be by
accident, misfortune, casualtie, rare successes and negligences of Masters and
Mariners unlooked for and happening in strange manner suddenly.

15 Whether an Assuror be liable to the adventure of goods shipped from one
ship into another?

A. Sometimes in policies of Assurances it happens that upon some especial
consideration, this clause forbidding the transferring of goods is inserted,
because in time of hostility or wars between princes, it might fall out to
be unladen in such ships of those contending princes, whereby the adventure
would be far greater. But according to the usual Assurances which are made
generally without any exception, the Assuror is liable thereunto: for it is
understood, that the Master of a ship without some good and accidental cause,
would not put the goods from one ship into another, but would deliver them
(according to the charterpartie) at the appointed place, which is the cause
that (when assurance is made upon some particular goods laden in such a ship,
under such a mark) the Policy makes mention of the goods laden to be
transported and delivered to such a place by the ship, or by any other ship or
vessel until they be safely landed, so that in all these and the like the
condition makes the law.

16 Now there is a question, Whether an Assuror is answereable to the assurance
of goods to bear the adventure if no goods were laden, or but part of the
goods?

A. If a man do bind or oblige a thing to be found in such a place, and it is
not found there; every man knows that the said thing tied to a local place
cannot be bound thereby, because it is a body named without substance, and not
in Rerum natura, and there would be understood a privation without being, and
where there is not materia and forma, first, there can be no privation: but if
part of the goods were laden, then the Assurors are liable for so much as that
part of goods did cost or amount unto: albeit that in this (as I have touched
before) custom is preferred above law; Custom to be above law in this
particular
for the civil law (if there be many Assurors in a ship upon the goods laden
therein) makes all the Assurors liable pro rata, as they have assured
according to the said part of goods laden, if a loss do happen: or if there be
cause to restore the Premio or sallarie of assurance in part. But the custom
of Assurances does impose the loss upon those Assurors which did first
vnderwrite, and the later vnderwriters of the Assurors do not bear any part of
the loss, but must make restitution of the Premio, and reserve only one half
upon the hundredth pounds, or 10 ss for their vnderwriting in the policy of
Assurance, as is observed. The Ciuillians therefore have noted, That in
Assurances the customs of the sealawes, and use amongst Merchants is chiefly
to be regarded and observed.

In like manner, if a ship bound for a certain port (being at sea) be driven
back to the same from whence it departed, and by tempest be cast away, the
Assurors are to answer the damage of the goods laden therein, for so much as
they did assure, as they do in other casualties. Assurors therefore are rightly
exempted by the Divines and Canonists to be no manner of ways vsurors, taking
a benefit by contract etc.

The matter of loss being well examined and made plain, the Commissioners
then with a mature deliberation do set down their determination and sentence,
That the Assurors shall pay every one the money by him assured; and if
thereupon any one do deny to make payment accordingly, then (upon certificate
to the Lord Mayor of London, and some of the said Commissioners made of his
refusal) they have by act of Parliament (as aforesaid) authority to commit
the said Assuror to prison, there to remain until he do pay or satisfy the
said sentence or final decree, which no man of any credit will incur. And
thus is this laudable custom established in England: and beyond the seas they
are compelled by the Magistrates to perform the like ordinances or sentences
pronounced in the like cases of Assurances. (*)

CHAP. XXIX. Of Shipwrecke, and things found upon the Seas.
THE Merchant or the assured, together with the assurors, have great cause of
encouragement to look after the goods of a Shipwrecke, for there is no
forfeiture of the said goods; but with all humanity every man is bound to aid
them thereunto; and whosoever steals any such goods, he shall pay fourefold
to the owner thereof, if he be pursued within a year and a day, and as much
to the Prince or Admiral: wherein the Sea-law is so strict, that the stealing
of a nail or the value thereof, makes the party guilty to the rest of the
goods; so that by the ordinance of the Emperor Antonius, The these or robber
of such goods should be beaten, and banished for three years; or if he were
of base condition, scourged to the Galleys. For he that will not help such
distressed men, shall be counted as a murderer: and therefore may no man
hinder Ships to tie their ropes, or lay their anchors on land. And therefore
did Hadrian the Emperor ordain, That all men having possessions on the
coasts, should attend carefully upon such chances, otherwise they to be
answerable for all things missing by stealth or robbery.

If no man in due time claim such a wrecke, then it belongs to the Prince or
Admiral: and any action for Shipwrecke must therefore be commenced within a
year and a day.

Wherein also is to be noted, That if the Ship only perish and the goods be
saved, then the goods shall pay the tenth, or the fifth, as the difficulty of
the saving thereof shall require. For Gold, Silver, Silk, and the like things
of easy transportation, should pay less than goods of greater weight and
burdensome for carriage, as being in greater danger, except the Master carry
in his Ship to a place where he should not, and then is the Merchant free of
the Masters loss. Now of things found upon the Seas, or within the flood-mark,
these are of three sorts, either found on the stream floating, and then are
called Floatson; or found on the Sea bottom, Floatson. Lagon.
and drawn up from it, and then called Lagon; or found on land, but within the
Sea-flood, or cast forth there by storm and the water, and then are called
Ietson. Ietson.


Concerning Floatson and Ietson, whether things be cast up by Shipwrecke, or
else left or lost through casting in storms, the finders thereof (as some
Lawyers are of opinion) should do therewith as with other goods found upon
land, that is, to proclaim the same to be forthcomming to the true owner,
because the loser remains still proprietarie of them: and if no man claim
the same, the finder to keep the same to himself. But by the Rhodian Law, the
finder has one fifth part for the saving. And in France by the Admiraltie of
Rochell, they allow Pour le Droict de sauuage one third part, which my self
have allowed of eighty pipes of Oil, and twenty two Butts of Sackes, which
became Floatson out of a Ship of Diepe, called the Desire, which did perish
near the Island of Saint Martin de Rea, not far from Oleron, in the year
1589, the French King Henry the fourth late deceased being then but King of
Navarre. So has a Diuer for drowned goods, Allow^ee to Diverse in the Seas.
one third part upon eight Cubits deep, and upon fifteen Cubits he has
half, and upon one Cubit but a tenth; which of late years was accordingly
allowed in some part of Ireland, for drawing up some Ordnance of the Ships,
which of the Spanish Armada did perish upon the coast, Anno 1588. But by the
Custom now used, every man of some quality will claim all as his own, if
it comes upon his land, contrary to the Law of Oleron, which gives it to the
finder.

If Ships or Boats are found on the Sea, or upon the coast, without any living
creature therein, and no man claiming the same within a year and a day; then
the half is allowed to the finder, and the other half to the Prince. But of
late years all is left to the arbitrament of the Admiralls, to consider the
finder or taker with some portion for his trauells, charges, and danger. And if
the finder conceal such goods, whether Anchor, Timber, Jewels, dead men with
money or Jewels about them, he not only loses his part, but also shall be
fined at the will and pleasure of the Admiral.

If Whales, or Regal Fishes, Ships or Boats without living thing in them, be
driven by force of wind and waves only to any coast or land, then all and
wholly does appertain to the Admiral. But in the year 1617, a great Whale
being found on the coast in Suffolk, where Sir Robert Lloyd Knight was
Admiral for the late Queen Anne, his Majesty's Consort, for her lands there;
he took not the benefit hereof, as he might have done, but the said Queen had
the same.

In like manner, a Deo dando or Deodant appertains to the Admiral, that is
to say, The thing (whether Ship or Boat) that caused the death of a man, or
whereby a man did perish unawares.

To conclude this point, let us remember that in causes of spoil, it is
sufficient by the Laws of England, for the spoiled to prove his goods by his
mark, and the Shipwrecke may not only be proved by the persons living, but
also by the persons who were present at the preparation of their voyage, even
their own parents and children, if none of the Ship (broken) be alive.

CHAP. XXX. Of Partners of Ships and Voyages.
FOrasmuch as Parteners and Owners of Ships cannot be constrained by the Law to
remain in Partnership, although they had made a covenant never to sunder or
separate themselves; therefore are there many considerations to be had and
required in the same.

And first it is generally observed and accustomed, That if Owners of a ship
newly builded or bought between them, shall fall out and be at variance, the
said ship shall be employed and make one voyage first, Law of Oleron.
upon their common charges and adventure, before any of the parteners be heard
to sunder and discharge their part. And after that, if they cannot agree, he
who desires to be free, is to offer to the rest his part, and to set the same
upon a price, as he will either hold or sell; which if he will not do, and
yet refuses to set the ship forth with the rest of the Owners or Parteners,
then may they rigge the said ship at their own charges, and also upon the
adventure of the refuser, so far as his part does extend, without any account
to be made unto him of any part of the profit at her return. But they are
only bound to him to bring her home safe, or the value of his part to be
answerable for, and that justly; because ships were made and invented in common
for the use of all men, even of them that dwell in the Mountains, as on the
Sea coasts, and ordained for sailing and not to lie idle and unoccupied. But if
the persons, who have most part of the ship, refuse to abide in Partnership
with him who has a small part, that neither he can sell his part at a price,
without great loss, nor is yet able for want of means to attain or buy their
parts; then are they all bound to put the ship to an appraisement, and so to
dispose of her by sale, or setting of her forth on a voyage, accordingly; by
means whereof their discord may be ended and the ship not spoiled. And if for
want of buyers in that place, the poor partener can neither avoid the
oppression of the richer, nor yet the rich satisfy the poor man, which may
also be wilful, then may the Judge of the Admiraltie, or the ordinary Judge
deal and decree the same, as he may do in omnibus alijs bonae fidei
actionibus: And consider of all the circumstances of the persons, of the matter
of their difference, and of their motives; that thereupon he may administer
Justice in giving every man his due right.

In cases where Owners do agree, and voyages are undertaken, there the Master
of the ship is placed by the Owners, A Master placed by the Owners.
and they ought to make good the Masters fact and deed; so that the Master may
lay his action upon any one of the Owners: but the rest of the Owners shall pro
rata of their portions be contributarie thereunto, except the handling of the
Ship be so severally divided amongst them, or that the Master have not his
Power and Commission of them all; or that the Master has bound himself above
his Commission, as if he have taken up money to mend the ship, when as he needs
it not, or that he have no Commission at all: in which case the lender
commits an oversight, and has no remedy but against the Master. But if
there were cause of mending the ship, and the Master should spend the same
another way; the Owner is to satisfy the Creditor notwithstanding. And above
all things money lent for victuals to the ships company should be paid and
preferred before all other debts.

If a Merchant contracting with a Mariner, that is not a Master, be therein
ouerseene, he must content himself, for he can have no action against the
Owners, except for a fault done by a Mariner which has been hired and put in
by the Owners.

Again, albeit that by the Sea-lawes, the Owners may not pursue any persons
obliged to the Master; yet are they permitted to pursue upon the Masters
contract, as if they had been principal contractors. Because herein they do
represent and undertake the person of the Master, and these privileges are
granted to the Owners, for the good of the Commonwealth, and augmentation of
traffic.

Nevertheless the Master is not bound to render an account of all to the
Owners, as for passengers which are found unable to pay; and so are not Owners
bound to answer for the Masters negligence. But it is very convenient if the
Owners be in place, that the Master do not let the ship to freight, or
undertake any voyage, without the priuitie, knowledge, and advice of the
Owners, or of some of them, to the end many things may be advised by them,
whereof the Master was ignorant.

CAHP. XXXI. Of Moneys taken upon Bottommarie, by the Master of a ship, called
Foenus Nauticum.
THe name Bottommarie is derived by the Hollanders from the Keele or Bottom of
a ship, upon the parallel whereof, the Rudder of a ship does govern and direct
the same: and the money so taken up by the master of the ship, is commonly done
upon great necessity, when moneys must be had in foreign countries to
perform a voyage; for the use paid for the same is very great, at 30, 40,
and 50 pro cent. without consideration of time, but within so many days after
the voyage ended. Difference between interest money and Bottommarie.
This Money is called Pecunia traiectitia, because that upon the lenders danger
and adventure it is carried beyond or over the seas: so that if the ship
perish, or that all be spoiled, the lender does lose the money. But on the
contrary, money letten at interest is delivered on the peril of the borrower;
so that the profit of this is merely the price of the simple loan, called
Vsura: Locatio, or hire
but the profit of the other is a reward for the danger and adventure of the
sea, which the lender takes upon him during the loan, which is to be
understood until a certain day after the voyage ended; therefore if the money
miscarrie, either before the voyage begin, or after the term appointed for the
full loan, then the peril pertains to the borrower thereof, and not to the
lender. I mean of perils proceeding by storm, violence, spoil, or such like
occasions which cannot be eschewed by any diligence of the borrower. Therefore
if the borrower employ that money upon commodities, and that the said
commodities become forfeited for nonpaiment of Custom, the lender shall be
clear of any damage thereby. It is also to be noted, That money lent at
maritime interest without hazard, but upon security, should pay no profit,
otherwise than the money lent at interest, because the security is given over
and above for the lenders assurance. Again, suppose it were money not entered
in the pursers book, and yet lent for the need of the company within the ship
during the voyage, if before the day appointed for the payment, ship-wrecke, or
spoil happen, then should the loss come in contribution between them;
because if that money had been lying by the lender still vnlent, it had been
in common danger with the rest: but if the time appointed were past with the
perils aforesaid, then shall the borrower pay that money so borrowed, free from
all contribution.

Further in case the borrower detaines any such money lent as aforesaid, beyond
the time appointed for the repaying, he shall at his return not only pay the
profit agreed upon before the voyage, but also augment the same according to
the longer time, and shall pay the profit of that first condition accordingly.

Some Merchants there are, that will deliver money in nature of Vsura Maritima,
joining the use money and danger of the seas, either upon the ships or goods
all in one consideration, and so take 25 or 30 upon the hundredth, at the
return of such a ship from such a voyage; wherein they have an eye to the
person that takes up the money, making account to be better assured by a
vigilant eye upon a Merchants traffic, whom they must trust (if they will
make benefit of their moneys) rather than to deliver their money unto another
of whose dealing they cannot give so good a judgment. Combination of interest
money and assurance.
As for example, They know that such a Merchant does deal for Turkey, and that
in known ships trafficking that way, the deliverer of money goes unto him and
makes an offer to lend him 1000 ll for a voyage to be made (with Kersies and
Tin) to Tripoli, and that he will bear the adventure of that money during all
the voyage, which he knows is commonly performed within the year: for
(says he) you know that I am an Assuror, and you do use to assure your goods,
and to increase your trade you take up moneys at use of others in smaller
sums; it may therefore be very commodious for us both to include the price
of assurance, and the use money together, and so with the return you shall be
provided to pay me again, if God do prosper the ship and make homewards
speedily, if not, I can demand nothing of you, and must be contented to bear
the loss with patience. Hereupon a contract is made, ten in the hundredth is
accounted for the use money, Contract of interest and assurance jointly
and ten in the hundredth for the adventure of the goods outward, and another
ten in the hundredth for the adventure of the return homewards: in conclusion,
there is 30 pro Ceinto; So that upon the return of the said ship he is to have
1300 ll within such a time as they commonly agree, be it one or two months
after. This is a good bargain for the lender, howsoever the borrower of the
money may speed; for the lender has not to do with the sale of the goods, nor
with the return of them: but he will be sure that (at the return of the ship)
he may have his money paid him, not only by the prouenue of the Kersies and
Tin which was bought with the thousand pounds he lent, but also with the
return of all other goods which the borrower did lade more in the said ship
for Tripoli, as aforesaid, and in like manner for other places.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Shipping and Navigations.
Under the name Nauis is all kind of shipping understood, and Nauigium is a
general word many times used for Navigations. So that it is not of any moment
to describe the diversity of ships, as Carracks, Galleons, Galeasses, Galleys,
Centaureis, ships of War, Flyboats, Busses, and all other kind of ships and
vessels: But that we may understand the sea laws and customs observed
therein, appertaining to the law Merchant, as also those things which properly
may concern ships, as follows.

All ships being made for failing, are to be prepared accordingly, both for
goodness and sit timber, and convenient building; as for the placing of the
Rudder of the ship upon the right parallel of the keele of the ship, The
Parallel of Equalities.
for therein consists a maine point for swift sailing, which is found to be a
great defect in many ships partly new built and repaired: for new timber and
old, mixed together, does never endure long, especially if the ship be not
repaired in time before she be much decayed, which often comes to pass, when
the owners of it cannot agree therein. The law therefore is commendable, That
if the most part of the owners, or those that have the greatest interest and
part therein, cause the same to be repaired, that he who provides not his
money for his part within four months after, shall lose his part to the other
owners, if he refuse to be conformable with the rest, or with his partner in
the said ship, who did disburse the same; and moreover he is to pay the
consideration of the money also, for the time that the same was laid out.

Some make a question, Whether a ship so amended and repaired shall be taken to
be the same? But it is clear, that so long as the keele of the ship remains,
it is still the same ship, and not to be called another ship; so is it always
belonging unto the owners of the ship, although they had fabricated and amended
the same with another man's timber: for the selling of a ship is not a
sufficient course to alienate the same; but the quiet possession thereof must
be delivered upon the sale made. And although the sale be made, and the
possession of a ship delivered, if nevertheless it afterward shall appear
that some have committed piracie with the same, the party who lost his goods,
may lay an action to the ship in place convenient. Hence the proverb arises,
A ship which cannot drink of all waters.
That such a ship cannot drink of all waters. Albeit this law is not general,
no more than a ship driven by tempest into a Harbor or Port, is subject to pay
custom there; albeit some demand the same, although no bulk be broken, which
seems to be unreasonable. A contract therefore takes his strength from the
parties contracting, and the place where it is made, according to the customs
thereof. It is therefore also dangerous to freight unknown ships, which may be
subject to other men's actions, and that in many places, where wind and weather
may command them to enter; for ships are properly reputed amongst moueables,
Quia non sunt immobilia.

Of shipwrights.
Here the ship-wrights or builders of ships are an especial sort of persons to
be considered and respected, called by the Grecians Naupegi, who are subject to
the jurisdiction of the Admiraltie, and to render an account of their skill and
knowledge in the building of ships to make the frame thereof comely and strong,
tith and durable, or else pay the penalty to be imposed upon them for all
costs and damages: therefore they are to provide good materials, and refuse to
take bad stuff, as Aller, Beech trees, and such like spungie timber for salt
water; whereunto Merchants must have a special regard, and look that no
green timber be put in the work, but such good Oak as has been cut down
either at the wane of the Moon, and in the deep of Winter, or at such times
as experience proves wood to be most sollid and durable: for being cut in
other seasons and dried up, it becomes open to receive the water, and
consequently the air, which is the cause of putrefaction in all things
vegitable.

Concerning iron, they are also to have a care it be not brittle, and that all
be performed with great care. Shipping being the walls of the kingdom of
England: and ship-wrights are forbidden under pain of treason to communicate
or make their art known unto enemies or barbarous people.

Navigations dangerous.
From shipping let us come to Navigations: of the necessarinesse whereof no man
ever doubted, and whose perils are always eminent; insomuch that Anacarsis
said, That travelers on the seas were no further from death, than so many
inches as the timber of the ship was thick or broad, according to the saying
of the Satyr, Digitis a morte remotis quatuor aut septem, si sit latissima
t^da: Whom Bias the Philosopher would neither reckon amongst the living, nor
those that had life infused. And he was esteemed to commit a great error, that
would bring any goods by sea, which he might transfer by land; whereof more
hereafter.

No man can be prohibited to sail on the maine sea, albeit in some places
(where the waters are as royalties unto them) it be prohibited, as the
Venetians do in the Adriaticke lake, and other Princes and Commonweals in
their jurisdictions and commands, which has been observed time out of mind,
and is taken for a most ancient prescription.

If a ship bound for Venice, do enter into the River of Lixborne and there
deliver some goods or merchandises, and afterward entering into the Straights
of the Mediterranian Sea, be driven by contrary winds to some other place or
Island in the said Seas, and then make after that his discharge at Venice:
Sailing from Port to Port.
all this time of the voyage is but one Navigations, and the Master of the ship
has committed no fault, and done his endeavor if he did depart from his first
Port at the appointed time, by the Charterpartie limited. But for as much that
we have already entreated of his duties to the Merchant: let us in the next
Chapters remember Navigations, with the community of the Seas, and now make an
abridgement of the Imperial Sea-lawes of the Haunce Towns.

CHAP. XXXIII. An abridgement of the Imperial Sea-lawes of the Haunce Towns,
made in the year 1614.
Having already in the precedent Chapters, declared the Sea-lawes generally
observed in all Countries, and that in compendious manner: I have thought good
nevertheless to abridge in this place the Imperial Sea-lawes of the Haunce
Towns, as they have been reuiewed and exactly set down by the Magistrates of
all these Haunce Towns, at an assembly in the famous City of Lubecke the 23
day of May 1614, under 15 Titles in several Articles, as in the margin is
declared.

No man shall set forth or cause any ships to be builded in any of our said
Towns, unless he be a Citizen, Of the building of ships.
or have obtained leave of the Magistrate.

No Master of a ship, shall undertake to build a ship in their parteners
absence, unless he do it at his own charges, and be able to set her forth
alone, upon pain of half a Doller for every Last, to be paid, the one half
to the Magistrate, and the other half to the poor.

The Master of a ship is to confer with his parteners, and to conclude of
what burden the ship shall be built, and in what manner, to be done all in
writing, and if it be found bigger, to pay two Dollers for every Last, etc.

The Master has no power to enlarge the building of a ship after she be at
Sea, unless it be upon great necessity to advance the voyage, and for her
safeguard, otherwise all the charges of it shall be his own.

The Owners, Parteners, or the Masters of ships, shall have no power (during the
building of the ship) to give away any of the materials or victuals of the
ship (but to bring the same to account) unless all of them do agree
thereunto, otherwise they are not to be paid for.

That with their general consent, some two or more persons be appointed to
buy all which shall be requisite to the building of the ship and provision,
and they to deliver an exact account of it by particulars, etc.

Of the owners or parteners of ships, and Masters.
The Master of a ship, which has been formerly for others at the Seas, shall
not be employed by others, unless he produce a testimonial that he is
discharged from the Owners in decent manner, upon pain of forty Dollers.

A Master being entertained, is forthwith to be assured by the Owners of his
wages, whereby he may be able to deal with his Mariners. And the said Owners
are to do their endeavor to make good, on their parts, what shall be
necessary for the voyage.

All Owners are to cause good accounts to be kept, and to deliver upon the
finishing of them, public writings and testimonialls of the Masters good
behavior, and discharge of his undertaking, upon pain, etc.

If the Owners of a ship cannot agree with the Master, as is fitting, they may
by general consent make choice of another, and pay the said Master his wages,
and discharge him: and if he have any part in the said ship, they are to pay
him for the same according to just appraisement.

Of the Masters office.
Every Master of a ship is to have knowledge of the Compass, and to be able to
govern and direct the same, and to hire his Mariners accordingly, or in
default thereof to be punished for his presumption and undertaking.

To provide Mariners of experience, and that the ship be not ouerladen, nor too
light laden, but have his due ballast, and to have his Cabin and ouerlop clear.

That he be on shipboord every night, and upon special occasions being
absent, he may leave his Mate and other that may supply his place.

That they do not too much meddle with merchandise or trade, whereby they
shall be hindered in the due care of the charge of the ship.

The Master is duly to pay the Mariners wages, without any abatement, unless
it be for monyes lent them before, or cause to pay any thing to the Owners.

The wages due unto Mariners for places near at hand, are to be paid but by
two payments, but for remote and long voyages in three payments; one at the
departure, another upon the vnlading of the goods, and the third upon the
ending of the voyage, by equal portions in third.

If a Masters upon some reasonable occasion will discharge his Pilot either upon
the vnlading or relading, he is to pay him full wages.

If Mariners be unruly and give occasion to hinder the voyage any way, by their
misbehauiour to be proved by two other Mariners, the Master may set them on
land, or cause them to be punished according to their demerite.

If Mariners will not testify of their fellows misbehauiours, the Master upon
his oath shall be believed, and the Mariner to be punished accordingly.

If a Master do conceal the offenses of Mariners, he shall forfeit and pay
fifty Dollers, half to the Magistrate, and half to the poor.

If a Mariner should kill another, the Master is to keep him in Yrons, until
he bring him unto the first judicature to be judged, etc.

If a Pirat or Thief shall come aboard, and the Mariners are willing to defend
the same, and yet the Master will not fight: this Master shall never be put in
trust any more, nor have credit as an honest man, nor be suffered to dwell in
any of the Haunce Towns.

If a Master be put in trust to bring over Pearls, Precious Stones, or Money,
which are wares of no volume to pay freight, but a consideration; the Master is
to have the fourth part of it, and the other three parts are to be the Owners.

If a Master, being part Owner, will sell his part, or cause his Owners to pay
dear for it: the said part is to be valued by indifferent persons, and the
Owners or some of them are to pay accordingly.

If a Master without cause will sail in another Haven than he is fraighted,
and loss do happen, he shall answer the same of his own means.

If a Master shall sell the ship, and the Merchants goods, and run away, he
shall not remain in any of the Haunce Towns, and shall be pursued to answer
for the same to the uttermost by all means.

If by contrary wind and weather being entered into another Harbor, the
Merchant do sell his goods, the Master is to have his full freight, or to go
the voyage.

If a Master find himself in places, where neither himself nor his Pilot is
acquaited, and may have Pilots, but will not use them, he is to pay one mark
of Gold for his punishment.

If a Master have his lading in Corn, which becomes hot, he is to cool the
same in convenient manner, if wind and weather do not hinder him: and the
Mariners are to have two shillings lups for every Last for doing of it.

Of the hiring of Mariners.
No Master shall henceforth take any Mariners to hire, without they have a
pasport of their last service, upon pain of two Dollers, which pasports every
Master is to give, and shall be printed with Blankes for the names.

None shall hire another Mariner by intisements of words, or by giving greater
wages, but take them of course, upon pain of ten Dollers, etc. And if the
Mariner take his own leave, the Master may claim half the wages which
another shall give him.

The Mariners shall keep their promise of fidelity to the Master, and be of
good behavior, and quietly live together upon pain as follows.

If any one do put himself forth to be a Pilot, Boteswaine, or any other
officer, and shall be found insufficient by two credible honest men, or be
proved by his company, they shall not only lose their wages, but also be
punished according to the fact.

If a Mariner be entertained, and at the Masters charges, and before the
voyage, the Master take dislike of him, he may discharge him, giving one third
of his wages, but it shall be of the Masters purse, and not for the Owners to
bear any part thereof.

When the Master has entertained the Mariners at the ship expenses, the
Mariners are to make their lodging on board, and to content themselves with it.

When the ship is come to some Port, or arrived at the place, the said Mariners
are not without the Masters leave to go on shore, upon pain to be
imprisoned, and further to be punished as cause shall require.

The Mariners shall have no guests on board without the Masters consent.

No Mariner shall have his wife on board in the night, upon pain of a Doller
if he do offend.

No Mariner is to discharge any Ordnance, or shoot without the Masters
commandment, upon pain to pay double for the powder and shot.

All Mariners shall both at Sea and in the Harbor, keep true watch night and
day, according to the Masters appointment, upon pain of half a Doller to be
abated of his hire, and by default to be punished, etc.

Whosoever be found to sleep upon the watch, shall forfeit eight shillings
lups, and he that finds him sleeping and conceales it, shall pay the like.

No Boteswaine shall loose a Cable, without the Masters or Pilots commandment.

When a ship is detained by wind and weather in any strange place, no Mariner
shall depart or go on shore without the Masters leave, upon pain to lose
half wages, the half of it to the Master, and half to the poor.

Neither shall the Mariners go on shore, when the ship is at Anchor, without
the masters leave, upon pain of half a Doller.

If any mariner go on land without leave, and become wounded, the master is not
to look to see him healed.

If a Boteswaine being absent, be the cause of some great harm or loss, he
shall answer for it: and if he have no means, he shall be then imprisoned one
whole year with bread and water: and if by his default the ship perish, or
some body be slain, he shall answer for it with his life, or be punished
according to his offense.

When the master with some of his mariners goes on land, the mariners are to
attend in the boat for him, or to follow his order; and if any remain all
night on shore, he shall lose his portage, and be punished.

When a master has hired his company for a certain place, and he has
afterward advice of his Owners or Partners, that more profit is to be made in
another place: the mariners are to be content therewith, and to take content
for their wages; wherein if they cannot well agree, then the most ancient are
to conclude, or other indifferent persons: and if any mariner be not so
contented, and thereupon quarrelleth, he shall be punished as a mutinous
person. The like is to be done in any freight which might happen, where the
master is agreed with, which being performed, then to be determined in like
manner for all controversies, as aforesaid.

When a master has maintained (at his expenses) the mariners in the Winter
season, they shall not seek to have their wages augmented.

If a ship be detained by some Prince or Potentate, or sent on a voyage, the
mariners are to serve nevertheless; and if any run away, they are severely to
be punished: and having served, the difference also to be ended with
indifferent proceeding, as aforesaid.

If mariners will go away upon ending of half the voyage, the master may
demand all their whole wages.

If any mariner officer (having received half wages) run away, he is to be
pursued, and burnt in the face with some letter for a mark.

If any mariner do commit any outrage to the master, he is to be severely
punished according to the offense. And if they combine or conspire against the
master, whereby he may be driven into some other harbor, or receive great
detriment to the ship and goods, all is to be punished both by wages, life, and
goods accordingly.

If the ship become assailed by Pirates or Frybuters, the mariners are to defend
the same, and to assist the master: and if they be found partakers in the
taking of the ship, they are to be beheaded for it.

If a ship be in danger at sea by tempest or storms, the mariners are to do
their uttermost endeauours to help the master to save the ship and goods; and
if cast away, to help to save the furniture thereof, as also the goods and
merchandises, and of them to have some recompense for the saving; and by
default, to be punished by all means whatsoever.

When a ship is to be prepared or set forth, it must be done with a free and
good will, and that all things may be bought at the best hand; wherein one or
more persons may be employed with the Master, taking care to bestow all things
in some convenient place, with the consent of the Owners: that the flesh be well
salted and preserved, and all other victuals provided to be shipped at the
appointed time, all with good order and direction.

But when a Master of a ship does victual in some other country where he has
no Owners, he must always buy all things as good as he can, and thereof keep
a true and just account, wherein (if he be found to have dealt fraudulently) he
is to be punished for a thief.

Therefore to prepare all things whereby a voyage may be sooner accomplished,
the Magistrates are to take care as well as the Owners to further the same; so
that the Merchant or the fraighter of the ship making the goods ready to be
laden, may find the ship ready at the appointed time agreed upon, upon
forfeiture of the whole freight.

No Master of a ship shall for himself alone, or his Owners, deal or lade any
merchandise and goods in the ship, without the knowledge of the fraighter of
the ship, but do all things orderly.

And whereas it may happen, that in the preparing of a ship, some of the Owners
may not agree to the same; most voices shall overrule the same, as the manner
is in all sea-lawes, and then money may be taken upon the ship for his part, by
Bottommarie, called Faenus nauticum.

Of Bottommarie.
The Master of a ship has no power to take up money by Bottommarie in places
where his owner or owners dwell, unless it were for so much only as his part
comes unto in the said ship, otherwise his own goods, and not the ship is to
answer the same.

But when a Master is out of his country, and where he has no Owners, nor any
goods of theirs, nor of his own, and cannot find means to take up by
exchange, or otherwise, and that for want of money the voyage might be
ouerthrown; then may he take money upon Bottommarie, and all the Owners are
liable thereunto, otherwise he shall bear the loss.

Of Admiralty.
When ships do enter into Admiraltie one with another, whosoever breaks the
Admiraltie is bound to answer the damage which shall happen thereby: If he have
it not in money, he shall make satisfaction by all other means.

If a ship at sea be in danger, so as goods must be thrown ouerboord, Of
goods cast, or Aueridge.
these cast goods are to be answered by ship and goods, as an Aueridge, wherein
the Owners and goods on board pay all pro rata.

If a Master cut his Masts or Sails by stormy weather, the Merchant is to
bear part of the loss; but not if the Mast do break, or the Sails be blown
ouer-boord.

The rating of the goods lost, and to be cast into an Aueridge, is to be
reckoned upon the ship, as the same may be valued to be worth, and that for so
much as he must take the same, if the Merchants will suffer it, and the like to
be done in the appraisement of goods, and the ships freight.

When Merchants goods are taken at the seas, some of one man, some of another
man's; every one is to bear his own loss, unless it were otherwise agreed
before the setting forth of the ship.

If a ship break on the seas, or be cast away, Of shipwreck, and goods found
at the seas.
whereby it cannot make his voyage, then there is but half freight due for the
goods saved.

When a ship receives damage upon the sea, by the Masters negligence, and
brings nevertheless the Merchants goods home, the Master is to have his full
freight: but for the goods which he brings not, there is no freight due; and
if any be damnified, he is to make good the damage.

If any man find any ship-wrecke goods upon the coast, or in the seas, driving
near the ship, and fisheth up the same, he is to answer the same to the next
Magistrate, or jurisdiction thereunto adjoining, be it town or country, and
the finder shall have for his labor and pains the twentieth part. But if it
be stolen goods upon the seas, then he is to have part.

When there is shipwrecke apparent to be on the seas, the Master is to see the
persons to be landed first, then to save the goods, tackle, apparel and all
the furniture; and of that which is saved, consideration for it is to be made
by the arbitrament of honest men.

If so much be saved of the ships furniture as the freight comes unto, then
are full wages to be paid to the Mariners.

When two ships at sea cannot shun one another, and both sustain damage,
upon proof made by oath not to be wilfully done, Of other damages at the seas.
it is ended.

If a ship under sail do run upon another ship at anchor, and sink the same,
or commit other damage, the party offending shall pay for all, and the ship
shall also be liable thereunto, according to indifferent judgment.

If by storm a ship break loose and run upon another, and indamage the same,
the loss to be repaired as aforesaid.

If a ship receive damage by the anchor of another ship having his boy, the
same is to pay the damage; and if both ships be in fault, then the same to be
borne proportionably.

When a ship is safely arrived to his place of discharge, the Mariners are to
be diligent to look to their discharge, Of discharging of ships, and
delivering of goods.
upon pain of half wages.

No Master shall sell any of the ships victuals, unless it were to prevent
some loss, and so bring the money to account, or upon necessity of others to
help them in distress; and the remaining victuals he is to deliver to the
Owners, and the Mariners shall take no part thereof after discharge, and the
Purser of the ship is to look to the safe keeping of it.

The Mariners are not to cast the ballast into the water, but to cause the same
to be carried to the appointed place.

Of the Masters reckoning, and of the lading, etc.
The Master is to deliver instantly (upon his discharge) a true account, etc.

The portage of Mariners shall not be allowed for Spain nor France, etc. but
when they are laden with salt, then they may have it homewards.

Of wagesextraordinarie.
The mariners deserving well, are to have certain extraordinary wages, and in
all accidents and sickness to be provided for; all which is agreeable to the
sea laws before declared.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Navigations and Community of the Seas.
Traffic and Commerce (without Navigations) would be of small moment:
therefore even as God the Author and Creator of all things, has made of the
waters and earth on perfect globe, for their more mutual service to man's use;
so has he also distributed his several and distinct Blessings to diverse
Climats, to the end that (by supplying the barrenness of some things in one
country, with the superfluities and fruitfulness of other countries) there
might be a communication and intercourse between all nations, by way of
Traffic and Commutation of things interchangeably, whetby one Commonweal
should live with another; so that Traffic between all people (having peace
one with another) is free. And according to the common right of mankind, The
law of Nations.
^ure Gentium, the Navigations through all the world, is no less free and open
to every one, than the use of the air. God having so disposed of the four
Eliments, two to swim above man's head; and two to lie under his feet, the Earth
and the Water. Hence it proceeds, that passage both upon land and sea through
all Christian regions, is and has been so indifferently permitted to all
persons of all nations, even to Turks, Jews, Barbarians, and Pagans (not
being professed enemies) much less to be restrained therefore of Christians in
all respects, both by land and upon the seas, understanding the great maine
Ocean seas, which cannot be hindered but by the right of wars.

This excellent art of Navigations is now so much practiced and known, that the
voyages heretofore performed by sir Francis Drake knight, and after him by
master Candish, sailing round about the globe of the earth in less than three
years time, is become no matter of admiration; and may be done in far shorter
time, as daily experience does prove.

Marvelous is that natural property of the Magnes, called the Loadstone, or
Adamant stone, Of the variation of the Compass.
whereby the needle of the Compass being touched, immediately turns to some
one certain point of the heavens, and after sundry motions hither and thither,
finds rest only in one place and point. And albeit this point in several
Horizons be different, yet in any one Horizon it remains permanent; and
therefore it plainly appears, that the same proceeds of some constant
permanent cause natural, and not of any uncertain cause accidental; but what
this cause should be, is hitherto unknown. The most probable and best
allowed, is the point Attractiue, which should be of such virtue as to draw the
needle touched, always toward the same point; affirming that there is a great
rock of Magnes stone, distant from the Pole certain grades. I have of late
years seen a Magnes stone (which the party said to have had from a rock in
Sweathland) which weighed not much more than one pound, and such was the
Attractiue power of it, that thereby an Anchor of thirty pound weight was
drawn up, as my self and diverse others have made trial of; howsoever, this
Mathematical reason following, is worthy the consideration of a good judgment.

As the Axis of the earth, notwithstanding all other motions, remains (as it
were) immovable; and yet in respect of the Sphericall form of the earth in
every several Horizon makes a line Meridionall, by reason of the Section made
in the superficies of the Horizons, by Meridians, having all that Axis as their
common Diameter: So may it also come to pass of the line of the needle, and
his variation, the needle being always permanent in one plain superficies,
according to the several Section of the plain wherein it rests, and the
Horizon there may continually be made, in every plain new variations: For a
fimile, as in a pair of balance of equal weight, there is a certain motion
too and fro, before they find their true place of rest (the same being only in
the level of the Horizon) which comes to pass by the Attractiue Center of
the earth; who drawing unto him either weight with like fo^ce, finding the
substance like also, compels them to rest in the superficies, like distant
from that Attractiue Center: so in the needle, being a body endued with two
several properties, the one of Gravity, and the other of Leuitie, which being
equally peized, forces him to abide in the Horizon; the other being
Magneticall and received by the touch, causes him to rest always in that one
Meridian to the Magnes appropriate, it thereby comes to pass, that after
sundry ballancing this way and that way, it only settleth in the common
Section of this peculiar Meridian and Horizon. So that even as in Dialls, the
line of the style only accords and concurreth with the Meridian line, in
such as are void of declination (but in all such plains as are declinatorie,
the line of the Style varieth from the Meridian line, and the same Angle of
variation also alters as well in respect of inclination as declination) so it
may be supposed this variation of the Compass to be nothing else but the Angle
comprehended between the Meridian line, and the common Section of the
Magneticall Meridian to the Horizon, in the Horizonceall plain; and this Angle
to be always exactly equal to the Angle contained of the Meridian line, and
line of the Style, the Longitude of the place proponed, accounted from the
Magneticall Meridian, being equal to the declination of the Dialls plain
superficies, making computation from South to East circularly, and the Latitude
of the place equal to the complement of the inclination of the same
superficies Horologicall, wherein every man at his pleasure may judge with
understanding, if he have tasted but of the first principles of the
Mathematikes or Cosmography. And having made mention of the Attractiue Center,
I call to memory a conference, which in the year 1606 (being in Yorkshire
about the Allome Mines, and certain Lead Mines in Richmondshire) passed
between the Archbishop of York Doctor Matthew, and my self, in presence of
Ralph Lord Eure, with whom I went to York to congratulate the said Archbishop
newly come to that See, which was concerning the Center of the earth, which he
said was unknown unto him what to conjecture of it; whereupon we entered into a
large discourse, insomuch that from the lowest Center, we did clime and ascend
to the highest Climate by imaginary conceits (for so is all the study of the
Circle of the Zodiac, Experience of former ages, does confirm this imaginary
Circle of the Zodiac.
and the appropriation of the twelve Signs therein:) and after many reasons of
the earths stabilitie, against the Pithagorians and Copernicus doctrine of
Mobilitie (that is to say, Whether the Heavens move, and the earth rests
immovable, or the earth move, and the great Orb of Stars be permanent
mentioned before) we did find all this to be imaginary, and in that
consideration and imagination we did descend to the lower Center again; and
thereupon conclude, That whereas the Center is taken to be as a point of a
great Circle, and so all weighty things falling thereunto, it may as well be a
great Circle whereupon all other Orbs run in circumference circularly:
Seeing that the earth and waters together make the perfect Globe as aforesaid,
and all weighty things may be inclining to that Circle. But this matter being
not concerning Navigations, let us return again to our observations, That the
maine Ocean Seas are common to all Nations as the passages are on the Land, to
be nauigated for traffic and commerce, yet no one man can traffic with any
Nation without their consent.

Concerning the Art of Navigations, Mariners have one great imperfection, that
is, the want of exact rules to know the Longitude, or Arkes Itinerall, East and
West, without the which they can neither truly give the place or situation of
any Coast, Harbor, Rode or town; nor in sailing discern how the place they
sail unto bears from them, or how far it is distant: whereby they are
enforced long before they come to any Coast, all night to strike sail, not
otherwise than if they were upon it, thereby losing the benefit of prosperous
winds, in sch sort sometimes, that whereas keeping a true course, they might
have been quietly at road, they are by contrary and adverse tempests carried
far off, and so not without great charge to the Owner, pain to the Company,
and peril to their Ship are enforced to waste their time; which of late years
by some new Chartes and Instruments is in some part amended, albeit the said
Chartes are still described with straight Meridian lines running equidistant or
parallel, which is erroneous: and they suppose that running upon any of their
points of the Compass, they should pass in the circumference of a great
Circle, and therefore in the plain Cards describe those winds with straight
lines, which is another abuse. For the Ship steming the North and the South,
only makes her course in a great Circle East or West she describes a
parallel, and being stirred on any other mean point she delineateth in her
course a Curue or Helicall line, neither straight nor circular, but mixed of
both: which supposition being well observed, between two different Angles of
variation, A very rare observation respecting the Latitude.
and conferred with some such third Angle of a Curue line, every degrees
sailing or thereabouts, will shorten their course of sailing, that (with like
wind and weather) they shall perform that in twenty four hours, wherein
they spend above three or four days, and many times the voyage is thereby
lost and overthrown. As I made Sir Francis Drake Knight to take notice of, in
the year 1587, and after that more sensibly to Sir Walter Rawleigh Knight.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the distinct Dominions of the Seas.
PLato the Philosopher, perceiving that Equality would be the cause that
every man should have enough, was of opinion, and willed all things in a
Commonwealth to be common; whom Sir Thomas Moore in his Vtopian Commonweal
seems to imitate, to the end that an infinite number of Laws already made,
and the making of so many new Laws as daily are made might be abolished:
whereas all of them are not sufficient for every man to enjoy, defend and know
from another man's, that which he calls his own proper and private goods.
But finding afterward that this Equality could not be established, and that
many other inconveniences should arise thereby, he did wisely revoke the same
in his second Commonwealth. Renuntiation of goods in common.
For the same was never used in any age, nor by the Word of God commanded, when
from the beginning he willed man to subdue the earth and rule over the fish.
Genesis 1.28.
And again after the Flood, willing man to replenish the earth, and for the
better performance thereof scattering Mankind at the building of the Tower of
Babel, over all the face of the earth, dividing the Isles of the Nations into
their several Lands, God being the Author of Nature, as also of the division:
Insomuch that when Mankind was propagated to an infinite number of creatures,
and things upon the earth not sufficient for their sustenance, then of
necessity followed the use of Trading upon the Seas, both for Fishing and
Negotiation; which could not be done if all things had been common, neither on
Land, nor upon the Seas, which thereupon became diuisible, in places of
fishing, but not in the maine great Seas, which is common to all Nations ( Iure
gentium) as in the precedent Chapter is declared; not that the words intend any
Law set down by common consent of all Nations, but only denotes unto us the
example or custom of other Nations in sailing and trafficking over the Seas,
with commodities reared upon the Land and by the Seas joining thereunto, and
not in the maine Ocean Seas where no fishing can be used: whereby the
properties of both Lands and Seas are distinguished by the said Law of Nations,
agreeable in this particular with the Law of God: For the Moral Law prohibiting
theft and the coveting of other men's goods, By Divine Law.
does declare the said property. And the Ceremonial Law, willing every man to
make sacrifices of his own, does confirm the same.

The means which God has appointed, to make this distinction of the Dominions
upon the Seas, are as certain as the mensuration of the Land whereunto the Sea
is adjoining, and in propriety to be esteemed accordingly, taking their names
of the Countries and Kingdoms adjacent, or of their situation; as Mare
Britannicum, Mare Germanicum, Mare Hibernicum, and for situation, Mare
Mediterraneum, observed by Cosmographers, Historiographers, and Mathematicians:
this is performed with the help of the Compass, counting of courses,
soundings, color of the gravel or sands, and other ways to design Finitum
ab' i^finito: By the Civil Law.
so far as is expedient for the certain reach and bounds of Seas, properly
apppertaining to any Prince or people; wherein the Doctors of the Civil Law
have recorded excellent observations. By the Law of Nation and Customs.
Baldus says, Vidimus de iure gentium, in Mare esse Regna distincta, sicut in
terra Auda.

Ad legem 1. de ter. diuisione. In. nullius in tratt, de i^sula.
Bartolas does in his opinion allow for princes and people at the seaside
Centum mitliaria, which is one hundredth leagues of sea from their coast, if
they extend their protection so far, called by them Districtus maris and
territorium, which is most plain in those seas where the Isles of Garnesey and
Iarnesey are so sensible and visible to the realm of England, Visible Marks
of Dominion.
or where there are such rocks or eminent marks as the Washes at the West seas
thereof; to which purpose Paulus a renowned Ciuilian says, That it is not
needful for him who would possess himself of any land, to go about, and
tread over the same; but it is sufficient to enter in upon any part thereof,
with a mind to possess all the rest thereof, even to the due marches, to be
made apparent by the instruments of Geometricians. And the like may be designed
upon the seas, notwithstanding the soliditie of the one, and the continual
flowing too and fro of the other.

This distinction of dominion having continued so many hundredth years, needs
not to be corroborated with other proof and arguments: yet let us note obiter,
That if the same were not distinguished as aforesaid, Cases of civil Law, or
Admiraltie.
one borne upon the seas should have no country or nation to appeal unto, and
a man dying intestate upon the seas, should minister occasion of question to
know who should administer his goods; and making of a Will, how the same should
be proved and executed by law, without approbation of some Court or
Jurisdiction: whereas we find many Admiralls of the seas, and their several
jurisdictions upon the seas, as deputies to their Princes or States, who are
always absolute Commanders in their precincts, according to the treaties and
contracts made between Princes which are in the nature of laws, and
inseparable of the said Princes right on the land, concerning the possession of
their Kingdoms or Commonweales, as the fundamental cause of their dominion,
wherein discontinuance (of any part of their right) cannot be pleaded against
them. The Kings of England nevertheless have been provident and careful
herein: for Historiographers have recorded, That King Edgar (one of the Saxon
Kings long before the Conquest) made a suruay yearly of the four great seas,
Matthew of Westminster.
and styled himself lord thereof even until Norway, Ranulph Cestriensis.
and his progress was most toward the North. It is also affirmed, Anno 973.
That the said King Edgar caused an inscription to be made upon his Tomb for a
monument, calling himself Dominus quatuor Marea: and as Papinian the
Iurisconsult says, In finalibus questionibus vete ra monumenta sequenda sunt.
Mare Britanicum.
But this for the dominion of the Kings of England over their seas, Mare
Hibernicum.
is not needful. For afterward William Duke of Normandy, after he had
subdu^d the realm of England by conquest, Mare Germanicum.
caused himself not only to be proclaimed King, Mare Deucalidon.
but also that all the goods of the subjects were his, and so caused the land
to be divided, and yet was contented to change the title of a Monarchy by
conquest into a Monarchy Royal, and was also Lord of the said four seas, Io
Bodinus de Resp.
by the former assumpsit, which had then continued 200 years; and his
progress by sea was most Westward. For when Princes or Kings do style
themselves by proclamation, then the continuance thereof (without opposition of
other princes) is holden and observed as inviolable and permanent.

Now King Henry the second succeeding William the Conqueror, Graftons
Chronicle.
within one hundredth years, did join Ireland to the crown of England, and
did reduce Normandy and other places in France to the crown, taking (as it
were) a new possession of the said seas: and Henry the first every year, or
within three years at the furthest, crossed over into Normandy, having taken
Robert Duke of Normandy prisoner.

In the time of King Edward the third, Chro. Malmesbu^e.
there was a disputation held with France, concerning the fishing of the seas
about Britain: in which it was proved to belong to England, Ioh. Hayward.
and thereupon France disclaimed therein, By ancient records and Treaties etc.
as appears by the said King Edward the third his Proclamation yet extant.
Which arguments and contracts are as a law effectual. And here I must remember
the singular care which the right reverend father in God doctor Abbot (now
Archbishop of Canturburie, A rare book remoining with the Archbishop of
Canturburie.
and Metropolitan of England) has had, in procuring (at his great charges for
the good of our posterity) an excellent great Volume or Manuscript which was
heretofore taken at Calice in France when the Spaniards took the same, Anno
1596, and carried to Bruxels in the Low Countries, whereof I have had the
perusal, and made an Abstract of the Chapters of the same, viz. The Treaty of
Peace between Edward the third, king of England, and John king of France, for
themselves and their eldest sons, namely Edward the Black Prince of Wales,
and Charles Duke of Normandy Regent; the French King his father being prisoner
to the said King Edward: which Treaty was made the eight of May 1360, in
Britanie near Chartres, and confirmed at Calice; whereupon sixteen Hostages
were given to the King of England, by the French King, who was to come thither
in person, and to pay three millions of crowns for his ransom, of two crowns
to be reckoned for an English noble, called in King Henry the eight his time
Angel noble, being some 750000 (...) sterling. The ransom of King John of
France.
The ship whereof upon the one side, did signify the dominion of the seas;
whereunto old Chaucer the Poet did allude in Henry the fifth his time. This
money was to be paid, to weet, six hundredth thousand crowns at Calice, within
4 months after King John's arrival there, more four hundredth thousand crowns
within the year, and so much yearly until the full payment made within the
city of London, being the kings Chamber.

After this follow the particular Letters for the delivery of several
countries and towns, as Caours, Carsin, Monstreull, Calice, Rochell, Turaine,
Poitiers, Poitou, Xantes, Xantogne, Dagonois, Perigot, and diverse others,
besides many Letters concerning the French Kings liberty, and his Hostages,
and of the homage to be made by the Earls and Barons to the King of England
(who remains with the title of Soueraignetie and Domayne) besides many other
memorable things; so that all matters concerning the seas and land were
established for those seas: and King E^ward took six pence a tun for
fishing ships. King Henry the fifth who did conquer all France, and had the
possession of Mare Britanicum, lost nothing of his right; no more did Henry
the sixth, and King Henry the seventh, as may appear by their Proclamations,
Treaties, Chro Holl^ngshed.
and Contracts not only with the French, but with the Archdukes of Burgondie,
as by Guicchardins Chronicle, Chr. Froiszart. Guicc^ar^in and the said Treatise.
or Historical description of the Low Countries appears. And as Docter Dee
in his book of Navigations affirms, King Henry the seventh in consideration
of the fishing trade, properly belonging unto England (in his seas and
dominions) had resolved to settle a trade thereupon, which he preferred above
all voyages; for in those days, there was no fishing trade established in the
Low Countries. By original antiquity.
And it is not yet one hundredth years complete, that one Violet, Stephens,
and other discontented Fishmongers departed the realm of England, and went
into Holland to the town of Enckhusen, where they procured the inhabitants to
fish for them, in his Majesty's of great Britain seas, streams, and
dominions: which inhabitants (upon the decease of the said Englishmen
Fishmongers) took the whole trade to themselves, dispersing the same into many
other towns, whereby the same is admirably increased. Queen Marie being
married with King Philip the second of Spain (under whom all the seventeen Low
Provinces were united) granted a lease unto the said King for the fishing of
his subjects in the North parts of Ireland, for one and twenty years, for a
certain fine, and paying one thousand pound yearly into the Treasury of
Ireland, and Edward Fitton knight then Treasurer. And the Company of the old
Haunce in primo of the said Queen Marie had also liberty to sish within the
said seas, upon certain conditions, as appears in the Chapel of the Rolls
of the Chancerie. And for England Northwards, licenses were given at
Scarborough Castle.

To this distinction of dominion of the Seas, Invention of the Porteullis.
I call to memory the proceedings of that victorious King Henry the eight, who
during the time that Calice was under the Crown of England (as it has been
full 211 years) used the invention of the sign of the Portcullis; signifying
the power of locking up of the narrow Seas between Dover and Calice, which was
thought convenient to be used upon the coin made for the East Indies, at the
beginning of that trade, being pieces of the value of eight Royalls of Spain,
whereof there was coined in the Tower of London for a trial (in January 1600)
some six thousand pounds, which could not be made current there, because the
Spanish pieces of eight Royalls, had been before that time counterfeited by
other nations, which made the East-Indians to doubt of our coin, although
without cause. This noble King Henry (having procured the Emperor Charles the
fifth to meet with the French King) went over in person with a great power to
besiege the town of Bulloigne in France, and when he saw that the Emperors
Tent or Pauillion was made with the two pillars of Hercules, and the
inscription Plus vltra: and likewise the French Kings Tent with the three
Flower deluces, and the title of Primus Christianorum Rex, He caused an Archer
to be made upon his Pauillion with Bow and Arrows, and his inscription was Cui
adherio praeest, declaring thereby his present strength whereby he did
qualify those wars, and peace was made between the Emperor and the said
French King, it being true that the state of a Prince does as much consist by
reputation, as by strength.

Our Sovereign Lord King James, has also been mindful of his right of
distinct dominion; for the great blessings which almighty God has allotted to
the Kingdoms of Great Britain, Ireland, and the Isles adjacent under his
Majesty's Dominions, is so visible to all the world, as that thereby they are
ravished with admiration. For albeit that the earthly blessings are produced in
seasonable times: yet the blessings of the Seas are directed and pointed at by
the finger of God at infallible seasons, causing those watrie creatures to
offer themselves for our sustenance, and for the general good of all creatures
in places certain, within his Majesty's Seas, Streams and Dominions, and not
into the maine where fishing cannot be effected. Whereupon his Majesty before
his coming into England, did let the fishing of Scotland to the Hollanders for
fifteen years, it being agreed by more ancient Treaties between them, that
the fishing then agreed upon should be eighty miles from the Coast, to the end
the Scoles of Herrings should not be interrupted. His Majesty in the fourth
year of his Reign of Great Britain, made a Grant to one Collyns of
Couentrie for twenty one years for the fishing in some parts of Ireland:
Graunts made for fishing.
and the like Graunts have been made for the Isles of Garnesey and Iarnesey,
according to the Common Law of England, By the Common Law.
which (in this point concerning his Majesty's right of dominion) is very
copious, the handling whereof I leave to the learned and judicious of the said
Law.

In the seventh year of his Majesty's said reign, his Highness caused a
Proclamation to be made, concerning his Dominion of fishing, which being
compendious and substantial, I thought convenient here to be inserted Verbatim.

JAMES, By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defendor of the Faith, etc. To all and singular persons to whom it may
appert^ine, greeting. Although We do sufficiently know, by Our experience in
the Office of Regal dignity (in which by the favor of Almighty God, We
have been placed and exercised these many years) as also by observation which
We have made of other Christian Princes exemplarie actions, how far the
absoluteness of Our Sovereign Power extends it self. And that in regard
thereof We need not to yield account to any person under God, for any action
of Ours which is lawfully grounded upon that just Prerogative: Yet such has
ever been, and shall be Our care and desire to give satisfaction to Our
neighbor Princes and friends, in any action which may have the least relation
to their Subjects and Estates: as We have thought good (by way of friendly
Praemonition) to declare unto them all, and to whomsoever it may appertain, as
follows.

Whereas, We have been contented, since Our coming to the Crown, to
tolerate an indifferent and promiscuous kind of liberty to all Our friends
whatsoever to fish upon Our Streams, and upon any of Our Coasts of Great
Britain, Ireland, and other adiac^^t Islands, so far forth as the
permission or use thereof might not redound to the impeachment of Our
Prerogative Royal, nor to the hurt and damage of Our loving Subjects, whose
preservation and flourishing estate We hold Our selves principally bound to
advance before all worldly respects: so finding that Our coniuence therein,
has not only given occasion of over great encroachments upon Our Regalities,
or rather questioning of Our right; but has been a means of much daily wrongs
to Our own people that exercise the trade of fishing, as (either by the
multitude of strangers which do preoccupie those places, or by the injuries
which they receive most commonly at their hands) Our Subjects are constrained
to abandon their fishing, or at the least become so discouraged in the same, as
they hold it better for them to betake themselves to some other course of
living. Whereby not only diverse of Our Coasts Towns are much decayed, but the
number of Mariners daily diminished; which is a matter of great consequence to
Our estate, considering how much the strength thereof consists in the power
of Shipping, and the use of Navigations. We have thought it now, both just and
necessary (in respect that We are now by Gods favor, lineally and lawfully
possessed, as well of the Island of Great Britain, as of Ireland, and the
rest of the Isles adjacent) to bethink Our selves of good and lawful means
to prevent those inconveniences and many others depending upon the same. In the
consideration whereof, as We are desirous that the world may take notice, that
We have no intention to deny Our neighbors and allies, those fruits and
benefits of peace and friendship which may be justly expected at Our hands in
honor and reason, or are affoorded by other Princes mutually in the point of
Commerce and Exchange of those things which may not prove prejudicial to
them: So because some such convenient order may be taken in this matter, as may
sufficiently provide for all these important considerations which do depend
thereupon: We have resolved, first, to give notice to all the world, That Our
express pleasure is, that from the beginning of the month of August next
coming, no person of what Nation or quality soever, being not Our natural
borne Subject, be permitted to fish upon any of Our Coasts and Seas of Great
Britain, Ireland, and the rest of the Isles adjacent (where most usually
heretofore any fishing has been) until they have orderly demanded and
obtained licenses from Us, or such Our Commissioners as We have authorized in
that behalf, viz. at London, for Our Realms of England and Ireland, and at
Edenborough for Our Realm of Scotland. Which licenses Our intention is, shall
be yearly demanded, for so many Vessels and Ships, and the Tunnage thereof,
as shall intend to fish for that whole year, or any part thereof, upon any of
Our Coasts and Seas, as aforesaid, upon pain of such chastisement, as shall be
fit to be inflicted upon such wilful offenders.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the sixth of May, in the seventh year of
Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland. Anno Dom. 1609.

By this Proclamation, is his Majesty's Right and Dominion of the Seas,
expressed in two words, by Lineall and Lawful possession of an hereditarie
Kingdom or Kingdoms, whereunto those Seas are joined and appertaining.

It is not a Dominion obtained by an elective Kingdom, as Poland, Hungary,
and others; neither is it had by any first discovery, wherein the Pope must be
a mediator, as Alexander the sixth was between the King of Castile and
Portugal, upon the discovery of the East and West Indies, by drawing a line
upon the Globe from the Island of the Canaries, to make the division between
them: Neither is it like to the Whale fishing in Greeneland, where some upon
their discovery took neither possession, much less had any occupation, which
makes the stronger right: Neither is it by gift or purchase, as some Italian
Princes in the Mediterranean Seas, which do nevertheless enjoy both freedom
and benefit thereby; but it is undoubted and indisputable as aforesaid.

To conclude this Argument, The best mark of distinct dominions upon the Seas.
the distinct dominion of a bordering Prince upon the Seas, is best seen by
the Tribute or Tax which he takes upon fishing ships, whereof we have many
presidents.

In Russia many leagues from the Maine, Fishermen do pay great taxes to the
Emperor of Russia, and in most places none but his subjects are permitted to
fish, and the Hollanders do give him the tenth fish.

The King of Denmark takes great tribute, both at Wardhouse and the Sound.

The Kings of Sweathen have done the like, which is now continued by the King
of Denmark, for Norway. The Duke of Medina Sidonia takes for Tunyne.

King Edward the third of England, took six pence for every Tun in his time,
which by inhauncing of the money is now 18 pence.

All the bordering Princes of Italy, do take tribute of the fish taken within
the Mediterranean Seas, for their several Territories.

In Lappia, Fishermen do pay monyes in the Sound for passage to fetch it, over
and above the tenth fish.

The Earl of Orkney takes the tenth fish, for the Isles of Orcades under his
jurisdiction: as the Fishermen do to the Lords of the Manors in the West parts
of England, for Pilchards, Hake and Conger.

The States of the united Low Countries, do take an Imposition upon fish taken
within the Seas and Streams of other Princes, as also near their Coast, and
their subjects trafficking with the Russians, as Haunce Noblett, Haunce Van
stracle, Robert Englegraue and others, do continually pay the tenth fish unto
the Emperor of Russia.

All which is requisite for Merchants to know, to prevent troubles or losses,
for the pretense of ignorance does not excuse, as our Merchants of Kingstone
upon Hull have found to their exceeding loss heretofore.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Customs, Subsidies, and Impositions paid upon Commodities.
WHereas Customs, Subsidies, Impositions, Toles, Customs upon comm^dities due
by the Law of Nations.
Accizes, Imposts and other duties, by the exemplarie actions of Princes and
Commonweales, are due by the Law of Nations; as a matter inherent to their
Prerogatives, because they are absolute Commanders in their Harbors, Havens
and Ports, where commodities are exported and imported: every Merchant is bound
to take notice thereof and to observe the same, according to the ordinances and
proceedings used therein in all countries respectively; to avoid the danger of
the loss and forfeiture of his commodities, and to make a true calculation how
to buy and sell to profit, observing how much upon the hundredth pounds in value
of his commodities (rated by the orders of diverse countries) the same amounts
unto, and to add the same with the charges upon commodities, to the price
whereat the said commodities were bought, as well in his native country, as in
other countries where he does traffic and trade.

In Russia, Denmark and Sweathen, Rigorous dealing for Customs.
the Custom and Ordinances is; if a Merchant do not declare all his
commodities, which he imports or exporteth, but concealeth some part of them;
all the commodities of that kind, are forfeited to the Prince, and he shall
find but small favor to redeem them.

In Spain, and other Dominions of the King of Spain, the commodities
concealed, are only forfeited, unless they be prohibited and unlawful goods.

In England, Scotland, and Ireland is the like, and only the goods concealed
are forfeited, and may be had again upon reasonable composition; for the
Statute Law gives authority to the Officer who makes the seizure, that upon
license sued forth to compound, he may do it safely for his part, which is
the one moitie; and for the other moity which is the Kings, Merchants are
graciously dealt wichall, by the Judges or Barons of the Kings Exchequer, Abuse
of favorable dealings.
or others thereunto authorized: Insomuch that it has happened that some
Merchants relying upon this favorable dealing, have adventured to expose their
commodities unto the forfeiture thereof, being commodities which pay much
Custom and Imposition: as Cambrickes, Lawnes, Tobacco, Cutcheneale, Venice
gold Thread, and other things, because they were (in a manner) assured to make
composition under the sum which they were to pay for Custom and Imposition.

In France and Germany is the like for concealed commodities, which are not
declared in the Custom House; and Jewels, and precious Stones, and Pearls are
freed of Custom. And so was it in England, until of late years, since the
Customs were taken to farm, and yet they pay but three pro cent. of the value
of their appraisement, Strict orders for Customs at London, etc.
to be rated by the Officers of the Custom House at London. But if any
Merchant or Ieweller bring over any Jewels or precious Stones and Pearls, he
is to declare them to the Officers or Waiters of the place where he landeth,
otherwise they will be seized (by water or land) as forfeited to the King;
wherein more strict dealing has been used of late, since the King has letten
to farm his moitie of the Seizures. So that first of all the Custom of
concealed goods must be paid, before any composition be made, next the
composition being made, then may the Informer be agreed withal. And no
commodities can be delivered upon security to the owner, as formerly by the
Law was accustomed to be done; but they must remain in some sufficient
custody until the matter be tried by Law, or compounded by agreement. But
prohibited commodities (as Allome and other things) by Letters Patents and
Proclamation, the possession may be had, upon security to be given to answer
the value thereof, according to the appraisement made of them. And these
commodities (if the Master of the ship do not declare them, upon his entry
made in the Custom House, upon his oath) are also subject to the forfeiture,
although they come consigned unto a Merchant or Factor unawares, by another
Merchant that knew not that such commodities were prohibited to be imported.
The like is it for a Merchant shipping out unlawful wares: but herein he may
have intelligence by the Customer, before he do lay them upon the water to
be shipped. Again, if a Merchant carry money by water down to Grauesend,
with an intention to bestow the same in Bays at Sandwich, or in other
commodities at Canturburie: he is first to declare the same in the Searchers
Office, or else the money is lost, and three times the value, upon information.
For no money of Gold or Silver, or any foreign Coin or Plate brought into the
Kingdom, can be transported; only for Passengers expenses, some four or five
pounds may be carried out. But for commodities brought in, which have paid
Custom, the same may be shipped out again by Cocket, without paying any more
Custom and Imposition; so it be done upon good Certificate, that it is the
same commodity, and that the property thereof is not altered; and this must
be done within six months after their importation.

All Merchants ships being laden, Permitted to break bulk at Tilburie-hope.
have always (time out of mind) been permitted to break bulk below, or at
Tilburie-Hope, and to pay no Custom, but for the goods they brought up, or
landed in England, and not for the goods which they did transport in the said
ship, or in any other vessel or ship: which privilege and certainetie of
Merchants Custom ought to be seriously observed, better than it has been of
late. And of this and other observations Merchants and Factors are to give
notice to their friends and Masters, to the end they do not incur any danger,
To enter goods upon sight.
which (to avoid in some sort) is effected by entering the goods upon sight of
the Customers view, by opening of them.

In Barbary and other places, where the Customs are paid in kind or Species,
if any part be concealed and not entered, that only will be forfeited; and
yet the loss is greater, because they will make choice of the best: as for
example, Suppose a Merchant does enter diverse sorts of Linen Cloth, and
concealeth some pieces, the Officers will take both the tenth piece for the
Custom, and all the concealed pieces of the best and finest sorts, to your
exceeding great loss.

In the Low Countries and Germany, as also in most places of Italy and
Turkey, you shall only forfeit the goods concealed, and be permitted to
compound for them as you can agree, wherein the circumstances in some places
will be considered, and the manner how the error grew, or whether it were done
with a set purpose.

There are also in diverse places allowances made (as in England) upon Wines in
regard of lecage of ten or fifteen upon the hundredth, or else all the Buts
and Pipes are to be filled up, Allowances made upon Customs and Impositions.
and so to pay accordingly; wherein the time of the voyage, foul weather, and
other accidents are to be considered, to make your composition thereafter.

Upon Clothes to be shipped out, Allowance upon Clothes.
there is allowance made of the tenth Cloth for a wrapper, which pays no
Custom: and so of all other woollen Commodities, which pay after the rate; as
three Northeren Kersies for a Cloth, four Devonshire Kersies, two single
Dozens, one double Dozen, six Cardinals, Pinwhites, Statutes, Stockbridges,
Straites, and Tauistockes, four Cornish Dozens, Pennystones vnfriezed, Island
Dozens, and Northeren Plains for one Cloth; two Bridgewaters, Cornish and
Devonshire double Dozens, Florentines, Northren Dozens single, and pennystones
for a Cloth, to be understood for a short Cloth colored or white of twenty
and four yards long, waighing 60 ll until 64 ll, whereof English Custom was
a Noble, and the Merchant Stranger thirteen shillings and four pence,
whereunto is added the ancient Custom heretofore paid by the Merchants of
the Steele-yard or Haunce-townes being 14 pence, so together 14 ss 6 d a Cloth,
besides the ouerlength of 3 d the yard; The pretermitted Custom of Cloth.
which is of late comprised in the new Imposition of the pretermitted Custom
for waighing of Clothes, at two pence the pound, so that a short Cloth paid in
times past a noble, and now ten shillings, besides the ouer-length, according
to the weight, after the said rate of two pence for the pound: all which the
Merchant stranger pays double.

Also whereas of late years, since the Customs were letten to farm, all
Commodities, as Sugars, Spices, Raisons of the sun, and others are weighed,
and thereupon the Tarra for the Caske or Chest is to be allowed, Allowance for
Tarra or Cask.
and so the Custom is paid. There ought good allowance to be made for the
said Tarra, because many commodities being vnladed, and having taken the
moisture of the seas, increases the weight of their Caske; so that Merchants
pay many times Custom for that which they have not, by the strict dealing of
Officers contrary to equity and justice, if they do not warily look to
their affairs, wherein the Officers may also be excused.

Now to conclude touching Customs, we must consider what they may amount unto
upon the hundredth: according to which, Merchants are to cast up their accounts
for benefit and loss, as aforesaid.

Custom.
The Custom in England (called Parva Custuma) was three pence upon every
pound, that the commodities are rated in the Custom Book, which is paid by
Merchants strangers, now altered paying 6 d.

Subsidy.
The Subsidy or Poundage is paid by all Merchants of what nation so ever,
which is 12 d upon all commodities brought in. And for Cloth exported 6 ss 8 d
for English Merchants, and Merchants strangers double.

Imposition.
The new Imposition established in the year 1608 is also 12 d upon all
commodities imported, and upon some commodities exported is limited; so that
Custom and Subsidy in England is 12 upon the 100 for Merchants strangers:
besides but leridge or scauage, almost one pro cent. more for goods inward; and
for English Merchants is ten upon the hundredth.

Impost.
The Impost of Wines is limited upon the Butt, Pipe, or Hogshed, as by the Book
of rates, with the Composition money, and other duties.

In Spain and Portugal they take after diverse rates for commodities, some
^/10 or ^/^^ and twenty five upon the hundredth, esteemed to be one with
another un quinto or ^/^ part, or 20 pro cent. with the Alcaualla, taken for
Brokeridge to sell them. In Barbary seven pro cent. Alcaualla.
aboard.

The Turk takes part, as the Egyptians. The Venetians take 3, 5, 7, and 10
upon the hundredth with great aduisement, and upon the Manufactures of other
nations 14, 15, and more. And the like is done in France to advance the handie
crafts man.

The Great Imposts demanded in the year 1604 by Philip the third King of Spain
(of 30 upon the 100) of French, English, Great Imposts
and Flanders commodities, was soon abolished, when the French king Henry the
4 did the like; for one extreme enforcing another is of small continuance.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Merchants Wagers, Stipulations, or Conuentions.
FOr as much as diverse Ciuilians have entreated of this arguments of Merchants
Wagers, and made some Treatises de Sponsionibus, wherevnder matter of
Assurances is comprised: it may not be thought impertinent to handle this
subject briefly and diuidedly from Merchants Assurances, already declared in
his proper place.

The said Ciuilians do distinguish these Wagers or Sponsiones to be threefold.

1 Where a Wager is laid with a pawn in the hands of a third person.

2 Where (by way of Stipulation) some thing is given upon a Wager.

3 Where a thing delivered or by a covenant made with another person, the same
is promised to be restored, and double, treble, and ten times the value thereof
unto the party with whom the Wager is made, if the matter in question or doubt
do not take effect; whereof many examples may be given and declared, namely,

The Great Wager between Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, Examples of Wagers.
and Marc Anthony, for the great expenses of a supper, by dissoluing the
Paragon Pearl, and drinking the same, as Pliny reports, when Lucius Plancus
was made judge of that Wager, and pronounced that Anthony had lost.

That of Cecinna, whereof Cicero makes mention for the recovery of his
grounds taken from him in hostile manner by Eubusius, and restored again.

That such a Cardinal shall be elected to be Pope, That such a King is dead,
and such a town is taken: in all which, the Wager is made by Pawn,
Stipulation, or Conuention, as aforesaid; and hereof are innumerable examples.

Hereupon they conclude, That all Wagers laid must be for honest causes, and as
it were striving for virtuous actions; and that these by the law are to be
maintained in the performance of the Wager, wherein custom is the best
interpreter, Custom the best interpreter of Law.
even in the point of law, which is considerable in all cases by the long
observation of them.

A Wager being laid, that the Pope of Rome, or the Emperor, or any other great
personage shall die within the year, Lawful Wagers and unlawful.
is good in law: but to lay Wagers, as desirous or wishing some unexpected
evil or adverse fortune unto an honest man, or although it were to an enemy,
is neither civil nor natural in the understanding of well disposed men.

A Wager laid upon the death of a private person, is disallowed; but not for
the contracting of any supposed or expected marriage, which is lawful.

All Wagers laid in lawful games are allowable; but in prohibited games
cannot be recovered by the Civil law. So Wagers made by lookers on upon other
men's games are disallowed, which is the cause that Stipulations are made,
putting the pawn or money down, which is called, to stake down: and if it be
upon an unlawful game, then the lookers on are subject to punishment, as well
as the gamesters.

A Wager laid who shall eat or drink most, is unlawful.

If a Gamester or a Merchant playing, receive twenty and promise to give
fifty for it the next day playing, the Conuention is good.

A Merchant laying a Wager to give ten for one if such a ship arrive within a
limited time, within such a Port or Haven, is good in law.

A Wager is laid upon the arrival of a ship in the port of Lixborne, and a
certain sum of money promised thereupon: it falls out, that the said ship
is a Galeon; so denial is made to pay the money. The Law did determine the
money should be paid, because the word Ship is a general name, although it be
called by diverse names, As a Notarie is called a Tabellion, Scriuenor, or a
public servant.

A Wager upon a son or a daughter to be borne, is good in law; and if it be a
Hermophrodite of both sexes, then judgment is given according as the natural
inclination shall be found to be more masculine or feminine.

Ambiguitie, or Equivocation in Wagers.
And in all Wagers wherein ambiguitie or equivocation does happen, there must be
a natural moderation in the construction of them; for an evil custom loses
her name, and becomes usurpation, as is before declared.

If any man by the inducement or fraud of a third person lay a Wager that such
a woman shall be delivered of a son, when she was already delivered, the
Wager is not to be allowed, and if the Midwiues are partakers herein, they are
to be punished, and incur Crimen Stellionatus.

If one lay a Wager to run with another, and afterward does refuse to run,
he may be compelled thereunto, or the stake is lost; for he commits no
deceit, which preuenteth a fraud. The captation or advantage taken upon words
ought therefore to be excluded, and wagers are to be made in plain terms, and
to be construed accordingly; Fallere fallentem, non est fraus.

Wagers between Merchants are many times more done for sport and recreation
than for gain: for over great wagers are against good manners, and may
concern a Merchant much in reputation and credit, more than the playing for
great sums of money, which many times Merchants do use, with the observation
of a convenient time, and as the Proverb is, With good fortune, otherwise the
end of it is dangerous; for as nature produced all things in due time, so is
moderation required in all actions.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Merchants Marks set upon Commodities.
THe marking of Merchants commodities, either packt up in Bundels, Trusses,
Cases, Coffers or Packes, is of great importance; for not only by the Custom
of Merchants, but also by the Civil Law, the property of the goods and
merchandises is adjudged to him, by whose mark they are marked or sealed. It
is dangerous therefore to use another man's mark, as many times Merchants do
in time of war, when they lend their names and marks for the preservation of
their goods, between two or more contending Princes, both by Sea and Land.

Every Merchant is to set down his mark upon his Books of account, wherewith
his commodities are marked. Merchants marks to be set upon their books of
accounts.
And in like manner, If a Company or Society of Merchants do agree upon a
mark, the same is to be set upon the Books of that Society: and if that
Company do dissolve, the said mark may remain with the most ancient of that
partnership, by the Custom of Merchants; whereof the Civil Law and the Law of
Admiraltie takes notice in their judicature, and especially the Merchants
Courts of Consulate. And if the mark of one of the partnership be used for
all, the same upon dissolution of that partnership is to return to the said
party; and no man is to use another Merchants mark, without especial leave
had and obtained of the party whose mark it is. For even as Merchants do
sail between the two dangerous rocks of Scylla and Charibdis in their course
of traffic, when Princes are at variance: So is the danger to use another
Merchants mark without leave; because the party owner of the said mark is to
defend the said goods, if they be taken, or to countenance the persuers of the
suit in Law for them, Danger to use another man's mark, etc.
as far as they in reason may require, otherwise the said goods may be lost
as soon as taken. For as Ships are known by their Flags, and so taken to be
at the Seas; so are Merchants goods marked with another man's mark, to be that
man's goods, although it were not, and will be so adjudged in the Courts of any
Admiral of the Seas; experience has proved the same by two notable examples,
worthy the observation.

In the year 1586 or thereabouts, Robert Lord Dudley Earl of Leicester was an
Aduenturer for Barbary, where he sent some commodities by way of commerce,
unto a certain Factor (that did deal for diverse other Merchants) there to be
sold for his account, and to make return unto him of the prouenue thereof in
Sugar and other commodities. The Factor having sold some of the said goods
(considering the number of men of war, which were then at the Seas, and the
greatness of the said Earl) thought good, that all the Chests of Sugar and
other commodities which he sent home to all his Masters in a certain ship, The
Bear and Ragged staff.
should be marked with the Earl of Leicesters mark, albeit the least part
did appertain unto him; the rather for that the most part of his goods were
yet unsold in Barbary. The ship arriving within the River of Thames, no sooner
were the Letters delivered, but the Earl laid claim to all the said goods,
pretending the same to be his because of his mark: hereupon the Ciuilians were
of his side for the point of Law, and the Merchants were compelled to make
their best compositions with him, as they could agree; and the Earl lost
nothing thereby howsoever they sped.

In the year 1597 one John de Bassadonna, the son of one of the Magnificoes
of Venice, then resident in London, had a certain ship which was fraighted for
Lixborne, and so to go for Venice, according as the Master thereof was bound
by a Charterpartie of fraightment, and in both places to take in all such
commodities and merchandises as the Merchant should lade or cause the said ship
to be laden withal, and to be discharged at Venice with the usual conditions
of Sea-lawes. The Venetian Flag.
This ship bearing the Venetian Flag of the Lion of S.Mark, was well received
and welcome at Lixborn, and every man was willing to lade therein his goods for
Venice: nevertheless some Portugalls considering the dangerous times of war,
did borrow the name of Italians and their marks also, and caused their goods
to be laden as appertaining to the said Italians, and made the Bills of lading
and their Letters accordingly; other Portugals were not so provident, but did
lade their goods in their own names: whereupon the Master of the ship (being
sure of the one, and suspicious of the other) resolved to come (with all the
said goods) first for England, to take advice whether this were a lawful prize
or not, and being arrived at Plimmouth, sent up to know the Lords of the
Council their pleasure. So the matter came in question with the said
Bassadonna, and was referred to the Judge of the Admiraltie, and diverse
Ciuilians, where the matter of the Flag was much respected in regard of the
Seignorie of Venice, as matter of State; and the principal goods laden and
marked in the name of Italians, were adjudged clear by the Law. But the other
goods laden and marked with their own marks, were taken for good prize. So
that it behooves all Merchants to be careful what mark they use, etc.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Buying and Selling of Commodities by Brokers, and by the
Candle.
IT is an old Proverb, and very true, that between What will you buy? and
what will you sell? there is twenty in the hundredth differing in the price:
which is the cause that all Nations do more affect to sell their commodities
with reputation by means of Brokers, than we do; for that which seems to be
gotten thereby, is more than double lost another way. Besides, that by that
course many differences are prevented, which might arise between man and man,
in their Bargains or Verbal contracts: for the testimony of a sworn Broker
and his book together, is sufficient to end the same. And moreover it is many
times a cause that Factors and Servants deal more faithfully for their Masters
in buying or selling of all commodities, or in monyes by exchange, knowing
their evidence is extant against them. Therefore no Broker should be admitted
unless he were sworn, and upon Affidauit or Certificate made by some
principal Merchants, of his sufficiency and behavior, and to put sureties
for his true and good demeanor amongst Merchants, according to the Custom of
London. For albeit that the common saying is, That a crafty Merchant needs
no Broker: yet it may much concern the Commonwealth, when too much hunting
after foreign commodities may increase the price of them, and offering our
home commodities to sale, Bills of Entries in the Custom House.
may be an occasion of vnderselling them to the general loss comparatively
considered, wherein (I think) the Bills of Entries made so generally common,
by the copies delivered to shopkeepers and others, are to be regarded. For no
sooner are the goods entered in the Custome-bookes, but the copy of it is
delivered abroad for every man to run upon them.

The Venetians therefore have an Office, called Messacaria, consisting only of
Brokers, which deal between man and man advisedly; and in Spain they are of
such estimation, that they ride on horseback upon their foot-clothes, and
having the Inuoyces of Merchants goods, they will deal for great matters at a
time, against the lading of the Fleet for Noua Espagna and the Islands of the
West Indies, to be paid partly ready money, and partly at the return of the
said Fleet; and then afterward let you understand their Merchant: and many
times they are of that means and credit, that for a small matter they will be
bound to make the debts good, if the Merchant should fail, whereupon (as the
Custom is to have one upon the hundredth) they will condition but double
Brocadge, or less. Our Brokers of London take but two pence upon the pound
(which is less then one per cent.) for the sale of commodities, and to hinder
one another they will take less; which amongst Merchants beyond the Seas, is
taken to be a disorder, for they are inclined to make the Brokers good gainers.
The like is done in the Faires of Frankford, where many Brokers do resort
twice in the year, and they keep account of all the bargains that they make
between the foreign Merchants, that come thither to make their payments most
by rescounter and assignation, after the manner of Bankers: For the commodities
sold in one Mart, are commonly payable the next Mart, being between five and
six months time one after another; wherein these Brokers are very necessary
members and instruments also to transfer Merchants Bills Obligatorie for
other commodities, or to make payments thereby. The duties of the Alcaualla in
Spain, are taken upon that consideration.

Selling by the Candle.
The selling of commodities by the Candle, is an ancient Custom beyond the
Seas, only for such goods, rents upon houses or lands, or the houses also which
require a sudden sale, after they have been one year and one day denounced
by publication that they are to be sold; to the end that if any man will lay
any claim thereunto, they may come in within that time. And these sales are
made upon Fridayes in accustomed places by public authority, for the better
warrant of the Buyer, the manner of it is thus: There is a waxen Candle or a
piece of it, set up lighted in some place easy to be seen, and the standers
by are required to make an offer for such goods, or such a house; which being
made, another will offer more, as they do in outcryes, having still a regard
to the burning Candle: declaration is made how the payment must be, so that
he who makes the last offer (upon the going out of the Candle) has the
bargain. If it do fall o^t, that there is confusion of voices of the offers
made, whereby it cannot be discerned who made the last offer, and the standers
by do differ in their judgment of it, then the Candle is set up again by
those that are in authority, and in like manner it is determined accordingly.

The Merchants of the East India company do imitate the same, and after
public notice given in writing upon the Royal Exchange in London, That such a
day, such and such commodities will be sold at such a place, Merchants and
others (knowing the great parcels of Pepper, Indico, and other commodities of
Silks, Calicoes, and such like) will join together to buy the same in
several companies, and so buy the same by the Candle, as aforesaid, although
it were a parcel of one hundredth thousand pounds. The time for the payments is
four times six months, which is fifteen months in one payment, according to
which (if you will pay all or part of it in ready money by way of
Anticipation) you shall have use allowed you accordingly, after the rate of ten
upon the hundredth. But their good orders require a more larger declaration.

CHAP. XL. Of buying of commodities by Condition, termed Capiticus, and of
selling things upon Casualties.
THe buying of commodities upon Condition is termed by the Ciuilians Capiticus,
a capiendo, either to refuse or take upon a penalty; or sometimes upon a
casual Condition. Which bargains are much used in the Low Countries, as also
in France, especially at Roan and Calice, where my self have made money of
Corn and Salt: and this bargaining is most proper for such and the like
commodities, the price whereof does quickly rise or fall, and are also
commodious when a man's money is not so ready, to buy much, and to make a great
employment with little money, which happens upon some soden advice many times
unexpected, whereupon men are very hot either to buy or sell: which is much
used in Flanders in buying of Herrings before they be catched, by (stelle gelt)
as they call it, that is by a sum of money agreed upon to be paid, if the
party do repent himself of the bargain, wherein he takes a time of one
month or two to be advised according to the occasions and probabilities of the
success.

To disburse or offer fifty pounds upon fifty Last of Herrings with six
weeks respit upon the condition after twenty pound were equal nineteen and
twenty one, and without respit of time presently to say to be delivered at
three months, the fifty Last at twenty pound amounts to 1000 ll, you
advance the interest, warehouse-hire, charges, lackage, besides the commodity
that you have bought with the money a bargain of fifty Last, when it would
pay but 2 Last, upon condition to take or leave.

One hundredth pounds delivered out to pay the first year one pound, the second
year two pounds, increasing every year one pound, amounts in fifteen
years to 128 pounds, in twenty years 210 ll, to the 20 add one, multiply
with of 1 to 20 is 10, and so of all other augmenting, be it of 1, 2, 6, 8, etc.

The Conditions are diverse: The certainetie of the money which you do adventure
to loss, being well considered of, may turn you to gain, especially in places
bordering upon the seas or rivers, to serve the Inland people, as Calice,
Dunkerke, for Flanders, Henault, Arthois, and other provinces. The like might
be practiced in many coast towns of England. But strangers are more addicted
to make casual bargains for buying of commodities.

For selling of commodities upon casualties, therein are we more frequent,
especially of things not vendible at all times, to sell them payable upon the
return of such a voyage from Venice, Turkey, or other places, or upon the
decease of such a man or woman, or at a marriage day, or the first, second, or
third child, either male or female. In all which sellings, money and wares may
be joined together. But in delivering money with wares at interest, the
contract is usurious by the law. (*)

CHAP. XLI. Of dividing of Commodities by Lots.
ALl extremes being vicious, has given me cause to write this exorbitant
chapter, concerning the division by Lots, because there are men in this age so
precise (by some called Puritanes) that they can be well contented to buy a
commodity in company with their neighbors, when their own means and credit
cannot compass the same; but afterward to divide those goods (by the Lot)
between them, they are very scrupulous, and hold it a profane action, and
they are (as they say) bound unto it of necessity, or else to take that which
their partners do give unto them, and so let them cast the Lot amongst them,
and what remains upon equal division, they will rather accept of, than that
any Lot should be cast for them: yet they will more favor the Lot than the
casting of the dice, or the measuring by strawes. To these weak stomakes thus
troubled with a Nausea, I would not minister any Cordials, Electuaries, or
Potions to rid them of that distemperate humor; but a plain vomit is fittest,
the Moon being in Aries or Capricorn, which must be thus prepared.

As in Gods Church there never wanted true religion revealed from God himself,
so amongst heathen, and all nations, there never wanted means to acknowledge a
sovereign power; which caused them to devise a certain shadow of religion, by
worshipping their imaginary gods with a kind of divine service: the
contemplation and use whereof, they did esteem to be the highest degree of
felicity, or summum bonum, in so much that (even in their blindness) they did
attribute the success of all things to proceed from above, using (for to
attain to the knowledge of the divine pleasure) diverse means of Diuinations,
Imprecations, Oracles, and casting of Lots, because they wanted the
illumination of the most glorious and transparent Sun of the word of God,
whereby we are taught to obey the known will of God, and to reverence (with
admiration) his secret will not declared unto us.

Diuinations and imprecations being not accompanied with visible and sensible
apparitions, caused all Oracles to be in greater veneration: as that of Dodona,
where Jupiter answered, striking the Caldrons with a silver wand: That of
Jupiter Hammon in the confines of Egypt: That of Delphos, where an old woman
answered in Greek verse: That of Latona, and that of Motenzuma in America, and
others. All which ceased, when and where the Sun beams of the word of God
did disperce the mistie clouds of darkness, and then all was abrogated, and
only the casting and drawing of Lots did remain as a custom of great
antiquity amongst all nations, recorded not only by profane
Historiographers, but also by divine Prophets and Evangelists. To which purpose
we may observe two especial examples in the holy Scripture.

Jonas 1.7.
The first is of Jonas the Prophet, who flying from the presence of God in a
Ship sailing for Tarsis, was exposed to a very great tempest at the seas,
endangering the ship and mariners to be cast away at every moment; when it
pleased God to manifest by the Lot drawn, or cast by the Master and Mariners,
That Jonas was the cause of the said tempest.

Luke 23.24. John 19 24. Psalm. 22.19.
The second is of the Lot cast by the Soldiers, upon the garment or coat of our
Savior Christ, according to the Prophecy of David: allotting the same to some
particular person, according to his good will and pleasure.

But least these men should object, That the aforesaid examples are actions of
the Heathens, and but mentioned in the holy Scripture; we pray them to
remember, That the children of Israel had no other means propounded unto them,
to obtain victory against their enemies, by removing the offense of the
interdict or forbidden goods, Joshua 7.14.
but the use of casting the Lot, which fell upon Achan, who had hid some of the
forbidden goods, which were to be burned according to the commandment of God,
who was pleased that Joshua should find out the man by Lot, and not by
Revelation.

Acts 1.26.
The Apostles having appointed Barsabas and Matthias, and prayed the Lord to
show them, Whether of the two should succeed in the Ministry of the
Apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, gave forth their Lots (as
the Scripture says) and the Lot fell upon Matthias.

Joshua 14.2.
What shall we say of the Division and Partition of Lands and Goods, when the
land of Canaan by Lot was divided amongst the Israelites? And the like use
remains until this day amongst diverse nations. The saying of the Wiseman
being true, That the Lot is cast; Proverb. 16.33. and 1.14. and 18.18.
but the success thereof is according to the providence of God: which caused
him to speak so often of Lots in his Proverbs.

Plutarch.
The Grecians did make election of their officers by the drawing of Lots, which
they called Ostracisme; according to which the Venetians in their rare
government of Aristocracie, do at this day use the like by their Ballotting;
and so do the Russians in their government of Monarchy: So to conclude, all
Nations do continue the use of Drawing or Casting of Lots in all occasions.
Wherefore, I hope, these precise men will be hereafter more resolute to accept
of their part (of Indico in Barrels, Sugar in Chests, and Pepper in Bags,
marked and numbered according to the goodness) by the Lot drawn or cast, and
expect Gods blessings, according to the saying of the Wiseman, as aforesaid.

Forasmuch as in Italy and Germany, diverse commodities and manufactures are
dispersed, distributed, and in a manner vented, by the means of Lottaries which
are continually extant, in public markets and other places; I cannot omit to
speak hereof, as a matter appertaining to Merchants.

There are two manner of Lotaries, namely, Standing Lotaries, and Running
Lotaries; the first limited for a continuance of time to be drawn at the end
thereof, without intermission by day and night; the latter to be drawn daily
and at all convenient hours, when the parties will put in their money, and
have the Lot drawn instantly. To which end in many places of Germany, there
are public Shops and Stales, where diverse sorts of manufactures are exposed to
be sold, and to every Lot there is a Prize appointed to answer the said Lot;
whereby a man has always some thing for his money, and many times a Prize of
good value. Being therein like unto the Tree of Fortune, The Tree of Fortune.
which is painted with blind Fortune sitting in the middle part of the Tree,
and all manner of men, women, and children, standing or lying over the said
Tree, do receive somewhat falling from it; to the one a purse full of money,
to the other a halter; to the one a golden chain, and to the other a cutting
knife: and to be brief, to some good, and to some other evil things, as is
seen in all wordly affairs.

Standing Lotaries, are stately and magnificent, consisting of Silver, Plate,
Chains of Gold, Jewels, Cabinets, Hangings, Pictures, and other precious and
curious things, fit for honorable persons, and others of quality. Albeit all
men are admitted to adventure therein, which is the cause the Lots are commonly
made of twelve pence or two shillings, the number whereof makes a complete
Lotarie, fit to be drawn when the same is full, which must be done by
gathering in the money in continuance of a certain time limited, as aforesaid.

The Running Lotaries are of Plate, Chains of Gold, and other things, whereof
the price is (in a manner) certain, as also of moneys: and for that they are
instantly drawn, and men willing to know their present fortune (as they term
it,) every one is inclined, that the money which they draw, they will venture
again in hope of a better, whereby their Lotaries are sooner filled. Both
these sorts of Lotaries have a Table wherein the Prizes are declared, which are
valued by public authority to prevent deceit and fraud, which in great
Standing Lotaries is more likely to be practiced.

There is as many Bills made of the adventurers, by their names or poesies, as
there are Blankes and Prizes to be drawn, answerable to the Tickets delivered
for the money to every man that is an aduenturer in the said Lotaries: and all
these Bills of names being examined by the Magistrates or Commissioners, with
the Books of Collection for the monyes, are put into one great close Basket,
with a hole in the middle thereof for a man or a boy to put in his arm to draw
them at the appointed time. Likewise all the Blankes and Prizes, with the like
suruay of Sworne-men, are put into the like close Basket, after examination of
the Prizes registered in the said Table, which being all of one fashion and
bigness, are publicly upon a Stage mixed, tossed, and tumbled in certaines
sheets of Canuas, before they be put in the said Basket; and between the said
two Baskets sits the Drawer, putting both his arms at one instant severally
in every Basket, delivering the Bills of the names or poesies with the right
hand, and the Blankes and Prizes with the left hand, to certain Sworne-men,
which do read the contents thereof openly to all the standers by; which
Drawers or persons do change for certain hours, (for they continue both night
and day until all be drawn out, without stirring of the Baskets.) Othersome
do herein observe certain hours daily, and upon every discontinuance, they
seal the said Baskets under two or three Seals from time to time, proclaming
all Prizes by the sound of the Trumpet, and stringing some blew papers in the
Files made of the Blankes and names: and the Prizes every day drawn, are the
next day to be seen in print, with the assistance of Officers appointed to
see good orders observed in keeping the Peace, upon all occasions of fallings
out, which might happen amongst the unruly multitude of mechanical people. The
Prizes are many to avoid discontent, which the reading of many names and
answers in Blanke provoke. And commonly they do not exceed in number above
thirty or forty for one; and so the least prize being but ten shillings, is
proportionably three or four to one in value or in ready money. All the
Prizes have a privy mark or number known only to some few persons, to
prevent the counterfeiting of evil disposed persons or officers, which are
hereby easily discovered. For all the cautions and preuentions of dishonest and
crafty dealings are more than necessary in Lotaries, the rather of the common
opinion of all men, which hold it impossible for Lotaries to be without fraud.
Caveat in Lotaries.
And here I may not conceal a great fraud committed in Standing Lotaries, when
not only the Prizes are ouervalued, or change; but also when the parties of the
Lotaries will set up the same to draw men to adventure, and take that to their
advantage, filling up the Lotaries themselves, and enjoying the most Prizes by
the multitude of the Lots put in by them: wherein they are like to the crafty
common Out-cryer for goods sold publicly in outcries, by appropriating to
himself and his parteners (which are only known to him) all such good
bargains and penny-worths as he has with them contrived to bring about, Fraud
of goods sold by outcryes.
or as he has undertaken to put to sale for other men, under the color of
outcries, selling them (if he please) or keeping and retiring the goods into
his own hands, when he cannot advance them according to his will, wherein
other men are ignorant. And this being a vendition, may not be omitted to be
noted in this Book, concerning all manner of buyings and sellings; the rather,
for that the aduenturer in Lotaries incurreth less danger, than Merchants do
in the course of Trade, especially in Assurances, when they do adventure one
hundredth pounds for three or four pounds from London to Barbary, whereas for
one Lot of twelve pence, he has a possibility to have allotted unto him two
or three hundredth pounds.

Lotaries are commendable, The right use of Lotaries.
if they be appropriated to their right uses and good intentions, finis Coronat
opus: for this makes them to be of continuance, pleasing and profitable, when
the benefit thereof does redound to pious works; as for the erecting of
Schools and Universities, maintenance of the poor, and of widows and
orphans, repairation of Churches and highways and ditches, for the
plantation of Collonyes of people in other Countries, and building of Towns
and Castles for their maintenance; as also to erect Pawne-houses to supply the
necessity of the mechanical poor, suppressing intolerable usury; whereof
we shall entreat in the second Part of this Book, concerning monyes.

The Etimologie of the word Lotarie, is derived from the word (Lot:) And albeit
all Lotaries are things casual in respect of man to whom the Lot falls; yet
in regard of the providence of God, they are certain (in effect) by the said
Divine disposing of the Lot. Insomuch, that howsoever the words, Fortune,
Chance, Fate, Destiny, and Casualtie, are borrowed from the Heathens; it
cannot be denied, but that (respecting the effects and operations of God
toward man) they are proper distinctions of Gods Divine Providence: And hence
arises the Proverb, Nemo sua sort contentus viuit. (*)

CHAP. XLII. Of Associations, Monopolies, Engrossings, and Forestallings.
ASsociations are twofold, the one is done by public authority of Princes or
States, upon Graunts made by Letters Patents, which are properly called
Societies; as the Company of Merchant Adventurers, Society of the Merchants
Adventurers.
which are of 400 years standing or thereabouts, reckoning from the year
1248; when the said Merchants obtained privileges of John Duke of Brabant, and
were called the Brotherhood of Saint Thomas Becket of Canturburie, which were
confirmed by King Edward the third, Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, Edward
the fourth, Henry the sixth, Richard the third, and King Henry the seventh;
who gave them the name of Merchants Adventurers: after him also confirmed by
King Henry the eight, Edward the sixth, Queen Marie, Queen Elizabeth, and
lastly, by our Sovereign Lord King James; not without many enemies and
oppositions, and most especially of late, taxing them to be Monopolizers, and
unprofitable to the commonwealth; being that all our Clothes were not dressed
and dyed in England. Whereupon their Patent was for a time suspended, but
afterward confirmed again unto them by his Majesty's ample Proclamation. As
this Society is of ancient estimation, so is their government very
commendable, and preserves the amity and intercourse between the Realm and
other neighbor Princes and States, venting the best commodities of the
Kingdom; yet so, that every man sells freely at his pleasure without any
combination or limitation, to the great honor and service of the State,
wherein they may daily see and observe more and more, as is heretofore
declared.

Societies of East Indies, Virginia, etc.
The East India Merchants are also a Society, but their adventurers run all
into maine Stocks, and is governed and carried all jointly upon benefit or
loss. This Company began in the year 1599. So the Merchants of Turkey are a
Society. Also the Virginia and Barmuda Merchants, and diverse others, are
Societies incorporated by his Majesty's Letters Patents, as aforesaid.

The other Association is done by and between Merchants of their own
authority, Partnership by Contract.
joining themselves together for to deal and trade either for years or
voyages; and this is properly called Partnership, where one man does adventure
a thousand pounds, another five hundredth pounds, another three hundredth pounds,
and another four hundredth pounds, more or less, as they agree amongst
themselves, to make a stock, every man to have his profit, or to bear losses
and adventure according to their several stocks, in one or many voyages, for
one or more years; besides the moneys taken up at use to trade withal,
proportionably according to the rates of their stocks by parts and portions, to
be divided into so many parts as they agree: wherein the conditions be diverse,
which must be observed truly, and the accounts accordingly; otherwise all will
run into a Laborinth and confusion. And by the common Law one partner cannot
proceed against another, and in Chauncerie the suits may be prolonged for the
life of a man, unless the Law-Merchant be better understood; and the Auditors
Office be enabled to end these businesses with brevity and expedition.

There is another branch of this manner of partnership, Partnership by
employment.
which comes to pass, when Factors beyond the seas (dealing for diverse
Merchants) will sometimes make employment of several men's money in one kind of
commodity to be divided amongst them. Here one may become a partner unawares
and unknown, as of late I know the like did happen in a great bargain of
Tobacco, whereupon all the partners (being seven in number) are fallen out, and
diverse of them are in law. This course (althoug used) is very dangerous,
especially when they use many Factors. One Merchant sends commodities to his
Factor to be sold in Spain, and gives order that by that means he shall
provide money for his part of the employment of Tobacco to be made: another
Merchant, he sends a Letter of credit of a friend of his, that so much money
shall be taken up by exchange for Antuerpe or London, as shall be needful for
his part: another Merchant he causes so much money to be made over to his
Factor by exchange ^^om Antuerpe, as will furnish for his part. Two other
Merchants dwelling in Spain do furnish their parts there themselves. And
amongst them all, they admit in Spain one Factor dwelling there to buy the
Tobacco, and he has a part with them, but finds the means to disburse no
money for his part, because he buyeth the said parcel of Tobacco (amounting to
some twelve thousand ducats) and conditioned to pay a good part of it at six or
more months. And the seventh Merchant, he provides not any money, and
neuerles will have his part, because he gave order to his Factor to take it up
by exchange for London upon him, promising that he would pay the same here.
Hereupon the bargain and employment of Tobacco is made, the goods received and
sent over to London, where it is diuidedly delivered to some of the said
partners to be sold (with one and others priuitie) for the general account of
them all, to be made up amongst them to clear the said account, and every man
to have his part of the benefit and profit, and likewise to bear such losses
as may decrease their profit, according to equity and conscience. Interim it
happened, that the Factor who bought the said Tobacco, dyed insoluent, who did
not only leave his own part unpaid, but a far greater sum, which the other
two partners were feign to pay, being bound for it, in all amounting to 1300 ll
sterling^ Now the question is, How this loss shall be borne amongst them? The
first Merchant, he says, I did send commodities, and by the prouenue thereof
my part was paid by him that dyed, and that depends upon accounts to be
cleared between him and the party deceased: the second Merchant, he says,
My part was paid in ready money in Spain, taken up by a Letter of Credit, and
I am to bear no part of the loss: and so says the third Merchant, that made
over his money by exchange from Antuerpe: the two partners dwelling in Spain,
they say, That they have not only paid their parts of the Tobacco, but also
the 1300 ll which were owing to the Merchant that sold the Tobacco, and
therefore they demand much money due unto them, and that rests also upon
account between the party deceased and them and others. The party deceased
(being decayed) has few to undertake the administration of the estate: and the
seventh Merchant is contented to bear his part of the loss, so he may come in
for his part of the gain, and says, That if the money had been taken upon
him by exchange, he would have paid the same. But howsoever, he is able to
prove that he had provision sufficient to pay his part, in the hands of some of
the partners there; and for as much as he has borne the adventure of the seas
of his part of the Tobacco, he claims his part of the gain; for if all had
been cast away at the seas, it is certain the rest of the partners would have
made him to bear the loss of his part. And thus they are all in a Dilemma,
and having some of them bonds, others contracts, and some but accounts and
papers, they know not how to make an end; and such as have more than their
own, are remiss enough to procure an end. I have thought good to set down
this Case, because men of understanding may judge ^ow it is possible that the
common Law (by the strict and peremptory proceeding of it) can determine the
same without the Law-Merchant, not knowing the Custom of Merchants, being also
impossible to direct a Jury of twelve men in the premises, wherein I am now
an Arbitrator my self.

Description of Monopolies.
MOnopolies are somewhat displeasing, because the property of them is commonly
to ingrosse things to an ill end, increasing the price thereof disorderly,
drawing a general benefit to a particular, diuerting the course of traffic:
but for as much as they are used now a days, it will be convenient to
distinguish them by Reasonable, Unreasonable, and Indifferent.

Reasonable, of such things and trifles as are for pleasure, as Starch, Cards,
Lute-strings, Tobacco, and such like.

Unreasonable, as of Flesh, Fish, Butter, Cheese, or needful things for the
sustenance of man, without which he can hardly live ciuilly.

Indifferent, as of Veluets, Silks, Sugar, Spices, and other delicacies and
dainties or curiosities, indifferent to be used or not.

All these are done by public authority of Princes and States, by Letters
Patents granted for term of years: Engrossing.
but Engrossing is done by private persons of their own authority, which is
commendable, to keep commodities in reputation to maintain a trade thereby:
as when men of means do engrosse and buy up a commodity, and for reasonable
gain they sell the same again to shopkeepers and retailers; this is much
used amongst Merchants of all nations: otherwise when abundance of a
commodity does so much abate the price of it, that Merchants do become losers
and discouraged, then the traffic and trade is thereby overthrown, to the
general hurt of the commonwealth. In which respect it is better to pay
somewhat more for commodities, than to have them altogether over cheap,
especially for commodities serving for the back, Forestalling or Forestallers
called by the Ciuilians Dardanary.
and not for the belly, which diverse times by Forestallers become dear.
Against which kind of people (Regrators and others) there are very good laws
made, which the magistrates are to see observed: and in France and Scotland,
the Admirals of the seas have an absolute authority to look unto this
inconvenience.

The government of Norenborough in Germany is much to be commended, not only
for the provident care to prevent Forestallers, Commendable Engrossing.
but also for the engrossing or incorporating of all manufactures into their
own hands to set the poor people continually on work, themselves causing the
said manufactures to be sold at such reasonable rates, as none can make or
provide better cheap than they do, whereof abundance is bought and sent for
the West Indies and other places, the mechanical people are very much
cherished by them, and all Artists are welcome unto them, which makes their
city populus. The Hollanders do imitate them, and some money of the Bank at
Amsterdam is employed therein; for the Proverb is to be commended, Sceptra
sauent Arts.

The Ciuilians have made the Latin word Monopolium, borrowed from the Greek, to
be less understood, because of their many difinitions thereof, which made me to
treat of Associations, Monopolies, Engrossings, and Forestallings, as having
affinity one with another, and to describe them in divided manner, as also to
note their coherence, as follows. For an Association, Company, A Society may
become a Monopoly.
or Society may become a Monopoly in effect; when some few Merchants have the
whole managing of a trade, to the hurt of a commonwealth, when other Merchants
are excluded to negotiate with their stocks, to vent the commodities of the
realm with reputation, according to the word (...) Solus and (...) Vendo, A
Society may become a Monopoly.
to sell alone. And as this is done many times by one Merchant, for one kind of
commodity (be it Corn, Salt, Oil, Woolles, and the like:) So may it be
done by a Society of Merchants continually, under the color of authority.
Albeit that there be no combination to limit any certain prices, for the sale
of commodities in the particular of one Merchant or more Merchants agreed
together to buy up a commodity, it may be called a forestalling. As one
Dardanus did, whereof (as we have said) the name Dardanarij was used by the
said Ciuilians, who define them to be (...). Qui omnia praemunt, vt carius
vendant, That forestall or buy up things, to the end they should sell them
dearer. Which although it be agreeable to the practice, meaning, and
intentions of Merchants: yet the practice is contrary to the Laws; for it
would run into disorder, in the government of a Commonwealth. In the
general, where a Society buyeth commodities apart, and sells apart,
although under orderly government, it is in the nature of engrossing, as the
manufactures of Norenborough aforesaid; and being done with discretion and good
order, it can give no cause of offense; but the abuse thereof made the same
odious, and so generally to be known of all men; as the word Usury is,
implying a biting.

Definition of a Monopoly.
THe truest definition of a Monopoly therefore is, A kind of commerce in
buying, selling, changing, or bartering, usurped by a few, and sometimes, but
by one person, and forestalled from all others to his or their private gain,
and to the hurt and detriment of other men; whereby of course or by authority,
the liberty of Trade is restrained from others, whereby the Monopolist is
enabled to set a price of commodities at his pleasure.

A Merchant of London, having sent a great Ship to Zante, to lade Corrints and
Wines, being there arrived; another Merchant there inhabiting, upon knowledge
hereof, caused all the Corrints to be bought up, to prevent the said Merchant,
and to compel him to buy the said Corrints of him at dear rates, to lade the
said Ship, which made the Factor (appointed to lade the said Ship) at his wits
end: But being ingenuous he devised a course to disappoint the said
forestalling Merchant, and caused Bills to be set up in all public places, to
give notice that the said Ship was come, to take in Merchants goods for her
lading, and to return for London: which being understood by him, brought him
into a secondarie, and to set all the Brokers of Zante on work, to help him
to sell the said Corrints again, whereby he became a loser. In this and the
like cases the said Societies are to have a care of prevention; otherwise it is
the part of the Prince to look unto it with a politic eye, upon complaint to
be made, as of late years has been done (when the French Merchants did
strive to bring new Wines first to the Market, thereby inhauncing the price of
Wines in France:) it was ordered and commanded by Proclamation, That no Wines
growing in France, should be sold or put to sale, before the first of December,
to be observed every year.

The like was done heretofore by our Merchants trading Spain, in the buying of
Rotta Raisons by an order amongst them, That none should be sold by them
before the last of October: which being known to Merchant Strangers, made them
to preoccupie the Market (they not being bound to their orders;) so that this
is to be done more properly by the Kings Proclamation.

Here I call to mind my former observation of that royal commodity Tin,
which above one hundredth years since, Preemption of Tin.
was sold for forty shillings the hundredth, when the best Velvet was sold for
ten shillings the yeard: how Merchants trading Turkey found fault with his
Majesty's preemption of the said Tin, and caused the same to be abolished, to
keep the price thereof at fifty five shillings the hundredth, and (bringing in
Corints, Leuant Wines, Spices, and Indico, at dear rates, as they sold them)
used all means to suppress the rising thereof: which being considered of by
foreign Nations, caused them to use means to incorporate or ingrosse the
same, whereby that commodity came to be of more estimation and request; where
upon the said Preemption was reestablished, which has increased the stock of
the Kingdom since that time above six hundredth thousand pounds, being risen to
double the price, and yet but proportionable to the price of Veluets and other
commodities. On the contrary, another commodity Mineral, namely Copperas,
which was sold heretofore (when there was Letters Patents for the sole making
thereof) for 10 ll, and 12 ll the Tun, whereof a great trade might have been
made for other Countries: has been so ill governed by worke-men vnderselling
one another, and for want of orderly carriage, that the same is sold under 3 ll
the Tun, and is become a mere drug out of request, by the abundance made and
indiscreetly vented, bartered or exchanged. France yielding abundance of Salt,
although one year more than another, suffers not the commodity to be
overmuch vilified. For albeit that the subjects within the Realm do not care
how good cheap they buy the native commodities, because of their own benefit;
yet the Prince ought to have a care to reduce them into trade, with a respect
of the foreign commodities brought into his Kingdom. So that not only those
Letters Patents or privileges granted by them, for the reward of new
inventions are necessary: but also some directions to Companies or Societies,
are (in policy) very requisite. Letters Patents for new inventions.
Virtue in a Commonwealth ought as well, and rather (in some respects) to be
more rewarded, than Vice to be punished by cutting off the malefactors.

This is agreeable to the Common Law of the Realm, and the fundamental Laws
of all Nations: granting the Proiectors or Inuentors, privileges for twenty
one or more years, which some men without distinction of Monopolies, would
have abridged to 14, 11, or 7 years, wherein the thing it self ought to make
the difference, upon good considerations, and not to measure all things alike.
For example, the Grant made for the sole importation of Spanish Tobacco, The
Farm of Tobacco.
does gain and save the Kingdom many thousand pounds yearly: for Bays,
Says, Perpetuanoes, and the like commodities, which these two years have
been sold in Spain, with fifteen upon the hundredth loss, to procure money
to buy the said Tobacco, are now sold to so much benefit, besides the
advancement of the Plantations of Virginia and the Bermudas. But this is not
proper to be done for other commodities that are not of that nature, neither
of commodities to be exported, wherein such and the like considerations is to
be had.

The general intention of all Graunts by Letters Patents for Manufactures,
has a relation to set the people on work, to recompense the inuenter of the
Art or Science, and that things may (in some measure) be better cheap to the
subjects. What shall we say then, of those Graunts which make the commodity
good cheap to foreign Nations, and dearer to the subjects? Surely this cannot
be without some great abuse.

If a Keelne for the drying of Malt for all the Kingdom over, were invented to
be done with Pit-coale, better cheap than with Wood fire, and more pleasing,
without the sent of smoke; and that this Keelne or Keelns were placed in
convenient places, for all men's access, whereby they should save much charges,
and have their Malt better cheap: if hereupon Letters Patents were granted
to reward the Proiector, no man of judgment will call this a Monopoly, nor any
part thereof, although the public liberty seems thereby to be restrained.
For take it another way, and you shall find it rather to be a common
distribution than a restraint whenever it brings a general good and
commodity to the Commonwealth.

The Statutes of the Kingdom restraining from the exercise of sundry Crafts
all such as have not served an Apprentishood unto the Art which they would
exercise, do it to no other end but that those Arts might be brought to
better perfection, and the things made, might be good and serviceable for those
that buy and use them.

Some men are well contented, if a prohibition or restraint of a commodity be
done by Act of Parliament, and they will no manner of ways have called the
same to be a Monopoly, although it be so in effect, when a Society of private
Merchants have a privilege to themselves only to sell certain commodities,
or to import them, and all other subjects are excluded, although they were
neither the discouerers or first inuenters thereof. But if it be done by the
Kings Prerogative, then they take it to be a kind of Monopoly. So that, if it
be by a dispensation upon a Penal Law, they make the same questionable;
wherein nevertheless the Princes wisdom is to rule for the good of the
Commonwealth.

Others would have all things at large in the course of traffic, and that
there should be no Societies or Corporations of Merchants for any places of
trade; but that by way of partnership, Merchants might associate themselves to
make or enterprise some voyages, or in sending of commodities in copartnership,
without regard had that innouations are dangerous, where the trade has been
carried always by Companies or Societies, whereof some are of great
antiquity. This is more considerable in the gouernements of Monarchies (and
especially in Islands) than in State or popular gouernements, where the
ouerballancing of foreign commodities is not respected; neither the
oueraboundant inhabitation of strangers, which augmenteth their Customs and
Impositions laid at pleasure upon their commodities; as a principal matter
whereby they subsist.

Others make a difference between Companies or Associations, dealing in a
joint Stock, or apart; affirming the negotiation of a joint Stock to be
within the compass of a Monopoly: Nevertheless they would be contented to
tolerate the same, for the employment outward. But for the returns
homewards, they would have a division in kind, or species of the commodities
which they receive; which is contrary to the manner of the Portugalls, whose
experience has made apparent unto us, that they have for many years sold
their Spices and other East India commodities, with good order and reputation
for their benefit.

And in this course they use many times other men's names, Merchants using each
others name.
according to the Custom of Merchants; as they do also manage other men's
affairs in their own names: but this is done with the priuitie of the party
whose name is borrowed, and thought worthy to be trusted, otherwise it may
prove very dangerous, especially in time of war.

Touching forestalling of Corn or other commodities in Markets, it is (as I
have said) provided for by Laws; nevertheless the Ciuilians have noted, That
by the Municipall Laws of all Countries, it is not prohibited for any man to
make his provision of Corn, or other victuals for one whole year, and upon
changing of mind, to sell the same again to profit. (*)

CHAP. XLIII. Of Merchants Oppignorations.
MErchants oppignorations are more used in regard of the commodiousnesse of it,
than upon necessity, as other goods are pawned. For when a Merchant has a
Ship come home, laden with Wines, Oils, Woad, or such like commodities, and is
to pay a great sum of money for Freight, Custom and Impost, he will not
willingly disburse more money, but will endeavor to sell part of his
commodities to pay the same withal: because that thereby he may avoid the
payment of interest for money unto others, which sometimes he cannot so
re^dily find upon his own Bond alone; and if he do, then must he be tied to
take the same for four or six months, and pay that interest; when within one
month he may make moneys of his own goods. Upon consideration whereof some
rich Citizens that have great houses, and many Sellers or Warehouses and to
let them at greater rents; have been contented to lend money upon the goods
brought into their Sellers and Warehouses, paying after the rate of ten in
the hundredth for the year, and when they sell their goods they must pay them
the said money: for they do trust Bayard in the Stable. In which regard the
houses of Commerce are very necessary, and other such houses that are spacious
to receive great quantities of commodities, where the Customs and Impositions
are only paid by the sale of the commodities, and you may borrow more money
for little or no consideration at all: and hereby does a Merchant enlarge his
trade, and young Merchants (having small Stocks) find great ease and
commodity. You have at Lixborne the Alfandega, in Seuill A Dicana, at Venice
Il fontego: Houses of Commerce.
at Antuerp the house of the Easterlings is memorable, whereof I did deliver
the figure in print to the late Earl of Salisburie; when he caused the
Britains Burse to be builded in the Strand, and withal a project to build a
house of Commerce upon the Tower Hill, which he did like exceedingly, and
protested that if he had not begun that work, he would undertake this
project: which I do here declare, in hope that some honorable friend to
Merchants may be pleased to build the same hereafter.

Domus Commutationis.
THe situation of this House of Commutations or Commerce, would be very
commodious upon the Tower hill, to be made of free stone; the proportion almost
square, according to the said Easterlings house at Antuerpe, leaving a fair
street on every side: the fore part thereof toward the river of Thames, and
the water to be brought before it, by cutting in the docke below the Tower
wharfe, so as two ships of ordinary burden might at one time come in to
discharge at the Cranes to be made there for the purpose.

The dryness of the ground is very fit to make great Cellars, in the midst a
stately Court, and all the lower part of this house double Warehouses for
commodities of great Bulk, and over that Galleries answerable to the lower
part, set upon stately Columes, full of Warehouses for small wares of value:
and so for a third Story, and double Garrets for corn and such like
commodities, reserving some fair rooms for the entertainment of great
personages (coming from beyond the seas) to feast them only; also with a
magnificent Turret, great Gates, and places with balances and beams to weigh
all sorts of commodities.

The earth of the Cellars would serve to raise the hither part of the ditches
of the Tower to make them deeper, and part of the ground level, fit for goodly
walks; and for the scouring of the docke or entrance, a Mill might be made to
grind mineralls, and other things.

One part of this House to serve the clothiers that cannot conveniently at all
times sell their clothes at Blackwel Hall, which they may remove when they have
occasion to use money to buy necessary commodities to maintain their trade;
which commodities they may have for that money, or by way of commutation, as
Woolls, Oil, Woad, Indicoe, Cutcheneale, Allome, Copperas, or other such like
extant in other Warehouses of this House, as by the Register kept thereof will
appear; whereunto all Brokers shall resort, and have notice of if they will.

When the clothiers shall have this commodiousnesse, they will increase their
trade, and set more people on work to make good clothes, according to the
statute, which will be more vendible in other places beyond the seas, to the
general advancement of traffic, his majesty's Customs and Impositions, and
all other dependancies thereupon.

No man is compelled to bring his commodities to this House, but allured
thereunto by the commodiousnesse and benefits thereof, because of the ease of
Warehouse room and Cellaridge at easier rates, the commodity of sale or
barter, the forbearing to pay Customs and Imposts for a time, the taking up of
moneys to serve his turn, and the goods better assured than in other places.

According to the said house of the Easterlings at Antuerpe, there will be 108
cellars, and double that in warehouses, and after that so many garrets, in all
above four hundred rooms. The benefit whereof will be very great, one with
another at 10 ll is 4000 ll. The benefit of weighing all commodities, and the
selling and registring of all will be much more. And all the charge of this
house is by the computation of some workmen to be done for 15000 ll, and may
yield 10000 ll yearly profit, to the honor of the King, reputation of the
city of London, and welfare of the realm, and credit of Merchants.

Staples of Woolls.
Our Staple of Woolls (heretofore kept at Calice and Bridges in Flaunders) is
now out of use, and Staple Towns are all (as it were) incorporated into
London; and therefore it is to be hoped, that some worthy Merchants will of
good affection to the City and State, be ready to resolve to undertake this
building of the house of commerce, as a worthy monument for posterity, and
ease of all traders.

The old Romans (when moneys were first made of Copper, and then Silver, and
before Golden coins were made) had appointed a place, Mensa Argentaria.
called Mensa Argentaria, where they lent moneys upon commodities for a
reasonable consideration, to advance traffic and trade, which (in comparison
of ours) was but in his infancy, and therefore to be left now to the mercy of
monyed men (without other provision by authority to supply men's occasions)
seems to be impertinent, especially when moneys are not plentiful.

Having hitherto treated of buying and selling, and the dependancies thereupon,
now we are to speak of receiving and paying by moneys, and of the manner of
Merchants dealings therein. But this does properly appertain to the second
part of the Law-Merchant, where moneys are compared to the Soul of traffic
and commerce.

A question touching Merces Vaenales for Oppignorations.
Returning therefore to the said matter of Oppignorations, let us note the
questions of Ciuilians, Whether in the general binding of a man's goods, wares
to be sold (called Merces Vaenales) are comprised, by saying, he binds his
goods present and to come? The answer is, that they are bound, but yet the
sale of the said goods is not hindered thereby, unless they were pawned or
obliged to be in a place certain, and named in the writing there to be extant.
Also in Tacita Hipotheca, or as it were close pawning, Merchants money may be
comprehended and made liable: but this is to be understood of moneys had some
other way; for it is reason that the money which a man takes up shall serve
him to expedite his affairs. Titulus Mandati.


Also in binding of future goods, it is to be understood only of such goods as
he may get during his life, and not by any of his heirs. These reasons have a
reference to traffic, which is a general body, and commodities by
merchandising or commerce do supply themselves in their places; so that when
some commodities are disposed of, other commodities come into the room
thereof: and the laws have always more regard to the general than to the
particular; insomuch that a woman (even for her dower) cannot arrest her
husbands goods, finding his estate to decay.

CHAP. XLIIII. The proceedings used against Bankrupts.
THe mutabilitie and inconstancy of all worldly affairs (and especially of
Merchants estates) causes me to remember the ancient Dutch Proverb, A dutch
Proverb Englished.
Goods lost, nothing lost; Credit lost, much lost; Soul lost, all lost: for to
be rich and to become poor, or to be poor and to become rich, is a matter
inherent to a Merchants estate, and (as it were) a continual and successiue
course of the volubilitie of variable blind fortune, which is admitted
(according to the heathen word) for a distinction of Gods providence, as the
words of Fate, Destiny, Chance, and the like are, for the better
understanding of it; so that by the frequencie of it, Merchants have made a
great difference and distinction between a Merchant which is at a stay and
takes days for the payment of his debts, or one that is broken or Bankrupt,
having an especial regard herein for the preservation of credit, which is as
tender as the apple of an eye: for it happens many times, that Merchants
(having taken up money at interest to augment their trade, and thereby doing
good to their prince and country) shall receive some unexpected losses by
wars on land, or Embargoes, or restraints of Princes upon the seas of their
ships and goods, or by having sold their goods and merchandises at home at long
days of payment, or otherwise by other occasions, having their best means in
remote places, whereby the said Merchants cannot suddenly make paiments of such
moneys as they have taken up at interest, which in that Interim may be due, and
so they are driven at a stay, although they have very good estates: for some
rich men (who like an Ape tied to a clogge, which thinks that he keeps the
clog, when the clog keeps him) are so tied to the clogge of their wealth,
that upon the least rumors of troubles and accidents happening to their
debtors, they become suspicious of these men's estates, and fearing to become
loosers, are so inquisitiue of their debtors means (without reason and
discretion) to the great hurt and impairing of Merchants credit and reputation,
that thereby they are driven into a strait upon a sudden, and so overthrow them
(unawares many times) to their own hinderance and loss; A caveat for
Merchants.
so that Merchants must be very provident and careful with whom they deal,
in taking credit for moneys, and not to have too much of their estate abroad;
for the Proverb is true, That he who is farthest from his goods, is nearest to
his loss. And in this case, Princes have great reason to interpose their
prerogatives for the defense of these Merchants persons and goods for
prevention of their overthrow, until their goods come to their hands and
disposing, that have been detained as aforesaid.

This difference and distinction between a Merchant taking days of payment,
and a Bankrupt, does encourage men to deal honestly and conscionably
especially with the virtuous and well disposed, for Virtus laudata crescit,
whereby they pay every man his own in time, and for the most part with
interest for the forbearance of their due debts: And therefore is it, that to
call this man a Bankrupt, bears a great action by the Civil Law, as also by
the Common law of the realm, which is very careful for Merchants credits and
reputation: for that Merchant which in the storms of adversity, shows to be
a good pilot, deserves great commendation of the care and endeavors which he
uses to prevent the ship-wrecke of his reputation and credit, especially with
a good conscience, which will be unto him a continual feast, although the seas
be turbulent, for he is armed with patience, and not destitute of comfort: and
on the contrary, those that like cowards become careless of their credit, or
being of an evil disposition, seek to defraud their creditors, and to enrich
themselves by their breaking, paying little or nothing; they do not only
deserve a name of defamation, but ought to be met withal by some severe
punishment by the Law. Seuerepunishment of Bankrupts.
It is not long since, namely in the year 1602, that there was a Merchant at
Roan in France, who together with his son and a Broker had confederated to
buy great store of merchandises upon their credit, of purpose to break and to
enrich themselves; which being known, made them to be apprehended, and the
court of Edicts did proceed criminally against them as thieves to the
commonwealth, whereof they were also convicted, and all three of them hanged
in the market place: observing that the reprehensiue Proverb ( Dat veniam
Coruos vexat censura columbas) was to be remembered, To punish the small theft
or little thief, and to suffer the great thief to escape, which is
unreasonable.

The statute against Bankrupts.
The Statute of Bankrupts made and provided by our law, against Merchants and
Citizens only, was done to a very good intent, if it were executed
accordingly, with due consideration of the quality of persons and their
behavior. But some can prevent the means of suing forth the same, and so
break the strength of it, as easily as a Spiders web, whiles plain dealing
men are laid hold of, that have an honest intention to pay every man,
according to their ability present or future, as God shall enable them; for
Vltra posse non est esse.

But these well meaning men are oftentimes hindered to perform their honest
intentions, by the hard and obstinate dealing of some of their creditors, to
the utter overthrow of them, their wives and children, and the general loss
of all the rest of the creditors: these men therefore are to be ouerruled by
the Lord Chaunceller, who may compel them to be conformable with the other
creditors, according to the Customs of Merchants in other countries: and there
has been in times past, during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Commission for
the relief^ of prisoners.
a Commission granted under the great Seal of England, for the relief of
distressed prisoners in the prisons of the Fleet and the Kings Bench; which
Commission, if it were renewed for the relief of the one and finding out of
the other, would work much charity and contentment to the subjects. Howbeit
to prevent these extremes is more commendable, for many Merchants and
Shopkeepers do flourish and become rich again, if their creditors be
favorable unto them, and do pay every man to the full. Therefore are the
Letters of Licenses devised amongst Merchants, Letters of License given to
debtors.
which are as a Pasport for the persons and goods of the debtors, given by the
creditors, by way of covenant, that they shall not (for and during such a time
or term of years) trouble or molest the persons and goods of the said
debtors, nor cause to be molested, arrested or troubled, upon pain and
forfeiture of their said debts, to be pleaded in Bar against them for ever,
as a full payment of the same.

For the better encouragement, and to retain men in their duties, The Custom
of Merchants concurring with the course of the Civil Law herein, Restoration
of credit.
does make a restoration of credit to those that pay their debts to the full,
notwithstanding their losses which they have sustained; and they may have a
publication made of it, by way of intimation to all men upon the Exchange or
other public places, for a perpetual remembrance to posterity, of their
honest religious and commendable endeavors and behauiours, to the honor and
credit of their house, kindred, or good descent: which is more especially
regarded in Spain, A gentleman's privilege in Spain.
where a Merchant or Citizen being decayed in his estate, and having paid
according to his ability, yea, although he does not pay at all, shall be
freed from all arrests and troubles touching his person, if he make proof that
he is a Gentleman by birth: which extends so far, that all Merchants
Strangers may have and enjoy the like privilege, upon Certificate made by any
that is Ambassador and agent for their country; who commonly will do it upon
the verification of it, by the Heralds or otherwise, which causes men not to
degenerate in virtuous actions, although adverse fortune plays her Tragedy;
which they overcome with constancy and magnanimity.

The said Statute against Bankerupts is made upon very great consideration,
which lies not against a Gentleman; so that to call a decayed Gentleman, a
Bankerupt, (although he have had dealing in the world) bears no action at the
Common Law, unless he were a Merchant or Shopkeeper, etc.

Commissioners for the Statute of Bankerupts.
The Commissioners appointed by the Lord Chanceller under the Great Seal to
execute this Commission of the Statute of Bankerupt, must be Councellers at the
Law, joined with some Citizens or Merchants, which are to seize of the party
(which by the said Commission is proved to be a Bankerupt) all goods, debts,
chattels and moueables into their hands, and to appoint one or two of the
creditors to be Treasurer of the same, which is afterward to be distributed
by the said Commissioners, unto all such as they shall find and admit to be
right creditors to the party (and with his priuitie and consent) upon such
specialties, books, or accounts as they shall produce and be made apparent
unto them; which must be done within four months after the date of the said
Commission. The contents of the said Statute.
For if it be after the four months expired, they may exclude any creditor
if they see cause; so that the said distribution shall be done to those only
which have been admitted within the said time, according to their several
principal sums due unto them, without any interest for the forbearance since
the specialtie was due, or any forfeiture; howbeit charges in Law expended for
the debt, shall be by them allowed according to their discretion. So likewise
is it in the discretion of the Commissioners to admit any creditor to come in,
where the party was surety for another, if that party be likewise decayed.
For it is usual for interest money, that two or three are bound together, and
the collateral Bonds which they give each to other to save harmless are to
be considered, both by the said commissioners and the creditors.

It is also provided by the said Statute, That whosoever shall be found to
have voluntarily yielded to any arrest, or his body to prison, and so
remains in prison, for, and during the time of six months, thinking by that
imprisonment to free his goods, and to deceive his creditors; against him may
the said Commission be sued forth and executed accordingly, for he is to be
taken for a Bankerupt according to the said Statute; and if the party be at
liberty, against whom the said Statute of Bankerupt is taken out, the said
Commissioners may (if they see cause) commit him to prison, and give him some
allowance for his maintenance. And of all their proceedings there is a Register
appointed, by his Majesty's Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England to
record the same, until the Lord Chanceller do dissolve the said Commission by
a Supersedeas.

Definition of the word Decoctor.
The Ciuilians are copious in the description of this Argument, and have
attributed unto this kind of people, the name of Decoctor, which is derived
from the word Decoqu^, as it were to consume the substance of things, by
decrease and euaporation of boiling over the fire, otherwise called disturbers
or consumers of other men's goods in the course of traffic. Nevertheless they
do observe great distinctions between these persons, as in the Treatise, De
Decoctoribus, made by Benuenuto Straccha, appears. And the Definition of
Bankerupts is three manner of ways distinguished:

First, When a man becomes insoluent, by losing his goods and other men's, by
fortune, mischance, and casualtie, which man is not taken to be infamous by the
Law, indeauouring to make satisfaction as he can.

Secondly, When a man by wasting, spoiling, and viciously given, consumes his
own and other men's goods, and he by the Law is infamous.

Thirdly, When a man is decayed, partly by wasting and spoiling of his own and
other men's goods, and partly by misfortune, and accidents; and this man is
taken to be infamous, if he be vicious.

Hereunto I may add the fourth, and most vile person, who enriching himself
with other men's goods, breaks without just cause, and only of purpose to
deceive men, according to the aforesaid example of Roan. Albeit I am of
opinion, that the said Ciuilians have left them out of the number to be
criminally punished, as thieves to the Commonwealth, by the magistrates or
princes authority, as the Banker of Florence was; who breaking for many
millions of ducats, made a sudden and deceitful composition with his
creditors for the one half, and did pay them in ready money: which being
understood by the great Duke, he caused his process to be made instantly,
and thereupon he was executed also accordingly; which was good justice, and is
to be done by the Magistrates, and not by the creditors. Punishments of
Bankrupts.
As of late years one of Genoa in Italy did unto a debtor of his, whom he knew
went about to deceive him for great sums of money; whereupon he caused a
Chair to be made, and called the party to his house and entreated him to sit
therein, which being made with certain engines, did suddenly so gripe and
claspe in his said debtor, that he was compelled to pay him, or it might have
cost him his life. True it is, that in Russia a man has leave to beat, or to
have his debtor beaten upon the hinder parts of the legs, if he cannot pay, and
therewith is he discharged; which is not so cruel as to keep him always in
prison, and make him to endure a lingering death, wherein the undoing of wives
and children are made partakers unjustly.

Concerning fraudulent dealers the Law is, That by making Cession they shall
not be relieved, and may be apprehended in the Church: whereas a freeman
cannot be arrested or taken in the Church, but may be unto him a place of
refuge.

If he be found a fraudulent man by his books of account, then any bargain
or sale made two or three days before his breaking, by goods sold good cheap,
may be recalled and avoided; and in like manner, if he pay one man after his
breaking, the same may be taken to be done in fraud of all the other creditors,
and may be recalled for the generality. So goods bought by him before
breaking, if they be found in esse, may be claimed by the Seller to his
particular use and payment again.

All conjectures of fraud may be augmented and aggrauated against the
fraudulent man, according to the saying, Semel inuentum decies factum.

If any man do break in partnership, the partnership is ipso facto dissolved
by law: but the credit of the other remains, paying the debts of the
partnership.

Also any commission given by him (for the partnership) is void instantly:
howbeit, if a Factor by ignorance of his breaking, have caused his commission
to be followed; that which is done does bind the Master, and shall excuse the
Factor.

Suspicious Debtors.
A debtor suspected by others, may be touched before moneys be due, and the
creditor may attach some of his goods or pawns: which is the cause that the
writ of Latitat out of the Kings Bench court may be served upon them to find
sureties for their appearance (at the return of the writ) before the Judges of
the said court. But the laws in diverse countries do very much differ in the
proceedings and execution of these fraudulent men.

A question for suretiship.
Here arises a question, Whether a Surety can pretend to be discharged, if the
Creditors have made or agreed with the Principal for a longer time of payment,
and the Principal breaks? The answer is, That if he knew of the new
agreement of the said party for a longer time, he is liable thereunto;
otherwise being bound as a Surety for a time limited, he ought to be cleared
at that time, or to make suit or demand to have his satisfaction of the
Principal, as also of the Surety, which being neglected, does in equity
discharge the said Surety: the reason is, because if the Surety do break at
or before the time of the payment, the Creditor may demand another Surety in
that man's place which is broken, wherein the law is very indifferent. And this
is the cause that diverse Lord Chauncellours of England (for moneys taken up at
interest upon bonds) were of opinion, That when the said moneys are continued
or prolonged at interest, the bonds should be renewed, and the counter-bonds
also, and not to leave the old bonds for many years to be uncancelled; for it
does oftentimes happen upon occasion of absence of some of the parties, that a
new bond is sometimes sealed, and the old not taken in, which breeds
contention; for the new bond being made, the old is void, and yet may be
uncancelled, and also put in suit by some executor or administrator ignorant of
the other new bond taken for the same, and paid long before: Albeit herein it
seems, there is more reason not to make new bonds; howsoever diligent care
must be had herein both by the parties and Scriueners which make the bonds.

Concerning agreements to be made between Bankrupts and their Creditors, there
is a question made, That if Creditors do agree with their Debtors for some part
of their debts, Agreements to be made between a Bankrupt and his Credi^ors.
because of the Debtors losses and misfortunes, Whether, when the parties being
become rich again may revoke their agreement? And the law has determined this
question, That if upon the agreement, there be an Acquitance made by the
Creditor, then the same agreement is absolute and cannot be revoked, unless the
Acquittance were conditional.

The greatest number, or the greater sum of the Creditors being agreed with
the Debtor, are bound to be conformable with the other, and to do the like with
the help of authority, not only by the Civil law, but also by the Merchants
Court of Prior and Consuls, which authority is already noted before to be in
the Lord Chauncellor. But the difference is great between the greater number
of the Creditors, or the greater sum: for a man may have an infinite number
of small Creditors, or few Creditors for very great sums by him owing; so
that the greater number should ouerrule the greater sums. It is therefore
thought convenient to follow the greater sums, which never the less does not
hinder the smaller number to proceed upon goods appertaining to the party, if
they can find them, if by the said authority the whole estate of the Decoctor
be not managed: Bills of conformity in Chancerie.
whereupon the Bills of conformity were of late years used in the Chauncerie,
which by the Parliament Anno 1621 are made void, because of diverse great abuses
committed in thedefence of Bankrupts, who to shelter themselves from the rigor
of the Common-lawes, did prefer their Bills of complaint in Chauncerie, which
was in the nature of a Protection, and the parties broken, became to be
relieved for easy compositions with their Creditors, albeit at charges another
way extraordinary.

Now concerning fugitive persons (being indebted) if they be Merchants, they
are taken pro confesso to be Decoctors or Bankrupts, Fugitive Merchants.
for they in substance by their absence deny to give a reason of their losses
to their Creditors, which they ought to do, if by fortune they are to have good
and favorable dealing, if it shall appear (that by losses and not by wastfull
or lewd behavior) they came behind hand, whereby the Creditors are induced to
divide in some measure the parties goods amongst them, as they may by the law
and custom of Merchants.

The statute (made in the 34 year of King Henry 8) has well provided against
these fugitive persons, Proclamation against fugitive Merchants.
that a Proclamation shall be made against them, That if they do not return
within three months after they shall have notice of it (which by Affidauit
must be certified) to present themselves in some convenient place to be
declared, that then they shall be proceeded against, as if they were contemners
of the laws of the realm. And in the mean time (by order from the Lords of
the privy Council, who have authority to grant a warrant for the
Proclamation) all such revenues of lands or goods to be sequestered, and
afterward to be sold as cause shall require for the payment of the Creditors,
which execution has lately been practiced against diverse, but lies only
against the kings subjects, but not against strangers, nor other persons which
are not Merchants or tradesmen.

All means of strict proceeding are to be used against those fugitive
Merchants, as also other Decoctors, and against them that do give them any aid
or assistance, which is not tolerated by the law: for he that will help them
because he may the sooner recover of him his own payment, may be convicted of
fraud by the law, when it is found out and discovered; besides that, the other
Creditors may call that money back again to be distributed amongst them. And
the Dictio, Nullo modo, How to be taken.
nullo modo is to be understood at no time, and without any reason of excuse,
in all other things prohibited by the law, especially in this which concerns
the disturbers of commerce, so much to be celebrated. And because many
questions do arise by the means of the interruption of traffic by Bankrupts,
and that (as I have noted already) the laws in most countries do differ in
the proceedings against them: I have therefore in this Chapter made a more
ample discourse, both of the Civil Law, the customs of the Merchants courts,
and the examples and laws of other countries, to prevent the multiplicities of
cases which might be alleged by true observation of the premises.

A question which concerns the estate of Bankers.
The question concerning Bankers which have their several places or Banks in
diverse jurisdictions, and become Bankrupt, How their Creditors shall be dealt
withal in the dividing of their estates between them, is worthy the
observation: for whereas they keep two, three, or more Books of account in
several places, and therein distinguish the Creditors of their several
Banks: The Ciuilians are of opinion for the most part, That the Creditors of
one jurisdiction should not participate with the Creditors of another
jurisdiction, and have put the same in practice; but the court of Merchants do
use to take an account of the state of the Bankrupt dispersed in all countries,
and divide accordingly. (*)

CHAP. XLV. Of Manufactures.
Having so often inculcated that important argument, whereby true Merchants are
to be careful, That traffic and commerce may be profitable as well to the
commonwealth, as to themselves; we may not omit to entreat of Manufactures,
as an important matter to the customarie Law of Merchants, considering the
abundance of materials and stuff which the realms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland do afford, Idleness the root of all evil.
whereby the people may be set on work to avoid idleness (which is the root
of all evil) most dangerous in countries which are populous.

Experience demonstrateth unto us, how many other nations (having not stuffes
of their own, but from others) do nevertheless set their people on work upon
the stuff and materials of other countries, making and dispersing the same
into a large trade. Therefore it is convenient to encourage all men to reward
new inventions with some privileges for a time, and not for ever, New
inventions to be rewarded.
to avoid the course of Monopoly, and to make the benefit to the commonwealth
more general, which makes men painful by the radical moisture of gain,
whereof Merahants are to have a consideration so to reward the artificers and
handy-crafts-mens labors, that they may live by their work, according to the
Dutch Proverb, which themselves use so frequently, Leven end laeten leven, To
live and to let others live. This is to be regarded also by statesmen, Live
and let live.
forbearing to impose over great Customs to be paid upon commodities, whereby
the people is set on work both upon goods imported and exported. It is
therefore prohibited in France, that tallow be brought in, but not candles; old
shoes, but not cobled; paper, but not cards, and the like; much more for richer
wares, as silks, cotton-wools, and linen etc.

The commodities which are not made at all, or but in small quantity in
England, and may be practiced, are many, as Buckrams, Tapistrie, Bustians,
Cambrickes, Canuas, Cables, Babies, cloth of Gold and Silver, Damask, Diaper,
Mather, Paper, and diverse other things; all which may be made in time, Quia
nemo nascitur artifex. And herein is to be considered, That all other nations
being careful to maintain manufactures, cannot but take an offense, if any
other nation will endeavor to do all, and to exclude others, which extremity
enforces another; One extremity enforces another.
as we have found by the enterprise of the late new company, for dressing and
dying of all the white clothes in England, which caused other nations to make
clothes of their own by the woolls of other nations. For (as has been noted)
it is contrary to that common intercourse and mutual course of commodities,
whereof some countries are destitute, and other countries do abound, thereby
supplying the barrenness of the one, with the superfluities of the other,
maintaining a friendly correspondence and familiarity.

The Impresa, Sceptra foeuent. Arts, may better be attributed to commonweals
or popular governments, than unto Monarchies or Kingdoms, because experience
proves the same unto us, by the great quantities made of manufactures, and
dispersed by way of trade; as we have noted by the laudable engrossing of them
at Norenbourgh.

To vndersell commodities is very dangerous.
The striving of making commodities, and to vndersel one another, are dangerous,
and prejudicial to both parties: for by their contention they hinder each
other, and bring commodities to be less esteemed. This is a matter of great
consequence for statesmen to be taken into their serious consideration; for as
the Spaniard says, Quien todo lo quiere, todo lo pierde.

Setting the fishing trade apart (which causes all sorts of poor to employ
their hands, though they want legs) let me recommend unto you, Bogging of Peate
and Turfe.
the making and bogging of Peate and Turfe, the rather for the want of wood,
which England is like to have in progress of time, the woods being much
decayed and inhaunced in price, and Peate and Turfe may be made serviceable to
supply the uses of wood, and set an infinite number of people on work. As the
making of Iron, and all other mettalls made in fowndries and fineries: the
boiling of mineralls, as Allome, Salt-peeter, Copperas, and the like, the
burning of Brickes and Tyles, the making of Glass, the refining of Sugar;
besides the common use for brewing, baking, dying, and other professions, and
every man consuming wood more or less in his house, besides sea-coale.

Commodities by the bogging of Turfe.
And here I cannot omit to say something of the commodities which will redound
hereby to the commonwealth, namely all boggie wast grounds and quagmires
(unprofitable and dangerous for feeding of cattle and dear) shall be converted
to profitable uses, in the making of Peate and Turfe, and (in time) with the
often dreaning of the waters, turn to firm ground and fish ponds. It will
prevent the often drowning of dear and cattle, venturing for some grass
growing in bogs and quagmires, whereby also many of them become rotten by
drinking the unwholesome red waters thereof. All the said grounds will be safer
and pleasing for hunting and planting of woods, and the fish ponds may be
planted round about with Osiers and hazelwood for hoopes, with diverse other
profitable means, as in Holland: for the said turffe is to be made according
to their manner, avoiding the sulphurous smell, by two years drying of them
before their use, and then they will in time be used by most men which now
find the said turffe to be offensive, as they did in the beginning when
sea-coales came to be used in private men's houses: if this had been followed,
the bogging of turffe had been already pleasing and profitable.

Next let us somewhat digress from Manufacture, to Apifacture, Apifacture of
Honey and Wax.
(and with Solomon the wise, send the sluggard to imitate the painful and
laborious Bees) for the increase of Honey and Wax in England, Scotland and
Ireland, and others of his Majesty's dominions: and let man's help succor this
Apifacture, if it may be so called, as follows.

The means to increase Honey and Wax, does properly consist in the preferuation
of Bees, and the making of convenient Skepes or Bee-hyues after a new
invention: Namely, you may make your Skepes either with Straw or Wicker of two
sorts, The Beehyue of two pieces.
and to be of two pieces, to take off at the crown or near the midst of the
Hyue; that when they have gathered and filled up their house, and that the
room is scant within then take away the upper half and clap on a board, or
the bottom, or head of a pitch Barrel or tar Barrel, or the like having
pitch on it, casting Malt meal, or Bean meal upon the same; and then daube
it well with clay about the skirts, and setting on with your clay mixed with
some salt; and when you have thus done, then raise it up below with so many
wreythes, as you took above for the gelding of your Hyues before, which is
very needful to make the greater plenty and increase. For making your Skepes
in this manner, the Honey may be taken at all times; but especially, when you
do perceive by the lifting up of your Skepes, that your Bees are well provided
for the Winters provision, and that there be plenty of food yet to gather,
then cappe them. Take a strong wire, make it flat, and cut your combs in two,
and then have a parchment in readiness to follow the wire, to keep a sunder
the wax from cleaving, laying on your board with pitch and meal, as aforesaid.
This to be done in Summer.

Preservation of Bees for the Climate of Great Britain, etc.
1 IN Mareh your Bees do begin to breed, and then they begin to sit, let
them at that time be served twice every week, because:

2 In April your Bees begin to hatch, serve them in hard and rugged weather,
whereby they are hindered to be abroad.

3 In May is your Be coming forth, look to serve them until Midmay.

4 In June are your Bees in their strength for casting, and then there is great
plenty of Flowers and Dewes for them to feed upon.

5 In July they are full of Honey, therefore cap your first swarms, and take up
the rest for Honey that you mean to take up for that year, and cap as follows.

6 In August is the most breed of Bees past, and you may cappe likewise those
you mean to keep over the year; I mean your old Stocks, for then they may
forbear it.

7 In September the gathering of Bees is past; stop close, and if there be any
that is not cappable, leave them and stop close with clay and salt, and daube
below with Cow dung as the manner is.

8 In October begin to look whether robbers have spoiled any or not; if it
be so that they have, take away your Bees as in Honey time, and set up your
Skepes with the combs whole, to be used as hereafter follows.

9 In November stop up all holes, let none pass in or out; but if they
prove weak, then take away your Bees from the combs, and keep them for the
second and third swarms after.

10 In December house your Bees, if they stand cold: and in the North, house
all.

11 In January turn up your Bees, and throw in wort, and water and honey twice
or thrice, but let your water be warm.

12 In February set forth and serve all them that stand in need, with wort
and honey, or honey and water, so it be warm: and then in March look for their
breeding, as is before declared.

No corrupt combs to be left, but the bad are to be taken forth in the Spring
time (being in feeding) and when you have thrown in one pint of warm worte,
and that they are struggling with the clammines of the wort; then may you very
well take from them any thing that does annoy them; which manner of dressing
you may observe for many years during your Skepe, so long as they stand to
work new again.

Necessary observations concerning the Premises.
FRom the midst of April, until the midst of May look diligently to thy
Bees; for then are they near beginning to hatch, and do stand in need of most
help, especially if the Spring be cold, The poison of Bees.
and the wind holding any part of the North or East; whereby the tender buds or
blossoms do perish, and the Bees are driven to the blossom of Apple trees,
which is their utter overthrow and decay.

Helps for weak Bees at all times.
TAke water and honey mixed together made luke warm, and throw it amongst the
combs, to the quantity of a pint at a time: or strong wort new run, or
vnboyled wort also luke warm, and the same two or three times at the most; and
this for the first Swarm.

For the second and third Swarm must be given in their Hiues, to preserve that
which they have gathered: Take Mulce, which is eight times so much water as
honey, boiled to a quart or three pintes; set the same with dishes in their
shepes, laying a few strawes in the dish to keep them from drowning. Wort and
figs boiled will serve also.

The smoke (as it were the Tobacco of Bees) wherein they delight, is Cowes or
Oxen dung, sophisticated with sweet wort; Bees Tobacco.
and the marrow of the Ox or Cow, being well dried: take the Sheep (which is
diseased) and set it in a meal skiffe or riddle, and then kindle a little fire
with your Cowes dung, and set them over the smoke of the fire, and so smoke
them by fits, scarce so long at every time as you can tell ten, and beware
not to use this smoking too often, but as necessity requires and in gentle
manner.

The necessary use of honey and wax, made me to observe the premises, wishing,
That in all Parishes of Great Britain and Ireland, all the Parsons and Vicars
in Country Towns and Villages, were enjoined to keep Bees for their own
benefit, and the general good; which they may do conveniently in the
Churchyards, and other places of their Gardens, and some of their children or
scholars may attend the same.

The multiplying of Bees is easy without destroying them, Equivocal
generation of Bees.
and the creation of them is known to many, proceeding of the corruption of a
Heyfar, the flesh whereof is fit to engender Bees, as the flesh of Horses for
Waspes, or that of man for Lice. And to abbreuiate, I do refer the desirous
Reader hereof to Master Hill his book of Husbandry, where he speaks of
Bees, with the commodity of Honey and Wax, and of their uses and several
profits, collected out of the best learned Writers, as Plinius, Albertus,
Varro, Columella, Palladius, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Cardanus, Guilielmus de
Conchis, Agrippa, and others.

Returning to manufacture, and to conclude this argument, many are the
commodities to be made of Silk, Wool, Linen, Cotton, and other Stuffes; but
vain is the conceit that would command and govern them all. But as we have
declared before, in the Commutation or Barter, and the use of them, lies the
greatest consideration; and in the setting of people on work to avoid
Idleness, the disturber of Commonweals, which causes men to make
Plantations and Discoueries of other Countries, whereof incidently we are now
to handle something, seeing that Merchants have the managing thereof.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Plantations of People, and new Discoueries.
WHen the Commonwealth of the Empire of the Romans grew to be very populous,
and men (idle) would have stirred more commotions: Plantation of Colonies of
people.
Then the Plantation of Colloneys of people in other Countries was most
necessary to be practiced, and means also to set the people on work, or to
employ them in the wars, to govern the quiet^r at home. And at this day in
Rome and many other places in Italy, if a man shall be found to live idle and
want means, offer is made unto him to draw a lot for a sum of money, be it
30 40, 60, or a 100 ducats (as he may be reputed) to have that money, or to
become an Officer in their Galleys, where other malefactors are confined to
serve. Three Impostumes or the world.
For unless the three Impostumes of the world, namely, Wars, Famine, and
Pestilence, do purge that great Body; all Kingdoms and Countries become very
populous, and men can hardly live in quiet, or without danger. Merchants
therefore seeking to discover new countries, are much to be commended and
cherished, and their Customs are to be observed as a Law permanent, which
hitherto have been herein kept unviolated.

The vnfatigable industry to make a complete Plantation in Virginia, and the
Island of Bermudus, Plantation of Virginia and the Bermudus.
(which has been very chargeable) might have been far better, if honest
householders and families of some ability has been induced thereunto by
benefit and profit at the beginning, and mere poor people and vagabonds had
not been admitted but afterward. This inducement should have wrought in their
Idea, an imaginary commonwealth, and ought to have been done in this manner
following.

Make choice of some honest Shoemakers likely to try adventures and to enrich
themselves, know of them how many pair of Shoes they make yearly, whereby
they live and their families, although victuals be dear. Then let them know,
that four or five times so many shall be taken from them, and Leather be
delivered them, if they will go and inhabit in Virginia, where they shall
have houses and lands for themselves and their heirs for ever, and their work
shall be taken from them, and they shall be duly paid, and that a certain
number only shall have this privilege for certain years, and none others to
be admitted, albeit the number of people do increase; whereby they may be sure
of a certain beneficial living. And no doubt they will adventure that little
they have to enrich their means and estate, and persuade their wives and
servants to go with them, who may succeed them upon other good conditions. The
like is to be done with Tailors, Bakers, Brewers, and other handicraftes-men,
and (so conceauing a commonwealth within themselves) will resolve and encourage
many that are of some means to accompany others of smaller means, whereby the
base minded will be brought to be also painful and industrious in time, and
the charge of the undertakers will be less, and more commodious to provide the
voyages with facility.

The like was to be put in practice by the Hollanders, in the Island of saint
Thomas under the line: but the extreamitie of the heat of that Climate did
bring a disorder, and the attempt was given over. It is more like to be
established in other places: for albeit the wars in Europe will diminish the
people, yet most countries are populous.

Politicians although they are much mistaken in the number of parishes of
several kingdoms, yet are they not in the number of the persons or
inhabitants.

France containing by late estimation about 27400 parishes, What people in
France in numbers etc.
esteemed in 44 hundredth thousand families, of five persons to a family (where
in England six persons are accounted to be in a family) is 22 millions of
persons.

England containing 9725 parishes, 52 shires, and 26 cities, is esteemed in 28
hundredth thousand families of six persons, which makes 16 millions, and 800
thousand persons.

Scotland containing above 4000 parishes, is esteemed to have about 1500
thousand persons or families of six persons, is nine millions of persons.

Ireland containing 5500 parishes, was esteemed not to contain the two third
parts of Scotland, which is now much increased.

The province of Flanders (one of the 17 Netherlands) esteemed to contain 140
thousand families, of five persons, is 700 thousand persons, which is more than
the kingdom of Denmark being ten times more spacious.

Now omitting to speak of other countries, Too populous is dangerous in
Monarchies
let us observe that in all popular governments, be it an Aristocracie, or
Democracie, the means to make countries populous is thought reasonable, which
in Monarchies is held to be dangerous. The concourse of people causes the
greater consumpsion of all things, and the revenues are great by Impositions,
and it gives life to traffic and commerce.

The Plantation of Vlster (one of the four Provinces of Ireland) is now very
great, and the means to set the people on work are to be taken in hand, which
may be done by a Corporation of English and Irish Merchants there inhabiting,
and English Merchants in England to vent the superfluities of the commodities
of that kingdom, and to increase the manufacture of many needful commodities
to be made there, the realm affording stuff and materials thereunto
plentiously.

And here I remember a good observation heretofore made touching the kingdom
of Ireland, Why the same was not brought unto perfect obedience to their
sovereign these 400 year^s, but under our most gracious king James? which is
attributed to the mistaking of the place of the plantation of the first
adventurers, that were deceived in their choice; Fit places for plantation to
be considered of.
for they sat down and erected their castles and habitations in the plains
and open countries, where they found most fruitful and profitable lands, and
turned the Irish into the woods and mountains, which, as they were proper
places for Outlawes and Thieves, so were they their natural castles and
fortifications: thither they drove their preys and stealths; the lurked there,
and waited to do evil and mischief; for these places they kept unknown, by
making the ways and entries thereunto impassible; there ^hey kept their
cattle, living by the milk of the cow, without husbandry or tillage; there
they increased and multiplied unto infinite numbers by promiscuous generation
among themselves; there they made their assemblies and conspiracies without
discovery; but they discovered the weakness of the English dwelling in the
open plains, and thereupon made their fallies and retraits with great
advantage. Whereas on the other side, if the English had builded their castles
and towns in those places of fastnes, and had driven the Irish into the
plains and open countries, where they might have had an eye and observation
upon them, the Irish had been easily kept in order, and in short time
reclaimed from their wildness, and would have used tillage, and by dwelling
together in towneships learned mechanical Arts and Sciences. This discourse
may seem strange to the Law of Merchants: but when Merchants undertake
Plantations (as we see they do) no man will hold the same to be impertinent.

The discovery of the Southern countries called Terra Australis.
And for as much as diverse Mathematicians heretofore have according to those
discoueries made their maps, and upon good probability affirmed and set down
Terra Australis incognita, whereof discovery has been made in the year 1615
by Ferdinand de Quir, a Spanish Captain; let us consider, that many other
countries may also be found out: albeit this contains a fifth part of the
world, for (as he says to Philip the third, late king of Spain) the length
thereof is as great as all Europe, and Asia the less, unto the sea of Bachu,
Persia, and all the Isles, as well of the Ocean, as of the Mediterranean sea,
taking England and Island into this account; seated within Zona Torrida, and a
great thereof reaches unto the Equinoctial Circle, elevated unto them to 90
degrees above the Horizon, and in some places a little less.

There they live without Kings or Laws, and know no neighborhood either of
Turks or Moors; and according to this manner of life (although they want Iron
and Guns) they have not need of any thing. But they abound with many excellent
commodities, whereof the Spaniards will in time make use, especially if they be
more assured of Gold there to be found, as in part they are of Silver and
Pearls; for these are the three most precious darlings that lie and are
cherrished in the bosom of Nature. To say nothing of Spices and Drugs whereof
they abound, with many other commodities, by the said Captain declared.

And here we may not omit to remember, That it is not enough to discover
countries, and leave them without plantation, or at the least neglect the use
of them* if Merchants do give over their enterprises: But it is the part of
Princes to see plantations made, True causes to make plantations.
for two maine reasons, That is, to convert the inhabitants or neighbors to
Christianity; and, to the end such temporal blessings may be enjoyed as the
land and seas do afford: most requisite to be done in the Island of New
found-land, bordering upon the coast of America, from which it is divided by
the sea, so far distant as England is from the nearest part of France, and
lies between 46 and 53 degrees North latitude, as Captain Richard Whitbourne
has very well declared in his discovery, affirming the spaciousness thereof
to be almost as Ireland: and therein he has noted many disorderly courses
committed by some Traders and fishing Merchants, in setting forth to the
New Foundland, which are worthy the observation and knowledge of Merchants,
because that the like errors may not be committed in other voyages, which by
this good advice may be prevented or reformed.

It is well known, says he, Worthy considerations for plantation for the
fishing trade.
That they which adventure to New Foundland a fishing, begin to dress and
provide their ships ready commonly in the months of December, January, and
February, and are ready to set forth at sea in those voyages near the end of
February, being commonly the fowlest time in the year: and thus they do,
striving to be there first in a Harbor to obtain the name of Admiral that
year, and so to have the chiefest place to make their fish on, where they may
do it with greatest ease, and have the choice of diverse necessaries in the
Harbors. And thus by their hasting thither, oftentimes there comes not only
dangers to themselves, but also great mischief and losses to many others which
arrive there after the first, as it may by that which follows truly appear.

For by the hasting forth (as now they use) they greatly endanger themselves,
being many times beaten with rough and stormy winds, and oftentimes they are
thereby forced to return back with great loss both of men's lives and goods,
as it is well known; so that to get the superiority to arrive there first in
an Harbor, they will bear such an ouerprest sail, and in so desperate a
manner, as there are no true understanding seamen that use the like to any
place of the world. For albeit when the fogs are thick, and the nights dark,
that sometimes they cannot discern the length of three ships in the way before
them, and the ye often threatening much peril unto them; yet on runs the
ship amain so fast as po^sibly she may, when commonly most part of the
company are fast a sleep, even with extreme hazard of their lives. Thus many
times both ships and men have been cast away suddenly, to the utter undoing of
many adventurers and families.

And also this untimely setting forth consumes a great quantity of victuals
that might be saved to better purpose, and it forces them to carry and
recarrie many more men in every ship (every voyage) than they need, if they
once take a fitter course.

Such Stages and Houses that the first arriuers find standing in any Harbors
(wherein men set diverse necessaries, and also salt their fish) some men have
used to pull down, or taken their pleasures of them: by which unfit disorders
of some first arriuers there yearly, those which arrive after them are
sometimes twenty days and more, to provide boords and timber to fit their
boats for fishing, and other necessary rooms to salt and dry their fish on,
whereby much time is lost, and victuals consumed to no purpose, and thereby
also the voyages of the after-commers are often greatly hindered and prolonged,
to the general hurt of the commonwealth: and the mariners themselves which
commit those great abuses are thereby also much wronged, as themselves may
conceive.

Wherefore if such as henceforth adventure to that country, take some better
course in that trade of fishing than heretofore they have used, they shall find
the greater safety of their adventures, and much good thereby. Penefits
arising by reformation about fishing.
For whereas heretofore they have used to make ready their ships to sail in
those voyages in such unseasonable time of the year, whereby they often
receive such hindrances and losses, they need not then to go in the said
voyage until the five and twentieth day of March, which is a fit time of the
year to put forth to sea from our coast to that country, the Winter storms
beginning then to cease: and then any such ship which carries in her thirty
men in every voyage, may well leave six men there behind them, or more all the
Winter season, until the ships return to them again; and these six men's
victuals will be saved and serve to better use, and thereby also cut off that
months setting forth in those voyages so soon in the year as now men use to
do; and then the victuals for that month (which is so vainly, and with such
great danger consumed) may well maintain those men which are left in the
country all the Winter season, till the ships return to them again, with a
very small addition to it.

Couenient privileges to be granted.
And it may be thought reasonable, That men which will undertake to settle
people in New Foundland, shall have this privilege, that in case he leave
there a fifth person (of such as he carries thither in his fishing voyage) to
inhabit, whereby those men so left might keep a certain place continually
for their fishing and drying of it, whenever their Ship arriueth thither:
then would all such as leave people there, build strong and necessary rooms
for all purposes, and then in some necessary houses and rooms they may put
their fish when it is dried, which fish now stands after such time it is
dried, until it is shipped (which is commonly above two months) in great
heaps packt up uncovered in all the heat and rain that falls, whereby great
abundance of good fish is spoiled yearly, and cast away for want of such
necessary rooms. And for the want of such fit houses some men's voyages have
been overthrown; and then a mean place to make fish on will be made more
commodious than the best place is now, that men so dangerously and desperately
run for every year.

And thus every man's fishing Pinnaces may be preserved in such perfect
readiness, against his Ship shall yearly arrive there again; which Pinnaces
are now often lost, and sometimes torn in pieces by the first arriuers there,
very disorderly: and if such Pinnaces, Stages, and Houses may be maintained
and kept in such readiness yearly, it would be the most pleasant, profitable
and commodious trade of fishing that is at this time in any part of the world.

For then every Ships company might fall to fishing the very next or second
day after their arrival, whereas now it is twenty days before they are
fitted; and then such Ships should not need so soon to have away from England
by one month, at the least men's lives might be thereby much the better saved,
less victuals wasted, and many dangers prevented. And so every Ship in
every such voyage, may gain quickly one hundred pounds, that usually carry
in her but twenty men more than now they do, by leaving of four men there of
twenty. And as the proportion before named holds, for leaving six men in
New Foundland of thirty; so the allowing of men to be made proportionably fro
every Ship, An easy way for plantation.
will soon raise many people to be settled in every harbor where our Nation
uses to fish, and in other harbors in other Countries in like manner, some
Ships by this course may then quickly gain two hundred pound, and some 300 ll
and more, according to their greatness, more than they do yearly now; and
those men so left will manure land for Corn, saw boords, and fit timber to be
transported from thence, and search out for diverse commodities in the country,
which as yet lie undiscovered: and by such means the land will be in little
time fitly peopled with diverse poor handycrafts men, that may be so
commodiously carried thither with their wives: and that no man else should
appropriate to himself any such certain place, and commodity for his fishing
voyage, except he will in such manner settle a fifth part of his company
there to live. And then such adventurers thither will carefully provide yearly
for such as they leave there, not only for bread and victuals, but likewise
for all necessary tools fit for any kind of husbandry. And the charge
thereof will yearly repay it self with the benefit of their labors that
shall be so left there, with great advantage.

By this means will shipping increase, men be employed, and two voyages may be
made yearly, and much victual saved: for the allowance of victual to
maintain six men to carry them and recarrie them outward and homewards, is
six Hogsheads of Beer, and six hundred weight of Bread, besides Beef and
other provision: which men as they sail too and fro (as now they use) do
little good or any service at all, but pester the Ship in which they are, with
their Bread, Beer, Water, Wood, Victual, Fish, Chests, and diverse other
trumperies that every such six men do cumber the Ship withal yearly from
thence, which men are to be accounted unnecessary persons returning yearly
from thence.

But being left in the country in manner aforesaid, the places of these Ships
which by them should have been preoccupied, may be filled up yearly with good
fish, and many beneficial commodities; and the men so left in the country,
will not only be free from the perils of the Seas by not returning yearly, but
will live there very pleasantly, and (if they be industrious people) gain
twice as much in the absence of the Ships, more than twelve men shall be able
to benefit their masters that are kept upon Farms, The fertility of
New Foundland.
and that yearly, for the fertility of the soil is admirable, replenished
with several wholesome fruits, herbs, flowers, and corn, yielding great
increase; the store of Dear, of Land-fowle and Water-fowle is rare and of
great consequence; as also many sorts of timber there growing, with great hope
of Mines, and making of Iron and Pitch.

Furs may be procured not only by taking the beasts, but by settling (in
process of time) a traffic with the Savages for their Furs of Beuer,
Martins, Seal, Otters, and many other things. Finally, the rocks and
mountains are good for seeds, roots, and vines; and the Climate is temperate,
seeing the greatest part thereof lies above three degrees nearer to the South
than any part of England does; which has also moved me to write the said
commendations of New Foundland, by the affirmation made unto me by the said
Captain, to the end all Merchants might further this intended Plantation,
whereby the fishing trade may be much advanced, and the fish it self become
more vendible, which shall be prepared by the inhabitants of the persons to be
left there. For it is well approved by all those that yearly fish for
Herrings, Salt boiled to pre^erue fish.
Cod and Ling, that Salt orderly boiled, does much better preserve fish, and
keeps more delightfuller in taste, and better for man's body, than that fish
which is preserved with any other kind of Salt, as in now done for want of
convenient houses to boil and prepare the same, yet may be done by the said
Plantation. But this being a matter depending thereupon, I am now to entreat
of the fishing trade more in particular in the next Chapter, ending thus
concerning Plantations, whereby Princes dominions are enlarged for their honor
and benefit also.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Fishing Trade.
SOme men may wonder, and not without just cause, That this most important
argument of Fishing has not been handled hitherto. But in truth my meaning
was not to have touched the same, because of the neglect of it in the Kingdoms
of Great Britain, and Ireland, where the same is abandoned unto other
Nations: howbeit upon better consideration (calling many things to mind) I
found that it would have been a great error to pass over the same with
silence, and to omit the Customs of Merchants therein, as the fundamental
cause of the traffic and trade of diverse Nations, whose great wealth has
proceeded from the same. For it has pleased almighty God, to extend his
blessings herein, more than in all other things created: For when God said to
the earth, Let it bring forth Trees and Plants: Genesis 1.2 c. 22 ^
and for Fowls created out of the Sea, Let the Foul fly in the open
firmament: and of Cattle, Let the earth bring forth the living thing according
to his kind: He says of Fishes in a peculiar phrase, Let the waters bring
forth in abundance, every thing that has life; and willed them to increase
and multiply and to fill the waters, which was the cause that the Prophet
David, being ravished with admiration, says; O Lord, how manifold are thy
works, Psalm. 104.
in wisdom have thou made them all, and the earth is full of thy riches: so
is the great and wide sea also, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both
small and great beasts. The earth is full, but in the sea are innumerable. Of
the beasts of the earth the learned have observed, Scaliger, Bodin, Ca^dan, and
others.
That there be scarce 120 several kinds, and not much more of the fowl^s of
the air: but no man can reckon the several kinds of the creatures of the
seas, or can number any one kind. This ought to stir us up to establish the
fishing trade, especially for Herrings, Cod, and Ling, which took his
original from us: for it is not much above one hundredth years since that one
Violet Stephens, Original of the fishing Trade.
and other discontented Fishmongers departed the Realm of England, and went
into Holland, to the Town of Enchusen, where they procured the inhabitants to
fish for them in the seas, streams, and dominions of Great Britain: which
inhabitants (upon the decease of the said Englishmen) took the whole trade to
themselves, which afterward has been disperced into many other Towns,
whereby the trade is so increased, that Holland and Zealand have above 2000
Busses or Fishing Ships, which do make ordinarily two or three voyages
yearly, albeit their country is remote from our Seas; and England, Scotland
and Ireland have the fishing (as it were) at their doors. And such is the
blessing of almighty God, that above six hundredth thousand Lasts of fish are
taken yearly in the dominions of the King of Great Britain only, ommitting
the quantity of fish taken in Denmark Seas, Russia, New Foundland, Spain,
Italy, and other dominions.

And here I am to make a little abridgement of the collection of one Tobias
Gentleman, a Fisherman, who made a Treatise touching the same, entitled
Englands way to win wealth, and to employ Ships and Mariners, That fishing is
lawful, ^easible, and profitable.
proouing first, The lawfulness of it by his Majesty's subjects of Great
Britain; secondly, How feasible it is for them by the exemplarie actions of
other Nations, that have nothing growing in their own land for that use, but
are constrained to fetch all out of other countries; lastly, That the trade of
fishing is profitable, by the success seen with the Hollanders being rich and
opulent, notwithstanding their long wars, and which themselves do call to be
their chiefest trade and principal Gold-mine, whereby many thousands of their
people of trades and occupations are set on work, maintained, and do prosper,
Proclamation of the States of the united Provinces.
as may be seen by their Proclamation annexed to the said Treatise.

Hereupon he shows, That about Mid-may they make ready their Busses, and
Fisher-fleetes, and by the first of June (their Style) they are seen to sail
out of the Mase, Texell, and the Vly, a thousand sail together for to catch
Herrings in the North Seas, being most of them ships of 120, or 100 tons, and
the other 60 tons or thereabouts; having in them 24 men, and some 16, and 20
in every ship; and they continue their course North-west and by North, until
they arrive at the Isle of Shotland, The situation of Shotland Isle.
which is the dominion of the king of great Britain, and the greatest Island
of the Orcades, and lies in the height of 60 degrees of Northerly latitude.
And by the 14 day of June (which is by their law a time limited to lay their
nets) they begin to fish, and do never leave the skoales of herrings, but come
along amongst them, following 500 miles in length, lading their ships twice or
thrice before they come to Yarmouth, sending them away by the Merchants ships
that send them victuals, barrels, and more salt and nets if they need any;
which ships are called Yagers, that is to say Hunters or Doggerbotes, and these
ships docarry them, and sell them in the East countries, some to Riga and
Revel, some to the Narue, Russia, Places to sell Herrings.
Stockholme, and all Poland, Prussia, Pomerland, Lituania, Statin, Lubek, and
Denmark; returning Hemp, Flax, Cordage, Cables, Iron, Corn, Soapashes, Wax,
Wainscot, Clapboord, Pitch, Tar, Deals, Hoopes, and other commodities, with
plenty of money; and for France, they send for Bordeaux, Rochell, Nantes,
Morliaix, and San Mallous, Cane in Normandy, Roan, Paris, Amiens, and all
Picardie, and Calice, with the Low Countries of the Archduke of Austria,
reconciled with the king of Spain, returning other commodities and moneys for
the prouenue of their fish. For by their laws all those* Herrings that they do
catch in Yarnmouth seas, from Bartholomew tide until saint Andrew (which are
rope-sicke) they may not bring home into Holland; and these they sell unto
Yarnmouth men for ready money.

Their fishing for Cod and Lings continually is done with smaller ships (of 40
tun burden) called Pinkes and Welboats, and all this is done with so good order
and provision, Good orders in the fishing trade.
that by night and day all is supplied, and fish taken off instantly. And of
mine own knowledge, they are so constant in their fishing, that they are
contented to have one good year for fishing in seven years. All fishermen are
provided for, and their wives at home cannot want; for in their care, they may
be compared to Joseph in Egypt, providing for the time of famine.

They have besides all this (continually in the season) another fleet of
Fishermen (called Flyboats) which are in number some two hundredth or more, and
these be at the North-East of Shotland, having small boats with them, called
Cobles, and by means of them Lings are taken in great abundance, which they
do not barrel, but splet and salt them in the ships bulk. To say nothing of
fresh Fish, and other pretty observations of the said Tobias Gentleman, let us
note the commodious fisher-townes of England, as Colchester, Harwich, Orford,
Alborough, Donwich, Commodious towns for fishing in England.
Walderswike, Sold, Yarnmouth, Blackney, Wels, Linne, Boston, and Hull by him
named; whereunto I may add Scarborough, Hartlepole, Whitby, Marske, Stockton,
Gysborough, New Castle, and other places in the North. And it is to be much
admired, that this trade has been so long neglected: howbeit some are of
opinion, That it would hinder much to the trade of cloth, if fishing were
entertained, especially in the return of our commodities, and that the
privileges granted to diverse societies (as the Merchants Adventurers,
East-land, The first objection to the fishing trade.
and Russia Merchants) should be infringed thereby, and so both trades cannot
subsist together.

Others say, The second objection.
That other nations are more painful and industrious than we can be, and have
more skill in the cutting, packing, and salting of the Fish; and which is more,
they can send away their Fish (and pay no freight) by their ships going
(otherwise) empty for corn and salt; for they pay but four shillings for a
Last, which is drinking money. And the Hamborgers having heretofore imitated the
Hollanders to fish with Buffes for Herrings after 5 or 6 years trial, have
been compelled to abandon the fishing, and suffer their ships to lie by the
rotting, because they found a loss, and that the Hollander did out sell them,
having the better and cheaper fish; and the like would befall England, as some
have already found.

To these two objections, The one being Domesticke, and the other Foreign, I
make this answer; which is referred to the judicious reader.

Answer to the first.
That the trade of cloth should be hindered by the fishing trade, is not
probable, being a distinct commodity which serves for the belly, and the
other for the back, and both are sold by us and other nations in one more
places, and we both make our returns homewards by commodities, money and
exchange for moneys by Bills, so that the difference of the persons makes not
any sollid argument: for if we return commodities for commodities, and they
return moneys, we may return both the one and the other, having means more
than sufficient to maintain the trades, considering the great sums of money
delivered at interest, although the money in specie be wanting, which by these
means would be supplied. And concerning the privileges granted to several
societies, it will be easy to reconcile them by good orders to be observed in
the fishing trade; wherein all men of several companies may participate, and
the general good is always to be preferred before the particular, and that
society which is against the common good ought not to be admitted or
continued for any private respect.

Answer.
To the second objection, That other nations are more painful and industrious,
and have more skill in the cutting, salting, and packing of fish, and pay no
freight for the transportation of their fish: Suppose it be so as you say for
the present, yet you cannot deny but that the same may be amended by use and
custom, seeing our people can endure all climates and hardiness as well as
others, and by good orders and gain may be allured to undertake labor and
pains, when want breeds industry, and gain is like a second life.

The managing to make fish more merchantable and vendible, may be learned of
others in time, and for wages men will be procured that shall teach others; we
know that the proverb is true, omne principium grave. The like may be said
touching the freight of shipping, which in process of time may be had in the
same manner, if the coast Towns of England were made and appropriated to be
the Warehouses or Megasins for the gross commodities of those countries where
the Herrings are sold: For the situation of England is far more commodious
to send away the said commodities for all other countries, and in diverse places
at all times and seasons of the year, when their countries are frozen for many
months together, or want many times wind and weather to perform their
voyages, which was the cause that the Hamburgers could not conveniently
continue their fishing trade, as is alleged.

Having answered sufficiently (as I hope) the two maine objections against the
fishing trade, let us now examine the benefit of it, by the calculation made by
the said gentleman. Now to show truly, says he, what the charge of a Busse
will be, with all her furniture, as Masts, The whole charge of a Busse.
Sails, Anchors, Cables, and with all her fishers implements and appurtenances
at the first provided all new, is a great charge, she being between 30 and 40
Last, will cost five hundredth pounds, and may continue 20 years with small
cost and reparations: but the ye^rely slite and wear of her tackle and
war-ropes, with her nets, will cost 80 pounds.

And the whole charge for the keeping of her at sea, for the whole Summer, or
three voyages, for the filling of a hundred Last of caske or barrels.

100 Last of barrels -- 72 ll For salt 4 months -- 88 ll Beer 4 months -- 42
ll For bread 4 months -- 21 ll Bacon and butter -- 18 ll For pease and billets
-- 6 ll For men's wages 4 months -- 88 ll 335 ll
A hundred Last of barrels filled and sold at 10 pounds the Last, is 1000 ll 0 0

The charge deducted 335 0 0 Gotten 665 0 0

Here (says he) plainly appears, The profit of one Busse.
that there is gotten 665 pounds in one Summer; whereof, if that you do deduct
one hundredth pounds for the wearing of the ship, and the reparations of her
nets against the next Summer, yet still there is 565 ll remaining for clear
gains by one b^sse in one year, rating the Herrings sold but at ten pound the
Last, which is commonly sold by the Hollanders at Danske for fifteen and
twenty pounds.

The charge of a Pinke of eighteen or twenty Last, Of ^ Pinke.
making fifteen Last of barrel fish, he accounted accordingly to cost 260 ll,
and the provision and wages to be for two months 57 ll, and the Last sold at
14 ll 8 ss, or 24 ss the barrel, there is resting gain for fifteen Last of
barrel fish, 158 ll.

He has noted moreover, that besides the Hollanders, the French men of
Picardie have also a hundredth sail of fishermen only for Herrings, on his
majesty's seas every year in the Summer season, and they be almost like unto
Busses, but they have not any gagers to come unto them: but they do lade
themselves, and return home twice every year, and find great profit by their
making of two voyages yearly.

And hereupon he concludes with an exhortation to all noble, Exhortation for
the fishing trade.
worshipful, and wealthy subjects, to put too their aduenturing and helping
hands for the speedy launching and floating forward of this great good
commonwealth business, for the strengthening of his majesty's dominions with
two principal pillars, which is, with plenty of coin brought in for fish and
Herrings from foreign nations, and also for the increasing of mariners against
all foreign invasions, and for the bettering of trades, and setting of
thousands of poor and idle people on work.

But now returning to the lawfulness of fishing, wherein we are to observe,
That albeit hunting, hawking, and fishing be of one kind, as subject to a like
law and liberty, because that any wild beast, foul or fish being once taken
by any man, commonly it becomes his own proper by the law of nations; yet
there is a difference between these three: and although hunting and hawking be
almost every where lawful, yet fishing is forbidden in other men's ponds,
stankes, and lakes, as comparable unto theft.

Statute Laws of England, Scotland, and Ireland, concerning fishing.
THe several Statutes of these kingdoms have established good orders
concerning the fishing trade, whereunto relation may be had, containing in
substance, the ordinances to build ships and boats, and appointing of certain
times for fishing, and then only to fish, upon pains not only of forfeitures
and fines, but death also, according to the manner of offense made, and
contempt of those decrees and ordinances.

Prohibiting (for the increase of fishes) the making, setting and using of
crows, yarres, dams, ditches, tramlets, parkings, dyking in any waters where
the sea ebbes and flows: and albeit some are permitted to lay nets, and to
make wears, yet must he keep the Saturdaies slop, that is, to lift the same
from Saturday in the afternoon until Monday. And he is to make each space or
mesh of his nets three inches wide, except for taking of Smelts, and other fish
which will never be bigger, and the same is to be set upon the water, that the
midstreame may have the space of six foot wide, upon pain of five pounds.

The privileges of fishers.
And concerning the fishers safety and privileges, it is provided, That all
ships sailing to catch Herrings, shall (during the taking of them) let down
sail after daylight is past, and let their anchor fall, and keep watch with
lantern and light until the day light appear, least otherwise the poor
fishers should be ouerrunne, and their nets broken.

It is also provided, That fishers shall not hurt one another, and the measure
of their nets are limited in length and breadth: and also that no drag-net be
set before March, nor upon deeper water than fourteen fathom.

Also that they shall be honest and true, and not lie to their neighbors,
being asked concerning the length and depth of their ropes or tewes when they
are in driving; neither shall they wittingly and willingly suffer their tewes
to flit and run over one another, under pain of ten pounds for every offense.

That till Sun set on Sunday, no man lay nor hale nets or great lines, or
exercise any labor, upon pain as aforesaid.

And for the encouraging of Fishers in the North and West Isles of Scotland,
there is a Statute prohibiting all exactions to be taken of them, but only
the Kings Custom, upon pain to be found to be a manifest oppressor. And
Concerning Fishers and dealers or traffickers with fishes, it is also ordained,
That not only all fish slain and taken near to the coast of Scotland be
brought to the market places, Laws of Scotland for fishes taken.
where the taker dwells, or the nearest place thereunto, but also all the
fishes taken in the North, or West Isles, or Forts, to be brought directly to
the towns where the Fishers dwell, to the end the country be first served
and the fish offered to the market places, from which none may carry them to
pack and pile, but only between the hours of eleven and two in the
afternoon, upon pain of forfeiture of the same. In which markets it is
lawful to the Provost and Bailifes to set down prices, and to compel the
Packer and Piler to sell again for the need of the subjects; which being done,
they may transport the remainder where they will: and if they commit any
contempt, then their fish is forfeited, two parts to the King, and the third to
the Magistrate.

In like manner concerning the barrelling of fishes, Barrelling of fishes.
it is ordained that the measures prescribed of old shall be kept, namely,
each barrel of Herrings, or of white fish, to be of twelve gallons; and the
barrel of Salmon of fourteen gallons, according to the measure of Hamborough,
upon pain of forfeiture, and five pounds to be levied from the Cooper; and
therefore hoop yrons to be made in each town for the trial and gaging
thereof. All which concerns the Law of Merchants, and the particular
knowledge of every one of them.

Let us now remember in this place the fishing of New Foundland, The fishing
of New Foundland.
and the Whale fishing, with the profit and commodities of the same, as they
are observed by the aforesaid Captain Whitebourne, who affirmed upon his own
knowledge, That the French Biscaine* and Portugals, can make two voyages
yearly to New Foundland, with 400 sail of ships, and get thereby an
incredible wealth; besides English ships, whereof he says, That in the year
1615, there was 250 ^ayle of ships great and small, the burdens and tunnage he
esteemed to be one with another 15000 tons, at 60 tunn^s, and 20 men and
boys to every one; therein were employed above 5000 persons, by whose means
there was taken by every ship, above six score thousand fish, and five tons
of Train oil, which being brought into England, France, or Spain, and sold
after the rate of four pounds for every thousand of fish, and 120 fishes to
the hundred, will amount to six score thousand pounds, which is not above one
penny a fish. The Train oil amounting to 1250 tons, at 12 ll, amounted to
15000 pounds; so the total sale was 135 thousand pounds, omitting to reckon
the ouerprices, which were made and gotten by the sale thereof in foreign
countries. The consideration (that all this and the like wealth procured by
fishing, is done by the labor and industry of men, with exportation of money
and exchange, or other commodities to be commuted or bartred for them) is
worthy the observation, Necessary points to be considered touching the fishing
trade.
and by the trade of it moneys are to be had plentiously, and all foreign
commodities also, to the enriching of Commonweals, where many numbers of
people are set on work and relieved; as Bakers, Brewers, Coopers,
Shipwreights, and Carpenters, Smiths, Netmakers, Ropemakers, Linemakers,
Hookemakers, Pullymakers, and many other trades to make the necessary provision
of the fishing voyages, wherein the lame, impotent, and all poor people may
have employment for their maintenance.

Greene-land fishing
Touching the Whale fishing, especially in Greene-land, for the making of Train
oil; the same is much augmented by several Nations, since that the Biscayners
and Bayoneses have taught the manner of taking of them, casting harping yrons
into their unwieldy great bodies, when they are on shore for want of water,
otherwise very nimble in the Seas: For they have a great feel^ng, and their
flesh is viscosite or oily, The manner of Whale ketching.
apt for swimming, and as soon as the harping yrons have stricken them, they
run toward the bottom above a hundredth fathomes deep, as the lines (which
are fastened thereunto) will give way. So that sometimes it will be above two
hours before they come up (being ordinarily above twenty foot in length) and
then being hoysed up to the stern of the ship, the flesh is pared off, and
swimmeth upon the seas, and the rumpe of the body is letten fall again, and
then the flesh boiled, and pressed, makes Train oil, which yields good
benefit, if the voyage be not ouercharged by expenses. For prevention whereof,
let us note the proportion for the victualling of fifty men for eight months,
A proportion for victualling of ships.
of a ship of 200 tons, and cast Merchants or Fishermens account accordingly,
for the greater or lesser number of persons, or the longer or shorter time of
victualling, more or less also in price, 50 men are 12 Messes, being four to
a mess by distribution.

ll. ss. d. Biscuit a pound per day to a man, is 120 quintals, at 9 ss 47 16 0
Syder and Beer, one hogshead a day, with cask iron bound, 12 tuns at 50 ss,
and 48 tuns caske, at 20 ss, more 25 tuns of Beer, at 50 ss, and 35 tuns
Syder, at 50 ss is 180 0 0 Water caske new, and iron bound 10 tuns, at 45 ss 22
10 0 Beef two pound per day, is 100 ll weight for three days a week, is in
all 96 days, and 8500 and 3 quarters, at 26 ss the hundredth, is 111 0 0 Caske
iron bound, 500 weight in a Hogshead repacked, and Salt 12 0 0 6000
Newfoundland fish, at 4 ll 10 ss with the caske, is 27 0 0 24 Bushels of Pease,
20 bushels of Oat-meale, two barrells of Oil 14 12 0 Butter six firkins,
Cheese ll a day, Aquauite and vinegar 60 0 0 Candels, Platters, Surgeons
Chests, etc. 65 0 0 539 18 0 which said sum of 539 ll 18 0, amounts unto 28
ss a man for every month, besides the ships freight and men's wages, which may
be agreed upon diversely. And commonly the Company is permitted to have one
third, the Owners of the ship one third, and the Merchant or Merchandise one
third: all other incident charges to be borne accordingly between them,
whereof Indentures of covenants are made.

Having reserved to entreat of this important business of Fishing, in the end
of this first Part of Lex Mercatoria, concerning commodities, which are
compared to the Body of Traffic, together with the Sea-lawes observed therein,
with all other Customs of Commerce: Let us now proceed to the Second Part,
touching Moneys, being the Soul of Traffic, which in times past were noted
to be raised by the fishing trade (now so much neglected) appertaining to the
Kingdoms of Great Britain, and Ireland, as has been showed even by
original Antiquity. The correspondence and long intercourse between the
Society of Goldsmiths and Fishmongers alludeth hereunto: For Saint Dunstane
the Bishop, The allusion of Saint Dunstone.
termed to be the Patron of the Company of Goldsmiths, had no other Elixer or
Philosophers stone, than the Gold and Silver, which by the benefit of fishing
was obtained, whereby the Kingdoms Plate and Bullion was procured. For the
advancement of which fishing Trade, he did advise, That three fishing days
ought to be kept every week, which caused also more abstinence: and hence the
Proverb came, That Saint Dunstane took the Devil by the nose with his
pinchers. Which Custom, if it were better observed with us, would prove very
beneficial to the State and Commonwealth. *

THE SECOND PART OF LEX MERCATORIA, or the Ancient Law-Merchant; concerning
Moneys, compared to the Soul of TRAFFIC and COMMERCE.
We have already compared the three Simples or Essential parts of Traffic,
namely Commodities, Money, and Exchange of Moneys, unto the Body, Soul, and
Spirit: And in our first p^rt of Lex Mercatoria, treated of Commodities, as the
Body of Traffic, with the dependances thereupon, as being properly the
causes of Commerce, with their Effects, Adi^ncts, and Accidents: which method
we are now also to observe in this second part of the Law-Merchant, concerning
Moneys, compared to the Soul, which infuseth life unto Traffic by the means
of Eq^alitie and Equity, preventing advantage between Buyers and Sellers. And
because Money is made of Metals, whereof we have not spoken in the Chapter of
the Commodities whereby Commerce is maintained, here we are to begin with the
very original of Metals and Mines, as a matter worthy the knowledge of
Merchants and others.

First we find, That when commodities began much to abound in the world, all
manner of metal, as Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead and Iron grew into
greater estimation, as being fit and more dureable for preservation; and so the
purest and finest Metal most esteemed. At which time the riches of men was
notwithstanding described to consist of cattle, commodities, and other
moueables: Pecu^ia, non Pecu^a^ia.
and there was a commutation of commodities, as has been declared, which was
found to be very cumbersome, The beginning of Moneys.
and did require much carriage of wares up and down from one country unto
another; by reason whereof Money was devised to be coined, to be the rule and
square whereby all other things should receive estimation and price, and (as it
were) become a measure whereby the price of all things might be set, Publica
Mensura.
to maintain a certain euenhood or equality in buying and selling; and the
same to have his standing valuation only by public authority, to the end
that all things might equally pass by trade from one man to another.

Denomination of Money.
Concerning the denomination of Money, it is derived of Moneta, which proceeds
a monendo, to show you the name of the Prince; vel nummi nota, and consequently
the price of the piece of coin by his authority made, stamped, and valued.

Pecus fuit Pecuniae fundamentum.
Pecunia is derived a Pecude, of Cattle, as of Sheep and Oxen, the figure
whereof was coined thereupon, Nummus, a numerando, vel nomine, of the name of
the Prince stamped upon it; and also so called, Carolus Guildren or Floren; so
a Ducat of Ducatus, the name of a Duke. And in times past being called
Stipendium, was a stipe and pendo, before the same was coined with a stamp,
but made and weighed, being silver, as the Cicle of the Hebrews.

The Romans in times past used copper Moneys, calling their Exchequer Aerarium.
So in Germany it is called Argentarium of the Silver, and being kept at
Strasbourgh, that city is called Argentina. The first Silver moneys coined was
the 484 year of the foundation of Rome; And the coins of Gold was sixty and
two years after that. Since the foundation of Rome until the year of 1622 are
2373 years.

Sterling Standerd altered in the valuation.
The sterling Standard of the Moneys of England, was first coined at a place, so
called, by Osbright a Saxon King of England, above seu^n hundredth years since;
at which time an ounce of Silver was divided into twenty pieces, and so
esteemed twenty pence (as who should say) so many pieces, which so continued
by denomination until King Henry the sixth his time, who in regard of the
inhancing of Moneys in foreign parts) valued the same at thirty pence. But
there was more pieces made out of the said ounce, and the former pieces went
for three half pence until the time of King Edward the fourth, and then they
were current for two pence, and the said King did value the said ounce at
forty pence; until King Henry the eight did value the ounce of sterling
Silver at forty and five pence, and so continued until King Edward the sixth,
and until Queen Elizabeth her time, and then the very same piece, or the
same penie was valued at three pence, and so did all three pences (coined by
the said Queen) weigh but a penny weight, and the six pence two penny
weight, and accordingly the shilling and other pieces, which made the ounce to
be valued at sixty pence or five shillings; whereof twelve ounces make the
pound Troy weight, The pound Troy divided by weig^t.
which remained divided nevertheless in twenty penny weight; for the said
ounce being still the same in weight did retain the same name, and four and
twenty grains also for every penny weight; and according to the said pound
weight is the finesse of Silver also divided. For if it be all pure Silver
without any Copper, called Allay, it is justly called twelve ounces fine,
because that pound weighed twelve ounces, and has no mixture in it; The pound
of Silver divided in finesse.
and so every ounce is consequently twenty penny weight in finesse, and
every penny weight is twenty and four grains in finesse.

The finesse of Gold is twenty and four Carrats, Finesse of Gold.
and every Carrat is four grains in finesse, and was heretofore accounted
two Carrats for an ounce of Silver. And all moneys of Gold and Silver do
participate of this finesse, according to their substance, which makes their
standards thereafter, whereby the sterling standard contains eleven ounces
and two penie weight of fine Silver, and eighteen penny weight of Copper: and
our Angel Gold holds twenty and three Carrats, three grains and one half,
and half a grain of Allay, as shall be hereafter more amply declared,
together with the proportion between Gold and Silver.

Let us now speak of the properties of Moneys in the course of Traffic, and
make the effects thereof apparent. The propertie^ of Moneys.


The first property is, That plenty of Money makes generally all things
dear, and scarcity of Money makes generally things good cheap: whereas
particularly commodities are also dear or good cheap, according to plenty or
scarcity of the commodities themselves, and the use of them. Money then (as
the Blood in the body) contains the Soul which infuseth life; for if Money
be wanting, Traffic does decrease, although commodities be abundant and good
cheap: and on the contrary, if Moneys be plentiful, Commerce increases,
although commodities be scarce, and the price thereof is thereby more advanced.
Nay by Money a trade is made for the employment of it both at home and abroad:
For those countries (where things are good cheap) are destitute of trade, and
want Moneys; and although things for the belly are good cheap, there is less
benefit to be made by Merchants.

According to plenty or scarcity of Money then, generally commodities become
dear or good cheap, and so it came to pass of late years, that every thing
is inhaunced in price by the abundance of Bullion and Moneys (which came from
the West Indies into Europe) which like unto an Ocean, The Ocean of Moneys.
has divided her course into seuerell branches through all countries, and the
Money it self being altered by valuation as aforesaid, caused the measure to
be made lesser, whereby the number did increase to make up the tale, being
augmented by denomination from twenty to sixty, or of those latter years
from forty to sixty.

So that plenty of Money concurring herein made every thing deerer, and
especially the foreign commodities, as we have noted before, which caused some
men to be of opinion, That our Moneys should be more inhaunced (as it were)
striving therein to exceed other nations, wherein they are far from the
mark, Alteration of M^ney alters the price of things.
for if that were done, not only all the foreign commodities would be deerer,
but also our home commodities, howbeit only in name. The like would happen, if
Moneys were (by allay of Copper) imbased, as experience has proved in the time
of King Henry the eight, and of latter years in the realm of Ireland: so
that we see the Proverb to be true, That the unknown disease puts out the
Physicians eye. The plenty of Money required, must be, not with a
consideration that we have (or may seem to have) more moneys than in times
past, but according to the present great quantity and abundance of Moneys
now found in all countries, which (in effect) have more proportionable part
thereof than England has. Neither was Money more plentiful when an ounce of
Silver was valued but twenty pence, (judging of Money as we do of Commodities,
either dear or good cheap according to the price) for Money must be still the
measure, and ouerruleth the course of Commodities: Howbeit Exchange of Moneys,
is predominant over Commodities and Moneys, as shall be declared hereafter.

The second property of Money (proceeding from the operation of Usury devised
thereupon, The operation of Money by the rate of Usury.
whereby the measure is engrossed and also falsified) is, That the rate of
Usury is become the measure whereby all men trade, purchase, build, plant, or
any other ways bargain; and consequently all things depending upon the
premises, are ruled and governed accordingly, as in the Chapter of Usury
Politic is declared, to the decrease of Traffic and Trade.

Moneys will have substanall value really
The last property of Money is, to have an internal value in substance,
whereupon the Exchanges of Money are grounded; in so much that in countries
where the transportation of Money is prohibited, and Merchants Strangers and
others are commanded to make their returns in Commodities, or by Exchange; if
the Moneys be base, or of Copper, the value in Exchange will be made
accordingly, to the utter overthrow of all Commerce; for Moneys will have
substantial value.

Thus much for an Introduction concerning Moneys. Now let us begin from the
original of Mettalls, and so descend to the Particulars and Accidents. *

CHAP. I. Of the Essence or Existence of Mettalls.
ALl Philosophers (by the light of Nature and long observation) have determined
that the sperme, or seed of all things, created of the four Elements, does in
a secret manner lowre within the two Elements of Water and Earth; and that
Nature does continually work to produce perfect things, but is hindered
therein by accidental causes, which are the begetters of corruption and
imperfection of all things, whereby we have variety of things which are
delectable to the spirit of man. Herein they observe the operation of the Sun
and Moon, Vegitatiue, Sensitive, and Rational.
and the other Planets and Stars in the generation of all things, which
either have a Being or Existence as the Elements have; or a Being and Life, as
vegitable Trees or Plants, or a Being, Life and Sense, as Beasts, Birds, and
other living creatures; or a Being, Life, Sense and Reason, as Man has, and
all reasonable creatures: which knowledge and wisdom (no doubt) the holy
Prophet Moses did learn amongst the Egyptians. Acts 7.22.
But had these Philosophers read the Genesis.
Book of Moses of Creation and Generation, they would not have ascribed the
guiding and conducting of all natural things to the two Leaders, namely the
Stars, and Nature. Hence it proceeds, that amongst vegitable things (which
have a Being and Life) they reckon all mettalls, which have their beginning
from Sulphur and Mercury, Tanquam ex patre and matre; which meeting and
concurring together in the veins of the earth, do engender through the heat
and quality of the Climate by an assiduall concoction, according to the nature
of the earth wherein they meet, which (being either good and pure, or stinking
and corrupt) produces the diversity of the mettalls of Gold, Silver, Copper,
Tin, Lead, and Iron, in their several natures: and hereupon they have assigned
them under their distinct Planets, to be beneuolent or maleuolent; The Planets
of Metalls
as Lead under Saturn, Tin under Jupiter, Iron under Mars, Gold under Sol,
Copper under Venus, Quickesiluer under Mercury, and Silver under Luna. So
Mercury or Quickesiluer is one of the seven metals, which being volatile and
by his volubilitie running with every one, is in nature as they are, either
good or evil. And howsoever they have placed Tin under the beneuolent Planet
Jupiter; experience has proved unto us, that Tin is the poison of all
mettalls. Sulphur is excluded, which they say is of two colors, being white
and corrupt in the Silver, which therefore falls away; but red and pure in
the Gold, and therefore permanent.

These diversities of mettalls being come to pass by accidental causes, is
the cause that Art (being Natures Ape by imitation) has endeavored to perform
that wherein Nature was hindered. Whereupon Aristotle says, Facilius est
distruere Accidentale, quam Essentiale, So that the Accidental being
destroyed, the Essential remains, which should be pure. But this cannot be
done without proiection of the Elixar or Quintescense upon mettalls. Hence
proceeds the study of all the Philosophers to make their miraculous Stone,
which (I confess) is very pleasant, and full of expectation, when a man sees
the true and perfect transmutation of mettalls; Transmutation of mettalls.
Lead and Iron into Copper; the Ore of Lead into Quickesiluer or Mercury, with
a small charge to a very great profit, as it has been made for me, until the
make^ of it dyed within three months after he had made almost four thousand
pound weight, as good as any natural Mercury could be, and that in six
weeks time.

To return to our Philosophers, concerning the Essence of Mettalls, they have
been transcendend in the knowledge thereof, for they show the generation of
Sulphur and Mercury in this manner.

The Essence of Sulphur and Mercury.
The exhalations of the earth being cold and dry, and the vapors of the seas
being cold and moist, according to their natures, ascending and meeting in a
due proportion and equality, and falling upon some hilly or mountainous
country, where the influence of Sun and Moon have a continual operation;
are the cause of generation, or properly from it is Sulphur and Mercury
ingendered, penetrating into the earth where there are veins of water, and
there they congeale into Gold or Silver, or into the Ores of Silver, Copper,
and all other mettalls, participating or holding always some little mixture of
the best; or being in nature better or worse according to the said accidental
causes. So that they do attribute the generation to the operation of the
influences of the Sun and Moon: where the Book of God shows us the
creation of all things in heaven and earth, and the furniture thereof; The
earth (being the dry part of the Globe of the world) did appear and was made
the third day, containing in it the Ores of all mettalls and mineralls; whereas
the Sun and Moon were created afterward on the fourth day, whose operation
was incident to the things created, but not before. In like manner (say they)
are Diamonds, Rubies, and other precious stones engendered, according to the
purity of the matter, and the portionable participation of every element
therein: Exhalations, and vapors, etc.
if the exhalations (being subtle) do superabound and prevail over the
vapors, then hereof is Sulphur engendered; and if this subtle exhalation be
mixed with the moist vapors, and wants decoction, as being in a very cold
place, it becomes Mercury or Quickesiluer, which can endure no heat or fire
at all.

The first metal mentioned in the holy Scripture, is Gold, which was found in
the river Pisson, Genesis 2.11. Gold grows.
running through the Garden of Eden into the country of Hauila, where Gold
does grow, and this was in the East: according to which observation, all the
veins of Mines run from East toward West, with the course of the Sun, as
shall be more declared.

To this argument appertains the Philosophical study of Prima Materia,
Prima Materia, vel Mercurius Philosophorum.
to be found out by experience for the great work of Lapis Philosophorum, by
the operation of the Sun, in seven years; the practice whereof was made
about forty years since, by a Germane Doctor of Physic, at Dansicke in the
East countries (as I have been informed by a friend of mine, who was also a
Physician) and was done in this manner, according to the bigness of the body
of the Sun, The body of the Sun, is 166 times bigger than the whole Globe.
being 166 times bigger than the whole Globe of the earth and water, making the
circumference of the world; whereupon he took 166 vialls or glasses, wherein
he did put, of all the Ores of mettalls and mineralls, and other things which
had any affinity with mineralls, and some of them mixed, and calcined all of
them, and closing or nipping up all the glasses by fire, he did expose them to
the Sun in an eminent place, for and during the said time of seven years, and
found thereby (as it was reported) Prima Materia, which was reduced to seven
glasses; howsoever, it was certain that he grew very rich, and bought above
one hundredth houses in that City before he died: which was an occasion, that
my friend (imitating him) did likewise place not far from London seven
glasses, with calcined mettalls made of the ores of mettalls and minerals, upon
a house top against the back of a chimney, where the repercussion of the Sun
did work upon them, which was admirable to behold from six month to six
months, not only by the sublimation of colors very variable and Celestial,
but also of the rare alteration of the Stuff, being sometimes liquid, another
time dry, or part of it moist; ascending and descending, very strange to
behold, as my self have seen diverse times from year to year: some had been
there two, three, four, five, and one almost seven years, the color whereof
had been yellow, then white in the superficies, then as black as pitch,
afterward dark red, with Stars of Gold in the upper part of the glass, and
at last of the color of Oranges or Lemons, and the substance almost dry. Many
were the questions between him and me, but he was confident that there was
the Elixar, howbeit very doubtful that he should never enjoy the same, and it
came so to pass, for after a long sickness he died of a burning Ague, and a
Gentleman gave a sum of money to his wife for that glass, whereof I have not
heard any thing these seven years. In this glass he would show me the
working of this quintescence, according to the description of Ripley, Lapis
Philosophorum.
who he was assured had the Lapis, and so had Friar Bacon, and Norton of
Bristoll. Kelley had by his saying, some little part to make proiection, but it
was not of his own making. The charge to make it, was little or nothing to
speak of, and might be done in seven months, if a man did begin it upon the
right day. The twelve operations of Ripley, he declared unto me, were but six,
and then it rests; for (says he) all Philosophers have darkened the study
of this blessed work, which God has revealed to a few humble and charitable
men. Ripleys twelve gates.
Calcination, Dissolution, and Separation, are but one; and so is Conjunction
and Putrefaction; likewise Cibation and Fermentation; then follows
Congelation; and at last Multiplication and Proiection, which are also but one.
For mine own part, seeing that no man can be perfect in any one Science, I
hold it not amiss for a man to have knowledge in most or in all things. For by
this study of Alcumie, men may attain to many good experiments of
distillations Chimicall, Fire-workes, and other excellent observations in
Nature, which being far from Merchants profession, I hope shall not give
offense to the Reader of this Book, seeing it is but in one Chapter
(accidentally) handled. Neither will I crave pardon of the Muses (as it were)
insinuating to the world to have a far greater knowledge in these trialls or
conclusions; but to satisfy the curiosity of some, that it may be (with a
gaping mouth) expect to understand somewhat of the Stuff put into these
glasses, I may say (as I was informed) That in some was the calcined ore of
Sil^er and Gold, in some other Mercury calcined, and Sulphur in some other:
Arsenike for the Air, Sulphur for the Fire, Mercury for Water, and Seacoale
for the Earth; were put altogether, as the four Elements. In some other glass
was Vitrioll and Orpiment, and what more I do not now remember, concluding,
That where Nature gives ability, Art gives facility.

I have read all the Books of Paracelsus, that I could find hitherto, and in
his Book De Transmutatione Rerum, I do find to this purpose the observations
following, concurring with my friends opinion concerning Ripleys 12 Divisions,
comprised into six, and the seventh is the matter it self and the labor or
working rests, wherewith I do end this Chapter, and proceed to the surer
ground of the Mines of Mettalls.

Omne quod in Fri^ore soluitur, continet Aerum Spiritum salis, quem in
sublimatione vel distillatione, acquirit and assumit.

Omne quod in Frigore vel Aere soluitur, iterum calore, Ignis coagulatur in
Puluerem vel Lapidem. Solutio vero Caloris, soluit omnia pingua and omnia
Sulphurea: Et quicquid calor ignis soluit: hoc coagulat, Frigus in mass^m, and
quicquid calor coagulat, hoc soluit rursus Aeer and Frigor.

Gradus ad Transmutationem sunt septem.
Calcinatio, Sublimatio, Solutio, Putrifactio, Distillatio, Coagulatio and
Tintura.

Subgradus Calcinationis, compraehenduntur, Reuerberatio and Cementatio.

Sub Sublimatione, Exaltio, Eleuatio, and Fixatio.

Sub Solutione, Dissolutio and Resolutio.

Sub Putrifactione, Digestio, and Circulatio, qui transmutat colores, separat
purum ab impuro; purum superius, impurum inferius.

Sub Distillatione, Ascensio, Lauatio and Fixatio.

Coagulatio est duplex; vna Aeris, altera Ignis.

Tintura tingit totum corpus, and est fermentum massae, farinaceoe and panis.

Secundum est, Quod calidius liquescunt, eo celerius tintura transcurrit, sicut
fermentum penetrat, and totam massam acetositate inficit etc.

Sequitur Mortificatio and Fixatio sulphuris, and in Libro de Resuscitatione
Rerum: Reductio metallorum in mercurium vivum.

CHAP. II. Of Mines Royal.
THe Mines called Royal are only of Gold, Silver, and Copper, of which three
mettalls Princes made choice to make their moneys of, simple or mixed, as shall
be hereafter declared. But for as much as Silver is found in the lead Mines,
and that the silver Mines have their Ores mixed with hard lead also, it
happens many times, that there are great questions about these Mines, when
Princes will claim their interest in some lead Mines, because they are rich in
silver: as of late years between Queen Elizabeth and the Earl of
Northumberland, as you may read in Master Plowdens Commentary of Book Cases,
where it was adjudged, That if a Mine be found richer in silver of more value
within the Ore, than of lead, all charges of the working of both mettalls being
fully paid; the Prince may claim the same to be a Mine Royal: wherein must be
had great aduisement, some Ore in one place being richer than other Ore in
another place of the same Mine, whereof we may handle in his proper place of
other Mines.

Beginning therefore with Gold, the most precious metal, Gold Mines.
let us observe, That the same is found in hills, rivers, and in the earth, but
not mixed in Ore, as Silver, Copper, and other metals. That which is found in
the rivers is the finest, as containing less corruption, and is all of one
goodness otherwise. There is Mayden-gold, so called because it was never in the
fire. Naturally all Gold has a little Silver in it, as also some Copper, and
coming out of the ground it is soft, and does harden by the air. Such Gold as
has no need to be refined, but may be used according to his finesse in works,
or to make money, is called Aurum obrison: such was the Gold which sir Beuis
Bulmer knight brought out of Scotland, found in the sands of the rivers near
unto the Gold Mines of Crayford-moore, Crayford Moore in Scotland.
which was above twenty and two Carrats fine, and better than the French
crown Gold. I saw some eighteen ounces of it which was in big grains, some
like pease found out by the Sheepheards, by whose means that place has been
discovered in the latter time of queen Elizabeth. Some other Gold has been
found out also in Scotland within a white sparre, wherein it grows, near the
superficies of the earth, and runs into small veyns like pins, fit to be
refined by quicksiluer from the sparre, because it is as pure Gold as any found
in Africa or Barbary, which we call Angel Gold, holding but half a grain of
Allay. I have seen the like sparre of Gold which was found in England in
county of Lincoln at Brickell hill near Spilsbie by Lincoln. Brickell Hill
in England.


But neither this place or any other are looked into for the reasons hereafter
declared, being right worthy to be regarded with a curious eye, and an
industrious understanding; and consequently many other, whereof this Monarchy
of Great Britain is rarely blessed, and especially in Scotland where much
barren ground is: for God in his divine wisdom does counteruaile the said
barrenness of the soil, with the riches contained within the bowels of the
earth, as in fertile ground with the Corn and fruits growing upon the
superficies thereof: An observation to find out any Mines.
which may serve us for an observation, especially where we find rivers of
water running about the hilly places in dales, which the Spaniards did so much
regard in the West Indies, seeking after Mines, that in all places where they
found not the same, they presently gave over the search after them.

Gold does come out of many countries, as out of the mountains in Bohemia,
rivers of Pannonia in Hungary, out of the kingdom of Sweaden; but it is all
exhausted. There was wont to come out of Spain of the rivers and mountains
above twenty thousand pound weight yearly, which is worth above eight
hundredth thousand pounds sterling; but there is none found now. In the Island
of Santo Domingo all is exhausted also; and so will it be in Perou, and the
West Indies: it is more like to continue in Africa and Barbary, because of the
climate, Cold climates have abounded with Gold.
albeit that Hungary in Pannonia lies under fifty and three degrees, and is
a colder climate than ours, and nevertheless has yielded abundance of Gold
since the year 1527, until the year 1568, as by a certain record appears,
which was kept thereof. The King of Spain was wont to have from Castle de Mina
(upon the coast of Africa) above eighty thousand pounds worth every year,
which is now almost decreased to the one half: and all along that coast, the
Hollanders and the French Merchants complain of the small quantity now
extant, or there to be found, to make return of their commodities (Hides and
Wax not being so plentiful as in times past.) Turkey is hindered also to have
such quantity of Gold as in times past came out of Persia unto them.

Of the Gold of Ophir, Gold of Ophir
we hear but a discourse of old observation; That Solomon had the Gold from
that place to beautify the temple of Jerusalem, and his palace. This is held
to be the Island of Sumatra or Taprobana, being the greatest of all the
Oriental Islands, The situation of Sumatra.
and is divided from the firm land of Malacca by a strait and dangerous sea,
by reason of many Islands and Cliffes that are within it. It lies under nine
degrees on the South Side of the Line, which no doubt is very rich of Mines of
Gold, Silver, and Copper. The Hollanders did touch there in their first voyage
they made for the East Indies, where the Inhabitants make excellent Brass
Pieces, and are opulent in all things. But I never have yet heard of any Gold
brought from thence, neither from the Island of Iaua Mayor, which lies right
over the Island of Sumatra, on the South Side of the Aequinoctiall Line, which
may be, hereafter shall appear; for out of all doubt, men's treasures are
hourded up in Gold in many places. It is recorded that David left in Gold
(besides Silver) 180 millions sterling, according to the calculation: But
Solomon left behind him but one tenth part of that, namely eighteen millions.

Silver is always found more abundantly, Silver Mines.
because of the number of Silver Mines found in diverse countries, and for that
all Lead Mines contain some Silver, especially the poor Lead Mines, the Ore
whereof yields but small quantity of Lead, either 25 or 30 ll weight in one
hundredth of Ore; and that Silver contains likewise some Gold, found sometimes
to be three or four ounces in one hundredth pound weight, besides the Copper in
the Silver Ore.

The Silver Mines of Hungary and Bohemia, as also Sweaden, are drawn out, but
do continue in Germany (in many places) which have properly the Silver Ore of
the Celestial color with fine grains glistring like little stairs. In
Saxony the Mines are richer: so are the Mines of the Seuerstall Mountains,
Seuerstall Silver Mines.
which have continually yielded six or eight thousand pound weight a year, but
are wrought upon at leisure.

The Mines in the West Indies are the principal in quantity of poor Ore,
where many hands make light work. For the King of Spain does divide his
grounds by proportion to his subjects to work for him, allowing them money and
Quicke-siluer to separate the silver from the drossie substance, and they must
pay him again in Silver after a certain rate; and were it not for the
quantity of Ore, the Silver would be very little. For I am assured by the
information of one Don Rodrigo de Cordua of the house of Toledo, a knight who
had lived in the West Indies many years, and attended the great Mine of
Potosie, Potosie Mine of Silver in the West Indies.
That the Ore thereof contains not above 1 ounce of Silver in a hundredth: the
like was affirmed by a Portugal called Antonio Diaz, who had dwelt thirty and
two years in the said West Indies. I was interpreter between our sovereign
Lord James, and the said Antonio, when he made the trial of the Silver Ore of
Scotland in the Tower of London with Quicksilver before the King, and did
inform his Majesty hereof; as also that the best Silver Mine that ever was
wrought upon in the West Indies, did not contain above eight ounces in one
hundredth weight. The Mines in Germany are far richer: Charles Mine in Misnia.
some contain thirty and forty ounces, that is to say, by the mixed metal
Ore, taking of it disquisitiuely, or here and there: for the blossom of Silver
appearing in some branches is fine or better than sterling, which therefore
does not proportionate the goodness of the Mine; whereof more hereafter. Now
leaving the Mines of the Earl of Mansfield, and others that are in Tiroll and
other places of Germany, we must not forget to give the due commendation unto
the noble Duke of Brownswicke, that to his loss did maintain the Silver Mine
of the Wild-man, Mines in the Duke of Browneswikes country.
or Savage, in his country, only to set the people on work, being indeed but
a Mine of course Lead, whereof he had great store, heretofore, six hundredth
weight of Ore making but one hundredth of Lead, and that hundredth of Lead has
but 1 ounce of Silver, whereof his Dollers are made; expressing the same by the
Inscription (which may very well be assumed by many, for their Posie) Alijs
inseruiendo consumor, As the candle does, which by consumption of it self,
does give light unto others. The stamp of those Dollers is a savage man,
holding a burning candle in one hand, and the trunk of a tree in the other
hand, and the Emperors Arms on the other side.

Silver Mines of Great Britain.
I cannot therefore without grief discourse of the Silver Mines of this
Monarchy of Great Britain, and heartily lament to see them lie dead and
buried in oblivion, because I have heretofore sought to advance the working of
them: for it is now about fourteen years since I caused diverse workmen to
come out of Saxony, Brownswike and other places in Germany at my great
charges, to the number of seventeen persons, some for the Silver Mines in the
Bishopric of Duresme, Richmondshire
others for the Lead Mines in Richmondshire in the county of York, some for
the Allome works there also, and some for the making of Steel in Wales,
wherein the noble Lord Eure deceased, and certain London Merchants had
undertaken to proceed with me. The action being applauded by a great personage
then in authority, and now deceased, who promised all the favor that he could
do: but he had some other private designs herein, as he had also in the Silver
Ore of Scotland, whereof we are now to entreat: in so much, that the actions
of these two Lords were like unto Phaetons horses, for all was set into a
combustion, and the poor men went begging homewards, to our exceeding great
loss of the benefits in expectation, our Mines being richer than those of the
West Indies, whereof I have made (and caused to be made) many trialls, of above
twenty several sorts of Silver Ores. The two Mines of Muggleswike and Wardall
at Duresme contain six and eight ounces of silver in the hundredth, which
being fallen in, Silver Mines at Duresme.
may with a reasonable charge be brought in working, according to the
information which I took of the inhabitants there, at which time I did intend
to go further into Lancashire to Slaithborne Mine, Slaithborne Mine in
Lancashire.
holding above four ounces of silver in the hundredth: but being in the Winter
time, and the weather very foul I was diuerted, not without discontent,
because it is the country where my ancestors and parents were borne.

The Silver Mine at Combmartin in Cornwall, Combmartin in Cornwall.
holds ten ounces in the hundredth, where Sir Beuis Bulmer did work for a
time, which is deep and overflowed with water; but there are diverse branches
of that Mine running many miles off spread into the earth, and within these two
years some Ore was sent me from Barnestaple of a branch of that Mine, Mines of
silver by Barnestaple
lying within one foot and a half of the superficies, which upon diverse
trialls of one pound weight at once, holds by computation above ten ounces of
Silver, but little Lead; for every pound did produce above two penny weight in
Silver, and is not difficult in the melting. The party in whose ground it is
found will not have it touched nor meddled with, fearing his grounds shall be
spoiled, and the Mine taken from him, which is known above half a mile of one
foot broad. Howsoever I thought good to remember this for our posterity, for
there may come a time that industrious men shall be more regarded.

It were also injurious, Silver Mines of Scotland.
if I should not remember the Silver Mines of Scotland, especially that Mine
which lies in the grounds of Sir Thomas Hamilton Knight, Lord Advocate of
Scotland, within eighteen miles of Edenborough toward the sea side,
discovered in the year 1607, by means of a Collier, as I am informed. In the
report of the goodness of this Mine has been very great diversity,
according as they found the Ore of several veins, as we have noted before,
for the blossom of Silver Ore, A singular good observation.
or the small veins cannot give true direction of the richness of the Mine,
which is the cause that the Spaniards in the West Indies, having found any
vein of a Mine, they will pursue the same toward the East and seek to find
out (as it were) the Trunk or Body of the Tree, which they call Beta, saying
Es menester siempre buscar la Beta de la mina, We must always seek after the
body of the Mine; which may be sometimes three or four foot broad, when the
veins are like an arm or finger: and according to the trial made thereof
they give their judgment, not by the trial of the subtle assay, but by some
good quantity, and increasing their said trialls by some additements fit for
the nature of the metal Ore, as they judge the same to be. For all diseases
cannot be cured with one remedy in all persons, although the disease be alike;
so may it be said of those that make trialls of the Ores of mettalls, for some
trialls did report 80 pound of Silver in one hundredth weight, others 60 ll, 40
ll, 35 ll, and 20 ll, and then it fell into ounces, which was more reasonable
and natural, as I informed then some Privy Councellor, Trial of one tun of
Ore by Sir Beuis Bulmer.
and the said Sir Beuis Bulmer, whereupon it pleased his Majesty, and the
Lords of the Right honorable Privy Council, to appoint ten Tons of the
said Silver Ore to be brought into the Tower of London, whereof one Tun of
twenty hundredth weight was indifferently taken and calcined or grinded
together, and thereunto were two Tuns of Lead added and commixed, and
afterward molten by a continual fire and hand-blast of four men, according
as I have noted in writing. And there was a cake of silver remaining weighing
17 ounces, and the extraction out of the Lead was some four or five ounces
more; so that it was reported to be 22 ounces in the hundredth weight of Ore,
but the charge was great.

There was also another trial made by William Beale, with a far lesser
quantity of Lead, and roasting the Ore; and by Master Broad and others, as
Master Russell, who refined the same with the flag of Lead; others by Lead Ore
to save charges, and they all found above 22 ounces of silver in the hundredth
weight of Ore. And so did Sir Richard Martin Knight, Master worker of his
Majesty's Mint, lately deceased, who delivered unto me at times 20 pound
weight of the said Ore, grinded, shaddered and washed, which I did send beyond
the seas unto an expert Mint-master, and withal a particular of the manner of
trialls which every man had made here; as also of the trial made by the
Portugal with Quickesiluer, who found 23 or 24 ounces; his answer was, That
upon his first trial he found 42 ounces, and of the other less, and that the
ore was easy to be wrought (but not by the means that all those men had used)
and with little charges; and that the manner to refine with Quickesiluer, was
good for poor Mines of two or three ounces, where the Ore had little or no
Lead; Color of the Ore of Scotland.
and that the commixture of the Mine was very brittle, and Belmettall, and so
did all the other Refiners affirm. For the said Ore does look between white
and blew for the most part, and is like the Bell metal found in good
quantity about Bristoll, which is used to make some kind of Alkemie beyond the
seas, and this must be allaied to qualify the brittlenesse with some
mineral, of all which I have made a record in my Book of Collections.

Great quantity of Silver Ore.
In the month of August 1608, there came two ships before the Tower of London
from Scotland, laden with some 400 barrels of this silver Ore, in weight some
hundredth tuns lading, which were there landed and delivered unto the Lord
Knyuet, Warden of the Kings Mint, whereof 20 tons was taken promiscuously and
grinded, and afterward also distributed unto diverse Refiners and others, and
the trial of master Broad was best, who found 28 ounces in the hundredth of
Ore. Of this quantity Sir Richard Martin had three tuns, whereof some was sent
to my friend beyond the seas: Interim, these trialls and conclusions so
differing brought the said Ore (together with other proceedings) into some
disgrace, whereupon (according unto commission given me) I made an offer to
buy the 80 tons remaining in the Tower, to a great personage, to give it for
24 pound the tun, to be transported to my friend into Holland paying ready
money: time was taken to give me an answer, and then difficulty was made, for
that treasure was not to be exported, unless by returning the quantity of
silver by weight; hereupon conclusion was made to bring in so much Bullion of
silver or royalls of plate. But when all came to all, with running up and
down, and further offering to deal for greater quantities, and to take it in
Scotland I was put off with this consideration, That it was a dishonor to
England, not to have men of as good experience as any were beyond the seas,
whereby the Kings loss was 2000 ll; for his Highness gave the same afterward
unto James Achinson his Grauer of the Mint heretofore, who brought the same to
nothing, being unskillful of the refining of it. And thus are good matters
marred in the handling, Good matters marred in the handling.
and works brought at a stay or hindered, as I have before set down. There
are many rich Mines in Scotland, if we compare them to the West India Mines;
and in Wales, Plus Pencer que dire.
where the Lead Mines are poor, they contain the more silver of 1, two and
three ounces in the hundredth of the Ore, which will not yield above 40 or 44 ll
weight of Lead, and the Ore of the Mine which holds three ounces, contains
but 25 pound of Lead. The Mines most known are those in Cardiganshire in
Wales, where master Hugh Middleton of London Goldsmiths, has bestowed very
great charges, as he did in bringing the water-workes to the City of London;
so he brings now silver to the Tower to be minted: the Ore being four
ounces in the hundredth, or 80 ounces in the tun, and the less in Lead; for the
richer the Ore is in Lead, the poorer it is in silver. So one hundredth of the
best Ore of Lead will make near 70 ll of Lead, and holds but 1/^ ounce of
silver, not worth the charges of refining, as we shall declare.

The Lead Mines in Ireland, do contain more silver than these Mines of
Darbieshire, and Somersetshire, called Peake and Mendisse Lead.

The Saxons, which were procured to come into England, had no more, no not so
much experience as our refiners of London, for by saving of Lead, they found
lesser quantity of silver, and so all was given over.

The third sort of Mines Royal, are the Copper Mines, Copper Mines
which are found also in diverse Countries, which are not so plentiful in
Hungary (where the best is) as in times past; but are very abundant in
Sweaden, howbeit that it is very mean and inferior in goodness. There are
also Copper Mines in Germany, and the Duke of Brunswickes country: as also
certain natural Copperas waters, wherein they cast from time to time great
quantity of old Iron, which within six weeks or two months does transmute
into Copper. Natural water of Copperas.
England has diverse Copper Mines: at Keaswike near Scotland are made some
forty tons yearly by certain Germans there inhabiting, it contains some
Gold. Some Mines of Copper Ore are found in Yorkshire: and albeit the charge
of making one tun of Copper be commonly 30 ll, yet if seven tun of Copper
Ore make one tun of Copper, it may yield good benefit; for whereas 22 fires
have been used, it is brought to 12. I have seen excellent Copper Ore of some
Mines in Staffordshire in the hands of master Stonewell, Staffordshire Copper
Mines
which absolutely is the best Ore that ever was found in England, he does
assure me of great store of Ore. It is lamentable that such works should lie
dead for want of undertakers, which indeed are discouraged by the great
charges: In mine opinion the charge of a tun of Copper of this goodness of
Ore will be made for 15 ll. There are also good Copper Mines in the West parts
of England, where I have seen good Ore in diverse places, which must be roasted
to destroy the Antimonie, Arsenicke, and other corruptions which are in it.

The working of copper Ore, by Allome and Copperas water.
A certain Nobleman now deceased, was embarked in those Western Mines, which
were promised to be wrought by imbibition of Allome and Copperas water, and the
Ore after digestion with rainewater, would make of six tuns one of Copper:
hereupon (for 300 ll by him disbursed) he was offered 1800 ll. It pleased his
Lordship to take my advice, and to conclude the bargain; for when I did
calculate the charge of grinding and roasting of the ore, the making of the
great quantity of Allome water and Copperas, the consumption of iron plates
decreasing in weight, with all the tubs and vtensills, the long time of
imbibition, and consequently workemens wages, I found the charge to exceed, and
that the course of ordinary melting was to be preferred: and so experience has
since proved the same, to the great loss of the undertakers. For when works
are clogged with immensiue charges in the beginning, it choketh the benefit
ever after, as we shall presently declare. Seeing that profit is the radical
moisture of such and the like actions, his Majesty has been graciously
pleased, to incorporate a Company of worthy persons, The Compa^ie of Royal
Mines.
for all Royal Mines, by Letters Pattents, and has reserved but one fifteenth
part to himself. But there is none of that Company that does advance any
works, that I can learn. I would to God that the Mines Royal or others, would
prove to be worth ten thousand pounds yearly, and above; whereby his Highness
(according to the ancient Maxim of the Law) might claim his interest as they
say; for it is well known how gracious and bountiful his Majesty is always.

The great wealth of the West Indies would not be so admirable unto us, A
Spanish Million, is 300 thousand pound sterling.
the Report whereof is greater than the Truth; and the Spanish Millions are not
sterling Millions: Nevertheless let us reckon them with the most, which is
three hundredth thousand pound sterling. And when the Fleet of the West Indies,
and Noua Espagna brings eight or nine Millions, it is a great matter. And to
make this apparent, I have here set down the greatest Treasure that ever came
at any one time, which was in the year 1587, as a provision for the great
Armada then preparing: whereunto unto great beneuolences had been gathered, in
regard of the meritorious action, which God from Invincible made Invisible. The
Register of the treasure was (with the most) namely, From Noua Espana and Terra
firm. For the King.
8100 Ingots of Silver. 12 Chests with Gold. 300 thousand Royals of eight. 20
Cases with Pearls. 1 Chest with Emeraulds. 5600 Roues of Cutchenille.
For particular persons. A remembrance of the great^st revenue of the
West Indies.

5 millions Teasted silver. 1500 Marks of Gold of eight ounces. 1500 Marks of
Pearls. 1 Chest Emeraulds.
From Mexico. For the King.
1900 thousand Pesos of Silver. 1100 Marks of Gold.
For particular persons.
2 millions in Silver. 64 thousand Hides. 25 thousand ll Indico.
From Santo Domingo Island,
35 thousand Hides. 900 Chest Sugar of 1000 ll weight. 22 thousand Kintals of
Ginger. 13 thousand Kintals of Logwood. 50 Kintals of Salsaparilla. 48 Kintals
of Caniafistula. 64 Roues of Cottonwooll.



All the Gold and Silver was valued at thirteen millions, and all the
commodities at three millions, whereof the King had twelve millions and one
half De claro: wherewith we conclude this Chapter of the Mines Royal, and are
moved to write also of other Mines and Minerals contrary to our first
intention, but briefly, as follows. (*)

CHAP. III. Of Mines and Mineralls.
THe next in order to be treated of are Tin Mines, which are but few in number
in all countries, Tin Mines.
and in Germany only found somewhat plentiful, but the Tin is blackish and
corrupt: so that our English Tin in Devonshire and Cornwall is the only Tin of
all the World, which contains four ounces of Gold in a thousand, whereof
there is some twelve hundredth thousand made yearly. It has been sold for many
years at an under value: but his majesty has by way of Praeemption advanced
the price thereof, which belongs to the Dukes of Cornwall, and consequently
unto the noble Prince of Wales Charles, son and heir apparent to our
sovereign Lord king James. This Praeemption is letten to ferme to certain
Merchants, and the government of the Staneries, with all the good orders
observed therein, and the coynage of Tin to demonstrate the goodness is
profitable to the kingdom, and deserves great commendation, as is already
noted.

Lead Mines.
Lead Mines are found in all cold countries, especially in Germany in the
dukedom of Brown^wike, but it is black of color, and until it be refined it
is unserviceable, and consequently not vendible. The old Duke had almost made a
wall abo^t the city of the sowes and pigges of Lead, until our Lead became
dear and scant, and that an Antuerpian did teach them how to refine their
Lead in taking away the cobble (which is like unto a knot in a piece of
timber) which made the Lead brittle, and by his means all the Dukes Lead was
sold in Italy, Spain, and other places, in France, and elsewhere.

Scotland and Ireland have many Lead Mines, containing also Silver.

The Lead Mines of England are situated in diverse places of the kingdom, but
most in Darbishire in the hills of Peake, Somersetshire, and Wales.

There is great difference in the Ore, as has been noted. There are also many
Lead Mines in Richmondshire under the county of York, where I went to view
them, anno 1606, about Arkendale, and the new Forest, having prepared a long
Iron boar of eighteen foot long for that purpose, Description of many Lead
Mines in Yorkshire.
and there I did observe within the compass of ten miles, that the situation
of Arkendale i^ betwixt two hills, the one lying North called Windike, and the
other South-West called Moldersey, adjoining unto another hill called Pouncy,
lying West from Moldersey, all belonging unto the King, and by lease unto sir
John Maillorie knight.

There are also adjoining unto it certain other hills where lead Mines are, as
Swailedale, where my lord Wharton has his works, also Readhurst, Cocka, and
Fellind being East from Wyndecke. The Mines of Arkendale have never been
wrought to any purpose. There is but three smelting cottages which do feed upon
the poor people and inhabitants thereabouts, which at their leisure seek for
Lead Ore upon sufferance, and bring the same to the melting places, where they
fell the same for 20 or 24 ss the load, giving to the owners three or four
parts in ten, as they can agree, and one tenth to the Parson or Vicar of the
Parish or Chapel.

A load of Ore with them is as much as four or five horses can conveniently
carry, which by computation is some ten hundredth weight, and is also delivered
by a measure called Load; four of these Loads will make a Fother of Lead of
twenty hundredth, their weight being 120 ll to the hundredth London weight; so
one hundredth of Lead Ore makes but 30 ll of Lead: which comes to pass for
that their manner of melting is by foot-blast and small furnaces with wood and
charcoale, Foolish manner of melting.
casting the Ore of Lead between them in small pieces, and so still augmenting
their melting, which can yield but little, the heat of the fire being choked
with the fuel and dross of the Lead; whereas flame is the greatest mean of
melting of all mettaline Ores, which require furnaces to be made accordingly,
where thirty six or forty hundredth may be molten together, they melting three
or four hundredth.

There is no wood to be had, but within two miles, but sea coal and good peate
is near hand, which may serve better cheap; for they reckon 7 or 8 ss for the
charge of a fother for the melting. The Lead being cast into small Piggs of
somewhat more than one hundredth weight, are brought on horseback through
Richmond to Burroughbridge, being about thirty miles distant, and are conveyed
by water to York for 2 ss the hundredth, and from York to Hull for other two
shillings; so that a Fother of Lead with all charges will not stand in three
pounds: and there is a nearer way by Stockton on the seaside (about twenty
and five miles) which will lessen the said charges.

Now we are come to Iron mines, Iron Mines.
whereof almost all countries in Europe are provided, which do much differ in
goodness, yet may be used according to the several works whereunto it is
employed; as the Sp^nish Iron serving for Blades, and not so good for other
things.

England has great store of Iron Mines, for by computation there are above
eight hundredth furnaces. The melting of it by flaming sea coal or Scots coal,
saves a great deal of charges. There are lately found more Iron Mines in
France, which Iron being made into bars, is transported into Guinea, Binea,
and other parts upon the coasts of Africa, where it has continually been in
great estimation, and now becomes so abundant, that their profit is but
small of those voyages; and so it falls out at this present for the price of
Lead.

The Iron stone in Wales is found to differ from the Steel stone, by means
whereof a Germane made good Steel in bars, Steel stone.
and also Gad Steel. But the patent of sir Baesell Brook for the making of
Steel did hinder the proceedings therein: and Germane Steel is best, until
of late that a Frenchman (showing the imperfection of ordinary Steel) caused
his majesty to make void the said patent, and to grant another for the making
of perfect Steel, surpassing in goodness the Steel of all countries.

So we find, that our Iron is best for the casting of Ordnance, and that the
Sweaden cast Iron Pieces are brittle, and commonly one in seven will not abide
the trial; and of late the broken pieces of ours are made serviceable for Iron
in bars to be cast again.

Quicksiluer Mines.
Mercury or Quicksiluer natural, is not yet found in England, but only in
Germany in very cold places: and within these thirty years there are two
Mines of Q^icksiluer discovered in the West Indies, which is a help to the
quantity which they yearly buy to refine their Silver Mines.

Sulphur Mines, or Brimstone.
Sulphur or Brimstone being found in diverse countries, cannot be better than we
have in some mountains in Wales, from whence I have had diverse sorts of
Sulphur earth or mine very rich. Some there is also in Blackemoore and
Basedale in York^shire; as also many other Minerals which my workmen did show
me, Minerals of diverse sorts.
as Terra sigillata, Oacre red and yellow, Bole Armoniacke, Tera d' Vmbra,
Antimonie, Salniter, Black lead, Vitrioll to be made of Copporas: to say
nothing of such things as are made of Metals, nor of Salt-peeter, which is
plentiful.

Allomes are made o^ stone, slate, and earth
And now I cannot omit to treat of the Allomes, whereof in many countries great
store is made: but the best is at Ciu^ta Vecchia in Italy, called Romish
Allome, made with small charges, out of a kind of stone which yields above
the one half of Allome without using any urine or saltish mixture, as they do
in Germany, where they have both red and white Allome at reasonable rates: so
they have in many places of the Straits at Constantinople, Carthagena, and
other places; Sweaden and Poland are not without it.

In Scotland and Ireland great quantities can be made, had not England
undertaken so much, whereof I have set down the original, progress, and
continuance concerning those works at large, the substance whereof follows
in brief.

Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, did in the sixth year of her reign grant
by Letters Pattents, unto one Cornelius de Vos, the sole making of Copperas and
Allomes within the Realm of England, which was assigned by him to James Lord
Mountioy, and being renewed for twenty one years, was confirmed unto him by
an Act of Parliament, by virtue whereof one master Lane, his workemaster, made
great quantity of Copperas in Dorsetshire, and the Isle of Purbeke, and some
Allome and Copperas was then sold at 30 ll the tun, now under three pounds.

Afterward about the year 1604, one master Atherton began to practice the
making of Allomes in Yorkshire, about Gisborough, with whom one master
Bourchier, now Sir John Bourchier Knight, did join to bring it to some
perfection (in hope whereof, and at the suit of the said Sir John) the King in
the fourth year of his reign, granted certain conditional Letters Patents,
to the Lord Sheffield President of the North, Sir Thomas Challoner, Sir David
Fowls Knights, and the said master Bourchier, for twenty one years, for the
sole making of Allomes in Yorkshire only, where (in building of seven houses
and the vtensills for working and charges, Above Black^ Moors.
with other extraordinaries) they were out of purse in two years, some 33
thousand pounds, and could proceed no further without bringing in new men; for
some of the other gave over in time, and would proceed no further, although the
Germans were now come, which they had sent for. There are rich Allome Mines in
the Isle of Wight.
Hereupon other Letters Patents were obtained for thirty one years for all
England, Scotland, and Ireland, without conditions, and then they were out
above 40 thousand pounds, and no Allomes made to benefit, although the price
was raised at a certainty, and all foreign Allomes prohibited to come in. And
his Majesty has been pleased to enter into the said works, and laid out so
many thousand pounds, as is not fitting to be expressed. Thus by ouercharging
the work^s in the beginning, are good businesses overthrown; many are the
particulars which I have observed in writing concerning these works. But
leaving this, I wish good success therein, for there is Allome earth enough to
continue for ever, and in places West-wards as good and better than any in
Yorkshire.

Now from the Mines of Gold, being fallen to Allome and Copperas, let us end
with the Coal pits or Coal Mines; Coal Mines.
whereof they make more account in the North, than of Lead Mines, and yet they
are abundant, more than in any country of the world. In the lower parts of
Germany, about Acon and Collogne, they have great store of Sea-coale, but it
does not cake as our Coals; they melt great quantity of iron stone with it,
being like unto the Coal in Nottinghamshire, or thereabouts, which flameth
more, like unto the Scots Coals. To know the goodness of the diversity of
our Coal, I have noted in the fourth Chapter of the first Part of Weights and
Measures, and now I am to show how Mines may be wrought to benefit and profit,
for the good of Merchants and others.

CHAP. IIII. Of the profitable working of Mines.
PHillip the second, late King of Spain, perceiving that many blind Bayards
were ouerbold to undertake the working of his Mines of Silver in the
West Indies: and yet considering on the one side, that without authority and
privilege they could not be encouraged thereunto; and on the other side
(having obtained the same for certain allotted grounds unto them) they did
hinder other men, and themselves proceeded not; did very advisedly make all his
Letters Patents (as we call them) conditional with a Prouiso, A good prouiso
in Lettets Patents for Mines.
That if the Patentees did not proceed in the works, or discontinue the work
for two years, the Patent was void of course, and upon Certificate made of it,
the King made new Grants unto others. If our King were pleased to do so, many
Grants or Leases made by the Company of the Mines Royal would be made void,
and other men would be encouraged to try their fortunes upon them.

The next consideration concerning Mines, Mettaline and Mineral is, That the
works in the beginning be not choked or suffocated with extreme charges and
expenses, which does discourage the undertaker and all others, whereby the
works are given over, or means are devised to charge Princes Coffers with
them. For it is true, That things do prosper best when they are underpropped
by authority it self; which to do in the beginning were more profitable,
than when the charges and expenses have ouerburthened them. For prevention
whereof, I made a contract for the Lead Mines in the North parts, which being
imitated shall cut off all such charges as commonly the parties do run into
in the working of Mines, upon the conceited benefit which draws more
violently than the Adamant stone. For as the Portugal Antonio Diaz told the
King, Todos los mineros son Ricos, porque quando no lo tienen en sustansia,
tienen lo enel animo: All Miners are rich, for when they have it not in
Substance, they have it in the Mind. The observation already noted, concerning
the running waters about Mines, must not be forgotten. The Contract before
mentioned was in this manner: A profitable Contract.
The Mine to be wrought, and the Ore to be divided into five parts: The owner
of the ground or the lessee, to have one part of the Ore shaddered and washed
ready to be molten, and he to redeliuer the same in the nature and quality
aforesaid, and to be paid for it every 3 months, paying for every load
twenty shillings. The workmen in like manner to have another fifth part, and
to be paid accordingly every week. The other / 35 parts to be for the
undertakers, and they to content the Parson for his tithes: by these means a
man is sure to have ware for his money, and then to make Furnaces to melt 36,
or 40 hundredth at one time, as has been touched. For to enter into charges
before you have good store of Ore above ground, is needless; herein observe
also to work from East to West, or from West to East, unless you find the
situation of the Mine to be such, that being troubled with water, you may make
entrances in the lower parts thereof to avoid the same. If your lead do contain
silver, although it were but an ounce in a hundredth, you may work it to
benefit if you preserve your Lead by making of an Iron Cap over your Furnace to
be drawn up and down to receive the vapor of Lead, which falls down
again, whereby the loss of above 200 ll weight in one tun will decrease to 80
ll, or thereabouts, and if you have vent enough for the Litargium, which is
your Lead, Litargium of Lead.
as it is cast up by the Footblast, or otherwise being red to paint withal,
then may you make profitable work every way. For Copper, observe your
roasting, to purge your Antimonie and all other corruptions, let not the
glistering color of Marquisite deceive you, it is but smoke and scurffe. And
although Antimonie will be the eldest son of Sol, and contend with Sulphur
and Mercury, hold him for a bastard; the thrift, is in ponderous ore for
copper, and with a reasonable quantity you may try your works, before you
be at charges in landing of your Ore, and to know how many fires will be
requisite to make one tun of Copper, and then land great quantity of Ore,
according to our former contract: If you are not sure of it, let others bear
charges and labor with you, and so shall you not ouercharge the work, but
rather find means to lessen your charges. The Lead Mines in Wales containing
two or three ounces of Silver, How to refine ^iluer by Mercury.
may (in my opinion) be wrought to great profit by the means of Quickesiluer,
being roasted by reflection of the fire, and grinded. To the furtherance
whereof, I have thought good to set down the manner of Potosie Mine in the
West Indies, and as the Portugal did the Scottish Ore; he did take to one
hundredth of the metal prepared, between 12 ll and 15 ll of Quickesiluer,
with salt and vinegre; and so sprinkling the said Quickesiluer through a linen
cloth, still using a reasonable quantity of salt (which divides the Lead from
the Silver) and vinegre or strong water (but that is costly) he did leave these
substances together 24 or 25 days, every second day stirring the same with a
staff, in which time or less (according to the Mineral) the Quickesiluer
does devour or eat up the Silver, and leaves all the other commixture: then
by straining the said mass, the Quickesiluer goes thorough, and there
remains a Paste in diverse Balls, called the Almond Paste, To be done by
retorts of earth.
which by a limbecke receiving fire, causes the Quickesiluer to subleme, and
falling down by the neck into the water, which is in the receiver stopped
close, takes his body again in the said water, and the Silver remains
pure, which commonly is not above one fourth part of the weight of the said
Paste; your Quickesiluer serves again, and there is not lost above six pound
in the hundredth of Silver: he said also, That having once two or three months
before hand, the Mineralls thus prepared or decocted, himself and four men
could refine ten tons of it in a day, which is admirable. But these men are
like travelers that sometimes may speak an untruth, Cum gratia and
Priuilegio. Nevertheless, considering that Potosie Silver Mine holding but 1
1/^ ounce of Silver is but 30 ounces the tun, which at 5 ss is but 7 ll 10 ss
0, and the loss of the Quicksiluer and all charges deducted there will remain
but little, unless the quantity of tons to be done in a day should
counteruaile the same, to provide yearly against the coming of the Fleet,
although (as I have said) many hands make light work, and light gains and
often does fill the purse: and if the workmen should return one pound of
Silver for every pound of Quickesiluer, there would be above ten for one,
and they to live by the overplus of it.

CHAP. V. Of the Nature of Gold, Silver* and Copper, and of the Moneys made
thereof.
FRom the transcendent contemplative study of Philosophers, of vapors and
exhalations, to the Essence of Sulphur and Mercury generated into Ores of
Mettalls, We have produced, Gold, Silver, and Copper to the Mint to be
converted into Moneys. To which purpose let us now examine the nature of them,
and (by inuersion) coin first Copper, then Silver, and so come to Gold,
according to the beginning of coins made by the ancient Romans:
notwithstanding standing, that at our coming to the Mint we saw nothing but
Gold coined, whereupon we do remember the verses which were made at their first
coining of Gold.

Era dabunt olim melius, nunc omen in Auro est:
Victaque concessit prisca Moneta nobis.
Such is the quality of fine Gold (by reason of the equal proportion of the
four Elements therein, The qualities of Gold.
that none is predominant over the other) that the fire does not consume it,
being also hot and dry of nature, neither is it subject to any other Element,
for there is no rust or scurfe that does diminish the goodness, or wastes the
substance; it does abide the fretting and liquors of salt and vinegre without
damage, which wears any other thing; it needs no fire to be made Gold, as
other metals do, for it is gold as soon as it is found; it draws without
wool, as it were wool; it is easily spread in leaves of marvelous thinness;
you may adorn or guild any other metal with it; it is not inferior for
making of any vessels; in color it resembles the Celestial bodies; it
defiles not the thing it touches, as Silver and other metals; it is not
stinking in smell; the spirit of it can by art be extracted, and the body
(being as red earth) can never be moulten without the spirit be again added
thereunto, Difference between natural and artificial Gold.
as it were infusing life: and lastly, it is medicinable and makes glad the
heart of man, which artificial Gold does not, neither is it corrosiue as this
Gold is, so that a scratch of it will hardly be healed.

But for our purpose of moneys (being soft, and only hardened by the air,
deaf in sound, and ponderous in weight) it requires to make Crown Gold fit
for moneys and works to have some allay of Silver and Copper mixed, which is
1/12 part: howbeit, that moneys are also made of fine gold, wherein (for
observation sake) we ascribe half a grain of allay in twenty and four
Carrats. It has also by reason of his hot and dry quality a property, That
filling a cup with wine to the brim, yet you may put ten or fifteen pieces of
Gold coined into it by little and little, without spilling, as it were
apprehending and clasping the liquid quality of the wine.

It is held for certain, that the Salamanders wool, Soda bariglia, or
Massacote.
and Alumen Plumosum are not subject to fire, yet are they subject to
corruption.

The stuff called Soda Bariglia, or Massacote whereof Glasses are made (which
stuff is burnt of certain sea weeds, as we know and daily may see in the
Glasse-houses) is not subject to fire, but altogether to the air: But Gold is
permanent. Here now arises a question, How it was possible that Archimedes
Geometrical trial (so much celebrated by Antiquity) can be sure, seeing Gold
has that attractiue power to retain so many pieces of it in a cup of wine?
For the King of Egypt being deceived of his Goldsmith in the making of two
Diademes or Crowns of Gold, whereof the one contained much Silver) was
desirous to know the falsehood without breaking of them: Archymedes trial.
Sixteen pound of Silver did spil thirty and six, and sixteen of Gold did Spill
but twenty, and the Crown twenty and four, so it was 13 (...) Silver, and 4
li. of Gold.
whereupon Archymedes caused two vessels to be made of one equal bigness,
with receivers under them, and caused them to be filled brim full with water,
and therein he did put these two Crowns a sunder, and gathered up the water
very circumspectly, whereof one of the vessels d^d spill more than the other;
according unto which, by Arithmeticall proportion grounded upon the
Geometrical observation, he found out the difference between the quantity and
we^ght of the two waters, and consequently how much Silver there was put in, in
one of the Crowns, in the hew of Gold, which if they had been both falsified,
he could never have found it: for the difference came to be known by the bulk
or bigness which caused the more spilling, and the matter was visible in some
measure. For I have observed by my Instrument made for proportions, Proportion
of vo^ume (...) Gold, Silver, and Copper.
That the difference in bulk between Gold and Silver is as five to nine, and
between Silver and Copper as eleven to thirteen; that the body of Copper is
bigger than Silver, Lead to Silver as from fifteen to fourteen. Tin is
lighter than Silver, and does differ from it as nine to thirteen, and from the
Gold as seven to eighteen. Iron differs from Silver as four to three, and
from the Gold as six to nine, the body of gold is lesser. Quicksiluer comes
nearer, and does differ as three to four.

But to resolve the question, we must note the diversity of the intentions,
which were mere contraries; for the one had an intention to spill, and the
other to keep it from spilling, whereas also between the operation of wine and
water there may be a difference in this trial.

Thus much concerning the nature and quality of fine Gold, whereunto Lead
comes nearest for ponderositie of weight, bigness of volume, and deafness
of sound, as fittest for protection.

The nature and quality of Silver is like unto the Moon, The quality of
Silver.
that is, cold and moist; the Sulphur of it white and corrupt, and falling
away, as you may see by drawing lines upon a paper. Between the Planets Sol
and Luna you have Venus the Planet of Copper, to allay the same, although
Mercury be between them, which being fixed, joins with any metal. Copper
does harden the Silver, and yet as the weaker of the two, is soonest corrupted
and consumed for it is in metals according to the Proverb, The weakest goes
to the wall, and the Allay of Copper is done for the preservation of Silver.
The first moneys, Sicle is half an ounce of Silver.
or the Sicles of the Hebrews was pure silver weighing half an ounce, which
was delivered by weight, and cannot properly be called money, for there was no
print upon it: and being allayed with Copper it has a smell, The quality of
Copper.
for the Sulphur and Antimonie of Copper (being red and corrupt) has a strong
smell, which may (by heating it) be sooner discerned by rubbing: and howsoever
there are many blanchers for Copper, the best of them all in time will appear
in his color, being not thoroughly fixed. The nature of Copper is also cold and
moist, and being commixed and augmented with the Calamine stone and lead makes
the yellow brass, Yellow Brass.
and increases the volume from eleven to fifteen, whereas (as we have said
before) between Silver and Copper, it is but eleven to thirteen, which
causes the counterfeiters to be encouraged, notwithstanding the smell and
rednes of the color: Allay of Gold.
therefore in the allay of crown Gold, the Mint-masters in France and
England, do take half Silver, and half Copper, which makes the higher color
of Gold. But in the Low Countries and Germany they take three parts Silver and
one part Copper, which makes the difference between the color of their
crown and ours, and is the reason that our Gold will sooner wear away than
theirs.

We have already declared the true deriuation of moneys, called by the Romans
Pecunia, of Pecus pecudis, not Pecus pecoris; for they coining first Copper
moneys (and as it should seem, the wealth of man consisting most in cattle,
as in the time of Job) caused Oxen, Sheep, and the like cattle to be stamped
upon their coins of mere Copper, whereof their Exchequer was called Aerarium,
Proportion which was between Silver and Copper.
being then in greater estimation: for the proportion or value in the time of
Numa Pompilius was ten of Copper to one of Silver, and ten of Silver to one of
Gold, which now by the abundance of Copper is much altered, notwithstanding
the Copper moneys used in all countries in some reasonable measure. But in
Spain, being (as it were unto us) the fountain of Silver and Gold, there it
is used immoderately: Copper moneys of Spain and Portugal.
for they have so many millions of Copper moneys in four and eight Maluedies
and otherwise, and in Portugal of Vintenis, Patacois of so many Reas, that the
half Ryall (which is our three pence) is only of Silver, and all moneys under
it are mere Copper, without any mixture of Silver. This quantity is almost
incredible, for it is not many years since during the Kings reign of Philip the
third, that certain Italians (finding fault that his Octauos and Quartillos
were too big) gave the King six millions of Ducats to coin them at half the
weight, within a time limited, and as many as they could utter within that
time; Necessitas non habet legem, is true in some respects.

The Venetians also coin mere Copper moneys, Copper moneys of the Venetians.
they have Sessini which are valued at two Quatrini, and three Quatrini are one
half penny sterling; for six Quatrini are one penny. Bagatini they have
also, whereof four make one Quatrini, and twenty and four Bagatini make one
penny sterling by calculation.

In France they have Mailles, petit Deniers, Deniers, Doubles, Of France.
and Liarts, and in times past, most of these had some Silver in them: but upon
due consideration (that it was so much Silver wasted, because the charges of
refining did surmount the value, and that these moneys did serve for the
commutation of petty things and trifles) they have saved that Silver. Of
Germany.
The like they have done of all the small moneys in Germany: but they cause
them to be Alkimed like Silver, which is done with Tin and Sal Armoniake after
they be coined, which holds fairer for a longer time than the moneys of
silver allayed with much copper, being in a manner incorporated with the copper,
and takes away the smell of it. Such are their Hellers, Albs, Hallincke, and
the like small copper moneys.

Of the Low Countries.
In the Low Countries they have Duyts, Mites, Negemanckens, Ortkens whereof
four make a Styuer, and five Styuers make six pence which we may well call a
Styuer for a penny sterling; eight Negemanckens and twenty and four Mites
for one penny also. In some places (as in Flanders) the Mite is called Corte,
and in the Wallone country Engcuni, and in other places Point, Pite, Poot,
being all subdiuisions of Obolus, or the half penny.

Of many other kingdoms and states government.
In Bohemia, Poland, Sweaden, Denmark, East-land, and many other Kingdoms and
States they have mere copper moneys tedious to describe; likewise in Italy in
their several principalities and dukedomes.

Of Scotland.
In Scotland they have Turnoners, and pence, and half pence in their names, and
much base money of Achisons, Plackx, Babyes, Nonsuits, Of Ireland.
and the like. In Ireland they had in Queen Elizabeth her time half pence,
and pence of copper, which are most of them lost and consumed.

The necessity of these small moneys did appear here with us in England,
where every Chandler, Tapster, Vintner, and others made tokens of lead and
brass for halfe-pences, and at Bristoll by the late Queens authority,
Farthing tokens in England.
were made of copper, with a ship on the one side, and C.B. on the other side,
signifying Ciuitas Bristoll: these went current (for small things) at Bristoll,
and ten miles about. Hereupon it pleased our sovereign Lord the K. to approve
of the making of a competent quantity of farthing tokens to abolish the said
leaden tokens made in derogation of the Kings Prerogative Royal, which
farthing tokens (being made (by Engines) of mere copper in the year 1613,
with certain cautions and limitations) have on the one side two scepters
crossing under one diadem in remembrance of the union between England and
Scotland, and on the other side the harp for Ireland, and the inscription of
Iacobus D.G. Magnae Britt. Fra. and Hiber. Rex. And the said farthing tokens
have not only been found very commodious and necessary for petty
commutations, but also to be a great relief of the poor, and means to
increase charity, without which many of them had perished, every man having
means to give alms, even the mechanical poor to the indigent poor.

Silver moneys
To come to the coins of silver, we have also noted, that the Romans made but
moneys of silver the 484 year after the foundation of Rome, which was in the
year 3695, from the beginning of the world, being now about 1900 years since:
and by some coyns and models extant, the goodness of it was sterling silver
being above 11 ounces fine, since which time many are the standards of silver
moneys made in diverse countries according to occasions, both in time of peace
and wars, as you may find in the following Chapters, where we have reduced
them from the mark weight, unto the pound weight Troy of twelve ounces: And
concerning the Moneys of England of the sterling Standard, more follows
hereafter.

The Moneys of gold were but made when the Romans had taken great wealth from
all Nations, Gold Moneys.
and was sixty two years after their beginning of the making of silver
Moneys, and they were of fine gold; since which time also, there have been
many Standards made of gold, and that from about twenty four carrats fine,
until seven carrats, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of the Officers of Mints.
THere are diverse Officers in all Mintes: The principal Officer is the Warden
of the Mint; next is the Mint-master: the one to look to the making of Moneys
complete, according to the Standards, and the other with his workmen (called
Monyers) to make them: Then there is the Comptroller to keep the Contrebookes
for the Prince and State, to see the bullion received, and the assayes made
thereof, and the complete moneys returned for the same, weight for weight,
paying coynage money forth same, which is done by the Warden, by the said
moneys in specie, as they were coined at the first. There are commonly two
Assay-masters, one Grauer, and his deputy; one that keeps the Yrons to
deliver them to the Monyers, or the Provost or chief of them, to see them
every night returned again: then the Sincker, Smith, Porter, and the like in
their places; all these have wages for themselves, or allowances yearly from
the Prince or State. The Mint-master and the Monyers, are paid for every pound
weight they make, whereof 30 ll weight they call a Journey. The Tellors Office
is but used in England, The Sheyre book of Moneys.
which the Wardens deputies execute in other countries, to keep a Sheyre Book
of the pieces contained in the mark or pound weight, although the money be
delivered by weight and not by tale. For although there be, suppose eight or
ten pieces over in 100 ll by tale, it does encourage the bringer in of Bullion;
for the ^^act sizing is not so much to be regarded upon the total in
quantity, as upon the equality of weight in pieces: for it happens
sometimes, that one shilling will weigh one farthing or half penny more in
value by the weight, than an other; The cause of culling of money.
whereby moneys are culled out and transported, and the light pieces remain
amongst his Majesty's subjects: Goldsmiths also wanting Bullion, must melt such
moneys down to make plate of.

The Bullion which is brought in, or foreign coin either, is always locked up
in great chests, or enclosed places under three keys, namely, the Wardens, the
Mint-masters, and the Comptrollers: at the days of Receipts which are observed
in the Tower of London, Saturdayes and Mondayes, and then the Officers have
their diet in the place, the one half at the Kings charges, and the other
half at the Mint-masters charges, who is called by some, Master-worker of the
King moneys, Vel Magister operarius: and between the Warden and him, there is
commonly emulation and necessary discord; like unto that which Cato used
amongst the servants of his family, which he did compare to the stones of a
vault, which by striving do uphold the building, and made him to be more
quiet and regarded.

Suppose now that we are come to the Mint to see moneys made of our Ingots of
Gold and Silver, and one of the Assay-masters comes unto me and says, Sir, I
have read that all things are governed by Number, Weight, and Measure; What say
you to finenesse of Gold and Silver? I do ask him first, What he takes
finenesse to be? he does answer me, That it is a Mystery, and that the study
of it is as intricate, as the Transubstantiation of the Papists Sacrament, as
you may perceive (says he) by the controversy between the Warden of the
Mint, and the Mint-master, concerning the Standards of the sterling moneys of
Silver, and the base moneys lately made for the Realm of Ireland, which is
grounded upon the finenesse of the bullion reported by trial of the subtle
Assay, whereunto I do reply, That plain things may be made intricate,
Finenesse of silver what it is
for finenesse of Gold and Silver is properly fine Gold and fine Silver, and
this is known by weight, which I do thus demonstrate in the Silver for both:
Posito, that this piece of Silver is fine Silver, without any mixture of allay,
and weighs one pound weight of twelve ounces Troy: I hope you will call this
to be twelve ounces fine, because it weighs twelve ounces, which is the pound
weight and finenesse also: now take away one ounce of this fine Silver, and put
so much Copper unto it to melt them down, as makes up the said pound again
twelve ounces in weight, you (knowing that there was but eleven ounces of fine
Silver remaining) will make no difficulty to affirm that this is eleven
ounces fine Silver, and one ounce of copper in the pound weight, and put the
same to the trial of your subtle Assay and you shall find it so; is there any
Mystery in this? and he says no, as I did propound it; and so is it if there
be more or less allay in the pound weight accordingly: for the pound weight
does proportionate the whole mass, ingot, or lump of bullion call it what you
will, as in the next Chapter of assayes shall be made more apparent. But, says
he, This does not clear in my understanding, the business which is in
controversy between the Warden and the Master worker: for the Copple or Teast
does drink in some two penny weight of Silver with the Lead, and so there is
so much hid from report: Drinking in of the Teast or Copple.
for the Bullion is that which makes the moneys, and not the Silver of the
assay: So that the said Bullion is finer in every pound weight two penny weight,
in value six pence half penny, and the twelfth part of a half penny; which is
the cause, that the Master worker (being subtle and cunning) does put into the
melting pot, Two penny weight of copper put in the commixture. Account charged
with two penny weight of silver, in every pound weight. Melting Book.
Indentures. Base moneys is eight penny weight in the pound of silver Bullion.
two penny weight of Copper in every pound, whereby he gains the weight of
so much sterling Silver; now this gain is the Kings, for with his Highness
moneys, this Bullion is bought of the subjects. And therefore the Warden does
charge the Mint-masters account with two penny weight of Silver in every pound
weight, and allows the same unto the King, for the Mint-master is to account
by the melting book, where this allay of Copper is entered, according to the
Indentures between the King and him. And so in the base moneys made for
Ireland, whereof one of Silver makes four of that moneys, he is charged in
account eight penny weight of silver, for every pound of the silver Bullion:
for the commixture of two ounces eighteen penny weight of silver, and nine
ounces, two penny weight of copper is found to answer that Standard of three
ounces fine: And so does eleven ounces of silver, Standards sterling, and Irish.
and one ounce of allay answer the sterling Standard; for there is great
consideration to be had, in the calculation of the silver Bullion to the fire
and from the fire: From the fire, and to the fire.
for eleven ounces from the fire is set down for Standard, to pass according
to the indented trial piece, made by the sworn officers, or refiners, and
assay-masters, Indented trial pieces of silver sterling and Base. Commixture.
thereunto heretofore appointed, whereof my self was one; which indented piece
we have commixed accordingly of fine silver, refined upon a dry teast, and
good copper or allay, and the same we have divided into three parts; one part
to remain in the Kings Treasury at Westminster, another part with the Warden
of the Mint, and the third part with the Mint-master to make the moneys
thereby, and all these things are done very orderly. There is no reason that
the Mint-master should pocket up this benefit, which comes almost to ten
thousand pounds, and would have been much more, if it had not been spied out in
time for the Kings service. And then he concluded his speech with an
affirmation, That he could take the said two penny weight of silver, out of
the copple, which had drunk up the same, or within a little less of it;
whereunto I made him such an answer, as I had oftentimes understood of the
Mint-master, and partly of mine own knowledge concerning assayes, which I had
observed and known above forty years, my father also having been a
Mintmaster, and I told him that all his allegations as abouesaid, should and
could be very well answered: For albeit that he had alleged many things
concerning the State of the matter in question, I would (according to the
course of the Common Law) join issue upon one peremptory point, to be tried
by all understanding men: to which end I told him, That in Germany and the Low
Countries there were certain officers, Generals of the Mints bey^nd ^he Seas.
called the Generals of Mints, which did determine such and the like questions
and controversies, arising between the Wardens and the Mint-masters, which were
men of great knowledge and experience in Mint affairs, and had from the Prince
large stipends given them for to attend these M^nt businesses, when the trialls
of pixes; or of the boxes are made, and the Mint-masters make their accounts
with the Prince: Hereupon the said Assay-master, according to his courteous
behavior, was very well pleased to hear me (as he said) in favor of Justice
and Truth. And so I began to answer gradatim and articularly, as follows.

Drinking up of the copple admitted.
First, concerning the drinking up of the copple; albeit that it appears unto
me (by certain testimonialls made beyond the Seas, by Generals, Wardens,
Mint-masters, and Assay-masters) that if a copple or teast be well made it
drinks not up any silver at all: yet I will admit that it does so, because
you are so confident, that you can take it out of the copple, or the most part
of it, and so I will proceed.

Two penny weight of copper acknowledged to be put in.
Secondly, I do acknowledge that there is two penny weight of Copper put into
the melting pot, as you say, for it is commixed at twenty penny weight, which
is a f^ll ounce, where the standard requires but eighteen penny weight: but
this is done to counteruaile the wast of Copper, which comes by melting of
Bullion, remelting of the Brocage and Scizell, and by working, hammering, often
nealing and blaunching of the moneys, whereby the moneys grow better in finenes
than they were at the first melting, because so much and more copper does
waste; Wast of copper counteruadeth the copper put in.
and can it waste less than ten ounces in one hundredth weight? No surely,
which is the cause that the red Book in the Exchequer for Mint affairs
admitted this two penny weight for waste, which is but ten ounces in the
hundredth. And to say that this two penny weight of silver is the cause that the
Mintmaster puts in two penny weight of copper, Unequal proportion.
it carries not any proportion to put one for one, when the mixture of the
Standard is eleven to one. But you reply unto me, That the Mint-master is to
bear all wastes, and therefore must answer the same, and be charged in account
for it; I answer, That the accounts of all Mints are made only upon the
finenesse of moneys by their weights, and that it was never otherwise used in
England until this day: All accounts are taken upon the fine matter only.
and if the Warden will bring a new manner of account than ever has been
taken according to the Leidger Book of the Mint, and the Comptrollers Book:
then the M^nt-master is to be charged with every thing in his proper nature,
silver for silver, and copper for copper; otherwise it were better for him not
to put in any copper, than to be made to answer silver for it: But the
Mint-master must hold as well his allay as his fine silver, Allay to be kept.
according to the statute 2. H. 6. ca. 2. and in doing otherwise, by not
putting in of this two penny weight of copper, the moneys would be too fine,
and the Master might incur fine and ransom. Therefore all Mint-masters do
work according to their remedies, and they do bear all wastes incident and
casual, as if some ingots were falsified with copper within, as has been
found at the Mint, the Mint-master must bear the adventure of it, Hazard of
Mint masters.
for Princes will be at a certainty: which is the cause that the Mint-masters
may commix at their pleasure thus far, as the sixteenth Article of the
Indenture declares, That every pound weight Troy shall be in such sort
commixed and melted down, that at the casting out of the same into ingots, The
Inden^u^e of Eliz Reg. xluj.
it shall be and hold eleven ounces two penny weight of fine silver, and
eighteen penny weight of allay, every pound containing twelve ounces, every
ounce twenty penny weight, and every penny weight twenty four grains,
according to the computation of the pound weight Troy of England, which eleven
ounces two penny weight of fine silver, and eighteen penny weight of allay in
the pound weight of Troy aforesaid, The old right ^^erling Standard.
is the old right Standard of the moneys of silver of England: and (that the
commixture of the Mintmaster has been done accordingly, so that it was found
so at the casting out) you best know what made the assayes thereof from time to
time. As for your Melting book where the allay is entered, if you will charge
the Mint-master thereby, let it be done distinctly for silver, and copper, or
allay in his proper nature as is said before, and then the controversy is
ended. Now let us come to the Standard of the Base moneys made for Ireland: I
am sure there is not two penny weight of copper put in, as in the sterling
Standard; Silver taken out by division o^ the standard of Base moneys
but there is two penny weight of silver by computation taken out, in every
quarter of a pound of silver, which as you say is eight penny weight of silver
in the pound weight; why should the Mint-masters account be charged with this,
where silver by the division of the proportion is taken out, and two ounces
eighteen penny weight, are taken for three ounces from the fire, as the
Indenture declares? Shall a Mint-master commixe and melt by prescription, or
suffer other men to melt it for him, and yet be made to answer for the
finenesse of moneys according to an indented trial piece, made of refined fine
silver (as you say) and receive neither silver answerable in finenesse, nor the
quantity which he ought to have allowed him according to the Standard* I am
sure that in the making of these moneys, C^ea^ wast of copper.
there has been above forty ounces of copper wasted in one hundredth weight
of the moneys made thereof, whereby the Bullion is grown finer, that is to
say, These forty ounces of copper being wasted, have left the silver behind,
wherewith they were commixed at the first, and so is the said whole mass or
bullion so much finer and richer in the proportion, which Arithmeticall
distribution does demonstrate unto me, Demonstration Arithmeticall.
and in this ingot of course silver may prove it unto you: let us suppose it
weighs 16 ll, and contains 4 ll of silver, and 12 ll of copper, and so may
we say it is the fourth part silver; if this ingot now should be made to
decrease or diminish 4 ll of copper, and so it should weigh but 12 ll, and
therein still contain all the four pound in Silver; may not we justly call
this to be richer, and say it is one third part of Silver? and yet there is no
more Silver than before, and this we call grown in finesse by the decrease of
the mass or proportion: and so two ounces eighteen penny weight of Silver,
commixed with nine ounces two penny weight of Copper made into moneys, How
Silver does increase in finesse.
becomes to be three ounces fine by the melting of the bullion, remelting of
brocage and scizell, and by the working, hammering, often nealing and
blaunching, which always in base moneys is very great, as experience has
proved; call you this poketting up of almost ten thousand pounds? Well I am
content to join my issue hereupon, and to prove that the Mint-master has not
pocketted up any benefit or gain at all by this finesse of Silver hid and
vnreported in the bullion, Above nine thousand pound.
but that he has been a looser of so much as has been taken from him, by
making him to answer Silver for Copper. The commixture of these two standerds
are contraries, and contraries to work all one effect, is strange unto me:
with that he desired me to go with him to the Assay-house to see the assays
made of our Silver and Gold, and there to end our discourse, whereof he seemed
unto me to be very desirous.

CHAP. VII. Of the Assayes of Bullion and Moneys.
Coming to the Assay-house, there we found diverse gentlemen desirous to see
the manner of making of Assayes of Gold and Silver, as also diverse Goldsmiths
which brought some ingots of Gold, but no Silver at all, and here we were all
courteously welcome, and our discourse was interrupted, and the Assay-master
desired me to have patience until his business were ended with the
Goldsmiths, and so he would make the Assayes of our Silver first, and then
come to the making of our Gold Assay, which he would first teast before he
should put some proportion of it to the trial of strong-water. The little
furnaces were fired, and the Assay-master took four copples or teasts, which
are made of Boneashes, and he did put them in the furnace quater corner wise,
with the bottomes upwards, and so let them remain almost an hour until he
had made an end with the Goldsmiths Assayes, to the end they should be
thoroughly dry, to avoid the springing of the Silver, How to make the Assayes
of Silver.
and then he did turn them upwards: and so cutting off some Silver of our
ingots on both sides, he did beat the same very thin with a hammer, and
weighing justly the quantity of fifteen grains, he divided the same by even
portion of weight into half, and thereunto he took five times so much in thin
purged Lead, and winding or inuoluing the Silver therein, he did put the same
upon the several copples two to two, and upon the other two he did first put
the Lead, and the Silver afterward when the Lead was molten, making no great
difference in this: then with coals he did stop the furnace indifferently,
neither too hot nor too cold, until it began to drive, and then he made it
hotter, and finding it to appear bright, he brought the copples one after
another to the mouth of the furnace, there he let them smoke a little, holding
them out and in before he took them out: Then taking off this Silver, he
weighed them one against another, and found them alike, whereby he knew his
Assay was well made; and then he weighed them both together, and what they
weighed less (than before) was Copper wasted. And he reported our Silver to be
eleven ounces and four penny weight fine by the true proportion of the pound
weight, which is to be taken accordingly in the whole ingot, weighing some
forty pound weight; so that every pound of it did contain eleven ounces
four penny weight of fine Silver, and sixteen penny weight of Copper,
making together twelve ounces for the pound, Troy weight: and so is finesse
known by weight, and is properly fine Silver as aforesaid. Hereupon I did ask
him, whether the copple had drunk up some little quantity of Silver which
might amount to two penny weight in the pound weight of sterling Silver by the
computation of Silver of several finesse? and he answered me, it had without
all doubt. The other Silver Assay he reported to be but eleven ounces fine.

After this, To make the Assayes of Gold.
he took in like manner fifteen grains of our ingot of Gold, and putting the
same to the teast, as aforesaid, to purge the Copper, (which he did with a
hotter fire) he did bea^ the Gold with a hammer very thin, that he could wind
it upon a little stick round, to make it go through the neck of the glass,
and to work the better: and hereunto he took twenty grains of very fine
Silver in like manner, and put them all together into the vial or glass, and
hereupon he did pour some strong-water, and put the same upon coals, and
there it did smoke and stand until it did smoke no more, and then it had
wrought and separated the Silver from the Gold, which remained whole, and the
Silver was turned into water; then he did pour out that water into another
glass with raine-water, To divide Silver from strong-water.
which divided your Silver from the strong-water again, and weighed the Gold
again, reporting the same to be twenty and three Carrats fine, by the
calculation upon the balance of his subtle Assay: and then we went up to
deliver our Silver and Gold to the Warden of the Mint, whereof entry was made
in diverse and several books of the Warden, Comptroller, Mint-master, and
Assay-master; and the Mint-master did deliver bills of the weight and finesse
thereof under his hand to the Warden of the Mint, where we stayed to see our
silver molten and cast into ingots, for to be delivered to the moneyers to
sheire the same by weight into small pieces for twelve pences and six pences:
for it was allayed according to the sterling standard, and the Assay-master
made another Assay of it (called the pot Assay) and found the same to be
standard, The Pot Assay.
whereupon we took our leave and departed: and here also he affirmed unto me,
that the copple had drunk in the like small proportion of silver. The next
week following I went to receive my satisfaction in coined moneys, which were
brought up to the Warden, and he perused them, whether they were well coined
without crackes or flawes, and as the Monyers brought them up in trayes, he
took out some pieces not well made and cut them a sunder with a sheire, and
some pieces he weighed, and then took some other pieces and put them through a
hole into a box kept under several keys, and some pieces he delivered to the
Assay-master to make trial of. Assay of moneys.
And after I had received my money by weight for weight of my bullion, I went
to the Assay-master and saw him make an Assay of the said moneys in like manner
as the other, with five parts of lead, and hereupon I took occasion to ask
him, Trial of the Pixe.
whether the last and supreme trial of the moneys (which was made commonly
once a year before the Lords at the Star Chamber) was done in like manner? And
he answered me, it was, and withal he desired me to resolve the question
between the Warden and the Mint-master, concerning the two penny weight of
silver hid from report (as it is supposed) according to our former conference?
I told him, that according to the issue joined between him and me, that the
Mint-master had not pocketted up any such two penny weight of silver (as his
account was charged withal) I would make that plain by demonstration, which
he said was his desire, whereupon I framed my answer as follows.

Four Assayes of bullion and money.
I make no doubt (sir) but you have marked my observations of the four several
Assayes made concerning bullion and money, namely, the first of the Ingot
before melting, the second of the pot Assay after melting, the third of the
moneys complete made thereof, and the fourth and supreme trial of moneys at
the Star Chamber (as it were) before the King and his Council, all which
(being done in manner alike) you have from time to time told me, that their
operation or effect was also alike: for the trial of the Ingot, there the
copple had drunk in two penny weight of silver: for the Pot Assay, there two
penny weight was drunk in also: the Assay made of the complete moneys has
drunk in the like two penny weight: and last of all the highest trial of all
has drunk in the like two penny weight of silver; how can it then be
pocketted up by the Mint-master, when it was in the bullion, remaining in the
pot, found in the moneys, and confirmed to be so by the supremest trial? and
why should the Mint-Masters account be charged, either with an imaginary or
substantial thing which he never had or inioyed? A Tacit Resolution.
To this the Assaymaster answering (rather by signs than words) said, It was
otherwise taken and understood, and himself took now better notice of it, and
wished that Truth might prevail, according to the saying, Magna est veritas,
praeualet, praeualuit and praeualebit; and so ended our supposed discourse.

Now let us come to the mysteries of the Mints beyond the seas, to recompense
them that might take offense for discussing the premises; and let us be like
Nathaniel, in whom there was no guile, Qui vadit plane, vadit sane; howbeit
discretion is requisite. The assayes beyond the seas, are most made according
to the proportion of the mark, which is eight ounces Troy; and they take
twenty grains to make their assayes by, which is correspondent with our
fifteen grains; Thirty two grains beyond the seas, is more than 24 grains
with us.
for they divide their English or penny weight in thirty two Ases or grains,
which from twenty four unto thirty two, differs one third part; so is
fifteen unto twenty also a third part: For this mark weight of eight ounces
is twofold; the one is called English weight, and the other French weight in
the Low Countries. But the English weight is most used, which is divided into
eight ounces, every ounce twenty English or penny weight, English mark
and every English thirty two grains as aforesaid is, 5120 grains to the
mark. This mark and one half makes (within a little) our twelve ounces Troy
for the pound weight, being in grains 7680.

The French weight called penny weight, is also eight ounces, French mark.
every ounce four and twenty penny weight, and every penny weight twenty
four grains is, 6912 grains for the twelve ounces, or 4608 grains for the
eight ounces. These grains are also divided in twenty four Garobes or
Primes, and the Primes in twenty four Seconds, and the Seconds in 24 Tercies
or Malloquen, which is superfluous; notwithstanding all the said weights and
divisions (to make assayes) they use another weight, Assay weight.
which every man makes according to his fancy: but most commonly they will
divide the mark in twelve deniers or pence, and the penny into twenty four
grains, and then grains subdivided of paper, making 1/10 and 1/32 part of a
grain, which concurreth nearest with our assay weight; for if one pound of
silver do contain 1/12 part copper, they call this eleven deniers fine, as we
say eleven ounces fine.

For the gold likewise they do use the same weight, accounting for every
denier or penny weight two carrats; so twenty four carrats for twelve deniers
or ounces, and consequently eleven deniers is twenty two carrats, etc. So the
gold mark is twenty four carrats, Gold mark. Silver mark.
a carrat is twelve grains, so 288 in the mark: So the silver mark of twelve
deniers of twenty four grains, are 288 grains also, which are bigger
grains, divided into four Primes or Siliquas is, 1152.

They use also a manner of speech to say, Twelve shillings to the mark pound,
Mark pound.
every shilling twelve pence, and every penny twenty four grains, is 3456
grains in the mark; all which is done to make the knowledge of these things
intricate. In like manner for the sheiring of their moneys, Sheire moneys
they will for every piece make a penny, as if there be made seventy eight
pieces out of a mark, they will say it holds six shillings and six pence
in the sheire, or for 62 pieces five shillings two pence, and so obscure things
to take advantage upon others. For the Mint-masters of the Low Countries and
Germany, are very experienced in Mint matters, and the assayes being made
upon the grains, may deceive much if (by trial) the calculation be not
rightly made; and if the said Mint-masters were not subtle, yet the Generals,
which follow the Prince or State, do nothing else but study these things
always: therefore let us observe more particulars of their proceedings as
follows.

In the making of coins of gold and silver, they will use many times to make
pieces of fine gold and courser gold; as the Imperial Royal and the half
Royal, the one twenty three carrats 3 grains, and the other but eighteen
carrats, or the Flanders Crown of 22 carrats. In Germany the ducat and the
gold guildren, which for works being mixed are serviceable, admitting by
conniuence the melting of the moneys, rather than for want of it Bullion should
not be brought to their Mints, therefore they also take little for the coynage,
because it should sooner come unto them than unto other Minters, where the
coynage or seignoriage is great: and albeit the same be but small, yet will
they find means to make other Princes to pay the same, Moneys made for
transportation.
and cause moneys to be made for transportation, especially for the East
countries to buy corn to bring the same unto their Magazins, whereby trade is
increased, and Spain and Portugal supplieth the same, by suffering moneys to
be also transported in the return of corn, whereby Customs do also
augment. The Box for moneys is kept under three several keys or locks, by
the Warden, Mint-master, and Comptroller; wherein the Warden takes of every
Journey of work, one, two, or more pieces, according to his instruction, to
make the last trial by before the Lords or Estates. The Mint-masters have some
remedies allowed them for the making of moneys, either for being too feeble and
under the Standard, Remedies for Mint-masters.
or for being better and above Standard. And hereupon they always work by
commixing it accordingly, whereof they have an absolute power, wherewith
neither the Warden nor the Comptroller are to meddle: for Princes and States
will not be upon vncertaineties with the Mint-master, for he must bear all
casualties upon their remedies; with certain cautions, That if it be above the
said remedies, and feebler one half penny weight, he pays double; and for
the double of that, quadruple; and if it be above that, he is subject over and
above to punishment.

When the trial of the Box is made, if there be quantity of coin to avoid
the multiplicitie of assayes, motion is made to the Master, whether by one
mark indifferently taken of every species of coin, he will be concluded for
the whole quantity of the work, whereunto condiscending, the marks are
weighed out accordingly, and the pieces are told, and the assay is thereupon
made, Privy mark of moneys.
and the total work is reported to be accordingly. The like is done in
England, observing the works by the privy mark of the Rose, Mallet, Cross or
any other, which is recorded in the Exchequer upon the said trials of the pixes.

The Assay-masters receiving Bullion of ten or eleven ounces fine, make their
assayes with five parts of Lead, if it be of six or seven ounces they will
take eight parts of Lead, if three or four ounces, Lead for the trial of
Silver Assayes.
then fifteen parts of Lead, and if under they will take twenty parts of
Lead: But this Lead is first to be purged, because all Lead holds some little
Silver and Gold as has been noted. So for Gold (if need be) more strong-water
may be added, which may serve once again for trial.

Their strong-water called Aqua fortis, Aqua Fort^.
is made two parts calcined Vitrioll, one part Salniter, and half a part of
Allome calcined and distilled as the manner is but for Gold they use Aqua
Regis, Aqua Regis.
which has the same proportion as abouesaid, but there is one fourth of a part
of Sall Armoniake added thereunto; and upon their trialls they use to report
half a grain for the Masters benefit, which must needs be a grain where
fractions are not used in cipher, especially with us, for there is for Silver
nothing reported above twelve grains, which is the half penny weight, which
is done to have the accounts cleerer; and withal, there is no Bullion received
in the Mint under nine ounces fine, Base Bullion.
whereas beyond the Seas (though it be never so base) it is received, and the
rules for calculation are easy and brief; which to avoid prolixitie I do
here omit.

In the melting of Gold, Observations for melting of Gold.
observe to melt the same first before you put your Silver allay unto it, and
let the finest Gold lie upwards in the crusible or pot, to have less wast and
better mixing, for the finest Gold is heauiest and seeks the center; let no
wind come to your melting pot or crusible for fear of breaking, and take fine
Silver for your allay, wherein there is neither Lead, nor Brass, or Laten,
which makes your Gold brittle and brings a loss to make the same malliable,
albeit to make it tough is no charge. For take but an old shoo, and cut the
same into small pieces, and put the same into your crusible, and stop it up
with a cover, let it stand upon the fire, and it takes away the eagrenesse of
Brass: Even as a hot brown loaf of bread cut asunder and clapped over the
bom-hole of a hogshead of wine (tasting of the caske) will cure the same of his
foul taste.

Goldsmiths are appointed to work Gold of twenty two carrats fine, but the
trial is made by the touchstone only, Trial of the Touchstone.
with an observation of the rubbing-strokes upon it to be alike and of the
same strength, which is worthy the observation, for otherwise you can give no
true judgment. There is also an easy scaling of Gold to be made to fall from
the Silver, as it was laid on by the means of Quickesiluer.

To take the figure of coin.
To take the figure or print of a piece of coin, take Lampblacke and Vernice,
such as the Painters do use, anoint the coin with it, put your paper upon
Lead and print thereupon.

To refine Gold with Cementation without Strong-water, which is costly.
TAke eight pound of Flanders Tiles, three mark Copperas, 1 mark, Allome, of
a mark of Salt, and two ounces Saltpeter; all being mingled and calcined
together, take a great crusible, put this Cement one finger thick in the
bottom, then lay some of your Gold beaten thin (or if it be golden coin) upon
it, and then of your Cement again upon that, and thereupon Gold again, which
the Alcumists call Stratum super stratum, and cover your crusible with tiles
leaving a little hole: The coin remains with the print whole.
then begin Lento igne, and afterward with a great fire let it stand four,
five, or more hours, and all the Allay will be in the Cement; to take the
Silver out of the Cement, take four marks Cement, and three mark Potters
Lead; two mark of Tiles, four ounces of Dodecum, four ounces Saltpeter, and
do as before: or else you may take out the Silver by quicksiluer, as I have
declared in the former Chapters.

Blanching of Silver.
To blaunch Silver in a basin of red Copper, which must be done before it be
coined; take four gallons of raine-water, two mark of red Tartar or Argall,
and one mark salt, cast your Plates (being red hot therein) and stir the
same, as you did before in the dissolution until you find the same white
enough; and after it is coined then you must color it, To color Silver.
putting the same into great trayes, and with water sprinkling them until they
be moist, but not wet; then put the color upon it tossing and tumbling them,
and being put into a Melting pot, let them be red hot, and then cast them into
water. To make this color, take to twenty pound weight of money, three ounces
of Sall Armoniake, two ounces Saltpeter, half an ounce Verdegreis, and half
an ounce Copperas, calcine them together for that purpose, etc.

Refining by a great Teast.
To conclude with the refining of Silver with a great Teast, which must be red
hot two or three hours, trying the same with Lead if it do not spring, the
Teast must be for double the quantity of your course Silver, and accordingly
you are to take more or less Lead: to drive out three pound of Copper is
twenty four pound Lead requisite, but is not to be put all at once; then blow
until the same do drive off and the Silver remains, which take out
suddenly, etc. (*)

CHAP. VIII. Of the weight and finesse of Moneys, and their several Standards.
IT is now twenty years complete since Thomas Lord Knyuet, sir Richard
Martin, and diverse other Knights and Aldermen of the city of London, and
master John Williams his majesty's Goldsmith, and my self were in Commission,
to consider of the Mint affairs of the Tower of London, and of the causes of
the transportation of the moneys of the realm, and of convenient remedies to
prevent the same. The causes were observed to besix, whereof the Weight was the
first; next the Finesse of our standard; then the Valuation of moneys, and
therein the proportion between Gold and Silver; fourthly the abuse of Exchange
for moneys by bills, wherein all the former were included: for we all did set
down, that the difference of Weight, Finesse, Valuation, and Disproportion
aforesaid, According to our certificate.
were not of themselves true causes of Exportation, if there were betwixt
countries and country a due course holden in the exchange of money; but that
due course not being observed, then they might accidentally becauses. And this
course was the cause of the ouerballancing of foreign commodities, increased
by the immoderate use of them, and neglect to set the people on work; so that
the remedy was wholly found to consist in reforming the abuse of Exchange,
whereof I have handled at large in the third part of this book for Exchanges.

Hereupon conferring the pound weight Troy of 12 ounces with the mark weight
of eight ounces, admitting one mark and a half for the said pound, we found,
with France full three penny weight, ours to be heavier, and the Low Countries
and Germany 2 penny weight or thereabouts, with Scotland four penny weight
and nine grains, and always heavier than any other.

This agrees with an instruction declared in an old Book concerning Mint
matters in the time of King Edward 3, where it is demanded, What benefit it
would be to the King and realm, Over heaviness of the weight Troy.
if the Troy weight of this realm, and the Troy weight of France, Flaunders,
Spain, and Almayne, and of other realms and countries were of equal weight
and size? For as much as other countries keep one size and weight, whereas the
Troy weight of England is heavier in every eight ounces by half a quarter of
an ounce. It is answered, that the Merchant that brings in bullion does loose
so much, and the calculation is made what it was for every hundredth weight
both for gold and silver, and it follows there. Wherefore this is one great
cause that so little bullion comes into the realm, and therefore may it please
the King to devise some weight that should be correspondent to the weight of
other realms, and call it by some other name than by the Troy weight.

And it is there thought meet, that (for information of Merchants and others) a
Calendar should be made and published, A Mint Calendar.
to show how much every pound weight, ounce, and penny weight is worth, that
the true valuation of Gold and Silver may be thereby perfectly known, whereby
Merchants and other persons shall give honor and praise to the King and his
Council for Equity and Justice showed in the Mint.

There has been used from the beginning (in the Mint) both Troy and Tower
weight, Tower weight.
each of them containing twelve ounces in the pound weight, saving that the
Troy weight is heavier by sixteen penie weight upon the pound weight: by which
Troy weight the merchants bought their gold and silver abroad, and by the same
did deliver it to the Kings mint, receiving in counterpeaze but tower weight
for Troy, which was the Princes Prerogative, gayning thereby full three
quarters of an ounce in the exchanges of each pound weight converted into
moneys, besides the gain of coynage, which did rise to a great revenue, making
of thirty pound weight Troyes, thirty and two pound weight Towers; which is
now out of use, and the Troy weight is only used, Subdiuision of the pound
weight Troy.
containing twelve ounces, every ounce twenty penie weight, every penie
weight twenty and four grains, and every grain twenty mites, every mite
twenty and four droicts, every droict twenty periods, every period twenty
and four blanks, although superfluous (but in the division of the subtle
assay) which in Scotland are all divided by twenty and four, from the denier
whereof they reckon twenty and four to the pound Troy, so twenty and four
grains, Primes, Seconds, Thirds, and Fourths all by twenty and four. And for
the mark and pound weight of other countries I do refer the reader to the
fourth chapter of weights and measures of the first part of this book.

Concerning the pound weight for finesse and allay, let us note that these two
make properly the pound weight, as being distinguished therein: for if it be
one pound of fine silver, it weighs 12 ounces, and it is likewise 12 ounces
fine: Division of the pound Troy in finesse.
but if there be 2 ounces of copper in that pound, then is there but 10 ounces
of silver, and so called 10 ounces fine, and so if there be 10 ounces 16 penny
weight of silver, and so called in finesse, then is there one ounce four
penny weight in copper; and so for all other finesses accordingly.

The like is for the Gold, whereof the said pound is divided into twelve
ounces, or twenty and four carrats, being two carrats for one ounce, and
every carrat is divided with us into four grains, and finesse accordingly.

From this general weight of the pound, General weight. Special weight
is derived the special weight of the piece according to the standard, wherein
(after that the commixture is made for finesse) the pieces must concur in
value, and thereby is the special weight known of the piece, whereby the
monyers cut their pieces, The Sheire.
it being the direction for the sheire unto them, which pieces they cut by
their weight delivered them accordingly: and herein they are to use good and
exact sizing, to prevent the culling of moneys for the transporter, or the
goldsmiths for melting them for to convert into plate.

Concerning the finesse of the moneys of other countries, with their weight and
number of pieces in the Mark of eight ounces, (which I have reduced to the
pound Troy of twelve ounces) I have here made a plain declaration as follows,
to instruct all Merchants and Goldsmiths therein, for the common good;
observing that some men (not over wise in Mint affairs) perceiving the Mark
to be divided into 24 carrats for gold, What 36 carrats fine is.
and that one Mark and a half are taken to the pound of 12 ounces, they have
done the like for finesse, and (unadvisedly) termed gold thirty and six
carrats fine, which is exorbitant of the general observation.

Touching the several standards of money in other countries (as you may see by
the contents of the said declaration, whereby a man shall many times receive
coins of above twenty standards in one hundredth pounds) it is the only
fallacy in exchange that can be, whereby no merchant is able to know whether
he have the true value of the sum to be paid him: but he is carried with
the stream of valuation and tolleration of money to go current, as in the
next Chapter shall be declared; and all men commonly have a regard to the great
moneys used in every country, making account that other smaller moneys have
their true valuation thereafter.

As the Philip Dollers of ten ounces fine, Standards of foreign coin
and 7 9/04 pieces to the Mark.

The Holland Dollers of nine ounces fine, and 8 8/9 pieces in the Mark.

The Spanish Royal of eleven ounces four penny weight, and nine pieces the
Mark.

The Gueldres and Frizeland Dollers of ten ounces four penny weight, and 9
^/2 pieces.

The Shillings of Zeland of six ounces fine, and thirty and eight pieces the
Mark.

The Golden Royal of twenty and three carrats 3 grains fine, and forty and
six pieces the Mark.

The French Crown of twenty and two carrats fine, and seventy and two pieces
in the Mark.

The golden Rider of the States of twenty and two carrats, and twenty and
four in the Mark.

The Albertins or Ducats of Albertus of twenty and three carrats, 3 grains
fine, and being seventy pieces in the Mark, or thirty and five double pieces.

And their daily new coins which they make of several standards which
requires a vigilant eye: but we have shunned industry and labor, which is
the cause that (contrary to my first intention) I abreuiate some things.

A Declaration of the coins of gold, concerning their finesse, and number of
pieces in the pound weight of twelve ounces Troy, every ounce containing
twenty penny weight, and every penny weight twenty and four grains in
weight, and in finesse twenty and four carrats, and every carrat four
grains; calculated for the foreign coin upon the mark weight of eight
ounces, every ounce twenty English, and every English thirty and two azes
for the pound weight, and in finesse twenty and four carrats, and every
carrat twelve grains, unnecessary fractions omitted. THe imperial Royal of
gold always accounted equal with the English Angel in finesse, and in weight
but a little differing of twenty and three carrats, three grains, and sixty
and nine pieces weighing twelve ounces Troy.

The half Royal is but eighteen carrats in finesse, and 105 pieces to the
pound weight.

The Carolus Guildren being parts of it, but fourteen carrats fine, and 126
pieces.

The Rose Noble of England twenty and three carrats 3 grains fine, and 46
pieces to the pound.

The double Royal of Austria of twenty and three carrats 3 grains fine, and
24 pieces to the pound.

The Nobles of Holland, Vtrech and Ouerrysel twenty and three carrats, three
grains, and forty and eight pieces.

The gold Guildren of eighteen carrats, three grains scarce in finesse, and
112 pieces.

The half Noble or Hungary Ducat, twenty and three carrats, 3 grains fine,
and 113 pieces.

The Bishops ducat fine twenty and three carrats, and 105 pieces to the pound
weight.

The Ducats of Italy, Venice, Turkey, and Rome twenty and three carrats,
three grains, and 106 pieces: other Italian ducats, and the ducats of Guelders
twenty and three carrats, one grain, and 106 pieces.

The Angel of England of Queen Elizabeth twenty and three carrats, 3
grains, and seventy two pieces.

The Sovereign of the said Queen, twenty and two carrats fine, and sixty
pieces to the pound.

The old Sovereigns of more weight, twenty and two carrats fine, and 54
pieces.

The half Sovereign fine but twenty carrats, and 120 pieces to the pound.

The Angel with the O. is but 23 carrats fine, and 72 scarce to the pound.

The Angel with three Lions 22 carrat fine, and 76 pieces to the pound weight.

The half Noble, with the Lions and the Noble of Bridges 23 carrats, and 88
pieces.

The Andrew Guilder fine eighteen carrats, three grains, and one grain, some
pieces 108.

The Gulielmus Gilder fine eighteen carrats, one grain, and 108 pieces to the
pound.

The Gold Guilder of the States twenty carrats fine, and 120 pieces to the
pound.

The Golden Fleece or Toyson d' or 23 carrats three grains and 81 pieces.

The Phillips Guildren fine fifteen carrats three grains, and 111 pieces to
the pound.

The Ioannes Guildren fine sixteen carrats, and 109 pieces to the pound.

The Nobles of Gaunt and Zealand twenty three carrats fine, and fifty four
pieces.

The half Imperial Crown twenty two carrats, 1 grains, and 107 pieces.

The Henricus Noble of England twenty three carrats 3 grains, and 53 pieces.

The old English Crown somewhat better than twenty two carrats fine, and 100
pieces.

The Henry Noble of France twenty two carrats fine, and fifty one pieces to
the pound.

The half Henry Noble fine twenty two carrats, 2 grains, and 108 pieces to
the pound.

The Floret Crown of France twenty three carrats, 3 grains, and 100 pieces.

The Charles French Crown twenty three carrats, three grains fine, and 100
pieces.

The Floret of France standing twenty two carrats, and 100 pieces to the pound.

The old Golden Lion of Flanders twenty three carrats, three grains, and 79
pieces.

The ducat of Castile twenty three carrats, three grains fine, and 79 pieces
likewise.

The Spanish ducat 23 carrats, two grains fine, and 105 pieces to the pound.

The Holland ducat twenty three carrats, two grains fine, and 105 pieces
likewise.

The double ducat of Zealand twenty three carrats fine, and 52 pieces to the
pound.

The ducats of Navarre, Majorca, and others twenty three carrats, one grain,
and 52 pieces.

The Spanish Pistolets twenty two carrats fine, and 108 pieces to the pound.

The Milreys ducat of Portugal twenty two carrats, one grain fine, and
forty eight pieces to the pound.

The Contrefait Milreys is but twenty one carrat fine, and likewise forty
eight pieces.

The Emanuel ducat of Portugal twenty three carrats, 3 grains, and 105
pieces to the pound.

The Emanuel great Crusate of Portugal twenty three carrats, three grains,
and 10 pieces.

The Ioannes great Crusate is but twenty two carrats, three grains fine, and
10 pieces.

The ducat, with the short Cross of Portugal twenty two carrats, three
grains, and 105 pieces.

The ducat, with the long Cross twenty two carrats, one grain fine, and
likewise 105 pieces.

The ducat with the long Cross of Batenborgh nineteen carrats fine, and 105
pieces.

The Pistolets of Italy twenty two carrats, and some twenty one carrat 2
grains, and 108 pieces.

The Flemish Ryder twenty three carrats, three grains fine, and 105 pieces to
the pound.

The Guilders and Vrisland Ryders, of the year 1583 fine, twenty one carrats,
and 108 pieces.

The Ryder of Burgandie twenty three carrats fine, and 105 pieces to the pound.

The English Salut and the half, twenty three carrats, three grains, and 108
pieces.

The Schuytken or Ship of Flanders twenty two carrats, one grain fine, and 109
pieces.

The Ryder of Guilders Of fourteen carrats fine, and 114 pieces to the pound.

The Phillip Clincart Of fourteen carrats fine, and 114 pieces to the pound.

The Ryder of Deuenter, Campen, and Swoll twelve carrats, three grains, and
114 pieces.

David guil.

Of Trier is 17 carrats, 2 grains and 114 pieces to the pound weight. Of
Vtrecht 16 carrats fine -- and 114 pieces to the pound weight. Of the Harp 15
carrats fine -- and 114 pieces to the pound weight.
The Peter of Louaine of 17 carrats fine, and likewise 114 pieces to the pound.

The Clemmer guilder of 13 carrats fine and 114 pieces.

The Frederick of Beyeren guilder fourteen carrats, and 117 pieces to the
pound.

The Arnaldus guilder twelve carrats fine, and 138 pieces to the pound.

The Postulat of Bourbon 12 carrats fine, and 136 pieces to the pound.

The Postulats -- Of Horn -- 10 Carrats -- fine, and 156 pieces to the pound
Of Guliers -- 9 Carrats 3 grains fine, and 156 pieces to the pound Of Cleue --
9 Carrats grains fine, and 156 pieces to the pound Of Fran. Friar -- 9 Carrats
-- fine, and 156 pieces to the pound Of the Dog and Cat 12 carrat fine, and 136
pieces.


The nine Stiuers pieces of Batenborgh and Frise, seven carrats, one grain,
and 176 pieces.

The Gulielmus ducat of Batenborgh twenty one carrats, three grains, and 52
pieces.

The other ducat of Stephanus, but nineteen carrats grain, and 52 pieces.

The ducat of Nimeghen with Stephen, twenty one carrats, one grain, and 52
pieces.

The new ducats of Saint Victor Pancratius, Vict. Batenborgh, W. B. Margarite
Toren, Petrus Rechem, George Rechem, twenty one carrats, three grains, and
106 pieces.

The ducats Victor H. B. 20 Carrats fine and all 106 pieces to the pound. Water
ducats and the 20 Carrats fine and all 106 pieces to the pound. Marie of
Batenborgh 20 Carrats fine and all 106 pieces to the pound. Ducat wirh the
Checker 20 Carrats fine and all 106 pieces to the pound. Ducat of Denmark 20
Carrats fine and all 106 pieces to the pound. Pancratius Alleb. H. 19 Carrats
fine and all 106 pieces to the pound. Oswald ducat Cusa -- 19 Carrats fine and
all 106 pieces to the pound.
The Ducat of Nimmeghen 1569 fine, eighteen carrats, two grains, and 108
pieces.

New angels coined heretofore -- Of Thoren- 22 Carrats 1 grains And all 72
pieces to the pound. Of Horn -- 22 Carrats 1 grains And all 72 pieces to the
pound. Of Batenb. 21 Carrats 3 grains And all 72 pieces to the pound. Of Viana
-- 18 Carrats 3 grains And all 72 pieces to the pound. Of H. M -- 17 Carrats
-- And all 72 pieces to the pound.


The Scots Pistolet ninteene carrats, two grains fine, and 108 pieces to the
pound.

The Ryder with the Loaves fine 10 carrats, and 114 pieces to the pound.

The Pistolets, Dilege and Legion, fine, eighteen carrats, and 108 pieces to
the pound.

The ducats Ferdinand of Batenborgh 19 carrats, and 106 pieces to the pound.

The ducats Ferdinand and Carolus of Horn eighteen carrats, and 106 pieces to
the pound.

The double ducat of Albertus of Austria twenty three carrats, 3 grains fine,
52 pieces.

The single ducat of Albertus of Austria twenty three carrats, three grains,
and 78 pieces.

The double third parts of the said double ducats twenty three carrats, three
grains, and 70 pieces.

The single third part of the said ducat twenty three carrats, three grains,
and 126 pieces to the pound.

The Unite piece, called Iacobus of England twenty two carrats, and thirty
six pieces to the pound.

The Ryder of the unite Low Provinces also twenty two carrats, and 36 pieces
to the pound.

The half Iacobus and Ryders accordingly in finenesse and pieces.

The ducats of the Estates of the united Provinces, with the Letters, 22
carrats, and 105 pieces.

The new twenty shilling pieces of England twenty two carrats fine, and 39
pieces.

The half and fourth part of it accordingly.

The Scots piece of the Cross Daggers twenty two carrats fine, and 72 pieces
to the pound.

The Scots Rider of twenty two carrats, and some of the finenesse of the Scots
Pistolet.

Note, that here are set down many Species or Pieces of gold, which are little
or none at all to be found: And although some are found in great quantity; yet
are they not made current in the united Provinces, by their last valuation of
the one and twentieth day of July 1622 hereafter declared. The like is in the
Reconciled Provinces under the Arch-Dutches Isabella Clara Eugenia of Austria,
as also in Germany: so that the general knowledge of them all, may give to
every man better satisfaction. And the like must be understood of the Silver
Coins of all Countries hereafter declared, with some addition of mere Copper
Coins. And whereas the Stiuer is the fundamental Coin, whereof twenty make
the Guilder, it is to be observed, That sixteen Copper pence are reckoned in
Holland and those united Provinces for one Stiuer, and so is the said Stiuer
two Groats Flemmish, called half Stiuers, every half Stiuer eight pence
Hollandts: also twenty four Mites is a Stiuer in the other Countries, etc.

A Declaration of the coins of Silver, concerning their finesse, and number of
pieces in the pound weight of twelve ounces Troy, every ounce weighing twenty
penny weight, and every penny weight twenty and four grains, and
containing likewise in finesse twelve ounces, every ounce twenty penny
weight, and every penny weight twenty and four grains; calculated for the
foreign coin upon the mark weight of eight ounces, every ounce twenty
penny weight, and every penny weight twenty and four grains in weight,
and likewise in finesse twelve ounces twenty penny weight, and 24 grains,
unnecessary fractions omitted, as near as conveniently could be computated
etc.

THe Philip Doller ten ounces fine, and 10 5/7 pieces to the pound weight.
The half, the fourth, the fifth, and tenth part accordingly, that is to say,
all of ten ounces fine, and pieces 21 3/7, 42 6/7, 53 4/7, and 107 1/7 to the
pound*

The twentieth part of the said Doller five ounces fine, and 107 pieces to the
pound.

The fortieth part of the said Doller, five ounces fine, and 214 pieces to the
pound.

The Carolus Gueldren or of the said Doller, ten ounces fine, and 16 1 pieces.

The old four Styuers piece with the Eagle, Charles and Philip, seven ounces,
7 penny fine, and sixty pieces.

The old double Styuer seven ounces, 7 penny weight in finesse, and 120 pieces.

The old three Styuers piece, eleven ounces, three penny weight, eighteen
grains fine, and 120 pieces to the pound.

The silver Fleece of three Styuers, ten ounces, ten penny weight, and 108
pieces.

The three groot or Deniers fine, five ounces, ten penie weight, and 117 pieces.

The old Styuer of three ounces, fourteen penny weight, four grains, and
120 pieces.

The new Styuer following, three ounces, thirteen penny weight, eight
grains, and 120 pieces.

The 17 Duyts, ten ounces, ten penie weight fine, and 147 pieces.

The half Styuer, three ounces, ten penny weight, and 201 pieces to the pound.

The quarter Styuer Oort, one ounce, 17 penny weight, and 158 pieces.

The eight part Stiuer Duyt fine, one ounce, fourteen penny weight, and 474
pieces.

The Hollandts penny fine, 19 penny weight, and 518 pieces.

The Styuer of the States United, 4 ounces fine, and 168 pieces.

The Styuer of Vtrecht, three ounces fine, and 167 pieces.

The nine Duyts penny of Charles and Philip, four ounces, fourteen penny
weight, 129 pieces.

The half Ruyters blanke, four ounces, fourteen penny weight, and 256
pieces.

The Brass penny and the half, four ounces, ten penny weight, and 120
pieces.

The Spanish Ryalls fine, eleven ounces, 3 penny weight, and 108 pieces.

The Saluator and Ryall of Venice, eleven ounces, ten penny weight, and 96
pieces.

The Italian Ryalls of nine ounces seuenteen penny, and nine ounces 14 penny,
and nine ounces eleven penny, pieces 108.

The course Romish Ryalls of seven ounces fine, and 108 pieces.

The eleven Duyts of Charles Limb. four ounces, fifteen penny weight, and
120 pieces.

The 11 Duyts of Holland, six ounces scarce, and 144 pieces.

The half Ruyters blank of Holland, 3 ounces fine, and 144 pieces

The five Groot of Flanders, and double Sassenars, ten ounces, 6 penny, and
146 pieces.

The 5 Groot of Gaunt, 5 ounces, 13 penny weight, and 145 pieces

The 17 Duyts of Lodouick, Liege, Philip, Guelders, Charles, Limborgh, Philip
of Flaunders, two standing Lions, nine ounces fine, and 145 pieces.

The 17 Duyts of Sluice, 9 ounces, 5 penie weight, and 148 pieces.

The double Vierysers fine, four ounces, ten penny weight, and 138 pieces to
the pound.

The Snaphanen coined for three Batts, seven ounces, 7 penny weight, and 39
pieces.

The Creuciat of John of Cleave, eight ounces, seven penie weight fine, and 39
pieces.

The five Styuer piece of Liege, seven ounces, eleven penny weight fine, and
48 pieces.

The five Styuer piece of Gueldres, eight ounces, 1 penny weight, and 48
pieces.

The Snaphane of Nimegen, Deuenter, and Cleave, seven ounces, eleven penny
weight, and 48 pieces.

The Shilling M.E. and five Groots Philip of Flanders, eleven ounces, three
penny, and 135 pieces.

The other five Groot of Philip of Flanders, ten ounces, foureteen penny
weight, four grains, and 135 pieces.

The five Styuer of Cambray, Liege, Horn, six ounces, 6 penny weight, 48 and
51 pieces.

The Shillings of Gueldres, Vtrecht, Freese, and Zealand, 1586 fine six ounces,
and 57 pieces.

The Shilling of Bridges, 1582 fine, five ounces, and 57 pieces to the pound.

The Shilling of Gaunt 1583 fine, seven ounces, seven penie weight, and 54
pieces.

The Styuer of Gant 1583 fine, three ounces, and 175 pieces.

The Styuers of Groeninghen, Cambray, and Liege, fine three ounces, five penny
weight, and 135 pieces.

The eleven Duyts of Philip and Marie, eleven ounces, 3 penny fine, and 270
pieces.

The Ferdinand of Tiroll ten ounces, 7 penny weight, and 270 pieces.

The pieces of 5 Groot of 1520, and Ma. Flandres nine ounces, fourteen penny
weight, and 120 pieces.

Dollers

The Doller of the States nine ounces fine, and 12 1/64 pieces to the pound
weight.

The Hollandts Doller nine ounces fine, and 13 pieces to the ll.

The Dollers of Gueldres and Vtrecht nine ounces fine, and fifteen pieces to
the pound.

The Dollers of Zutphen and Gueldres 1586 fine, ten ounces, four penny, and
13 pieces.

The Hollandts Doller with the Crown 8 ounces, and 13 5/3 pieces.

The Rickx Doller Oncia eleven ounces, five penny weight, and 12 pieces.

The other sorts of Rickx Dollers of eleven ounces, and eleven ounces three
penny, and 12 pieces.

The Poland Doller fine, seven ounces, fifteen penny weight, and 13 pieces.
The Bohemia Ne. Op. fine, seven ounces, fifteen penny weight, and 13 pieces.
The Batenborgh Dol. fine, seven ounces, fifteen penny weight, and 13 pieces.
The Bommell Doller. fine, seven ounces, fifteen penny weight, and 13 pieces.
The Polish Guelder of sixty Creutzer, eleven ounces, 3 penny fine, and
fifteen pieces.

The Dollers of Brisgau, Tremone ten ounces, fifteen penny weight fine, and
fifteen pieces.

The Dollers of Luneborgh ten ounces, sixteen penny fine, and fifteen pieces.

The Basell sixty Creutzer, Reynsborch, and Ismensen ten ounces, 13 penny,
and fifteen pieces.

The Doller of Riga ten ounces, 2 penny weight, and 13 pieces

Teastons.

Of Mantua, Francis -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45 pieces. Of
Ferrara, Hercules and Alphonsus fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45
pieces. Of Berne, Vincent -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45
pieces. Of Ottomanus Berne -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45
pieces. Of Lucerne, Episcopus -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45
pieces. Of Milan, Lodouicus -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45
pieces. Of Milan, Galeacius -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45
pieces. Of Friborgh, Nicolas -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45
pieces. Of Sedun, Nicol. dan Adrian -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and
45 pieces. Of Solod, Vrsus -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45
pieces. Of Sauoye, Carolus -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45
pieces. Of Castile -- fine eleven ounces, 5 penny weight, and 45 pieces.
Teastons.

Of Portugal Io.V.L. ten ounces, seven penny weight fine, and forty and two
pieces to the pound. Of France Franciscus ten ounces, seven penny weight fine,
and forty and two pieces to the pound. Of Lorayne an. 1524. and 29. ten
ounces, seven penny weight fine, and forty and two pieces to the pound. Of
Spain, Ferdinand ten ounces, 10 penny weight fine, and 39 pieces. Of Navarre,
Anna ten ounces, 10 penny weight fine, and 39 pieces. Of Baden, Chrysostom
ten ounces, 10 penny weight fine, and 39 pieces. Of Sauoy, Carolus ten ounces,
10 penny weight fine, and 39 pieces. Of Navarre, Henricus ten ounces, 10
penny weight fine, and 39 pieces. Of Monserat, George and Guill. ten ounces, 4
penny weight fine, and 42 pieces. Of Geneua, -- ten ounces, 4 penny weight
fine, and 42 pieces.
The Quarter Crowns.

Of France 4 Escu of ten ounces, 6 penny fine, and 39 pieces to the pound. Of
Lorayne fine nine ounces, 8 penny weight, and 39 pieces to the pound. Of Sauoy
Philip, ten ounces, 16 penny weight, and 39 pieces to the pound.
The Rickx Doller of late Anno 1567 fine ten ounces, 12 13 and 14 penny fine,
and 12 pieces.

The piece of Cambray 1/10 of a Doller six ounces, ten penny weight, and 123
pieces.

The 38 Gustaue of Liege ten ounces, four penny weight scarce, and pieces 12.

The Christopher Doller 45 10 ounces fine, and 12 pieces.

The Doller Guliel. Sweaden 10 ounces fine, and 12 pieces.

The Angel of Scrickelborgh ten ounces, 7 penny weight, and 78 pieces.

The ten Creutzer of Salsborgh, Rauenborgh, Frise, and Saxony eight ounces,
seven penny, and 64 pieces.

The three Carolus of Frankford, Campidona, Reynsborch, Patauia, Ernestus,
Otingus, Carolus and Salsborgh nine ounces fine, and 78 pieces.

The six Creutzer of Insborgh 10 ounces fine, and 124 pieces.

The Gross of Salsborgh four ounces, 12 penny weight, and 39 pieces.

Batsen of four Creutzers fine, five ounces, seven penny weight and 109
pieces. Of Fribourgh, Colmograue, fine, five ounces, seven penny weight and
109 pieces. Raynsbourgh, Taunte, fine, five ounces, seven penny weight and 109
pieces. Cost 1530, Roy, and fine, five ounces, seven penny weight and 109
pieces. Schafhuysen, Bauiere, fine, five ounces, seven penny weight and 109
pieces. Brandebourgh, Ottinge. fine, five ounces, seven penny weight and 109
pieces.
The Ausb. Saxon Gross, and Coniugsteyn five ounces, seven penny fine, and
108 pieces.

The Curiensis gross, Kempton, Bassau, and Brisae, five ounces, seven pence,
and 106 pieces.

Of Noiling, Ambass. Markegraue, George and Wormeser, four ounces, 12 penny,
and 94 pieces.

The Gross of Salsbourgh, six ounces 2 penny weight, and 118 pieces.

The Gross of Viena, six ounces, four penny weight, and 132 pieces.

Of Ausbourgh and Reynsbourgh, six ounces 4 penny fine, and 155 pieces.

Of Carinthia, Tauen, Basell, Shaf-huysen, Campido and Brisgraue, six ounces,
and 118 ^/2 pieces.

Nummi dragme, six ounces fine, and 140 pieces.

Nummi dragme, six ounces, 2 1/^ penny fine, and 118 pieces.

The Gulielmus of Turinghia, six ounces, fifteen penny weight, and 129
pieces.

The Bohemia Senube and the half, 5 ounces, seven penny fine, and 129 pieces.

The 1 silver Gross, three ounces 7 penny weight, and eighty seven pieces.

The Kempter Batts, four ounces 12 penny weight, 192 pieces.

The Munichen Batts, four ounces, ^2 penny fine, and 186 pieces.

The Gulielmus Lion piece, two ounces, five penny weight fine, and 150, and
179 pieces.

Pieces of twelve Creutzers, eight ounces, 7 penny weight, and 61 pieces to
the pound.

Of Viena, and Bauiere of twelve Creutzers, eight ounces, 7 penny fine, and 57
pieces.

Of twelve Creutzers ten ounces, ten penny weight fine, and 61 pieces.

Of six Creutzers, ten ounces, ten penny weight fine, and 123 pieces.

Of three Creutzers, five ounces, ten penny fine, and 136 1/^ pieces.

Of six Creutzers of Viena, eight ounces, 7 penny fine, and 114 pieces.

Of three Creutzers of Viena, four ounces, 8 penny weight fine, and 129
pieces.

Of three Creutzers of Bauiere, four ounces, eight penny weight, and 375
pieces.

Of Ausbourgh and V^me Creutzers 5 ounces, 5 penny weight, and pieces 384.

Albi of Coloigne, Mentz, and Trier, 5 ounces fine, and 345, 179, and 342
pieces.

Albi of Norenbourgh, Frankford, Bambourgh, and Palatin Rhene, four ounces,
eighteen penny, and 273 pieces.

Bohemia white penny, five ounces, seven penny weight fine, and 924 pieces.

Bohemia black penny, two ounces, 13 penny fine, and 990 pieces.

Dupli Maui 1/9; of Gulielmus Turinghia, two ounces, fifteen penny weight,
and 440 pieces.

Simpli dupli of five ounces ten penny weight, and 882 pieces.

The 1/1^ of one silver gross, or duodena, three ounces 3 penny weight, and
874 pieces.

Duplus of two ounces fine, and 324 pieces to the pound.

The six gross of Polonia, six ounces fine, and 13 7/8 pieces to the pound.

The Sigismond of Prussia 1534, 10 ounces, 11 penny weight fine, and 69 pieces.

The other with the Arms of Dansicke, 10 ounces penny fine, and 69 pieces.

The Sigismond 1532, and 1535, but 10 ounces, four penny weight fine, and 69
pieces.

The four gross penny, eight ounces fine, and 81 pieces.

The three gross Prussia alb. 10 ounces, 10 penny fine, and 138 pieces.

The same of Melicin 1340, of 10 ounces four penny, and 10 penny fine, and
138 pieces.

The gross of Prague, nine ounces 12 penny fine, and 180 pieces.

The Ferdinand of Dansicke, 5 ounces fine, and 180 pieces.

The Wersbourgh soli of Dans and Prussia, 5 ounces 6 penny, and 157 pieces.

The two Crosses and Har, four ounces fine, and 180 pieces.

The Bre 1499, the Key and Joan, three styuers, ten ounces, four penny fine,
and 156 pieces.

The eight Shilling of Dansicke 1541 fine, ten ounces, twelve penny, and 156
pieces.

The Deghen of Russia, Moscouia, and de Narde, eleven ounces, thirteen penny
weight, and 545 pieces or Dengen.

The mark stick of Lubecke, Lady Marie ten ounces 16 penny, and twenty
seven pieces.

The three Arms of Magenbourgh, five ounces 8 penny, and twenty seven pieces.

The other piece of eleven ounces, 3 penny weight, and fifty one pieces.

The Franks of France, three to one Crown, ten ounces fine, and 26 pieces.

The Turones of France, ten ounces, eighteen penny weight, and 26 pieces.

The French two soulz, and four soulz, six ounces 6 penny fine, and 117
pieces.

The double H and of one Soulz, three ounces, fifteen penny fine, and 132
pieces.

The old soulz with, four ounces, five penny weight fine, and 175 pieces.

The ordinary French soulz, three ounces ten penny fine, and 147 pieces.

The late French soulz, three ounces 6 penny fine, and 147 pieces.

The Lyarts of France H. three ounces fine Scarce.

The Petty denier, Pa. and Petty denier Tor. one ounce, and 270, and 337
pieces.

Petty Maille were one ounce fine, and 450 peecs, and now all Copper.

The shilling of England of Queen Elizabeth, eleven ounces, two penny fine,
and sixty pieces.

The English groats, eleven ounces, two penny weight, and 129 pieces.

The English shilling of late, eleven ounces fine, and sixty two pieces to the
pound.

The piece of nine pence, called silver Harp, eleven ounces fine, and eighty
two pieces.

The Base Irish Harp, three ounces fine, and eighty two pieces.

The Old Harp, nine ounces, six penny weight fine, and 102 pieces.

The King Henry base groat, four ounces, two penny weight fine, and pieces.

The English six pence or half shilling, eleven ounces fine, and 124 pieces.

The penny, two pence, and half penny acordingly.

The three Ryall pieces of Albertus of Austria, ten ounces, fifteen penny
fine, and forty pieces.

The single Ryalls, the half, and the fourth parts accordingly.

The double Guilder of Albertus, ten ounces, 15 penny weight, and 14 pieces.

The single Guilder, the half and quarters of the same finenes, and pieces
accordingly.

The pieces of four, two, and one Stiuer since 1590.

The pieces of eight Ryalls of Spain, of eleven ounces, four penny weight,
and 13 pieces.

The said pieces made at Mexico in the Indies, eleven ounces fine, and 13
pieces.

The Lion Doller of the Prince of Orange, of nine ounces fine, and thirteen
pieces.

The silver Ryder of Guilders and Frize-land, correspondent with the States
Doller of nine ounces.

The Dollers of Guelders and Vtrecht, ten ounces, ten and twelve penny
fine, and thirteen pieces.

The great silver Royal of the States correspondent with the Phillip Doller.

The 1/20 part of the said great Royal, with the Arrows accordingly.

The Doller of Zealand, with the Eagles of nine ounces fine, and 13 pieces.

The Edward Doller of England, of eleven ounces two penny weight fine, and 11
pieces.

The Doller of Scotland with the cross Daggers, eleven ounces, two penny
weight fine, and 11 pieces.

The Mark of Scotland eleven ounces two penny weight fine, and 54 pieces.

The Doller of Frize-land coined 1601, of nine ounces fine, and 13 pieces.

Coins made of mere Copper.
THe Ortgens, whereof four make one Stiuer, and two the half Stiuer.

The Duyts also four make one Stiuer.

The Negenmannekens, the eight make a Stiuer, and four the half Stiuer.

The three Mites, whereof eight pieces to the Stiuer is 24 Mites.

The sixteen pence Hollandts make one Stiuer, and eight the half Stiuer.

For other Copper Moneys, read the fifth precedent Chapter of Moneys.

Error of Trial pieces for the Standard.
So I do conclude this Chapter, with an error committed in the making of the
Standard Trial Pieces, used in most Kingdoms and States to charge the
Mint-masters to make the Moneys by; wherein they do not proceed according to
the Rule of Arithmatike, by observing true weight and finenesse. For if it be
appointed to make a Standard piece of ten ounces fine, they will take
certain ounces of fine Silver and Copper proportionable thereunto, and melt
them together, and being made into a plate of Silver, divide the same into
three equal parts to be delivered, one to the King, another to the Warden, and
the third to the Mint-master; and hereof are Assayes made both of this piece
and the moneys, and so compared together. As if a man should take eleven ounces
two penny weight of fine Silver, and eighteen penny weight of Copper, both
in weight and melt them together, making twelve ounces by weight, and never
weight them after they be commixed: But say this is sterling Standard, whereas
the weight, both of the one and of the other does proportionate the Standard by
weight, for in regard of the waste of copper this is better than Standard, and
ought to be made exactly: so that the pieces also are to be correspondent to
the pound weight, for the foundation rises from hence, as in the following
Chapter appears.

CHAP. IX. Of the Valuation of Moneys, and the Proportion between Gold and
Silver.
VAluation of Moneys is the Spirit which gives life unto coins, for without
it, weight and finenesse are in the nature of Bullion or Materials.

This Valuation is twofold: Two fold is the valuation of moneys.
the first is done by public authority of Princes and States, whereby the
pieces of coins are esteemed at a price certain, both for Gold and Silver, to
go current for that value within their kingdoms and dominions: the second, is
the Valuation of Merchants by way of Exchange between us and other nations,
which is predominant and ouerruleth the former, as heretofore has been
touched, and now will be proved.

The Kings or Princes Valuation is effected three manner of ways, Kings
valuation.
viz. by inhauncing the price of the coin, by Proclamation; secondly, by
embeasiling the standard of money by allay; and thirdly, by altering the
proportion between Gold and Silver.

The Merchants Valuation is also effected three manner of ways, Merchants
valuation.
viz. by the price of Exchange for moneys rising and falling from time to time;
by the tolleration of the coins at a higher rate between them; and by the
combination with Mint-masters, inhanceing the price of the Mark of Gold and
Silver. Of all these in order briefly.

The Kings Valuation is derived or drawn from the very piece or pieces made
out of the pound weight of twelve ounces, or the mark of eight ounces, which
the Romans did call Nummus a numerando, to tell or reckon by. The Saxons gave
it the name Pfemimg, or Pennimick in Ducth, from whence the word penny is
derived: for they cutt^ng twenty pieces out of the pound Troy of twelve
ounces, made twenty pence every way, that is to say, twenty pence in weight,
twenty pence in value; Weight and finesse both alike with the number of pieces.
and consequently dividing the finenesse also by twenty penny weight, and
every penny weight in twenty and four grains, which was the ancient
sterling standard of Osbright the Saxon King, seven hundredth years past: which
Valuation so continued until King Edward the third, and until Henry the
sixth, and then was valued at thirty pence the said ounce, and continued
until Edward the fourth, The ounce of silver advanced because of the inhancing
of money beyond the seas.
and then valued at forty pence, and so continued until King Henry the
eight, and then was valued at forty and five pence, and so continued until
Queen Elizabeth, who (after the decry of the base money made by King Edward
the sixth, which King Henry his father had caused to be coined) did restore
the sterling standard to her great benefit, by valuing the said ounce at sixty
pence, or 5 ss, inhauncing the same one full third part; so that one of those
pence became three pence by valuation: and Gold was raised according to the
proportion of eleven of fine Silver to one of fine Gold; or eleven of standard
Silver, to one of Crown Gold, which valuation of Silver has continued
hitherto, with little alteration.

But beyond the seas there has been great inhancing, both for the coins of
silver and gold, as well in France as in the Low Countries, and Germany, to
Englands incredible loss, as is at large declared in our The Canker of
Englands Commonwealth.
Treatise of Exchange. This (daily) inhauncing beyond the seas began in the
time of King Henry the eight, who went about to reform the same: but
afterward finding that if he should inhance his price of moneys, likewise they
would still advance theirs more and more, he began but moderately; and whereas
the Angel Noble (so called) was at six shillings eight pence, Angel Noble
inhanced.
he ^aused the same to be valued at seven shillings and four pence, by a
Proclamation in the eighteenth year of his reign, and within two months
after at seven shillings six pence, and withal he did write unto other Princes
concerning the same, and Commissioners came over about it, but all was in
vain; whereupon he gave an absolute authority to Cardinal Wolsey by letters
patents as follows.

HENRY the eight, by the grace of God, King of England and of France,
defendor of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, to the most reverend Father in God, our
most trusty and most entierly beloved Councellor, the Lord Thomas, Cardinal
of York, Archbishop, Legate de Leicester of the Sea Apostolic, Primat of
England, and our Chauncellor of the same, greeting. For as much as coins of
moneys, as well of gold as of silver, be of late days raised and inhaunced
both in the realm of France, Francis the French King, and Charles the fifth
Emperor.
as also in the Emperors Lowcountries, and in other parts, unto higher prices
than the very poiz weight and finesse and valuation of the same, and otherwise
than they were accustomed to be current; by means whereof, the money of this
our realm is daily, and of a long season has been, by sundry persons (as
well our subjects, as strangers, for their particular gain and lucre) conveyed
out of this realm into the parts beyond the seas, and so is likely to continue
more and more, to the great hinderance of the generality of Our subjects and
people, and to the no little impouerishing of our said realm, if the same be
not speedily remedied and foreseen. We, after long debating of the matter with
you and sundry other of Our Council, and after remission made unto outward
Princes for reformation thereof, finding finally no manner of remedy to be had
at their hands, have by mature deliberation determined, That Our coins and
moneys (as well of Gold as of Silver) shall be by our Officers of our Mint
from henceforth made at such finesse, lay, standard and value as may be
equivalent correspondent and agreeable to the rates of the valuation inhaunced
and raised in outward parts, as is before specified: whereupon We have given
commandment by Our other Letters under our great Seal, to the Master Warden,
Comptroller, and other Officers of Our said Mint, and to every of them, to see
this Our determination put in execution of the said coins by Proclamation or
otherwise, as in the print, coin, stroke of the same. Wherefore by these
presents We will and authorize you to proceed not only from time to time,
when you shall seem conveniently by advice of such other Our Council as you
shall think good, to the limitation, description, and devising, how and after
what manner and form Our said coins and moneys may be brought unto the rates
and values, finesse, lay, standard, and print by you and them thought to be
requisite, but also to appoint Our said Officers of Our Mint duly to follow,
execute, obey, and fulfill the same in every point according. In which doing
these Our Letters under our great Seat shall be your sufficient warrant and
discharge; any Act, Statute, Ordinance or Law, or other thing whatsoever it be
to the contrary notwithstanding. In witness whereof We have caused these
presents to be sealed with Our great Seal, at Westminster the 23 day of Iulie,
in the eighteenth year of Our reign etc. Graftons Chronicle does record that
all was to no purpose, for the inhauncing might on both sides have run ad
infinitum. Afterward in the two and twentieth year of his reign, finding
that Merchants did transport still the moneys, or made them over by exchange,
and made no employment upon the commodities of the realm; he caused a
Proclamation to be made according to an old statute 14 Richard 2, Statute of
employment.
That no person should make any exchange contrary to the true meaning thereof,
upon pain to be taken the Kings mortal enemy, and to forfeit all that he
might forfeit.

Hereupon it fell out, that lawless necessity did run to the other extreme
of imbasing the moneys by allay, whereby all things came to be out of order.
For base money makes every thing dear, Base moneys.
and overthrows the course of exchange between Merchants, and causes much
counterfeit money to be made to buy the commodities of the realm, and to
destroy the good moneys, like unto the seven lean Kine of Pharaoth which
devoured the seven fat Kine in a short time: as appeared of late within the
realm of Ireland, which is more dangerous in those kingdoms where their moneys
are of a rich standard, whereby many commotions happen, Commotions about base
money.
as in France during the reign of Philip le Bell. And Peter the fourth King
of Aragon, did for this cause confiscate the Islands of Maiorca and Minorca,
now kingdoms in the Mediterranean sea, whereas the policy of those nations
which do use several standards of moneys, does prevent the same, because that
promiscuously they make and coin moneys of several standards according to the
occasion, which is worthy the observation: and as all extremes are vicious
and defective, so does it befall those countries which will have no base money
at all, and are made a prey unto other nations by the exchange for moneys,
which must be maintained withal, as I have made and shall make more apparent.

Proportion between gold and silver.
The third effect or alteration of the Kings Valuation of money is the
Proportion between gold and silver, being in most countries twelve to one,
that is to say, one pound of silver for one ounce of gold wherein there is more
operation than most men do imagine. For you cannot advance or inhance the one,
but you abate and diminish the other, for they balance upon this parallel. And
whereas England by continuance of eleven to one has been a great looser of
gold; so now by advancing the same not only to twelve to one, but to 13 for
one, there has followed a very great loss of our silver which is over much
abated, as may appear if we do but consider that the French Crown of six
shillings was answered with six shillings in silver, and is now full seven
shillings and four pence; and our six shillings in silver are the very same:
for twelve ounces of Crown gold of twenty and two carrats at 3 ll 6 ss makes
39 ll 12 ss, and 108 French Crowns the which are made out of the pound weight
of twelve ounces at seven shillings four pence, makes also 39 ll 12 ss.
Hereupon to equalize the silver unto gold again will breed a general
inhauncing of things within the realm, for the alteration of the measure of
moneys causes the denomination to follow in number to make up the tale, which
requires great providence. Exchange fallen by the inhauncing of gold in the
Low Countries
For we find that other nations perceiving our gold to be inhanced, have abated
the price of exchange, (according to which the prices of commodities are ruled)
so that the same goes at thirty and four shillings six pence, or thirty and
five shillings Flemish for our twenty shillings sterling, whereas before they
did allow and reckon thirty seven shillings and six pence or thereabouts,
which is above our inhauncing of ten pro cent. and ought to be almost thirty
eight shillings, whereof our Mint men c^n take no notice, much less our
Goldsmiths and Merchants, which either are ignorant, or wise in their own
conceits; and it is a hard matter to find in one man that which belongs to
the professions of many, and when it is found to embrace it; for wisdom
draws back, where blind Byard is audatious.

For mine own part, although it were to be wished (which is not to be hoped)
that we were of the Scithians mind, who contemned silver and gold as much as
other men do admire the same: yet seeing money is by the judgment of the
wisest so necessary to the commonwealth, that it seems to be the Sinowes of
peace, and (as it were) the Life and Breath of warfare; I could not (if I were
a Lawgiuer with Licurgus) banish gold and silver as the causes of much evil,
and bring in iron in place, unless I might be persuaded as he was) of such
good success against unrighteous dealings as issued thereby, but rather use
the precious mettalls so conveniently as I might, and supply the defect with
baser coin, whereunto these chief metals of gold and silver cannot serve
without great loss and inconvenience: Or else I would by the course of
exchange for moneys, prevent all and abound with moneys and bullion, having
such Staple commodities to procure the same withal, whereof other nations are
destitute. Let us now therefore enter into consideration of the Merchants
Valuation in exchange, Merchants valuation predominant.
which we have noted to be predominant and ouerruling the Kings Valuation. For
if the King do value a piece of sterling silver weighing about four penny
weight at twelve pence, it will be current so within the realm. But Merchants in
exchange will value the same at 11 pence, and commonly at eleven pence, and so
it will be transported in specie by a low exchange, and the commodities of the
realm will be sold accordingly, as you may understand by the declaration of
exchanges in our third part of this book hereafter.

This Valuation of Merchants has two handmaides beyond the seas, which do
advance the foreign coin in price, as we do by exchange abate the same. For
Merchants when they have occasion to use any species of coins for
transportation (as Dollers for the Eastcountries to buy corn, or Royalls of
plate for the East Indies, or French Crowns for France) will give one, two or
three Styuers or Soulz upon a piece to have the same, whereby other Merchants
buying commodities, will condition to make their payment in such coins
accordingly; Current money in merchandise.
and so it goes from man to man by tolleration which is called Current money
in merchandise, or Permission money, whereby the same are inhaunced two or
three upon the hundredth at the least. This inconvenience seems to be
remediless, as the Placcart of the Estates of the united Provinces declares,
Anno 1594.
albeit the course of it is beneficial unto them, and in regard of them may
well be called Permission money. For when they will not break the coin of
other nations (as the manner is in all Mints) then it is either valued rather
above the value, which contenteth the said nations, and so is permitted to
pass between man and man, which draws moneys unto them which does not
endure long. Valuation altered by practice with Mint masters.
For the last and third effect of Merchants Valuation between the Mint-masters
(who love to be doing) and the said Merchants comes in place, either by
abating the price of the said foreign coin by Proclamation to avoid their
hands of it, or to gather up coins before they be inhanced, dividing the
benefit between them and the Financiers, who are Officers of their Treasury,
which is done with great dexterity every way; in so much, that when it
seems they will not have foreign coin, and to that end they undervalue the
same; then have they their Exchangers or Brokers to gather up those moneys to
be brought to their Mint, where they will give secretly a benefit, and help
themselves by the sheire, which cannot be done without private authority: So
that all things duly considered, there is nothing but the rule of exchange to
prevent and moderate all these inconveniences, which (to make men believe) is
to undertake Hercules Labors; for herein does the motion consist, and Motus
mayor expellit minorem.

Touching the Proportion between gold and silver in valuation; albeit some are
of opinion, That the same is not much material in the course of traffic, yet
experience has showed unto us, that the contrary must be believed before
their conceits: And whereas they have made observation upon my former assertion
to this purpose, That Spain holds the Proportion of twelve to one, and
Portugal holds but ten to one; they do not mark the reason added
thereunto, which is, That between those Kingdoms there are no commodities to
establish any traffic. So that exportation of silver for gold, Permutation of
Moneys.
or gold for silver, is but a permutation between them without any profit: But
England and other Countries affoording means to import abundance of foreign
commodities, and gold being with us in greater estimation than heretofore
(being but of late years advanced from eleven to twelve for one, An. 1611.
that is to say, From eleven ounces of silver to twelve ounces of silver, for
one ounce of gold) was continually transported in return of the said foreign
commodities, the exchange not answering the true value of the gold: so that now
when our gold is yet more advanced, the silver is thereby more abated in price,
giving 13 for one: and therefore no marvel that gold is imported unto us, and
silver is exported, there being a gain of above ten and twelve pro cent. And
this loss of silver far exceeds the gold in value, because in quantity
there is in the world 500 of silver to one of gold: Silver is 500 to one in
quantity, by weight extant.
and if any silver by accident be imported, it is exported again for the
East Indies and other places, they giving more for it than the price of our
Mint; for gain is the commander of all.

The Proportions used within the memory of man, are as follows.
IN the Low Countries they did reckon two Phillip Dollers, for the Emperors
Royal of gold, whereby one mark of gold did counteruaile eleven mark of
silver, being eleven to one in the pound accordingly.

In Spain one mark of gold was valued at 53 Pesos, every Peso 450 Maluedeis,
and every mark of Silver 2250 Maluedeis, makes the mark of gold to be but
10 valued by silver: but the Spanish Pistolets of twenty two Carrats fine, to
eleven Royalls, is eleven of silver to one of gold.

In France the mark of gold valued at seventy four Crowns, and the silver
at 6 Crowns, makes the proportion 11 11/19 parts, but valuing the French
Crown at three Frankes, is eleven to one.

In England the Angel at ten shillings, and the silver at sixty shillings the
pound Troy of 12 ounces, being that six Angels did weigh an ounce, made also
eleven to one.

In Germany one mark of Silver, at 8 Gold guilders, makes 11 for 1; but the
valuation of moneys being altered has also altered the same.

In Rome the pound of silver at 108 Carlini, and the Ducat of gold 99 is 12 to
1. So at Millaine the Ducat 112, and the Teaston 28 is but 9 for 1. The silver
being so in request there for the making of gold and silver thread, that is to
say, silver thread guilt and white. Now for all places of momentarie traffic
it is 12 to 1, and in England 13 to 1, as has been declared.

The valuation of foreign coin of gold and silver, published in the united
Low Provinces on the 21 day of Iulie 1622, with the orders established by the
Estates of the said Countries, for the better observation of the said
valuation, which never the less are continually infringed from time to time:
And the like is done in other countries; so that to observe our own rule
according to Equality and Equity, will be found the best and safest course of
Politic government. Guilders. Stiuers. Flemish. The great golden Ryder of the
united Provinces. 11 6 or 37 s^ 8 d The half of the said Ryder 5 13 18 10 The
double Ducat of the said Provinces with the Letters 8 10 28 4 The French Crown
3 18 13 0 The Pistolet of Spain of four Pistolets 15 8 51 4 The double
Pistolet of Spain 7 14 25 8 The single Pistolet after the rate 3 17 12 10 The
Albertins or ducats of Albertus of Austria 5 13 18 10 The double Rose Noble of
England 18 12 62 0 The Rose Noble of Henricus, Edward, and Queen Elizabeth 9 6
31 0 The Henricus Noble 8 6 27 8 The Flemish Noble old and new of the united
Countries 8 0 26 8 The old Angel of England 6 4 20 8 The new Ryder of Guelders
and Freeseland 3 13 12 2 The gold Guilder of those Mints 3 2 10 4

All which coins are to be weighed with their accustomed weight, and the
remedy of two grains and no more, with some little advantage over, or at the
least being within the rest of the balance: Provided always, that the coins
of their due finenesse (although they be lighter) shall be current, paying for
every grain wanting, two stiuers.

Silver Coins.
Guilders. Stiuers. Flemish. ss. d. The Lion Doller of the Low Provinces 2 0 6
8 The Rickx Dollers in general 2 10 8 4 The Cross Doller of Albertus 2 7 7 10
The Spanish Ryalls of 8 2 8 8 0 The Doller of Zealand and Frise with the Eagle
1 10 5 0 The Floren or Guilder of Friseland 1 8 4 8 The English Shilling, and
of great Britain 0 10 1 9 The Mark piece, or Thistle of Scotland 0 12 2 0
The Harp of Scotland and Ireland 0 8 1 4

And if any of the said pieces be found to want of their weight, and the
appointed remedy, within the rest of the balance, or some little advantage
over, they shall be current, paying (for every grain wanting) two pence
Hollandts, whereof 16 make one stiuer, and the English groats are made bullion,
or shall not be current.

Small Moneys for ordinary payments.
THe Shillings of all the several Provinces respectively, and of the Mints of
Nimogen, Deuenter, Campen and Swoll 6 Stiuers The half Shillings after the
rate 3 Stiuers The pieces called Flabs of Groninghen 4 stiuers, the double 8
Stiuers The twintigst part of the great silver Royal 2 Stiuers The double and
single stiuers of all these countries 2 and 1 Stiuer

The tenth to be received in copper moneys
1 Of all which small moneys for the payments of rents, interest or abatement of
the same, as also of all manner of Merchandise exceeding in one parcel the
sum of one hundredth Guilders, no man shall be bound to receive more than the
tenth penny.

2 The Duyts according to the order of the Provinces made in the Provincial
Mints, and none other, are as yet tolerated for a Duyt: and all other copper
moneys of the Provincial Mints are also tolerated to be paid out for one
penny the piece, the 16 whereof make one Hollandts Stiuer and not above;
whereas we do intend hereafter to prohibit the same to be current for any
price, because we will provide our selves forthwith with so much copper money
as the commodiousnesse shall require.

3 We do also prohibit from henceforth no copper moneys to be brought into
these countries above two stiuers, upon pain often stiuers for every piece to
be forfeited: and whosoever shall issue any copper moneys above the said price,
shall incur the like penalty of ten stiuers for every piece.

4 And all the said coins shall be current in these Provinces for the prices
aforesaid, declaring all other pieces for bullion, All other coins made
bullion to be molten.
which by this Our proclamation are not valued, prohibiting any of the said
pieces to be offered or received; as also to press any of those which are
valued to be paid at a higher price than they are valued, and likewise offer
to put forth other coins of gold and silver valued, which are clipped, washed,
broken, mended, neiled or otherwise augmented in weight, upon forfeiture of all
the said coins so to be offered at higher rates than this proclamation does
permit: and if the fact be not instantly discovered, to forfeit the value
thereof, and moreover the quadruple or the value thereof, or 24 guilders in
liew thereof, if the said coins did not amount to six guilders for the first
time, the second time double, and for the third time quadruple; and moreover
arbitrable correction according to the quality of the fact.

5 Without that any distinction shall be made, whether the said coins were
instantly paid from foreign parts, or sent from some one Province or Town
into another, in which case, if the receiver thereof will be freed of the said
forfeiture, he is to give notice of it within twenty and four hours after
the receipt thereof unto the Magistrates or other Officers to be thereunto
appointed, to the end they may proceed therein against the sender of the said
coin, as it shall or may appertain.

6 Yet shall the said Receiver keep the said coyns wholly to himself, if the
said moneys be sent unto him in payment of a former debt, and nevertheless
have his action against the party for so much as they shall want of the said
valuation: and if the said coins be sent for any debt as yet not due, or to be
made, the said Receiver shall reserve to himself so much as the forfeiture
comes unto, and the remainder shall be delivered to the said Magistrate or
Officer.

7 The Magistrates in places also where all such moneys are sent at a higher
rate than the said Proclamation, shall be bound to make good the said inhancing
unto the Receiver to whom the said moneys were sent; yet so that they may
redemaund the same of the Magistrate of the place from whence the said coins
were sent, who shall also instantly reembourse the same and have power to
recover it, with the forfeitures thereunto belonging, and hereby ordained
against the persons and goods of those who have sent the same at a higher price.

8 All which shall be observed also from the one Province unto another, or the
Counting-houses of the generality, wherein they shall be ayding and assisting
each other, to maintain the said Proclamation accordingly.

9 And We do intend that the said forfeitures shall be imposed as well upon the
receiver as upon the payer, every one to the full, unless one of the parties
did forthwith denounce the same to the Magistrates, in which case (whether he
be the receiver or payer) he shall be quit and free of the said forfeiture, and
moreover enjoy the one third part of the offenders forfeiture.

10 Prohibiting and expressly commanding, that no man henceforth shall presume
to buy or sell any wares or merchandises, or deal for moneys by exchange or
interest, nor buy new or old rents, or otherwise deal and negotiate than
according to the said price and valuation of moneys of this Our permission and
Ordinance, upon forfeiture of the said sums, and moreover quadruple the value
thereof.

11 Our intention being, That no paiments of Imposts, Demesnes or Revenues of
Lands, Towns, Villages, contracts of Merchandises, Hires, Rents, interest or
any Debts shall be paid than according to this our valuation; to weete, every
Guelder with the one half of a Lion Doller, and one pound Flemish with three
Lion Dollers, or with other coins of gold and silver, according to their
intrinsicke value, as the said Lion Doller, or the great Golden Royal now
contains. After which two (as being chief and standard pieces) all the
precedent moneys of gold and silver are valued; Standard pieces of the united
Low Provinces 1622.
without that it shall be lawful unto any man to make any lighter payment than
according to the said valuation, upon pain the same to be void, and no course
of law to be ministered thereupon, and moreover to incur the penalty in the
next Article mentioned: according to which, all courts of justice, Magistrates
of the bench or judgment seats, and all other Justices are to pronounce their
sentences, and to make their decrees, notwithstanding any trespass which
contrary to Our intention and expectation might be practiced, or at any time
be put in ure, cancelling from henceforth all those which are contrary to the
same, forbidding any execution, depositation of moneys, or other courses of
justice to be done thereupon: declaring moreover, that all such Judges as shall
have pronounced the sentences, and the said Officers that shall have assisted
therein shall forfeit and incur the penalty of five Netherland golden Royals
for every person at every time.

12 And to the end that the stabilitie and certainty of this valuation (which
we have taken to heart and in singular commendation, and intend further to care
for) may take the better effect, We do ordain, that instantly upon the
publication of this Proclamation (whereof mention is made in the latter end)
all persons being in any office, Estates and Officers high and low, civil or
military of countries, towns, members of colleges, or particular Lords within
the said united provinces, shall take their solemn oath for the performance of
the said ordinance, to cause the same to be maintained and observed for so much
as any manner of ways may concern their offices and command.

13 And if any of the said persons should perchance be found forgetful, and
to have transgressed the aforesaid points in the paying out, or receiving of
coins not permitted by this Our ordinance; likewise of clipped, washed,
cracked, mended, nailed, or otherwise augmented coins in weight, or giving
them in payment at a higher price than this Our ordinance; We do order and
establish, that all the said forfeitures committed, and to be committed, shall
(respectively) be paid double. And moreover, if they issue any coins made
bullion, or other moneys above their values, they shall be deprived of their
offices, upon the verification of the fact, without any pardon to be obtained
for the same.

14 And the better to bring this ordinance in course, We do prohibit all
Treasurors, Receivers, Rent-gatherers, their Deputies or Clerks, and all other
persons being in public service or administration to pay any of the said
moneys by assignation or otherwise, but to return the same where they have
been received, upon the forfeitures aforesaid, unless it were that the
assignement were made upon public Counting-houses or Banks, and not upon
particular persons, as Fermers, Collectors, and the like, being likewise bound
by the same oath; but this is to be done but once by him upon whom this
ordinance falls out, and no further.

15 And to discover the offenses which they might do in their payments, We do
order, That instantly when any payments are made, they shall indorse upon the
acquittances and discharges of their payments (amounting to the sum of one
hundred Guilders) the several species of gold and silver wherewith they have
made the said payments, and the price according to which they have paid the
same, with mention also of the grains which are wanting and paid for, to be
subscribed by him that has received the same, to the end, that upon their
accounts notice may be taken thereof, upon forfeiture that the said
acquittances or discharges shall not be allowed: and whosoever does receive the
said species and not vnderwrite the same, shall forfeit the fourth part so by
him received.

16 Commanding the Auditors (respectively appointed) to take the accounts of
the said Accountants to govern themselves accordingly, and not to allow of any
acquittances or discharges than is aforesaid, but by the said acquittances to
find out the offenders.

17 Moreover the said persons are bound, Marking and weighing of foreign
s^luer.
that whenever any coins of gold shall be received by them, which are too
light, they shall with a ponchion mark the same; and upon the silver coin,
they shall for every farthing or eight grains which the piece is too light,
put upon the said piece one grain or round O before they issue the same, upon
forfeiture of half a Ryder for every piece.

18 They shall also for those to whom they shall pay any moneys, have in
readiness balances and weights in their places where they keep their Banks,
upon forfeiture of half a Ryder for every default to be made therein.

19 And all the said countable Officers, as well general as particular, shall
be bound to have this our ordinance with the figures always ready upon their
Banks or Counting-houses, as also a proclamation fit to be affixed in print,
declaring the Valuation of the said coins, to the end every man may govern
himself accordingly, upon forfeiture of five Netherland Ryders, to be paid as
often as they shall be found without them in their said Offices or
Counting-houses.

20 Prohibiting all Receivers, Bankers, and Exchangers, their Deputies and
Officers, together with all Merchants or other persons of what quality and
condition so ever, to cull out any coins, to separate the light ones for to be
issued, and with the weighty ones' to make a benefit, upon forfeiture of
twenty and five Neatherland Ryders.

21 Prohibiting also that none of the coins of Gold and Silver which are
valued by this Our Proclamation (unless it be the Spanish Ryall of 8, with his
Proportions) shall be delivered into any Mint to be molten; to which end, we
command all the Mint-masters of these Provinces, that they do not receive any
of the said coins for to melt them: There will be no cause to do it.
and if any be so brought unto them, to detain the same, and to give notice
thereof unto the Generals of the said Mints, to proceed therein as it shall
appertain. And whoseuer shall be found to go about to sell the said coins, or
has sold or broken the same, We will have the same to be forfeited, and the
double thereof over and above.

22 Prohibiting also the importation of any coins (not valued by these
presents) either of Gold or Silver to be brought in, for to be distributed.

23 And for the better discovery of the said first authors or importers of
prohibited coyns, We do command all Our Officers to do their utmost endeauours
to inquire of those with whom they shall find any of the said coins of whom
they had the same, and so from person to person, until the first importers,
causing them to be punished as aforesaid, unless some can name his first author,
wherewith he shall be cleared of the said forfeitures: and if he do voluntarily
accuse his author, he shall enjoy the one third part of the same; and the said
first importer shall be banished out of all the said Provinces.

24 If any Officers shall make doubt, that any of the said persons have not
dealt well, or misbehaued themselves, then shall they (with the Magistrate)
have authority to put them to their oath, of whom they have received the said
coins, and at what price they have received and paid out the same: and if
they deny to declare the same by oath, he shall be taken as convicted of the
said trespass, according to this ordinance. But if without equivocation he will
roundly declare the truth, whereby the fault shall appear, he shall be
pardoned of the forfeiture, and also enjoy one third part of the offenders
penalty, if it be to be had.

25 And in like manner they may, and We do authorize them by these presents, to
seize and open coffers, trusses, and the letters of Messengers, where they have
suspicion to contain any coin. Provided always that the said opening be done
in the presence of him to whom the said coffers, trusses, or letters were
directed, if they can instantly come at them, besides some one of the
Magistrates where the said seizure is made; to the end that thereby the name
may be known of him who has sent the said moneys at higher prices, and to no
other effect.

26 All which penalties and forfeitures shall be distributed, the one third
part to the poor of the town where the penalty falls; the other third part
to the accuser, and the other third to the officer who shall challenge the
execution to be done; unless it were that the said forfeitures did exceed the
sum of five thousand Guilders: In this case the one half shall be for the
benefit of the common cause, and the other half to be divided proportionably
between the said three parties. And to the end the accuser herein may do his
uttermost diligence, his name and person shall be concealed so long as possible
it may be.

27 And herein we understand, that not only the person which has committed
the said trespasses shall be subject to answer for himself, but also for
them of his family: The Husband for his wife, the Parents for their children,
the Masters and Mistresses for their servants, men, or maids, unless it were
the said servants had done the same without their priuitie or knowledge.

28 And to the end that this our present ordinance, may be kept and fully
accomplished in all her points: We do order and command all the officers of
our said Provinces, and every one in his office, to have an especial care and
regard of the infringers and transgressors of this our ordinance, and to bring
them before the Magistrates of their jurisdiction: Without that the said
forfeitures be any ways diminished, upon penalty to be deposed of their
offices, and ever after to be disabled to serve in any office, without that
they may excuse themselves by ignorance, or by a general transgression of our
ordinance; which excuse shall not be available unto them, but our intention is
to punish them for their negligence and sloth.

29 We do further command all Magistrates and Justices, that setting aside all
other businesses and affairs, they do proceed herein summarily, only the
truth of the fact being known, to the condemnation of the transgressors, as
soon as by two witnesses they shall be convicted: And ^heerein shall the
testimony of the like offender be admitted, and their sentences shall be
without appeal or any prejudice.

30 We will and command, That whenever it shall manifestly appear that the
persons have transgressed, and are found upon the fact, or that by two
witnesses the same can be proved against them, the offender shall be bound to
deposite the said forfeitures, before he shall be admitted to defend himself
by the Law, whereunto he is to be compelled instantly, by the apprehension of
his person and otherwise: And if it be found that he is not able to pay the
said penalties, he shall be punished by corporal punishment as the cause
shall require.

31 The Judges and Magistrates shall have no authority to diminish or moderate
their decrees and sentences concerning the said penalties, upon forfeiture to
pay themselves the double value thereof: and if any of the said offenders
should obtain of the higher powers any favor or abatement, yet shall they be
bound to satisfy the accuser and the officer for their said part
proportionably, according to the said forfeitures.

32 And to the end that Our ordinance may be better observed, We do will and
order, That the Council of State of the said Provinces united, shall call
before them the Receiver General of the said Netherlands, the Receiver of the
Contributions, Confiscations, and other ordinary means which are letten to
ferme, or to be collected, together also with the Commissaries, Clerks and
servants of counting-houses, as also the Commissioners of musters, ammonition,
victuals, and wagons, and to cause them solemnly to swear to observe and
keep all the points and Articles of Our said ordinance.

33 The Council of State also shall appoint Commissioners for musters, to take
by the course thereof, the oath of all Colonels, Masters of horse, Captains,
Lieutenants, Ancient-bearers, Serieants, Clerks and Sollicitors of Companies
in Our service millitarie: which oath being taken, shall forthwith (by form of
Act) be sent unto the Council of State.

34 Likewise that the Council of Admiraltie, the Officer of Convoyes, Masters
of Licents, their Commissaries, Clerks and servants, and others that are
accountable, shall do the like.

35 We do further order, that the Committees of Our Council, the Council
Prouincial, or of Finances of every respective Province, for themselves, or
their Committees shall call before them all accountable Officers, as well
Stewards of the Demaynes and spiritual livings, Receivers of the ordina^ie
means, Collectors of toles, and all others, with their Clerks and servants,
which have the managing of the coins of particular Provinces. Item, The
Registers and Secretaries, Advocates, Procters, Warders of Colleges, courts,
and chamber of finances to take the aforesaid oath.

36 The Committees of States, and their Deputies or Council Provincial, shall
have care also, that all Towns and Villages of the said respective Provinces,
shall take the said oath before them that are accustomed to take the same; and
where the same cannot conveniently be done, the said Committees of States,
their Deputies and Provincial Council, shall appoint in all Towns and
Villages some persons to take the said oath, before the Borough-masters,
Magistrates, Treasurers and Secretaries of the said Towns and places: also the
Governors of the East India Company, and all other Companies already
erected, or which hereafter shall be erected, as also all Treasurers,
Receivers, Rent-gatherers, and their Committees, or Clerks of Lords, Princes,
Earls, Barons and other of higher powers: Item, all Deacons of Churches,
Masters of the Hospitalls or Orphants, Almoners, and all those that serve in
Almes-houses, houses of correction or Colleges, and their servants. Item, All
Bankers of moneys, their Deputies and servants, all Masters of Corporations or
Societies, Masters of handie-crafts-men, or trades, such as live by Rents,
Merchants in Gross or by Retaile, Shopkeepers, Brewers, Wood-mongers,
Herring-mongers, Cheese-mongers, Dyers, Beere-mongers, Inne-keepers and
Tapsters, and all those that use any trade: Item, all Chamberlaines and
Notaries resorting under them, Collectors of small duties, Fermers,
Impost-master, and of consumptions, Tole-gatherers, gatherers of Poundage,
Brokers, and their Committees, Clerks and servants within Towns and other
places residing respectively under them. And further all those that the
Magistrate of every town, place, or village shall hold convenient or judge to
be necessary shall take the said oath, upon penalty (in case of refusal) to
pay every day three guilders so long as they do not perform the same
according to the Proclamation: and moreover to lose their freedom of a
Citizen, and of their trade, office, or traffic; so as no man shall be
admitted unto his office, trade, or traffic to exercise the same, until he
have first (in conformity of Our said Proclamation) taken the said oath.

37 We have also concluded and thought good, That the Council of State, the
Council of the Admiraltie, the Committees or Deputies of the said respective
Provinces, and all Courts of Justice, shall promise under their Signature, upon
the oath they took at the entrance of their office, to keep all the said
points and Articles, none excepted: And the said Courts of Justice, shall (in
form of Act) send the said oath of all the said several persons mentioned in
the former Article to the said Lords, Estates of the said respective Provinces,
or in their absence to the Committees or Deputies of States, within fourteen
days after the publication hereof: which Committees or Deputies of States
shall within other 14 days after that send the same unto the Estates General,
to know thereby that this Our ordinance is received, and the observation
thereof established: the like is to be done by the Council of State, or of the
Admiraltie and their Committees or Deputies, and others within the time
aforesaid.

38 Over and above all the aforesaid oaths, to be done respectively by every
one, the said Provinces have mutually promised, and by these presents do
promise each to other, to observe and cause to be observed the said
Proclamation in all and every point and Article, without any alteration to be
done therein, making void and annihilating from hence forward all particular
graunts, consents, ordinances, privileges, permission or command, which
(contrary to the said valuation) in part or in the whole, by any of the said
Provinces, Towns, Colleges, and Magistrates, or other members of the same,
might be given and granted, being opposite to the common good and welfare of
the country.

39 Also because that hereby the said valuation is much eased, for the
multitude of coin, whereby it is apparent, that many coins of Gold and Silver
Bullion shall be incident in these Provinces, to the end Our inhabitants be not
overmuch charged with the same, but with the least grieuance might be freed
thereof; We will and command the Generals of Mints, instantly and with all
speed, to take care that in all towns of these united Provinces, with the
approbation of the Magistrates respectively, where there are no Banks of
Exchanges, nor Exchangers, there be appointed one or more persons of credit and
reputation (as the conueniencie of the place shall require) to be Exchangers:
and in places where such persons are to be found as are fit thereunto, that
the Magistrates shall procure them, and give them honest recompense, and to
furnish them with convenient instructions and commissions, unto whom or into
the Mints, every man having Bullion shall deliver the same, as is mentioned in
the Manualls thereof: prohibiting unto all men that are not authorized
thereunto, not to meddle with any exchanging function directly nor indirectly,
upon forfeiture of fifty Netherland Golden Ryders in specie for the first
time, and double the second time, besides arbitrable correction: the one third
part to the benefit of the officer, the other third to the accuser, and the
other third to the Exchangers of the place where the said penalties or
forfeiture shall happen.

40 And for the better observation of this present ordinance and command, We
do order and command, That the same shall be published in all accustomed
places where Proclamations are made, every three months precisely, and as
often as occasion shall require to be renewed and published; requiring
therefore the States of every respective Province, and their Committees or
Deputies of States to cause the said publication to be done at the days
nominated.

41 Finally, albeit We have caused the said valuation to be ^stablished upon
a firm and sure ground, without limitation thereof to any time certain:
nevertheless to accommodate, and for remarkable reasons; We have
condescended and tolerate, that the following species of Gold only and none
other, shall be issued and received for the prices hereafter, until the last
of September now next ensuing.

42 Provided always, That all sentences pronounced before the date of these
presents, for the payment of any moneys according to the permission of that
time, shall remain and be maintained and satisfied according to the tenor
thereof; without that by the said valuation or following tolleration, any thing
to the contrary shall be innouated or abolished.

43 Also during the said tolleration, no coins to be paid for lands or
heritages, or rents upon Bills, or paiments upon Obligations (until January
last) shall be drawn against the will of the party to the said prices of
tolleration, but are to be performed according to this present valuation.

44 Likewise the said Banks of Exchanges, shall have no power to take in
payment the said coins at higher prices, nor to issue the same otherwise than
the said final valuation, and not according to the following tolleration,
which (as unnecessary) are here omitted, the time being expired.

Observations concerning the said Proclamation and Ordinance.
THat the manner of popular governments in their Proclamations, Placcarts,
Edicts, and Ordinances does much differ from the Proclamations which are made
in Monarchies where Magistrates and Judges are of greater reputation and
dignity, according to their royal Parlements.

That in the year 1594, all mints stood still for one whole year to prevent
the inhauncing of coin between man and man: and the said States did declare,
that it was not in their power to reform the same, so long as the seuenteen
Netherlands were divided; every one claiming as absolute authority as the
other, as members of one body. And that now they have devised a course to make
their Proclamations effectual within the united Provinces, to their great
benefit, if we will consider the nature of the former valuation of coins made
by Princes and Merchants, with their several branches, which by policy are
made inconstant. And Germany, France, and other countries have not as yet
taken any course in their moneys, answerable thereunto.

That the Lion Doller, and the great golden Royal of the said united Provinces
are valued and made the standard pieces of all the gold and silver coins made
current by this Proclamation. And that all other coins of what Kingdoms or
States soever are made bullion, and not to be current within the said Provinces.

That silver coins shall be weighed as well as the gold, whereby a more
certainty may be made in the calculation of the Par for exchanges, the rather
for that their species are far less in number, and the proportion between
gold and silver can be better descerned; yet without the rule of exchanges by
bills, still great advantages may be taken by one nation against another.

That the scope of this Proclamation is to set their Mints on work by
abolishing all the several coins of gold and silver of all kingdoms not
valued or made current thereby, The coining of moneys is a mark of
soueraign^tie, so that the melting of money is a great matter of state.
which may be seen by the former declarations of their weight and finesse; in
so much that whereas in the year 1586, when the Earl of Leycester went over to
take the governments of those countries, by the direction of the late Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory, the Lion Doller (made now to be the standard
piece) was valued at thirty six stiuers, and the English shilling (which is
now required to be delivered by weight) was valued at ten stiuers: Decreed
four upon the hundred.
And now the said Lion Doller (albeit decreed after the former inhancement) is
still valued at forty stiuers, which is one ninth part, increased, according
to which the English shilling ought to be increased also 1/9 part, which for 10
stiuers would be 11 stiuers and 1/9 part, whereas the same is inhanced but to
ten stiuers and one half, and no more. The difference in exchange (according
to the valuation) being in the one after the rate of 35 of their shillings, for
our 20 shillings, and in the other above 37 shillings in the maine standard
coin, and much more in the smaller coins; whereof more hereafter concerning
Exchanges.

The like consideration is to be had for the valuation of moneys of other
countries, whereby authority will rule their own, and not according to the
rule of other Nations, but by equality and equity, which no N^tion can
control or contradict. Wherein consider we likewise the standard pieces of the
late Archduke Albertus of Austria for the united Provinces, declared by their
Proclamation in the year 1611, and we shall find the like ground and
foundation to their advantage, albeit they seem to find fault with the
disorderly course of moneys, which is one of the greatest policies in State
affairs. The said Archduke made (as now the States have done) his own coins
of Gold and Silver for standard pieces, Modern and ancient standards o^ gold
and silver.
namely the double Ducat of 23 carrats, 3 grains of Gold, at seven Guilders
and eighteen Stiuers: and the pieces of three Royalls, at fifteen Stiuers of
ten ounces and eighteen grains fine, by their calculation in the pound
weight Troy. And by these means there is a new foundation laid down for
moneys in the said seventeen Low Provinces, where heretofore they always had
the Phillip Doller of ten ounces fine, and the Emperors Royal of gold of 23
carrats 3 grains fine for their standard pieces. Qui vadit plane vadit sane,
takes not always place.

Lastly, that the Mints of certain Lords are called Hedge Mints, which are not
under their command, Hedge Mints.
as Batenborg, Heall, Bargen, Vianen, Gronswelt, Rechein, Geuarden, Stenwart,
and others, may follow their own course in the coining of moneys, and by the
means of commerce alter all these ordinances. For in the said year of 1586 all
the said forfeitures and penalties were far greater, and the melting down of
Queen Elizabeth her coin was prohibited upon pain of death and goods; yet
all was neglected, and came into disorder by the command of Gain, which being
taken away by a true course of exchange, is the only remedy to make the
effects to cease, and all other means are fallacies, and to be abused etc.
(*dtridot;)

CHAP. X. Of the Laws and Prohibitions against Usury.
MAny are the authors which have written against Usury in all ages, every man
according to his profession, most especially the Divines, who have the word of
God for their warrant, wherein also the ancient Fathers have been very strict
to construe the same accordingly, Definition of Usury.
making any thing taken above the principal to be Usury, because the very
word of Usury in the Hebrew tongue is called a Biting, of this word Neshech,
which is nothing else but a kind of biting, as a dog uses to bite or gnaw upon
a bone, so that he that biteth not does not commit Usury; for Usury is none
other thing than a biting, as I said of the very Etimologie and proper nature
of the word, otherwise it cannot be called Neshech, as the Hebricians say.

According to the definition then of biting Usury, we are to proceed in this
discourse, after that we have briefly declared the Laws and Prohibitions
against Usury, wherein we must begin with the holy Scripture, observing
these places.

God says in the 22 of Exodus, Holy Scripture.
If thou lend Money to any of my people. that is poor by thee, thou shall not
be an Usurer unto him, neither shall thou oppress him with Usury. In another
place, Leuit. 25.
If thy brother be waxen poor and fall into decay with thee, receive him as a
stranger, or a soiourner, Deuteronomy. 23.
and let him live by thee, and thou shall take no Usury of him, nor yet
advantage; but shall fear thy God, that thy brother may live with thee. Psalm.
15^ Ezech. 18. Matt. 5. Luke 6.
Thou shall not lend him thy money upon Usury, or lend him of thy food to have
an advantage by it. Add unto this the places noted in the margin, and so let
us come to the holy ancient fathers. Saint Hierome says, There is no
difference betwixt Usury, Fraud, and violent Robbing. Ancient Fathers.
Saint Augustine says, An Usurer is he said to be who does demand more in
money, or any other thing else, than he has delivered: according to which the
said Saint Hierome also says, That some do think Usury to be only in
money; but let them well understand, that Usury is an overplus in any thing
above that which was lent. Amb. de beno mortis.
Saint Ambrose likewise says, If any man take Usury he does commit
extortion, rapin and pillage, and shall not live the life; as who should say,
he shall die therefore. To omit many other of the said ancient fathers, Saint

Bernard says, That the Vsuror is a thief in law, because the Civil Law
tells him before hand what it is that he must rob from others, as who should
say, such Laws as permit Vsurors are lawful theeueries. Canon Law.
Hereupon the Canonists have made Vsurors to be defamed persons: and if any man
make (by his last Will and Testament) any goods unto them, the Testament may be
broken, neither are they to communicate with Christians, or to enter into their
congregation to offer any oblation; and when they are dead, they should not be
buried in Christian burial, and if they be, the doers thereof are
excommunicated.

Decretals
Decretals and Clementines, made by diverse Popes, are directly against Usury.
Alexander the Pope does straightly forbid all Usury, not only unto the
Clergy, but also unto the Layitie. In the book Sextus Decretalium, Gregory
the tenth Bishop of Rome of that name, says, We (being desirous to stop the
gulf or whirlepooles of Usury committed, which does devour souls, and
utterly wastes wealth) do command upon the threatenings of Gods curse, that the
constitution of the latter Concile set forth against Vsurors be without any
violation at all, fully and wholly observed: and thereupon a prohibition is
made, That no Corporation, College, or University shall let any house or
dwelling place to any stranger Vsuror.

Civil Law.
Baldus the Ciuilian speaks bitterly against Vsurors in his book of
Counsels, saying, That Usury is a gainefull piracie, contrary to nature,
upon the loan of any thing that consists upon Number, Weight, and Measure.
Bartolus says, That all Usury is utterly forbidden, and offensive to God and
man: So does Panormitane, and diverse others learned in the Civil Law.

Aristotle.
Aristotle in his Politickes says, That such money as brings forth money
through Usury, is an ougly beast that brings forth monsters, from time to
time, such as are not in nature.

The Romans being in their most flourishing estate, made a law by their twelve
Tables, that no man should put forth money upon Usury, but after one in the
hundredth, called Faenus vnciarium, whereas before that time, rich men might
take at their pleasure. Afterward it was ordained at the entreating of the
Tribunes to take an ounce and a half, and that was thirty shillings in one
hundredth pounds: after that it came to four in the hundredth, called Triens:
and last of all to six in the hundredth, called Semissis. And yet all these
alterations and diversities of suffering in Usury notwithstanding, Genitius
Law.
one Genitius a Tribune published a law, That it should not be lawful for any
man to be an Usurer at any hand, or by any manner of means; and so by all
devises that might be, it was utterly forbidden by diverse Edicts and
Proclamations, which being often repressed, did yet notwithstanding break out
by wonderful strange means. Wherefore Tiberius Caesar to remedy this evil,
and that no Usury should be used, he caused a marvelous mass of money to be
laid in bank, to the sum of two millions and an half of Crowns, being
five hundred thousand pounds English or sterling, and took order that every
man should have credit for three years without paying any Usury at all,
Cornelius Tacitus.
putting in surety for the double value of that he borrowed. And Cornelius
Tacitus (a renowned Writer) says, The canker of Usury is an old venomous
sore, and the chiefest head and cause of rebellion and variance in Countries
and Commonweals; and therefore it was altogether banished in the old time,
when least corruption of life appeared amongst men. Lucullus so hated the
excessive dealings of the Usurers, that whereas all Asia was overwhelmed with
Usury, he cleared the same utterly from all Usurers. And so did Cato in
Cicilia.

Anthoninus Pius, Alexander Seuerus, Claudius Vespasian, Leo, Emperors.
and diverse other Emperors did restrain the covetousness of Usurers from time
to time: And the Emperor Charles the fifth (of late years) at an assembly at
Augusta in Germany, did conclude with the assent of the whole Empire, That no
manner of contract that had any fellowship with Usury should be allowed; but
rather that all Usury should be avoided for ever, and be never more used, and
if any were found to have made any such contract, the same man to forfeit to
the Magistrate or ordinary Judge, the fourth part of his principal sum.

Plato the Philosopher warns among other things, Philosophers, and Orators.
in his fifth Book of Laws, That no body whatsoever he be, that will bear
the face of an honest man, do let out his money for Usury or gain. The like
says Cicero, and many other learned Philosophers and Orators, as we have noted
of Aristotle.

So did diverse Lawmakers banish Usury, Law-giuers.
and utterly suppress the same; as Licurgus in Sparta amongst the
Lacedaemonians, Amasis in Egypt, Solon in Athens, Sergius Galba in Africa, being
governor under the Emperor Claudius, and diverse others. So that Usury is
condemned and forbidden by the holy Scripture, the Imperial Laws, Civil and
Canon Laws, ancient Fathers, Decretals, learned Philosophers, eloquent
Orators, Historiographers, and Law-giuers. The consideration whereof caused me
(some years since) to write a small Saint George for England.
Treatise of the Operation of Usury in Kingdoms, States, and Commonweals;
showing (although allegorically) the effects of it, with the six members of
every Commonwealth; which are Clergymen, Magistrates, Noblemen, Merchants,
Artificers, and Husbandmen, by overthrowing the harmonicall government of
them, by too much enriching some, and by oppressing and impouerishing some
others, bringing the instrument out of tune, when as every member of the same
should live contented in his vocation, and execute his charge according to his
profession, whereby all things should be governed in the best and most assured
manner that can be devised, and (as it were) seeking a kind of certainty in
uncertainties, which is termed (Policy:) For all worldly and transitory
things being mutable, makes the world properly to consist of discord and
dissension, a very uncertain ground to build upon, and yet a certain
equality and concord is required in every well governed Commonwealth, the
Prince and governor having the disposing both of the one and the other:
Equality, concerning traffic and commerce betwixt his dominions and other
countries; and Concord amongst the members of a Commonwealth, when every
member thereof does live contentedly and proportionably in his vocation. Both
these are confounded by intolerable Usury, which is described under the
invented history of Saint George, The History of S. George.
whereby our Savior Christ was prefigured, delivering the Virgin (which did
signify the sinful souls of Christians) from the Dragon, or Devils power. So
by the person of Saint George is understood the Kings authority, armed with
the right armor of Christians, who with the sword of the Spirit of Gods most
holy Word, explained and corroborated with several other Laws, signified by
the Pybald horse whereon he was mounted, did destroy the Dragon (Usury)
having two wings to advance himself, being Vsura palliata, and Vsura
explicata, and his inconstant tail Cambium; the Virgin or Kings daughter
(being treasure and moneys) to be devoured by his means and foreign nations.
The allegory whereof requires a due consideration, and would in plain terms
be distasteful to diverse. This Dragon brings inequality in a Commonwealth by
the means of his tail, wherein lies his greatest strength, making the
expenses thereof to surmount the revenues. In the curing of which disease,
those would be thought to be very foolish Physicians, that by their medicine
should cast the Body Politic of a Commonwealth into a more dangerous
sickness. Wherefore as the wounds of this Dragon (Usury) are inueterated, so
must he be dealt withal by degrees and lenity, admitting him for the time
(as most States and Gouerments do) as a necessary evil, in regard of
traffic and trade; A necessary evil.
albeit that many Usurers are like unto Jews, who think it lawful for them
to take any forfeiture, be it never so unequal and unjust, any morgage, any
pawn, nothing is amiss for them; they are not afraid of that wenne which we
call Anatokismos, that is, Usury upon Usury: no, they dread not to take ten
upon the hundredth if it were for a week.

The pretense of the Jews is because we are strangers, as if we were all
Canaanites, or some of the seven Nations which were as well to be oppressed by
Usury, as to be rooted out by Iosuah: but these men cannot allege any thing
in their defense, but greedy lucre. (*dtridot;)

CHAP. XI. Of Usury Politic, and Moneys delivered at Interest.
IN the precedent Chapter you may perceive what Laws and prohibitions are made
against Usury: and nevertheless the practice of it is most usual in many
Kingdoms and Commonweals, and the Laws are also made accordingly; for this
sin is rather in the conscience, than in the act, and therefore there is no
penalty imposed upon it by Gods Law. True it is that the Statute Law of
England does tolerate ten upon the hundredth, and so do some other Laws
twelve and more: But the intent and not the rigor thereof, is to be weighed
for the clearing of justice; and the preamble of the said Statute Law in the
narratiue part says, That whereas Usury is against all Divine and Humane
Laws, yet ten upon the hundredth is tolerated to be taken for the year,
which by way of forfeiture in the nature of a punishment may be sued for by the
Law: but if there be never so little taken above the said rate of ten upon
the hundredth for the year, the principle is lost and treble damages.

The word Usury was not so odious in times past, as it is now taken by the
abuse of Usury Politic, Threefold Usury.
no more than it is in Usury Natural, and Usury Spiritual: and my meaning
is not to maintain Usury Politic in all respects, contrary to the opinion
of Divines that have the Word of God for their warrant; but the ouer-precisenes
therein may breed a great inconvenience to the Commonwealth. The Law of God did
not punish theft by death, but only by restitution; and as Cato says, Cato de
Rustica.
When a thief was punished to pay the double of that he had taken, the Usurer
was always condemned to pay four times the value. The Laws therefore are
made according to the alterations of times, nature, condition, and disposition
of the people, and simply to say that any thing taken above the principal is
Usury, is wonderful strict, unless you take the word Usury to be Biting,
because the same is never hurtful but where it biteth; and the matter of
conscience consists in the not getting of your debtor, and not in the taking
of much or little interest: The Usury is greater therefore to take but two or
three upon the hundredth of one that makes no benefit of the money, than to
take ten or twelve upon the hundredth of a Merchant, who makes a greater
gain thereby, according to the holy Scripture, Pecunia non potest parere
alienas negociari miserias; fratrem non mor debis, non munera super innocentem,
which was the cause that by the Laws of the Romans, he that took Usury of
the poor was more punished than he that took, nay than he that did steal
from the rich: for no man is bound by law or otherwise admonished to lend money
unto those that have no need of it; and there is on the other side a conscience
to be used, if a man have gotten well by another man's money, and does pay the
same again without any interest or profit.

Also in case of interest taken it is considerable, That if I do lend money to
him that has need, and can afterward prove that for want of that money I
have sustained great loss, or if my debtor do break day with me when I look
to have it at the time appointed, and so am endangered to my neighbor for my
necessary payments, it is great reason that my debtor bear my loss, rather
than I should sustain harm or danger for my good will. And this is defined to
be a gain to be taken, Usury, ex damno habito, improper.
ex damno habito, and it being so, is improperly called Interest, in defense of
Usury. In like manner, if a shopkeeper lend money freely to his neighbor
till such a day, having then occasion to use it at some Fair to lay it out in
wares, if he break touch, the shopkeeper may in justice take the benefit for
his money, losing the profit which he should have had by the wares which he was
hindered to buy, Ex lucro cessante.
and this is taken for lucro cessante: But in neither of these was an intention
to deliver money at Interest.

Some are of opinion, That it is better for them to deliver their money by
exchange, and that therein they are less to be evil thought on, than by
dealing upon Usury: But this difference consists only in the name; for they
have both an intention of gain upon money, and do bear an adventure for the
loss of their moneys: whereas the one is bound to receive but ten upon the
hundredth at the most, Difference of gain by Usury and Exchange.
and the other does expect fifteen or twenty upon the hundredth at the least,
only in regard he does bear an adventure to lose by exchange (which is very
seldom:) but still the intention remains, which should be the surest guide
of conscience to take away all counterfeit pretenses.

The Venetians and others allow no Interest at all, but approve the benefit and
course of exchange, although it be above Interest.

By the aforesaid rules, Usury is weighed straightly in regard of Charity,
albeit it may fall out otherwise that the borrower has sinned; therefore in
such cases circumstances are to be considered, and then judgment to be given
accordingly. If I deal with a Merchant that makes gain of my money with his
trade and commerce, and is well able to pay me again, being chiefly enriched
by my means; why should not I in reason have part of his benefit and
advantage, when by my goods he is grown rich? Suppose four men are become
parteners, two do disburse large sums of money, and the other employ their
labor and industry to make (by lawful trade) a great benefit thereby, is it
not reason that the other two (although they were idle at home) should have
part of the benefit? You will say, you hold this reasonable, for it is not
Usury at all: but these two men take ten in the hundredth for their money;
nay, then you reply and say, It is Usury, although the other two had gotten
thirty in the hundredth by it: How can this be a biting Usury? Objection.
Answer.
But they have not borne the adventure of the Seas, but conditioned a
certainty; the answer is, That they have not only borne the adventure of the
Seas, but many other casualties besides, and in trusting them that had no
means of their own: Well therefore say you, I will not deliver my money but
to rich men; herein you show no charity, and may be deceived too, for you know
not what money a man has in his purse; so that your conscience is still the
surest guide to direct you with prudence, as the loadstone does the variation
of the Pole. So much for particular persons.

Now coming to examine what the Kings of England have done concerning Usury,
we find that both before the Conquest and after, Usury has been banished by
some Kings, and by some other Kings it has been tolerated, according to the
times and occasions.

King Edgar before the Conquest, did utterly forbid all Usury; Bankers sent
out of the Realm.
so did King Edward the first, who did send out of this Realm, as well the
Italian Bankers that came from Pope Gregory the tenth, called Cursini, as all
manner of Jews, who did mightily oppress the Realm. To omit what other Kings
have done, we know that Henry the eight, in the 37 year of his reign made a
Statute, whereby none were suffered to take above ten in the hundredth upon
loan, either for wares or money: and this was repealed by the Statute of Anno
5, Edw. 6, which afterward being found against Policy was abrogated. So the
Statutes of Queen Elizabeth did succeed, which do tolerate the said ten in
the hundredth, which are of such strength and continuance at this present, that
King James himself is contented to allow the said rate to the Londoners for
some moneys borrowed of them; wherein (as I said before) time and occasions do
alter things; and as the case for the present stands with England and
foreign Nations, we have Usury like a Woolfe by the ears, dangerous to be
kept, and more dangerous to abandone the same. This Usury being indeed
exercised to the poor or to the rich, without respect of damage ensuing,
becomes intolerable: But in case of Interest, when time of payment is
neglected in the state of orphants in mutual hazard, or in hazard public,
Where Usury is allowable.
simply to disallow it is to cut off all trade and commerce, or reparation of
damages, and to go about to remedy a mischief with a greater inconvenience.

The Law of Justinian the Emperor, does therefore moderate the course of
Usury, which is much to be regarded, where the words are thus, as follows.

1. Co^. C. de Vsuris.
We have thought necessary to make a general Law or Statute touching the
quantity of Usury, bringing the old, hard, and most grecuous weight of the
same, to a certain moderate stay or mean rate. Therefore We command those
Noble men that are Earls, or their betters, that they do not make any
stipulation or firm bargain by any manner of contract whatsoever, great or
less, for Usury or gain to be had above four in the hundredth. Those that
are guardians or governors over handie-crafts men, or places where Artificers
do work, or else do use any lawful trade of merchandise; We will that they
shall moderate their stipulation, or firm promise taken in any bargain to
eight in the hundredth. And as for those that do adventure their goods beyond
the Seas, and put out their substance upon their own hazard; such may lawfully
demand by firm promise to receive twelve in the hundredth, and in no wise to
take above that rate; although by the old Roman Statutes it has been lawful
to exceed. And We will that all other men shall take only six in the hundredth
above the principal, and the same quantity of excess in no wise to be
enlarged in other contracts, where Usury is wont to be demanded without
stipulation or covenant made: neither shall it be lawful to the Judge to
increase the foresaid taxation or rate made, by reason of the Custom used in
any Country, etc.

This Imperial Civil Law, having a regard to the quality of persons was
duly observed, albeit the lender of the money could have taken more, when the
borrower would give it to serve his occasions, without this precise observation
of the quality of persons. A matter considerable now adays since the
West Indies have been discovered, whereby the current of moneys is divided
into many countries, and runs also according to occasions, and the Policy
of States and Merchants. Difference of the rate of Usury.
For the tolleration and permission to deliver money at Interest, does differ
in the rate in most countries, taking in one place more and in another less,
according to the traffic, and Merchants devises.

A Policy by plenty of money.
In Poland, Lituania, Prussia, and other countries adjacent, when they do abound
in corn, money is commonly very scarce, and the price of corn thereby much
abated; at which time they will rather tolerate or proclaim the moneys to be
inhanced in price, or to be delivered at interest after fifteen, twenty, and
sometimes twenty and five upon the hundredth for a year, or a lesser time:
hereupon presently, great store of money comes from all places thither, which
makes the price of money to rise. Afterward when many ships are laden, and
the fleet departed from Amsterdam and other places, then the interest begins
to fall accordingly.

In the Low Countries it is lawful for a Merchant to take twelve upon the
hundredth for the year, and after the rate for the longer or shorter time
within the year. But this rate may not be exceeded, unless it be upon some
conditions of casualties or adventure.

The Romans and Grecians made a difference as has been noted, according to
the law of Justinian. But the taking of one in the month was most usual,
because Merchants were the most lenders. And this twelve pro centum is to be
understood also to be Interest upon Interest, wherein equity is to be
observed: Interest upon Interest.
for this twelve pounds being delivered out again unto another, is pro rata as
beneficial as the 100 ll principal. Albeit in case of damage, when matters
between men are grown litigious, and depending in suits, then the courts of
Equity will account the whole time for the forbearance of the money, according
to the years past, without any Interest upon Interest.

Politicians or statesmen are to have a serious consideration of the operation
of this Usury politic, Usury a measure of men's actions.
as a property inherent unto money, because that according to the rate of
Usury men do measure all their actions, by trade and traffic, or purchase,
build, plant and bargain in all things accordingly. And usury is so inherent,
and does properly grow with the decay of traffic, The decay of trade
increases Usury.
as pasturage does increase with the decrease of tilling. Whereupon the
following considerations are to be handled as matters of moment, especially in
kingdoms and commonweals which have no gold or silver mines of great value,
but abundance of foreign commodities returned for the great plenty and
quantity of their home commodities, wherein the high continual rate of Usury
may prove more prejudicial than the abouesaid policy of Poland, Lituania, or
other countries can be beneficial unto them. For we see that generally all
Merchants when they have gotten any great wealth with us, leave trading, and
fall to Usury; the gain whereof is easy, certain, and great: whereas in
other countries Merchants continue from generation to generation, to enrich
themselves and the state; as we find diverse renowned families in Germany,
Italy, Spain, and other countries.

There was this last year a Tract against Usury presented to the high Court
of Parliament of England, Anno 1621.
showing the inconvenience of the high rate of Usury after ten in the
hundredth, in comparison of the lesser rate of six in the hundredth, taken in
the Low Countries, where money is so plentiful: and upon this difference is a
certain operation of Usury noted to be predominant over us, both in our
trade, and other affairs.

First it is alleged, that by reason of the high rate of Usury, Reasons
against the high rates of Usury.
not only rich tradesmen give over trade, but a number of beginners are
undone and discouraged thereby, their industry serving but to enrich others,
and beggar themselves.

Secondly, that many trades themselves are decayed thereby, because they cannot
afford so great a gain as ten in the hundredth; whereas if the rate of Usury
were no higher than in other countries, they had subsisted and flourished
still, and perhaps with as much advantage to the public, as those that do
bring more to the private adventures, which ought to go together, or else the
common good of the State is seldom greatly advanced.

Thirdly, that by this disadvantage between six and ten in the hundredth, other
nations, and especially our industrious neighbors do out trade and vndersell
us, for they almost double the use allowed, which we cannot by paying ten in
the hundredth; whereby also all contributions to the war, works of piety, and
glory, of State are better cheap to them than to us; as also the buildings of
ships or hiring of them, and all other things.

Fourthly, that above all the rest, it makes the land it self of small value,
causing the same to be sold so good cheap, that men do not seek by industry
any more to improve them, which is plain both by example and demonstration.
For we see in other countries, where the use of money is at a low rate, lands
are generally sold for thirty, forty, and some for fifty years purchase,
being the best assurance, and securest inheritance which men have, and
therefore bearing still a rate above money, which would increase if the rate of
Usury did decrease: and consequently laborers wages and other dependances
thereupon, which are therein more amply declared, the scope of all tending to
have a moderation in the price of Usury.

Objections to the moderation of the rate of Usury.
Hereunto are certain objections also alleged, and their answers to maintain
the rate of Usury at ten in the hundredth with us in England; albeit other
nations take but four, five, and six in the hundredth, or 6 which is called
rent after the penny sixteen for six times sixteen, and one fourth makes a
hundredth, after the manner of the Low Countries.

The objections are few in number. First, The long continuance of ten in the
hundredth and things are well enough. Secondly, That sudden changes are
dangerous. Thirdly, That money will suddenly be called in, and the borrowers be
much prejudiced. Fourthly, That money will be harder to come by, and commerce
much hindered. And lastly, That Merchant Strangers money now going here at use,
will be carried away again, if the rate of Usury should be called down.

Answer to the objections.
The answer to the first and second objection is, That the practice of Usury
has not been so generally used as it is now, when men's consciences are
hardened unto it, without any scruple or indifferent consideration, whereby as
in bodies natural, so in politic, diseases grow by the too much or the too
little of a due proportion in all humane actions. And the rule that innouations
are dangerous holds true, where the body natural or politic is in perfect
state of health; but where there is a declining, there to make no alteration,
is a certain way to run to destruction.

To the third, That money will be suddenly called in. It may be made or
enacted, that the borrower shall have two years time for the payment of the
money he owes, paying the Interest, and observing such cautions, conditions,
and limitations as may be thought convenient.

To the fourth objection, That money will be hard to be borrowed, it is well
known that the high rate of usury does not increase in the quantity of money
(whereof having plenty) causes commerce to flourish, and if money at interest
were called down, what will Usurers do with their money? They will not keep
it by them as a dead stock, for either they must employ it in trade, purchase
lands, or lend for use at such a rate as the Law will tolerate; so that herein
can be no hurt.

To the last and weakest objection, concerning the money of other Nations
delivered at interest here, it is demanded, Whether it be meet to have them
to feed upon the Realm, and in process of time to carry out such gains
thereby by multiplication of interest. For to men of understanding in casting
of accounts, it is plainly manifest that a hundredth pounds managed at ten in
the hundredth, Interest which seems incredible.
multiplies it self in seventy years (being the age of a man) to a hundredth
thousand pounds, and it is therefore compared to the Butlers box: For even as
men when they are at play, feel not what they give to the box, but at the end
of Christmasse it makes all, or near all gamesters losers: so there are not
few which continue in Usury, that are not ruined. And so the said Treatise
concludes ten in the hundredth to be biting Usury.

But to apostrophate this discourse, and to remedy the matter; let us but
procure to have plenty of money really in specie within the Realm, together
with the means used in other countries in the lieu of moneys; as the
transferring or setting over of Bills between man and man, the paiments by
assignement in Bank without handling of moneys, and Letters of Credit, or
Bills of Exchanges, as you may find in this Book declared. For plenty of
money will not only prevent, but also effect the benefits intended in the said
Treatise, making Usury to decrease in price, Plenty of money decreaseth
Usury in price or rate.
as in other countries where they are tolerated to take twelve in the
hundredth; and yet moneys are plentifully to be had, at five, six, and seven
in the hundredth: Then will the Kings Customs increase, and Commerce flourish,
Noblemens and Gentlemen's lands be improoued, Merchants and Artificers be
encouraged, young beginners be enabled, laborers find quick employment, and
Usurers may have land for their moneys.

Some will say unto me, considering the premises, That to take ten in the
hundredth of a rich Merchant indeed, or of any other that buyeth lands, or
makes gain by the money, is no biting Usury. Herein (to qualify the
contents of this and the precedent Chapter) I note two considerations for that
purpose; albeit that it seems no Comma can be made (as it were) from the
highest Climate to the lowest Center in regard of the litterall words,
denounced by way of curse against Usury: For if on the one side, you will take
all Texts of Scripture so precisely as men do, without construction; as for
example, Phil. 4. Luke 18.
Give to every man that asks of thee, Be always glad, Pray always, and the
like; and on the other side, so little regard them by large interpretations in
taking great Usury, what confusion and disorder would this bring to the
Commonwealth? Therefore to answer the question, I say, That consideration
being had in your particular, and the party who made benefit of your money,
there is no biting Usury committed and no hurt done, but rather mutual love
increases: but if there be consideration had of the general, there is biting
Usury committed, and even upon the poor and mechanike people. For by your
means (and others delivering moneys at Interest) is the same incorporated into
rich men's hands, whereby the meaner sort of people can have none to serve their
occasions, but at very excessive and abominable rates, and that upon pawn
also: For your delivering of moneys at ten in the hundredth and under, does
enable them to take intolerable Usury of the said meanest sort of people, as
shall now be declared, whereby they devour them; so that in all Kingdoms
they are provided for, but here; and until that be amended, your taking of
ten in the hundredth in nature before declared, is a biting Usury, although
it do not belong unto you to amend the same, but that Princes and Magistrates
are to provide for it. For this is a biting, nay a very gnawing to the bones
of your Christian brother with whom you ought to deal mercifully. As there are
three sorts of dealings amongst men, that is, Three sorts of men, and three
sotts of dealings.
Gift, Bargaining, and Lending; so are there three sorts of men, the stark
Beggar, the poor Householder, and the rich Merchant or Gentleman. To the first
you ought to give freely, not only to lend freely; to the second you ought to
lend, either freely or mercifully, and not to feed upon him with excessive
Usury; but with the third, you may deal straightly and ask your own with
gain, especially when he gains by your money, using in all these a
conscience with discretion. (*)

CHAP. XII. Of Intolerable Usury, and Lombards.
THE apprehension of the continuance of intolerable Usury in England, is able
to stupifie a man's senses; considering the same is so abhorred of Heathens,
Turks, and Barbarians, it being an evident token that our hearts are more than
sufficiently frozen over with the insensible y^e of uncharitableness; because
the cruel devouring thereof may be so easily prevented, And then Usury
Politic will not be biting. This intolerable Usury is effected by the
Brokers selling old apparel and household stuff, which do take after diverse
rates, but all of them excessiuely, they being the fittest instruments to
receive and buy stolen goods, whereby all thieves are encouraged, according to
the Proverb, If there were no receivers, there would be few thieves. Most of
these Brokers have their money masters, to whom they pay twenty in the
hundredth, or 15 at the least; for some of these money masters pay themselves
ten in the hundredth unto others, so that one thing drives or inforceth
another. Like as in a clock where there be many wheels, the first wheel
being stirred drives the next, and that the third, and so forth till the last
that moves the instrument that strikes the clock: or like as in a press
going in at a straight, where the foremost is driven by him that is next him,
and the next by him that follows him, and the third by some violent and strong
thing that drives him forward, which is the first and principal cause of
putting forward all the rest before him; if he were kept back and stayed, all
they that go before would stay withal. This is therefore called causa
efficiens; and so is Usury Politic, unless the biting of it be hindered as
shall be declared.

The most favorable extortion by Usury upon pawnes of any mooueable thing, is
after six pence for 20 shillings for one month of 28 days, which is above
thirty in the hundredth by the year, and two pence for the Bill money of half
a crown, or eight pence, or 12 pence for the Bill money of ^0 shillings, which
is more than the Interest, and this rate will be taken if it be for one week
that the pawn be redeemed again; for the intent is always taken to be for
one month. And under color of the Bill money, there is for registring of the
pawnes likewise exaction made since there was a register appointed, who does
not take knowledge of the twentieth part of the pawnes, but what they will
declare.

Others do take eight pence for the month or week, with the like allowance
for Bill money and registring, which comes to above fifty in the hundredth.

The usual rate upon small things, is twelve pence for the week or month as
aforesaid, and this is sixty in the hundredth, and with Bill money above
eighty; nay, there is taken the shilling penny by the week of the Fish-wiues
and other women selling small wares up and down streets, which is above 400
upon the hundredth by the year, besides the Bil money, what this comes unto
in divided small sums is incredible. This Bill is made to deceive the Law, and
the form of it is; Bought of John a Style one pair of stockings, one shirt,
one band, and a hat for five shillings, witness my hand the tenth of May 1622.
Io. a Style. And since the Register was made, much is pawned without making of
any Bills: and not contented with this horrible extortion, they will let out
for gain many of these pawnes and so wear them out, or at last take the
forfeieure of them, being sure to lend about the third and fourth p^rt of the
value: By these means devouring and consuming the poor householder and
mechanical man, it being only the remarkable sin of oppression by exaction
noted in the holy Scripture, for which the first world was drowned.

The use of Lombards.
This caused P^lititians or Statesmen to admit the use of Lombards in their
Commonweal, to moderate this intolerable exaction of Usury, so called
Lombards of certain Italians which came out of Lombardie, whereof
Lombard Street yet bears the name since Henry the third his time. Th^se
Lombards did take also extreme rates of twenty and twenty five upon the
hundredth, as the Jews did, and of late years they have been (by public
authority) admitted in Lombards of the Low Countries to take after three half
pence a week for the pound of twenty shillings, and one penny for the Bill,
but not to be bound to pay for the month, which was also a great rate: wherein
they were compared unto retailers of small wares, as Chandlers, and such like,
which may get 25 and 30 in the hundredth upon wares sold by retaile: and these
men were the retailers of money, and had allowance accordingly, which in the
Low Countries were almost in every City, and paid for it an yearly sum of
money to the States. But now of late all this kind of people is put out, Houses
of Commerce.
and there are Pawne-houses, called Houses of Commerce erected; where the
borrower paieth but after ten in the hundredth, and some allowance toward
charges, under the moderation of the Justinian Law, and this is declared to be
done for the reasons following.

That the intolerable Usury committed by the Lombards might be prevented.

That the pawnes should not be worn or used, but safely kept, to be by them
restored at all times, having men and women to look unto them.

That the use of twenty shillings for one week is but one farthing parts
toward the payment of warehouse and house room, keeping of the pawnes, and
entertainment of servants wages, and others to manage the same.

That almost the value of the pawn may be had thereupon, if the borrower will
desire it, one years time and six weeks considered, with the charges; during
all which time he may redeem the same, and pay but after the rate. But after
the expiration of that time, then the pawnes to be sold in a public outcrie
by a sworn Officer to be oppointed by the Magistrate: and what soever is made
more thereof than the principal money borrowed and the charges, to be restored
unto the party, or him that brings the ticket, or to their heirs, or within
two years to the Magistrates, if no man claim the same, to be distributed to
the poor.

That stolen goods may by these means be detected, and theeuerie decrease, and
men's lives preserved for the good of the Prince and Sta^e.

I hope no man will deny, but this is a commendable course taken for the
comfort of the common people, that by intolerable Usury they be not
destroyed, but as necessary membe^s of the common wealth, they may live in
their vocation and profession. Surely the famous city of London is worthy of
perpetual commendation for the education of Orphans.

But if an Orphane come to be an householder, and lives honestly by his handie
work and labor, and has thereby gotten a little estate of thirty or forty
pound in some years, and then being visited with sickness (whereunto all men
are subject) he is constrained to pawn his goods or substance unto these
uncharitable people; what a miserable and pitiful thing it is to see his
poor Family undone by these means (as it were) in a moment, loosing that
which with great care, labor, and sweat of his brows he has been gathering
for many years together? God is my witness, that the consideration hereof
has moved my soul with compassion and true commiseration which implies a
helping hand. For it is now above twenty years that I have moved continually
those that are in authority, and others that have been, to be pleased to take
some course to prevent this enormitie.

Some that God has called, either void of charity, or seeking Priuatum
commodum, have been remiss to further the same, and for as much as I am (in a
manner) hopeless of any success, and that it behooves me being stricken in
years to number my days, I thought convenient to publish the last Project and
offer, which has been made to the same effe^t two manner of ways, wherein I
have spent time, labor, and no small charges in hope that hereafter it may do
good to the public, Pawn houses.
if some Divine be moved to further it. The first is according to the manner of
Amsterdam, to which end the substance of the petition of honest and religious
men his majesty's subjects, is as follows.

First, that authority be given to A. B. to erect Pawne-houses in all
convenient places of the realms of England, Ireland, and the dominions of
Wales, for and during the term of one and twenty years, upon these conditions.

That all person and persons shall and may have at all convenient times moneys
upon pawnes, of or upon all moveable goods, chattels, and leases, or any thing
which shall be agreed upon, after the rate of ten upon the hundredth by the
year.

That the undertakers may be authorized or licenced to take for the attendance,
labor and pains, recompense of Officers, and Servants wages, house-rent, and
all other charges incident thereunto, as follows.

For registring and keeping of all pawnes that do amount to fifty pounds or
more, one farthing for every pound by the month.

For all pawnes that do amount to ten pounds or more until fifty pounds, for
every pound one half penny by the month.

For all pawnes that do not amount to ten pound, for every pound one penny by
the month.

For every bill given for pawnes under ten pounds, one penny, and being of
ten pounds or above, whatsoever it comes unto, but two pence, with such
clauses, conditions, and cautions as shall be requisite for the security of
the said undertakers, and agreeable with the laws of the realm of England,
paying unto the Kings majesty a reasonable sum of money yearly etc.

The said allowances are inferior to the moderation of the Emperor Justinian
his Laws, and will be found very reasonable, considering, that by the
tolleration of Usury politic, men can deliver their moneys in very great
sums at ten in the hundredth freely, and without such trouble.

CHAP. XIII. Of Mons pietatis, or Bank of Charity.
THe second mean to suppress the biting usury of extortion upon the common
people, is by providing a course, that they may have moneys upon pawn without
paying any interest or usury for the loan of it, according to the manner of
Bridges in Flanders; which is more pleasing, but it is not so universal as the
Pawn houses are, where great sums are to be had to accommodate Merchants and
all men, to prevent the general abuse: albeit it cannot be denied, but that
the extortion upon the meaner sort of people is more heinous and detestable;
which was the cause that by the Laws of the Romans, he that took usury of
the poor was more punished than he that did steal from the rich, as is before
declared.

In Italy there are Montes pietatis, that is to say, Mounts or Banks of
Charity, places where great sums of money are by legacies given for relief
of the poor, to borrow upon pawnes, and to pay only after three or four in
the hundredth at the most to maintain the officers, and to bear the charges of
such an erected Mount for ever. But the manner of Bridges, as aforesaid, may be
thought more reasonable, paying the officers out of the contributions, which by
their means may be much increased, according to the orders which are hereafter
declared; Moneys to be given to suppress usury.
for every man is willing to give for the suppression of intolerable and
abominable usury. The rich (that are charitably disposed) will give, because
usury politic should not be biting; the meaner sort of people will be
contributarie, because of the commodiousnes of it; for who will not give six
pence or twelve pence every quarter of the year, when he may borrow a
reasonable sum of money without paying any use for it, for one year, or a
longer time, according to occasions? I am sure of most men's inclinations, by an
attempt made of the practice hereof some years since: for (after the names
taken of above 1500 persons that were willing to contribute yearly, and some
Divines and others that would lend freely 50 ll, 100 ll, or more for some
years, and some 500 ll) I made an alphabetical register of them, which was
delivered into the hands of a great personage, who (as it seems) was not
worthy of the honor thereof; but to my remembrance it amounted to some 2000
ll for moneys given and to be lent, and above six hundredth pounds yearly
during the lives of the benefactors; so that no man has cause to doubt of the
collection of a great stock for so godly a work, if authority were had when
this was done, upon the only hope and surmise thereof: to the effecting
whereof, I will be willing still to do my best endeavor. Now the orders are
as follows.

Orders to be observed for the government of the Mount of Charity, consisting
of two houses within the city of London and the suburbs thereof, and one
house at Westminster; where all men may borrow moneys in small sums, without
paying any use or loan for the same, upon pawn to be delivered for caution or
security of the said moneys, according to the manner of Bridges in Flanders,
and other countries. 1 IMprimis, That all men of what quality or condition
soever they be (being destitute of money) shall have money at all convenient
times without paying any use or loan for the same, but delivering only a
pawn of any moveable thing, so it be not above forty shillings at any one
time, until a competent stock be raised for the maintenance of the said Mount
of Charity for ever.

2 Item, Whereas the said stock is raised, and to be increased by means of
charitable and conscionable persons (which either do freely lend moneys without
taking interest for the same, or do freely give in money and yearly
contributions, according to their virtuous d^sposition, which moneys may (in
progress of time) amount to a notable sum) the Treasurer general therefore
shall be a man sufficient, and of honest behavior, careful to appoint sworn
honest men (upon sureties) to collect the said moneys, and for keeping of the
pawnes, with their Clerks and other attendants: and the Surueior of accounts
shall be a man diligent and skillful in accounts, all for the better
encouragement of the said charitable giuers and free lenders, for the
advancement of this charitable work.

3 Item, Whereas the like House called Saint George, was heretofore erected at
Genoua in Italy by noble Knights bound in honor to see the people relieved
from oppression, biting usury and extortion, which by all virtuous Knights is
at all times approved and commended; There shall be kept one pair of tables in
every house, containing the names of such honorable persons, and virtuous
Knights' as shall be yearly contributaries (by quarterly paiments) during
their natural lives, or lend any sum of money (gratis) for a time, together
with the names of such well disposed persons as by their Wills and Testaments
do bequeath any sum of money for the maintenance of this pious work, in
perpetual remembrance of the said benefactors.

4 Item, That the said officers shall use their best endeavors, by all good
means to move all well disposed and charitable persons, to be giuers, lenders,
and contributaries for the increase of the said stock, especially when men are
visited with sickness; to the end that by their last Wills and Testaments,
they may be moved to further this godly action for the continuance thereof for
ever.

5 Item, That the Lord Mayor of London (for the time being) may have yearly
inspection of the collections and accounts of the officers of the said Mount of
Charity, at a day by him to be appointed, to see the due execution and
administration of the stock aforesaid.

6 Item, That the Clerks and other officers in place, shall attend the said
houses from six a clock in the morning, until eleven, and from two of the
clock in the afternoon, until seven, beginning (yearly) from the five and
twentieth day of March, until the last of September; and afterward to begin
but at seven of the clock in the forenoone, upon pain to be displaced.

7 Item, That no man shall offer to pawn any moveable thing, having life, or
being subject to manifest corruption, or pesterable wares of great bulk; but
only things of Wool, Linen, Silk, or Flax, Hemp, or Towe, and such like,
or Pewter, Iron, Brass, or any other matter mettaline or mineral; or of Gold,
Silver, Copper, or Precious stones.

8 Item, That all pawnes which shall be pawned, shall be taken as sold in open
market or shop upon the conditions following, with the consent of the owner or
lawful bringer thereof; and so shall not be subject to be recovered of the
said officers by any fraudulent dealings.

9 Item, That e^erie person (if he will) shall receive the three parts of the
value of his pawn; that is to say, If the pawn be worth twenty shillings,
he shall have fifteen shillings, and so after the rate. Provided it do not
exceed the sum of forty shillings at any time, as abouesaid.

10 Item, That the said pawnes shall be safely kept, for the time that the
same shall be pawned, without wilful detriment or hurt, be it for one month,
two, three, or more months, not exceeding the time of one year without new
license had for the same.

11 Item, That the persons which do pawn any goods as aforesaid, either being
owner, or put in trust to pawn the same, shall declare their names to be
entered in the Iournals, and other Registers, and bring an auoucher (if there be
cause of suspicion, that the parties are felons, or accessaries of felony) in
which regard the said goods shall be stayed for 24 hours, to see whether any
person do claim the same.

12 Item, That every person which does pawn any thing, shall take a Ticket
containing the date of the time and year, and the sum of money lent, with the
private mark of every house, thereby to redeem his pawn at all times at his
pleasure.

13 Item, That for the defraying of the rent of convenient houses, recompense
of officers and men's wages, and other charges incident for the due execution of
the premises, every person borrowing a crown or five shillings shall give
for his Bill or Ticket one farthing, and for ten shillings one half penny,
and for twenty shillings one penny monthly, and for a greater or smaller
sum accordingly, until such time that the stock be increased to such a
competent sum as may counteruaile the said charges, and supply the necessary
occasions or wants of the borrowers, to be declared hereafter.

14 Item, That all pawnes which do lie above one year, being not licensed to
remain for longer time, shall be sold by a public officer in open outcrie
every quarter of a year, the said officers to be appointed and sworn by the
Lord Mayor of London, for the time being, or by two Justices of the Peace at
Westminster, and the surplusage of the moneys which shall be made more of the
said pawnes than the money lent thereupon, (after charges deducted) shall be
restored to the owners or known bringers of the said pawnes, or to their
heirs, administrators or assigns, within one month after sale made of them,
(upon demand to be made) and by default of the said heirs, administrators or
assigns, to be delivered within one year after, to the said Lord Mayor, and
Justices of the Peace, and to be distributed (by their wisdoms) to the poor.

15 Item, It shall be lawful unto the said officers, to restore to the right
owner any pawn which has been feloniously taken, upon sufficient proof
made, if notice was given before the registring thereof; and if notice was
given after the said registring or pawning, then to restore the same upon
payment of the money borrowed thereupon, and charges.

16 Item, It shall be lawful for the Treasurer, General, and Surueyer, with
the consent of the Lord Mayor of London, or two Justices of the Peace at
Westminster under their hand writing (when the said stock is increased to a
greater sum than shall be needful for the maintenance of the said Mount of
Charity) to give some relief unto such prisoners as are committed for debt in
the several prisons of their jurisdiction; be it either for their maintenance
there, or (after they have been one year in prison) toward the composition
which they shall make with their creditors, so as the said gift do not exceed
the sum of ten pounds, toward every hundredth pound which the said
prisoners are indebted, if their good behavior and likelihood to do well
shall deserve the same. (*)

Quod gratis accepimus, gratis damus.
CHAP. XIIII. Of the true Calculation of Moneys delivered at Interest.
THE Act of Parliament concerning Usury, made in the thirteenth year of Queen
Elizabeth, declaring that Usury is forbidden, and contrary to all Divine and
Humane Laws; does by way of tolleration admit, that whosoever shall deliver
his money at Interest after the rate of ten in the hundredth for the year,
shall only be in danger to lose that ten in the hundredth, if any man by
information, plaint, or bill will sue for the same. But if it be above that
rate; the deliverer of the money shall lose the principal money, and incur
other penalties; and this Statute may be pleaded in Bar, and is to be
construed against him directly and indirectly. Wherefore all men delivering
money at Interest, must be very careful how they make their contracts,
because many mistakings may happen, for that all Council learned in the Laws
are not good Arithmeticians in the calculation of this ten in the hundredth,
which is the ground of those contracts; insomuch that by the strict rules of
the said Statute, the contracts being found usurious and to exceed the rate,
are not only void ipso facto, but the principal and interest is also lost.
This Statute has relation to the Act made by King Henry the eight, and the
words be in effect as follows.

None may have, receive, accept, or take, for the lending or forbearing of his
or their money, for one whole year, or for a longer or shorter time, or for a
more or less sum, above the rate of ten pound pro cent. yearly. 37. Hen.
8.

Forasmuch as some men, An objection to the Statu^e of Usury.
accuse the makers of this Statute to have committed some absurdity, it will
not be impertinent to clear the same: The Statute (say they) gives ability
unto a man, to take one way ten pound ten shillings or more, for the use of one
hundredth pounds for one year, being delivered out for two years; and another
way he cannot take ten pound five shillings and less for one year, but he
shall be within the compass of the Statute. But if they had a due
consideration, that Time is properly the judge hereof, and that they could not
make the said Statute, without the limitation of a time certain, they would
not find any absurdity therein, for it was impossible to make it otherwise
more certain.

Time begets Usury.
To make this evidently appear and of necessity, Time is herein Efficient and
Active, and the rate of 10 pro 100, Positive and Passive; let us suppose that
you do deliver at Interest one hundredth pounds for three months after ten
upon the hundredth, you may lawfully receive at the three months end, two pound
ten shillings for your Interest, and continue the hundredth pound again for
other three months by a new contract or agreement, and then receive again 2
ll 10 ss, continuing in this manner for the whole year by four several
agreements, whereby you do receive three parts of your Interest at several
times; which Interest you may put out also at Usury, and so take above 10 pro
100, without incurring the danger of the Statute, Agreement alters ^he
property of Use money by Time.
because your agreements have from time to time, altered the property of the
Interest money which you did receive, and was begotten in time according to the
Statute, and that which was before another man's, is thereby become yours, and
thereof you may dispose again. But if you do deliver out 100 ll from the
beginning for one whole year; then you cannot have but ten pounds Interest
for the same at the years end with your principal, for the property of the
ten pounds is not till then altered by your agreement. Thus is it with moneys
delivered for a shorter Time.

In like manner is it for moneys delivered out for a longer Time; as for
example, one delivered out 100 ll for four years, for the which at the four
years end he can receive but 140 ll; but if he had delivered out 100 ll for
one year, he may at the years end receive 10 ll for Interest, and continue
the 100 pounds again for the second year by a new agreement, and then receive
another ten pound, and so for the third and fourth year. Now whereas by
reason of his several agreements according to the time, he has altered the
property of Interest money, and received 10 ll the first year, he may put out
again this 10 ll as his own for another year, and so have Interest thereof
twenty shillings, whereby he receives 11 ll the second year, which being
put out the third and fourth year, will yield him accordingly in like manner
for the 10 ll rec^iued the second and third year, which will yield him after
the same manner accordingly: so that he shall have above 146 ll being thus
delivered out, the body of his sum still remaining whole, and being only
distinguished by Time which makes the difference. Again let us suppose that
the 100 ll were delivered out from the beginning of four years, to be repaied
by 25 ll a year and the Interest, it follows proportionably, that the first
year he is to receive 27 ll 10 ss, the second year 30 ll, the third year 32
ll, 10 ss, and the fourth year 35 ll, which makes all but 125 ll; add to
this the Interest of 25 ll received in deduction of his principal three years
before the Time, which is 7 ll 10 ss, and of 25 ll more in like manner for two
years, which is 5 ll, and of 25 ll more for the third year, which is received
one year before the time, which is 2 ll, 10 ss, all is 15 ll, which together
with the 125 ll makes the said sum of 140 ll. But when moneys are repaied in
this manner, as it were by way of anticipation, then the body of your sum of
100 ll is divided, and still time and interest must concur, for the interest is
begotten by time. For you may not deliver out 300 ll for three years to be
repayed 100 ll yearly, and receive the first year 130 ll, the second year
120 ll, and the third year 110 ll: but you must receive the first year 110
ll, the second year 120 ll, and the third year 130 ll, because you have not
forborne your money for any longer time proportionably, according to your
contract and agreement. And the property of the interest money is not altered
effectually, according to the law, for 10 pro ce^^. for a year is the Cubike
Root which does increase and decrease both ways accordingly. Yet some will
say, The property of the Cubike root.
suppose that I have 3000 ll in money to deliver at interest, are not my 3000
ll worth 300 ll at the years end, and may not I lawfully receive that 300 ll,
and any part of my principal, and continue the rest for another year, and so
do the like for more years? Who doubts thereof? So that you do make new
contracts or agreements from year to year, whereby the property of the
interest money becomes effectually altered, according to the law (as
aforesaid) your money from the beginning being delivered out but for one year:
but if you do deliver your 3000 ll* from the beginning by one sole contract
and agreement for six years, to be repaied yearly by 500 ll, and receive 550
ll the first, that is to say, 300 ll for your interest, and 250 ll for part of
your principal, as it may be construed against you, then do you incur the
danger of the statute. For in this (which is for a more sum and a longer
time) there is the like reason as there is with a less sum and a shorter
time, as by the former example is declared.

And as there is more gain when money is delivered out for three months, or
less time, and so continued from time to time within the year than when money
is delivered out for one year; so is there more gain when money is delivered
out for one year, and continued by new agrements from year to year, than
when it is originally delivered out for six or more years, agreeing with the
rule of Geometrical deliniation, and Arithmeticall proportion.

And the rule Quadrant, The rule Quadrant.
or the golden rule of Arithmeticke proves unto any man of understanding, that
in calculation these four things must concur: First, Principal.
you may find out by your interest money and the time (after ten in the
hundredth for the year) what the sum was which was delivered at interest:
Secondly, Rate.
at what rate according to the time such a sum was delivered: Thirdly, Time.
the time for which it was delivered at such a rate: And lastly, Interest.
what the interest money was for the sum delivered, according to the time;
and all these ( Posito in any one sum for all) will manifest the delivery of
one hundredth pound for one whole year of twelve ordinary months, after the
rate of ten in the hundredth, if it be so delivered out* for by inuerting,
postpounding, and supposing all must produce these just and positive sums,
whereby you may be assured whether you term your money delivered out,
according to the art and rule of Arithmeticke, the principles whereof are
infallible, or whether (being deceived therein) you have (unawares) made an
usurious contract, as many do ignorantly.

Auditors or Calculators.
The Ciuilians, especially Benvenut^ Straccha termed those which we call
Auditors or Accountants Calculatores, which in deed are to be very judicious
in matter of account, as skilful in the accounting, able by positions to find
out hidden sums: for it falls out many times in Princes accounts, that
sums are named which have relation to other sums, and must by suppositions
be found out* and can be done as they say Calculando. For example, A sum of
money is delivered out for three years, every year to be paid, whereof the
first sum ( Posito) is 500 ll, and the fourth or last sum is 665 ll, ^0 ss.
Between these two you are to find two sums proportionable: multiply 500 ll
within it self is 500000; with this multiply the 665 ll 10 ss of the product,
take your Cubike Root is 550 for the second sum; now to find your third
sum, multiply 665 10 with 550 is ^3200. Your Quadrant Root is Medium
between 2 and 4 being 605, and so you have your sum, and the interest you
find to be 10 pro cent. The like for 5, 6, or more sums which by Geomet^i^ is
yet more easy.

Reduction of Maluadies into ducats, shillings and pence.
So we find that for matter of division, to reduce millions of Maluadies in
Spain into Ducats without much division by 375 Maluadies for the Ducat, and
then the shillings and pence of ducats made in bills of Exchanges. Take part of
the sum, and the overplus if any be, put it down for shillings and pence,
then (in like manner) take of that sum, and again of that sum, and lastly
of that sum, being derived from; and you have your ducats, shillings, and
pence of ducats in Vntratto, as the Italian says; in like manner divide by all
the numbers contained in the table of multiplication, for 42 take and 1/7, for
63 take 1/7 and 1/9 part, and so of all the other sums, for six times seven
is forty and two.

CHAP. XVI. Of Usurious Contracts.
I Need not to make double inculcation against Usury, for the Ciuillians have
been so precise in the description of Usurious Contracts, Doctor Wilso^ de
Vsuris.
which Doctor W^lson has noted, that it is hard for any Merchant to escape the
consure of being an Usurer, albeit not in danger of the statute; which is very
necessary for all Merchants to take notice of. But he concludes, No Usury
without lending.
That where there is no lending, there can be no Usury: wherein he makes a
distinction between Mutuum, Locatio, and Commodatum, declaring Mutuum to be
where my goods are made thine; Locatio, where a thing is ^ut forth or letten to
hire, the property still remaining in the owner, who bears the adventure
thereof; and Commodatum, to be a letting or lending without alteration of the
property also, but free without any gain at all, where for hiring a gain is
taken: and so he makes a description of Vsurors, if they deal in manner
following.

If any commodity be sold unto any man, who buyeth the same by means of a
broker, or otherwise, to make a shift, and to sell the same instantly to make
money of, to supply his occasions, losing thereby, (as he must of necessity)
the seller of this commodity is an Usurer. In this case, if it be proved that
the said seller does buy, or causes the said commodities to be bought again
directly or indirectly, the statute against Usury will take hold of him, and
that very justly.

I do borrow of a man one hundredth pounds for three months, promising to give
his wife a satin gown, or an ambling gelding, hereupon he forbeareth his money
for many months more without interest, it is Usury.

I do bind my land (worth twenty pounds by the year) to a man for one
hundredth pounds in money for a year, and do not pass it by bargain and sale,
if the creditor do take the revenues and his principal, it is Usury.

Be it that a man lends an hundredth pounds freely, and hops assuredly to
have some thankful recompense at the years end, this is Mentalis Vsura.

What if one lend money in hope to get an office, this is also Usury.

If one lend a man money for a certain time, because the same man should
speak a good word for him, or do him a certain pleasure, it is a ruled case
that for so much as a covenant is past, it is usury.

I do lend you one hundredth pounds that you shall do as much for me when I
shall demand it of you, this is usury, because a contract is simply made
without any addition of time appointed, whereas if he had asked so much at the
years end, then it had been no usury but permutation, when one good turn is
done for another, and the time known certain.

A lord does lend his tenants money, with this condition, That they shall
plough his land, if he do not pay them for their labor but with the use, it is
usury.

I would borrow, and one sells me wares for more than they be worth by the
half, the seller is an usurer.

I do sell commodities unto a man for six months at a reasonable price, and
afterward he pays me in ready money, deducting the interest for the time
after the rate of ten in the hundredth, this is Usury.

The father-in-law do lend his son a sum of Money, and takes in pawn the
possessions of the dower, and conuerteth the fruits thereof to himself for the
lone of Money, this father-in-law is an usurer.

He that buyeth before hand Corn, Wine, or Oil so good cheap as he is sure
not to be a loser but a gainer at the time of the Harvest, the same man is an
usurer.

I do lend one hundredth pounds to my friend for ten years freely, not to pay
any penny gain all that time, if either of us do die: but if we both live
together till that time, then he to pay me after twelve pound in the hundredth
for ten years past; the law says, that the peril which may happen does not
excuse me from sin, but I am an usurer, for the time is not proper.

A Merchant lends to a Corporation or Company an hundredth pounds, which
corporation had a grant by statute, that whosoever lends such a sum of
money, and has a child of one year, shall have for his child (if it do live
fifteen years of age) 500 ll of money: but if the child die before that time,
the father to lose his principal for ever. The law says, If I lend purposely
for gain, notwithstanding the peril, I am an usurer.

I know an honest artificer owes to a draper forty pounds to be paid at six
months. I come to the draper and show him, if he will take thirty pound in
hand, I will pay so much for the artificer, if he will turn the debt over unto
me; herein I am an usurer in seeking to anticipate the payment.

One buyeth a pay of three or four hundredth pounds, delivering fifteen
shillings for every twenty shillings, here is a cloaked lending under the
color of buying, and therefore usury called Palliata, for he did hope for
gain. Vsura Palliata, Vsura Explicata


I do buy a man's Bill of one hundredth pounds due three months hence, and give
unto him in present money 95 ll; here, although a bargain and sale seem in
show, yet it is a lending, and therefore Usury.

I do bargain with some to have so many Oxen and Kine within four months,
to have them better cheap paying the money before hand; this is Usury if the
parties had not Oxen or Kine at the Time.

I do buy certain Geldings, to have them delivered at a certain Fair, for
less than they were worth; I am therein a Usurer, if I be sure that they will
be more worth at the time of the delivery.

I do deliver old Wheat to receive new; if I do deliver the same for gain,
and assure my self of benefit, I am an Usurer.

I do fear the fall of money, and therefore do deliver my money to another
man, to have as much at six months after, according as the money was then
current when I paid it; this is Usury.

I seek an office, which I cannot have except I do pay a certain sum of
money; to avoid this payment, I do lend for two, three, or four years, a
gross sum, because I will not pay the said money, in so doing is Usury.

I do pawn an house with an orchard for certain money, the creditor has the
benefit of my ground and house, he is an Usurer.

A Gentleman has a Manor stocked with thirty milch kine, and 700 sheep,
valued at 300 marks or thereabouts, as they are then to be bought and sold;
this Manor he would let out with the stock for ten years, to receive the
old rent of his Manor, and thirty pounds yearly besides for his stock, and
at the ten years end, either to have at his own choice his cattle of like
goodness and value as he did let them out, or else 200 ll in money. Here
there is first a lending, because the Farmour has property in the cattle,
and may alter them as he list for his best avail, paying his yearly rent for
them, and restoring so good cattle at the ten years end as he before
received. Again, he must answer the cattle at the ten years end, and pay
rent yearly for ten years, although the cattle die all the very first
year. So that this Gentleman (seeking his certain gain and principal to be
safely returned unto him) is an Usurer colourably.

Lastly, to deliver money by exchange upon Bills of Exchanges, intending any
gain thereby any manner of ways, is Usury, and all the premises are
usurious acts, although many not in danger of the Statute.

Now diverse Merchants and others will say, That then there is no dealings
between man and man, and all Traffic and Commerce is overthrown: For (say
they) here is nothing excepted, wherein any man can deal, and all other
Nations do continually maintain their Negotiation and Traffic, by
delivering moneys at Interest and by Exchange, and will not be ruled by our
particular direction in the course of Traffic: hereupon let us also note what
lawful contracts are, before we conclude.

CHAP. XVI. Of lawful Bargains and Contracts.
WE have already noted where a man may take a benefit for his money two
manner of ways, which is ex damno habito, where he has sustained a loss, or
ex lucro cessante, where his benefit or profit has been taken away or
prevented for the want of his money, which he might have bestowed in some
wares to furnish his shop at convenient time, and in both these the party is
not Active but Passive.

I do buy land of my friend for a certain sum of money, and of like value
to the land, with this condition, if he bring me the money again at any time,
he shall have his land again; I being lawful owner of this land by bargain
and sale, may safely enjoy the fruits and rents of the same lands without any
suspicion of Usury.

Another comes to me and would borrow a thousand pound in Gold, and as much
Plate for a show to declare and set forth his wealth the more to the world when
it is seen in his shop; in this case I may take Usury.

An Apothecarie lends to the Physician an hundredth pound by the year freely,
because he shall send his Bills of Receipts to him and to none other, this is no
Usury.

I do buy Timber, Brick, or Stone of a man to deliver the same at such a
place, at such a time, and to pay him for the same, I do borrow so much upon
Usury, if the said man do not perform with me, in delivering the said
Timber, Brick or Stone, yet is he bound to pay me that Usury truly.

A Corporation takes a hundredth pound of a man, to pay him eight in the
hundredth during his life, this is no Usury, and so for all annuities during
life, for the principal is never to be restored again.

A mightier man than my self, withholdeth through force a portion of land from
me, I am loath to try the law with him, because he has the law in his hand;
and I offer to lend him five hundred pounds for a year or two freely, so that
I may have mine own without further trouble or vexation: this is no Usury
because I receive but mine own quietly.

I do borrow an hundredth pounds for a year, promising at the years end to
lend another hundredth pound for it, for the same time; this is Permutation.

I take the peril upon me of the carriage of a great mass of money; I may
lawfully take portage money for my pains, and this is no Usury.

I am surety for one, and pay the debt, Ext. side iuss^r c. 1. and 2.
paying Usury for the same money; the principal debtor for whom I was bound,
is bound to pay unto me the Usury, and the payment unto me is no Usury, for I
receive but mine own.

A man by Testament grants a Legacy, and wills his son to pay the
Legacy, and so much ( Nomine poenae) for non paying it: the Law says, The
Testator may charge his Executors or heir under a penalty to pay his Legacy,
and the same is no Usury: But if the Testator should say thus; I will that my
son or Executor shall pay for every month that they are behind hand so
much, and so from month to month till it be paid; This is Usury say the
Lawyers, because the time is mentioned and peined: wherein Baldus is absolute.

The conclusion of all the premises is most in things Passive; and buying and
selling is left only between men with certain cautions.

Sailing thus dangerously between the two rocks of Sylla and Charibdis, with
the great tempest about Usury, looking that the bright and fortunate Stars
of Castor and Pollux should appear to bring a calm in detestation of all
Usury: Lo an universal and perpetual Princely contract of Commerce is
brought forth, grounded upon Traffic and Usury; yet with a religious care to
prevent the biting Usury upon the poor and honest householder, and to be a
means to maintain peace through all the whole world in matter of Traffic
and Commerce: notwithstanding the several and particular quarrels and
differences between Princes, which is very considerable and admirable. (*)

CHAP. XVII. Of the Universal and Perpetual Princely Contract of Commerce.
THE particulars of this Princely contract of Commerce (being compiled by
certain Politicians of diverse Nations) was exhibited unto the Kings most
excellent Majesty, in the year 1608, by a private Gentleman in the Dutch
tongue, and commanded to be delivered unto me to translate the same into
English; but I found the originalls to be in Latin and Italian, and partly in
French, as it had been propounded in diverse countries unto other Princes which
had subscribed thereunto, intending to have kept a copy of it; but on the
sudden being deprived thereof, I did instantly set down the substance
following of it, to the admiration of the Gentleman, and contentment of some of
(then) my honorable friends. And because it is not like that it should come to
any universal conclusion, I have thought convenient to make the same public,
manifesting thereby that Usury Politic is like to continue in all countries:
to the end we may therefore prevent biting Usury upon the poor, by the
charitable means of Pawne-houses, or Mounts of Charity as aforesaid.

Substance of the sole, universal and perpetual Contract of Commerce, or
united society of Knighthood to be made between all Princes, and one private
person; for the surer maintaining of Peace amongst Christians, and increase of
Traffic and Trade thorough all the world, grounded upon jus gentium, by the
Articles following. THE contract or covenant to be made with seven qualities
of persons, Emperors, Kings, Princes, Archdukes, Earls, Knights and
Gentlemen, amongst which some Merchants are comprised, in all not exceeding the
number of one hundredth persons, with the poor to be reckoned for one, as
being so many Stakes; wherein Seig^ories, Commonweals, Societies and Orders
shall be accounted for one also.

Every stake to be from five and twenty thousand crowns of five shillings
sterling, until one hundredth thousand crowns a stake; wherein Emperors and
Kings may not exceed three hundredth thousand crowns; Dukes, Earls, and
Commonweals two hundredth thousand crowns a person.

No man to be ad^aunced to this society but for his deserts, or wealth, or for
both, wherein but one of the kindred to succeed the father, or the nearest of
consanguinitie by default of sons.

The persons in every kingdom (besides the Prince) to be two or three of the
noblest or greatest in government, every one a stake, and the Master of
counting houses for a stake serving gratis, or some other Merchant.

These houses of Exchanges to be in all places of peace or security, and all
other places, as it were dangerous to be governed and served by
correspondencies, which may be in number seven or nine to one stake, and so
augment the stock by their credit and means accordingly, receiving a
proportionable gain of the benefit procured by their employment, without any
other use or consideration for their moneys.

The moneys delivered to this society for the stock to remain for ever by
way of donation, only the revenue yearly from time to time to be paid to the
parties, their heirs, or next of the blood, or to the lawful assign, or by
default (after a time) to the poor.

The persons advanced by deserts and without money brought in, shall for their
stake, or so much as is wanting (within the time limited) allow ten in the
hundredth, until the same is raised by the gain; which is offered by four or
five years revenue to be done, or by deduction of six and one fourth part per
annum.

No man for any criminal offense shall (by way of forfeiture) lose his stake,
or for any misdemeanor hinder his posterity to enjoy the revenue thereof, but
lose his voice (wherein every man is equal.) And moreover, for so much as the
society may be hindered thereby, defalcation (by suspense of payment) shall be
made, until reparation made thereof unto the said society at their pleasure.

No Executor, Administrator, Surueyor, Curator, or other persons or assigns are
to meddle with the premises: but for want of issue or ob intestato falling
upon children under years, or women, to take the accounts and revenues
according to the rate of others, without any other account to be made.

All controversies arising between them of the society for matter of
traffic, to be decided by the Master of Counting Houses, with their Counsel
of Assistance to be appointed unto them, without any appellation or remove to
any other court or jurisdiction whatsoever.

The preservation and assurance of the stock and credit, is by the authority
and confirmation of Princes and Commonweals; who (notwithstanding particular
differences) are generally inclined to maintain traffic, as the Soul of
their wealth and estates, so that the said authority (because of the
protection thereof, by the law of nations) shall be corroborated for the
defense thereof, by their association under their hands and seals, in unity
of covenant (with one private person of the quality hereafter declared) in
seven tongues, whereof every prince in his own language for subscription is
once to have precedencie, and after that without any ceremonial or politic
observation to be used indifferently.

To which end, the said Princes and Potentates are to renounce all laws,
privileges, exceptions, or immunities, of what high nature or dignity soever
to the contrary, and to make approbation of this contract, by their
Parlements, or highest Court of jurisdiction, in the best manner that can be
devised.

Every person of this society to be free and exempted of all Impositions,
Taxes, Customs, Subsidies, lending of moneys any manner of ways, or any
charges; as also masters of the counting houses, which shall not be permitted
to exercise any traffic or trade particular, but must wholly employ themselves
to this business, with such allowance and order as is prescribed unto them.

All worldly things being subject to mutabilitie, even the greatness and
superiority of Princes, which may happen to be deposed for a time, and
afterward to be restored again; It is provided, that of the gains of the
three parts allotted unto them for three stakes in this covenant, the two shall
remain to the Crown, and the third to the Prince, until he be restored
again or dead, which is only to take place in all hereditarie kingdoms.

The said society therefore not to purchase any land for the generality, to
endanger Princes estates, but only for their particular, as occasion serves.

Modells or Medalia to be worn by the said hundredth persons of the society,
and the Masters of counting houses, only with emendation and augmentation of
their arms, and by their successors, upon true register and acknowledgement to
be made and kept thereof. The said Modells to contain on the one side, the
world concatenated together under a Crown Imperial, assisted with the
personages of Prosperity, Honor, and Mercy, environed round about with two
enclosed hands and arms of Faith and Credit; and on the other side the like
with a Cross and Inscription, He does crown his own works in us. All which
persons shall be made noble Knights of this order accordingly, with certain
other additions, as shall be thought convenient, As by Faith and Credit it
shall subsist, or the like.

The aforesaid stock and credit to be employed by the said Masters of counting
houses, and assistants in five several matters, by Exchange, Bank, Mount of
Charity, Mensa argentaria, and Houses of Vendition without any adventure or
loss, according to an instruction, showing the benefit and commodiousnesse
which will arise thereby unto all estates, for the preservation and
augmentation of Honor and Wealth of the rich, relief of the poor, and
welfare of the commons in general, having some gratuities bestowed upon them.

The private person (with whom all the aforesaid parties are to covenant) is to
be general Master of all the counting houses, and only to keep a general
book of account, without any administration of the stock, or to meddle in any
trade of merchandise, but to have the honor of knighthood, with a large
allowance of charges, expenses had and to be had for to entertain all the
parties and correspondencies which might resort to the places of his
habitation: to which purpose he must be provided of a stately house, with all
convenient things necessary, and many servants, messengers, and posts, with
the gains of one hundredth thousand crowns, that he does furnish by many
allowances and other means, to the satisfaction of all the parties, according
to a particular agreement, wherein the united Low Provinces are named the
chief place or Rendevous of this negotiation or intended contract, whereunto
diverse countries have condescended.

The authors of this project (under the said private name) do desire for the
advancement hereof permission to execute the same, safgarde, to be protected
from all injuries, and to repair all damages which might be done unto them in
hostile or peaceable manner, freedom of all taxes, and assurance for their
persons and goods according to an instruction.

To which end the Master general of the said counting houses (if breach be
made by any one of the parties in any article of this covenant) is to receive
the complaint, and to consult with his counsel of assistance, and so to give
notice thereof unto the next neighbor, Prince, or State of this society, to
see the same redressed or amended. If that Prince do deny to be ayding, or be
forgetful therein, he shall be accessarie, and judged as guilty as the first
offender; whereas on the contrary, the forfeiture of the revenues of this
first offender for the time shall be his. And the society may remove their
counting houses, or change them into correspondencies, if other Princes and
States should also prove to be negligent, and (without respect had to their
private gain) abandon so good an action, losing their title or revenue,
violating the law of nations, wherewith (no doubt) most Princes shall find
themselves agreeued, and these Princes or persons transgressors will find the
worse, and endanger their estates, to their great dishonor through all the
world, and disturbance of other neighbor Princes.

For the better advancement hereof, there is a place reserved for reward of two
unknown persons, which by their industry, labor, and science shall be
thought worthy thereof, one bearing the name of it.

This princely contract requires a serious consideration. The Stock or
Capital is 2 Millions, or 2500 thousand pounds sterling, or ten millions
Flemish, which (increased by nine hundredth correspondencies) will make the
stock to be twenty and five millions, o^ one hundredth millions Flemish. It
being very probable that through all the world there lies so much money dead
without any use or employment. The calculation of ten upon the hundredth by
the year, doubleth yearly; so that he who by gift employeth one hundredth
pounds, is to have for it one hundredth pounds yearly for ever: and this is
supposed to be gotten by five several means, viz. by Cambium, Bank, Mons
Pietatis, M^nsa Argentaria, and Domus Commutationis, whereof you may find the
particulars in this Book. The proceeding of this matter of great consequence
has been interrupted by Monsieur Olden Barneuelt lately executed at the Hague
in Holland, the sequel hereof time will discover, and we may say with the Poet,

Quid non mortalia Pectora cogunt etc.
CHAP. XVIII. Of Moneys delivered upon Lives, Annuities, and Pensions.
Having entreated of Moneys delivered at interest without casualtie, and so
termed Usury by reason of the contract of benefit without adventure: it is
convenient to handle of Moneys delivered upon Lives, when Merchants do give
twelve upon the hundredth without pawn, called beyond the seas after the penny
8: the moitie whereof with pawn is six upon the hundredth, or double eight,
according to the penny 16, as aforesaid. The penny 8 is 12, for eight times
12 makes one hundredth: so the penny 16 which is used for rents upon houses or
lands is 6, according to which penny 8 upon one life or double for one year
(so they all live) is equal upon eight lives. This is much used in diverse
cities beyond the seas, to draw moneys into their hands. As for example.

One hundredth pounds is delivered to have two hundredth pounds for it at the
years end upon eight lives, if they all live, you have two hundredth pounds to
buy a perpetual rent; or sometimes as it has been, to give twenty per 100
for the year, and so from year to year, and dying the principal is theirs.

One hundredth pounds for eight lives (by equality decreasing the penny 8) is
12 ll 10 ss, for two lives, 11 ll 2 ss, for three lives 10 ll, for four lives
9 ll 1 ss 9 pence, is 6 ll 5 ss for eight lives.

The City of Amsterdam was wont to give good consideration, and did observe
this order upon a hundredth Guelders for eight lives gave 16 13 4 Observations
of money delivered upon lives.
Of nine lives 19 1 0 Upon ten lives they gave 22 4 5 Upon eleven lives 26 13
4 Upon twelve lives 33 6 8 Upon seven lives 14 6 4 Upon six lives 13 6 8

Here you are to remember the observations of Assurors, whether the persons be
young or old, sober in their diet and behavior, much traveling abroad or
staying at home, subject to sickness, and the like considerations. Rents upon
houses.


Moneys delivered upon annuities for rents, seem more reasonable than pensions
upon lives, because you bear only the adventure of the decay of houses or
destruction of them in time of war; and much more should be given without
pawn, than with pawn or morgage.

It is commodious for a man, having wast grounds and intending to build upon
them, to take much money upon rent after 6 pro cent. which many Cities give
continually to increase their wealth and inhabitants. And because the valuation
of their money does often alter and is inhaunced, whereby all things become
dearer, Rents paid in specie.
the parties are advised to have their rents paid in specie, in Crowns,
Dollers, Ducats to be paid as formerly they were current; the dangers in
times of wars causes rents to decrease, for the ancient rent is always
first to be paid, although all others be losers. (*)

CHAP. XIX. Of the Denomination and Division of Moneys of diverse Countries.
THE Denomination, Division, and Subdiuision of the moneys of all Countries, is
most necessary for Merchants and all others to be known; because without it,
they sail in the course of Traffic without Compass, abandoned at all
uncertainties and dangers to have true equality and equity observed in their
buyings and sellings, and that more especially if the course of exchanges be
neglected, as shall be declared hereafter.

Some of these moneys are imaginary, and some are substantial or real in
specie, and yet not concurring in price or value.
England.
IN England concerning Silver coins, there is the Crown of five shillings, and
the half Crown of two shillings six pence, the shilling, the six pence, the
four pence or groat, the three pence, two pence, three half pence, the penny
and half penny of sterling Silver, and the farthing of Copper.

The ordinary Golden coins are the unite pieces of 22 shillings, the half of
eleven shillings, and the crowns or quarters of five shillings six pence, and
the part two shillings nine pence, and the five pieces coined at four
shillings, making twenty two shillings, with the Rose and the Thistle.

The Laureat King James, of twenty two carrats fine of twenty shillings, and
the half piece.

Scotland.
In Scotland is the Cross Dagger piece of eleven shillings, and the half of
it, and their Rider of ten shillings six pence, and for their Silver coin the
Mark piece valued at 13 pence in England, and the half of the same, as also
six small pieces of above two pence for the said Mark.

Ireland.
In Ireland where no Mint has been since King Edward the fourth of England,
the fifteen shilling sterling, make twenty shillings Irish, and the Silver
Harp of nine pence sterling is there current for twelve pence, and the moitie
thereof accordingly, and the abouesaid Gold coins are current as in England,
or in sterling reduced into their Irish moneys one third part more: so that the
twenty shillings piece of Laureat King James, is there four Nobles, and all
other divisions of it accordingly. So the English shilling is sixteen pence
Irish, and the parts of it accordingly. All other old Irish coin is out of
use, and little quantity to be found of it.

In Germany they make all their moneys by the account of Batsen, every Batts
four Creutzers, coining pieces of three, six, Germany.
and twelve Creutzers. So the Ducat of Hungary makes 27 Batses; the Gold
guelder eighteen Batses; the Polish guelder or doller fifteen Batses,
Teastons five Batses. The said Gold guelder was value Anno 1520 to be current
in Holland for twenty eight stiuers, whereby their corn is bought and sold,
which is erroneous and imaginary, because there is no such piece in specie. So
was the doller and the Silver guelder, called Gros or Vnciales, weighing an
ounce.

The ancient Romans called an ounce a guelder, and the eight ounces made one
mark, and 12 ounces or guelders were reckoned for one pound; and there were
coined pieces called Nummi Dragmi, alias, Grosleyn, is the eight part of a
doller; Angelicies was the of a doller, making three Batses or twelve
Creutzers, called Schriekenborgers. The said Angelici were Tribute penies,
which being allayd and made worse, did obtain the name of Bats, as it were
seeking of a benefit, which since have bin more imbased, and therefore deserve
that name of Batses: they are called in Thuringia, Gulielmi, and in Bohemia
Bohemici, in regard of the said tribute, whereof they have also 12 pieces
diuidedly for 12 pence, which penny is all Germany over two Hellers by way of
account. The doller was first made upon sixty and five Creutzers, which (in
those coins so imbased) are answered by 72 Creutzers: And in oth^^ cities of
Germany they reckon as follows upon diverse coins, (...) made, and some
imaginary.

At Augusta they have small moneys, Grosses of three Batses, Augusta.
Lion pieces, whereof two make a Creutzer; the Blackepennie four to one
Creutzer, Snubourgh, Blaphart or Bohomicos of three and 3 Creutzers; the Ryckes
doller is thirty Albes of eight pence every Albe, or seventy and two
Creutzers for the said doller.

At Frankford they divide their Florens of sixty Creutzers, Frankford.
by twenty shillings, and every shilling in twelve Hellers, according to the
pound.

At Norenbourgh in like manner, and the Creutzer is four pence, Norenborough.
every penny two Hellers, and five pence called a Fynfer or five Pennick.

At Strasborough they use Blapharts, Grosses, Strasborough.
Bohemicos of three Creutzers, every Blaphart six pence of two Hellers or
four Ortlyn.

At Bohemia, as in Germany; and the Bohemici, Bohemia.
are whitgrosse of three Creutzers; the Doller is twenty four Bohemicos, of
twelve Angster, every Bohemico ten pence, and one Mark is forty Bohemicos,
and Scoc, is sixty Bohemicos.

Vienna.
At Vienna the Ryckes Doller is eight shillings, and the Ducat twelve shillings.

Trioll.
At Trioll the Doller at seventy two Creutzers, of five Fynfers or Hellers the
Creutzer.

Hungary.
In Hungary the said Ryckes Doller is seven shillings seven pence, now inhanced
to eight shillings.

Colloigne.
At Colloigne and Cleues, a guelder is 24 whitpennie, of twelve Morkens, and
every whitpennie is two shillings or stiuers, and four mark for the guelder.

Hamborough.
At Hamborough the Doller coined at thirty and one shillings Lups, and for many
years current for thirty and three, is inhanced now to fifty and four
shillings of three whitpennie, and every shilling is twelve pence, of two
Hellers every penny.

Pomerania.
In Pomerania the said Doller is thirty and two shillings, of two Snudens, one
mark Snudens is eight shillings Lups, and the two marks Snuds are one mark
Lups.

Dansicke.
At Dansicke the Doller thirty and five Gross of three shillings, and in other
places as you may find upon the moneys denominated hereafter, in the Chapter of
the Imaginary Moneys of Exchanges, for Merchants further directions.

CHAP. XX. Of Merchants Accounts kept by Debtor and Creditor.
THE manner of keeping accounts by Debtor and Creditor, was first devised in
Italy upon very good considerations. There is great affinity between Faith,
Trust, and Confidence; in Divinity Trust and Confidence are two handmaides
unto Faith, even as Faith is the hand whereby we apprehend Gods mercies, to
repose our trust in him, and to be confident thereof. But in Humane actions
the word Trust is more proper, which implies a credit or belief which we
give or repose upon others, or others do attribute and give unto us. Hence
proceeds the Italian speech, Star dal Credere, grounded upon that maxim of
the Civil Law, Omnis homo bonus, donec contrarium probetur; whereupon a man
negotiating in this world must trust and be trusted: he that is trusted with
any goods, moneys, or other mooueable things, is therefore called a Debtor or
Debtor unto the party that does trust him therewith, and he calls that
party his Creditor, because he gave him credit for the same; whereby Debtor
and Creditor concurreth between party and party. Suppose now, that a young
man being of age to manage his own, is desirous to deal in the world in
traffic and trade by buying and selling of commodities, or to let out his
money at use, or by exchange, for other countries (unto which three actions we
still observe our method, as being the Essential parts of Traffic, as often
has been declared:) and thereupon he endeavors to keep a true account of
all his proceedings and negotiation, by way of this manner of account by
Debtor and Creditor, that is to say, to have still a Creditor unto a Debtor,
and a Debtor unto a Creditor, which must reciprocally answer each other. Now
considering of his means for the effecting hereof, he finds that he has one
hundredth Clothes, two hundredth Kersies, or any other commodities left him by
his father or friends, and moreover some thousand pounds in ready money, and
five hundredth pounds in debts owing by several persons, payable at some time
to come, besides some hundredth pounds yearly in Lands or Leases: out of all
these he makes a Stock or Capital, which he does enter into a Book^ called a
Iournall, A Iournall Book.
because it contains his daily actions from time to time; and from this Book
they are transferred or set over into another bigger Book, called a Liedger, A
Leidger Book.
because the same remains (as lying) accordingly in a place for that purpose.

The Spaniard does call this Book El Libro grande, and the Iournall he calls
Manual, being of a far lesser volume, commonly but one third part of the
other, being manuable, and unto this they keep a Borrador or Memorial, wherein
all things are first entered, A Memorial Book.
and may upon occasion be blotted, altered, or (by error) be miscast, or not
well entered.

But in the Iournall and Leidger Book, there may not be any alteration of
ciphers, blotting (nor places left in blanke in the Iournall) but one parcel
without intermission must follow another, otherwise the books are of no credit
in law, or before any Magistrate; whereas otherwise much credit is given to
books well and orderly kept, for the deciding and determination of many
controue^sies which happen between Merchants and Merchants, and their Factors,
which is the cause that I could not omit to write thereof, as a branch of the
Law-Merchant, to the end that such Judges, and others that are unacquainted
with the manner of it, may be enlightened in their proceedings, which (in
matters of this nature) may come before them to be determined.

The manner how he does enter them in the Iournall is as follows.
WHerein observe, that every Debtor must have a Creditor, and so on the
contrary every Creditor his Debtor, and always the left side of your
Leidger Book being open is the Debitors side, and the right side of the said
book toward your right hand is the Creditors side, How parcells are found in
the ^eidger and Iournall.
wherein you enter every Account by it self from the parcells of your
Iournall, which parcells (in the said Leidger Book) are found in the Iournall
by the date of it when it was made. But in the Iournall, the Leaves or Folio of
the Leidger are noted over a line in the Margin for the Debtor, and under the
said line for the Creditor: and so in the Leidger book every parcel has in
the latter end a direction to the Folio or Carta, as the Italians call it,
whereby the Debtor shows his Creditor, and the Creditor makes relation to
his Debtor; which words are not used, but understood by, Such a one owes,
and, Such a one is due to have: not only of persons, but of things themselves.
As the great Merchants which buy and sell many commodities for themselves, or
for others, they will arm an Account, which is the Spanish phrase, Armar vna
Cuenta; but in plain English, they will keep or frame an Account for
themselves, Magazi^.
and make their Warehouses or Magazin Debtor, because the Warehouse is
trusted with the wares or commodities: others will make the commodities
Debtor, and their own Capital or Stock Creditor. Capital or Stock.
In like manner (because their moneys are laid up or locked in a chest, which
they call Cash) they will therefore imagine this Cash to be a person whom they
have trusted, Ca^^ or Chest.
and make the said Cash a Debtor for the money they put into it, and when they
pay out that money, or any part thereof, they will make Cash Creditor, and that
party to whom it was paid shall be made the Debtor, and if he do pay the
same by your order to another party, he shall be made the Debtor, and so the
other is discharged and becomes a Creditor; and so from one to another,
until you come to receive the money again, and then Cash is Debtor again:
for you must still have a care to find a Debtor to have his Creditor, A ^^rrie
jest of Will. Summers.
and that every Creditor may have his Debtor. It seems that William Summers
(being a Iester to King Henry the eight) had some insight in this manner of
Account: for when the King told him, that he had delivered a good sum of
money unto a gentleman a follower of his, Summers answered, That for doing so,
he had noted in his Book, that the King was a fool, giving his reason for it,
Because the gentleman would never return back again, and that the King was
cosined: but the King asked of Summers. What he would do, in case the gentleman
did return with the money? whereupon Summers answered, Then I will put him in
my book for a fool, and put you out, Sic nugae seria ducunt.

To return to our young Merchant, by this time he has taken an Inventory of
his estate, and caused his Clothes and Kersies to be valued, and finds that
the hundredth clothes are worth some 1200 ll one with another, and his two
hundredth Kersies of Devonshire 400 ll: hereupon entering the year, month, and
day in the Iournall, he makes Debtor and Creditor as aforesaid.

Magazin or Warehouse owes unto Capital or Stock 1600 ll for one hundredth
white Clothes of the marks following, The manner of making Debtor and
Creditor.
amounting to 1200 ll, and for two hundredth Devonshire Kersies at 40 ll the
pack of twenty pieces, which of mine own estate I find in this my warehouse
parcel of my patrimony, amounting together in wares 1600 ll, and this sum
is drawn out in the margin toward your right hand in the said Iournall.

Cash owes unto Capital or Stock (you need not to say of me A.B.) the sum
of 1000 ll, for so much ready money which I find this day in Cash, proceeding
of etc. and this sum is likewise drawn out etc.

B. M. Mercer owes unto Capital 300 ll, which he owed by bill unto my father
deceased, payable in two payments, namely etc. sum 300 ll.

N.W. Merchant owes unto Capital 200 ll for so much owing by him unto my
father deceased, which is payable the 25 of March next, by bond etc.

The Manor of Latham in Lancashire owes unto Capital 1500 ll, Land^.
which was left my father by descent from etc. containing etc. of the yearly
value of 66 ll, now in the tenure, occupation, or possession of etc. 1500 ll.

The lease of the house called the Golden Lion situate in Cheapside in London,
owes unto Capital 200 ll, Leas^^.
for so much I have paid unto the company of Mercers for a lease of the said
house for 21 years, with a reservation of a rent of 20 ll yearly, to be paid
every six months, now in the occupation of A.B. Goldsmiths, paying me sixty
pounds yearly rent for the same, I say cost me two hundredth pounds.

Plate and household stuff owes unto Capital 200 ll, Household stuff.
for so much I have bought, and find to be in moueables of plate, apparel,
and household stuff since my fathers decease, wherewith I find all my estate to
be worth 5000 ll, the particulars of which plate and moueables are by
Inventory to be seen in my Book of Remembrances or Memorial; so for this
parcel I draw out 200 ll.

Here you see that this young Merchant has an estate of 5000 ll to begin the
world withal, consisting of the aforesaid seven parcels. Transferring of
parcels to the Leidger.
These seven parcels now are put over into the Liedger, which some call posted
over, in so many several Accounts of seven Debitors, and there is but one to
be made Creditor for all these, which is Capital or Stock, which does answer
by correspondence all the seven Debitors in their proper accounts, amounting
all to the sum of 5000 ll on the Debitors side, and so is here 5000 ll on the
Creditors side which does balance the other, Ballancing of accounts.
being so termed of a pair of balances, wherein equal weight being laid on
every side, the balance will be just and even; and in like manner must all
accounts (kept by Debtor and Creditor be even balanced, whatsoever the
remainder of the accounts are, which falls out by calculation upon the
account. But the maine balance of the whole book may not differ one penny,
and fractions of half pence and farthings are not used in Iournall parcells,
but accounted in the summaries at the first.

This Merchant now employeth his money and buyeth some other commodities to be
sent beyond the seas: namely, one hundredth pieces of Perpetuanoes, which cost
him ready money fifty shillings the piece; more, twenty fother of Lead, at
ten pound the fother; fifty pieces of Bays of diverse sorts, cost him two
hundredth and twenty pounds; and twenty Redding mingled color clothes,
amounting in all to 870 ll, Entering of parcels in the Iournall.
which he paid in ready money. And all these commodities he does enter into
his Iournall in one parcel, making the said Magazin Debtor for all, and his
cash Creditor, because the said cash was made Debtor for the money of one
thousand pounds, For commodities bought and money paid for them
as you see before, and now being made eight hundredth and seventy pounds
Creditor, there is but one hundredth and thirty pounds more remaining in cash,
the rest is in commodities.

For money received, and a debtor partly discharged.
By this time B.M. the Mercer (who owes three hundredth pounds) pays a
hundredth pounds of it, now Cash is made Debtor for that one hundredth pounds,
and B.M. is made Creditor for the same; so he owes now but two hundredth
pounds, and there is now in Cash two hundredth and thirty pounds.

Substantial wealth.
The three existant parcells by themselves for the Lands, Lease, and the Plate
and Household stuff, remain still in the books untouched.

The Merchant begins to ship his commodities, and sends his hundredth white
clothes for Hamborough to a Factor, or his servant, and pays the kings
Custom, and all charges concerning the same: and now he frames an account of
those clothes, intituling the same voyage to Hamborough, Accounts for voy^ges
for Hamborough.
or clothes sent to Hamborough, do owe unto the Magazin one thousand and two
hundredth pounds, for one hundredth white clothes sent for my account to such a
man in such ships etc.

Money paid for Custom and charges.
Then he does charge this account of clothes with the Custom and charges he
paid; -- Clothes sent to Hamborough do owe unto Cash sixty pounds for Custom
and charges paid for the same, as in the Memorial Book appears.

For Seuill in Spain he sends the hundredth pieces of Perpetuanoes which he
bought, Voyage for Spain.
and fifty pieces of Bays, and twenty fother of Lead, which did cost him 670
ll; and the Charges, Custom, and Impositions are fifty pounds in toto.

For Lixborne in Portugal he sends two hundredth pieces of Devonshire
Kersies, Voyage for Portugal.
and twenty Redding clothes, which cost him six hundredth pounds, and the
Custom and charges forty pounds.

And hereupon he armeth two accounts under the name of voyage into Spain, or
voyage to Lixborne, or some other such name of the said commodities, as every
man thinks good: so these voyages are Debtor for the commodities, customs
and charges thereof, and the Magazin is discharged, and made Creditor as
abouesaid; Magazin discharged.
and likewise Cash is made Creditor, having paid the Customs, Impositions and
charges aforesaid.

This Merchant, not willing to bear so great an adventure of six hundredth
pounds, or seven hundredth pounds in one Ship, does cause himself to be assured
of three hundredth pounds in every Ship, Money for assurance.
at four and five upon the hundredth, and pays the same unto the assurors.
Hereupon he makes the said voyages Debtor, and Cash Creditor for so much,
namely, thirteen pounds for Lixborne, and sixteen pounds for Seuill, and so
commits the same to Gods will and pleasure, and all these parcells are
entered into the Books. Money received.
And B. M. the Mercer does pay more two hundredth pounds, whereof Cash is made
Debtor, and B. M. is made Creditor, and discharged of the 3 hundredth pounds he
did owe, Money delivered a^ interest.
whereby the Merchant finding some money to spare, he delivered out two
hundredth pounds at interest unto another Merchant for six months, and
thereupon he makes this Merchant C.D. Debtor, and Cash Creditor, declaring to
have his bond of three hundredth pounds, for the payment of two hundredth and ten
pounds at such a day in such a place. Interest money.
And for the interest money of ten pounds, he makes him likewise Debtor,
and the account of profit and loss Creditor. But some men do make a particular
account of interest, which is at a man's pleasure.

Now the two hundredth pounds which N. W. owes, are due, Moneys owing continued
at use.
and he desires to keep the money for six months at interest, and to give
his bond for it, which is so agreed between them; the interest is ten pounds,
for which he makes likewise N.W. debtor, and profit and loss Creditor.

The Merchants estate stands now thus, View of a Merchants estate by the
Books.
at Hamborough one thousand two hundredth and sixty pounds, at Seuill seven
hundredth thirty and six pounds, at Lixborne six hundredth fifty and three
pounds, at interest four hundredth and twenty pounds with the interest, and
but little money in Cash, because of his daily expenses.

Suppose now that the Ships of the Company of Merchant adventurers are come
from Hamborough, Return of voyages.
and our Merchants clothes are sold to diverse Merchants and others there, to
be paid at six and six months, Money paid by way of anticipation.
for which they have given their Bills obligatorie to pay the same accordingly.
But some of these Merchants are desirous to pay their money by way of
anticipation, having interest allowed them for it, after the rate of eight in
the hundredth for the year, and so pay ready money to our Merchants Factor,
and thereupon the said Factor makes over by exchange four hundredth pounds
sterling by two Bills of exchanges to be paid here at vsance (which is two
months after the date of the Bills) by Merchants strangers. Money made over by
exchange.
These Merchant strangers do accept the said Bills of exchanges, and you make
them severally Debitors for the same, and your Factor of Hamborough Creditor
for the said four hundredth pounds.

Moreover, your Factor has set over some of those Merchants Bills of debt for
foreign commodities, and has taken in payment two Cases of Veluets, Veluets
bought beyond the Seas.
which did cost eight hundredth pounds, and he sends them in these Ships,
with an account of the charges, customs, and factoridge of the said Veluets,
amounting to forty pound; so the Veluets cost in all eight hundredth and forty
pounds: for this you make a new account for Veluets, or the return of the
Hamborough voyage Debtor and your Factor Creditor for the said eight hundredth
and forty pounds, Money taken up by exchange.
as aforesaid. And because you are to pay great Custom and Imposition of these
veluets, and your Cash is not well provided; you take up by exchange here
sixty pounds to be paid by your Factor at Hamborough, and deliver your Bill
of exchange for it, and receive the money; now Cash is made Debtor for the
same, and your Factor that is to pay the money is made Creditor for it
accordingly.

Cloth sold beyond the Seas, and account sent of them.
This Factor does now by land send unto you the account of your hundredth clothes
sold unto diverse Merchants as aforesaid, and this account is made in Hamborough
or Lups money, and it is supposed amongst Merchants, that six and twenty
shillings and eight pence of their money, is correspondent to our twenty
shillings sterling; according to this you reduce your Hamborough money into
sterling money after the rate, Hamborough money reduced into sterling.
and your Factor in the said account has already deducted his factorige,
customs, and all charges incident upon the clothes sold by him: so that casting
your account upon the nett Prouenu of your clothes, he has received clear
money one thousand four hundredth and eighty pound sterling; hereof now you
do make your Factor Debtor, and the voyage for Hamborough Creditor, and
coming to your Leidger Book, you find the said voyage Debtor one thousand
two hundredth and sixty pounds, and now to be made Creditor one thousand four
hundredth and eighty pounds: so you find here is two hundredth and twenty
pounds clear gains by the account, unless you should become a loser in the
veluets; for the money deducted for interest to him that paid before his time,
is already deducted in the account of clothes: so that to clear this account
of the voyage, you make the same Debtor for the said two hundredth and twenty
pounds, and the account of profit and loss Creditor for the same.

You have now sold your two cases of Veluets, the one for ready money, and the
other at six and six months days of payment, to W.W. Mercer, amounting to
five hundredth and twenty pounds, whom you have made Debtor for the same, and
your veluets Creditor, and for the other you have made Cash Debtor for four
hundredth ninety pounds, which you have received, and likewise your Veluets
Creditor for the same sum; so in both, one thousand and ten pounds: and
casting up your charges, Customs, and Impositions of your Veluets, you find
them to amount unto 80 ll, and for this sum you make Veluets Debtor, and
Cash Creditor: so your Veluets did cost with all the said charges 920 ll, and
they were sold for 1010 ll; so there is 90 ll advanced by the said Veluets,
whereof to clear this account, you make Velvet Debtor, and Profit and Loss
Creditor, as aforesaid. Having now money in Cash, you make over 300 ll for
Amsterdam by exchange, with condition and order to your Factor, That from time
to time as the money grows due, he shall make it over again by exchange unto
you at double Vsance, which is two months, as you made it over unto him: some
now in this case will arm an account of exchanges; but it is better to make the
factor of Amsterdam debtor for it, and cash creditor.

Ships are now arrived from Saint Lucar in Spain, and your Factor of Seuill
has sold your Perpetuanoes, Bays, and Lead, Retu^ne from Spain in Tobacco.
and in return thereof has sent you a parcel of Tobacco, because Cutcheneall
was too dear, and rich Indico is here too good cheap: withal he has sent
you the account of your commodities kept in Royalls of Silver, Accounts of
goods sold in Spain.
accounting six pence for a Royal of the clear Prouenu, being 27240 Royalls,
making sterling 681 ll, whereof you make him Debtor, and the Voyage for Spain
Creditor; and when you come to your Leiger Book, there it appears that the
said goods did cost you 736 ll, and so there is lost 55 ll. For this now to
clear the account of the said goods, you make Profit and Loss Debtor, Loss
upon wares in Spain
and the said Voyage Creditor to balance this loss, contrary to the gain,
the Tobacco did cost with all charges 24800 Royalls, which is 620 ll; for this
you make an account of Tobacco Debtor, and your Factor of Seuill Creditor,
Reduction of Spanish money into sterling.
in the same manner as you did your Veluets, putting thereunto the great Impost
which you paid for the same, and all charges; and having sold your Tobacco for
ten shillings a pound one with another, you find to have made clear above
one thousand pounds, be it 1010 ll, which cost you in Spain but 620 ll, so
here is 390 ll gotten; Gain by Tobacco.
but you lost 55 ll by your wares sent into Spain: well, this account is
cleared, Tobacco is made Debtor 390 ll, and Profit and Loss Creditor for the
same, and now you are well stored for money, for all is ready money, saving
300 ll at six months. Hereupon you make more money over by exchange for
Amsterdam, Money made over by exchange.
by several Bills to your Factor, to the sum of 500 ll, and thereupon he is
made Debtor, and Cash Creditor for the said sum, Interim your said Factor of
Amsterdam has made over unto you by exchange the former 300 ll back again,
for which you make him Creditor, and the party Debtor that is to pay you the
money at double Vsance.

The Ships of Lixborne are also arrived, and bring in return of your Kerseys
and Reading clothes, forty chests of Sugar of the three sorts, Pancla,
Mascauado, and Blanco, or white, with advice that the commodities are sold at a
reasonable rate, for by the account it appears that the nett Prouenu of it
comes to 1204 thousand 800 Reys, Reduction of Portugal money into sterling.
which make 3012 ducats of ten Royalls, or 400 Reys, is sterling 753 ll; so
that there is advanced by the account just one hundredth pounds, which are
carried to the account of Profit and Loss, as in the former Accounts. The
forty chests of Sugars did cost 550 ll, whereof the Factor of Lixborne is made
Creditor, and the Account of Sugars Debtor, in like manner as aforesaid,
Mutatis, Mutandis, and the said Sugars were sold paiable at six and six
months, for 820 ll; so that the charges and customs deducted, there was 190
ll gotten, which are likewise posted to the Account of Profit and Loss.

Money which was made over, returned by exchange again.
The 300 ll made over from Amsterdam, are now due to be paid here, and the
Merchant does offer you to pay them by a new Bill of exchange; whereunto you
agree, and hereupon you make him Creditor, and your Factor of Amsterdam again
Debtor: and withal you make over by exchange other 200 ll payable at double
Vsance; and for this you make him Debtor also, and Cash Creditor.

The year is now almost expired, and every provident Merchant does commonly
make up his Account, and draws a balance of his book, and this Merchant
finds to have received of his Manor of Latham, Money received o^ lands and
lease. Expenses of house keeping reckoned.
and lease of a house 106 ll, and for this he charged his Cash, and carries
the same to Gain and Loss, as he did all the former parcells. Then he does
cast up his expenses of house keeping, which come to 150 ll; and for this he
makes Profit and Loss Debtor, and Cash Creditor.

The 400 ll made over from Hamborough are received, and Cash is Debtor for it,
and the parties that paid the same, are made Creditor, and discharged. Now by
the Account of Profit and Loss, there appears to be gotten 911 ll clear,
Gains of the Acc^unt of Profit and Loss, and Loss carried to Capital or
stock.
all charges and expenses deducted: this is now carried to Stock, which is now
5911 ll. Hereupon take all the remainders of the Accounts by Debtor and
Creditor, which is the balance of the Book, and you shall find nothing on the
Creditors side, but the Capital of 5911 ll, which is balanced by the nine
accounts following, and the three accounts for the lands, leases, and household
stuff, amounting to 1900 ll unaltered; So 1900 ll for the said lands, Balance
of the Leiger Book.
lease, plate, and household stuff. 420 Owing by two parcels at interest, by
C.D. and N.W. Merchants. 520 Owing for Veluets sold to, etc. 300 Owing for
Tobacco sold to, etc. 820 Owing for Sugars sold to, etc. 1000 Owing by the
Factor of Amsterdam, etc. 180 Owing by the Factor of Hamborough, etc. 61 Owing
by the Factor of Seuill, etc. 203 Owing by the Factor of Lixborne, etc. 507
Ready money in Cash. 5911 ll.

Thus it appears, that this Merchant has augmented his Capital or Stock
nine hundredth and eleven pounds, Loss by the Account of profit and loss
being now worth 5911 ll. And if he had been a loser by the Account of profit
and loss, then must he make his Capital Debtor, and the said Account
Creditor, to balance the matter, whereby his Stock would have decreased. Now
by these proceedings in buying and selling, receiving and paying, you may
understand all other voyages for what places soever, taking notice of the
diversities of moneys, and calculations of Exchanges already declared in our
former Chapters; having an especial care to keep an orderly Cash Book of all
the moneys received and paid out; which, The importance o^ a Cash Book.
as money is Publica Mensura, or a right Judge to set a price unto every
thing, so may you by the measure thereof (truly entered in the Cash Book) find
out many doubts, questions, and vncertaineties in Accounts. For the moneys
being proceeding from the originalls of commodities or exchanges, and the
persons with whom you deal therein, gives you light and direction to discuss
these differencies; and therefore it may well be compared to the measure of
Hercules foot, whereby the whole Symetricall proportion of all his body was
found out. Symetricall proportion in Accounts.
And many Merchants Accounts are so intricate, and ouergrowne with errors, as
Archymedes Tomb with thorns, when Cicero came to visit it.

But now me thinks I hear one say, You have briefly showed us the manner of
Accounts by Debtor and Creditor, with the application of it to a Merchants
negotiation for Commodities and Money, and also by delivering money by
Exchange, and how Money is gotten by Commodities, and by letting the same at
Interest; But I cannot understand how a Merchant gets money by Exchange of
money by bills of Exchanges.

Hereunto I answer, That it was omitted of purpose, because it should not
obscure the former demonstration, otherwise the matter is of such importance,
that whosoever deals without consideration of it, is like to a blind man
groping in the dark, and yet may hit the egg. For (according to the price of
Exchange) all the commodities of the realm which are exported, and all the
foreign commodities imported, are sold.

Know ye therefore, Profit of exchange known by the rechange.
that the benefit or profit of exchange is never known directly, but by the
rechange thereof: to which end you may remember, that our Merchant did first
make over three hundredth pounds by exchange for Amsterdam, which were rechanged
again; and then he made over five hundredth pound, three hundredth pounds, and
two hundredth pounds, in all one thousand pounds; and now lately he has made
over one thousand pounds more for the said place of Amsterdam, all at double
Vsance, to make the better benefit and less charges. These moneys are made
over at several places as follows.

ll ss d The manner how exchange gives profit.
300 ll are made over at thirty five shillings Flemish for the pound, is 525 0
0 500 ll are made over at thirty four shillings ten pence, is Flemish 870 16
8 300 ll at thirty four shillings six pence, is 517 10 0 200 ll made over at
thirty four shillings eight pence, is Flemish 346 13 4 1000 ll at several
prices one with another, at thirty five shillings 1750 0 0 So the 2300 ll
sterling paid at Amsterdam, is Flem. 4010 0 0

These moneys have been made over, or returned again by Exchange at several
prices, and the account cleared, as follows.

ll ss d 300 ll were made over from Amsterdam, at thirty four shillings two
pence, is 512 10 0 500 ll were made over at thirty three shillings six pence
for the pound sterling 837 10 0 500 ll at thirty three shillings nine pence,
paid at Amsterdam for the pound 843 15 0 500 ll at thirty three shillings
eight pence in like manner, is 841 13 4 The Factor takes for his sallarie, and
paid to Brokers 21 4 8 And makes over 500 ll more, and gave thirty three
shillings ten pence for the pound 845 16 8 More at the same price of thirty
three shillings ten pence, he made over the just remainder in his hands, being
107 ll 10 ss 4 d, and sends a particular bill of Exchange of 63 ll 11 ss for
it 107 10 4 4010 0 0

Gain by exchange to profit and loss.
Here you may find distinguished, that whereas you made over from London the sum
of 2300 ll sterling you now receive back 2363 ll 11 ss, whereby your p^ofit is
63 ll 11 ss, of this you make your Factor Debtor, and the account of Profit
and Loss Creditor, and the like of other sums for other places. The Spaniard
therefore fr^meth an Account of general exchanges for all places, called
Cambios generales, to keep an even and just Account with his Factor, admitting
a certain rate between him and the said Factors, according to which he rateth
all the parcells of Account, be it for commodities bought or sold, or moneys
paid and taken up again by exchange, which is the more labor, but more
exactly done; otherwise it brings some alteration in Account, as for example.

Difference in the rate of exchange.
This Merchants Factor at Hamborough does remain D^bitor upon the Account one
hundredth and eight pounds, which is according to twenty six shillings eight
pence for the pound sterling. This money he makes over by exchange, but he is
feign to give twenty seven shillings for the pound, which does differ four
pence lups in the pound sterling: so that for this difference you must make
another parcel, charging the account of Profit and Loss with this loss, and
making your Factor Creditor for it: whereas in the general account of
exchanges, all is brought over in one parcel; but herein every man may follow
his pleasure.

Another objection is made, How shall a man do that has no stock, Objection.
or little or nothing to begin the world, as diverse men that from nothing come
to an exceeding great wealth? what book of account can they keep by Debtor
and Creditor?

The answer is manifest, all is grounded upon trust. Answer^.
If any man will sell you commodities payable at long days of payment, and you
sell them, and pay him with his own, you can make him Creditor for the same,
and the commodity Debtor: and in like manner if any man lend money unto you
to trade withal. So that you may perceive that this is an excellent invention,
and a most commodious course to know things readily.

The Bankers therefore that deal for millions of pounds, The keeping of
accounts by the Bankers.
and make great payments continually by assignation, do sum up every ten
parcells, and post them over to a new Account, because they know at all hours
whether a man be Debtor or Creditor unto them.

If the treasure of Princes were disposed by this manner of Account, they
should receive many benefits and advantages.

First, they should not be in wants as they commonly are, Princes accounts to
be kept by Debtor and Creditor.
but make their treasure go further in payments, because they may know at all
times where to find their own, and what is owing unto them.

Secondly, they should not be deceived as they are by their Auditors accounts,
by way of charge and discharge, made sometimes many years after, when commonly
officers are much indebted unto them, and yet call for money continually, which
afterward (before the account made) is consumed by extraordinary allowances,
which are easily procured, when their moneys are out of their coffers; so that
upon the matter, they might pay that with one penny which now does cost them
three pence, whereof the late wars in Ireland give us a sufficient instance.

Lastly, the charges and expenses of officers would be much diminished, and
Princes would content their followers and subjects with better pay.

Worthy of perpetual remembrance is that noble Prince King Henry the
seventh, Notable example of King Henry the seventh.
who (in his singular wisdom and policy) knowing how Princes are subject to
be wronged by their officers in the disposing of their treasure, by fraudulent
and deceitful accounts, which either by ignorance or otherwise by conniuence
do pass, did himself (with great facility) take an inspection in all his
Exchequer Accounts, by an abstract of the said Accounts, entered in a book by
some experienced and skillful man in Accounts, whereunto his highness did
subscribe his royal signature, before the Officers (upon good certificate made
to the Lord Chancellor) could have their Quietus est pass the great Seal of
England. And the faid King was pleased many times to enter into particular
examination of some of the Accounts, whereby he did strike a terror into the
hearts of the officers; so that they became more careful, and durst not commit
any fraud or deceit by combination or tolleration, but his treasure was duly
administered and preserved. This Signature of the Kings in the said book, is
extant to be seen in his Majesty's Exchequer.

Providence of the French King Henry the fourth.
Urgent necessity caused the late French King Henry the fourth, when he was
King of Navarre, to be present in the disposing of his treasure: in so much
that afterward (in possessing the Diadem of all France, and calling to
remembrance his former observation, by comparing things to their first
principles) he found that of every French crown (being sixty soulz) which
his coffers should receive, there came not above the fourth part de claro unto
him. Whereupon, by rooting out of corruption, deposing of needless officers,
profitable emptions of things necessary, and by wise disposing of them, he
brought ( e contrario) three parts of every crown unto his coffers, and did
in progress of time accumulate a very great treasure: and yet did he increase
officers fees, according to the alteration of time, which (by accidental
causes) had made every thing deerer.

Factors Accounts.
Thus much obiter. Now if a Merchant be also a Factor for others in the buying
and selling of Commodities, delivering of Moneys at interest, and by dealings
in Exchanges and R^changes, having factoridge allowed unto him for the same,
according to the manner of Merchants, some more and some less, as they agree
betwe^ne them, the difference in keeping other men's Accounts with whom they
have any correspondence, is but small; for if it be for goods or merchandises
sold, they will entitle the Account, Goods of the Account of such a man do owe
unto Cash such a sum paid for Custom and Charges; or if it be for goods
bought, he will do the like, and discharge the Accounts by making the said
Merchant Debtor or Creditor for it is as the said Accounts require, which he
does also charge with factoridge, or provision for his sallarie: and therefore
all Factors keep a particular Account, to know what they have gotten by
factoridge or provision at the years end, and then they charge that Account
with their charges, and all such expenses as they have been at, and the
remainder is posted to Capital, as in the Account of Profit or Loss;
whereupon some others do bring their charges and exp^nces, and so carry all
the provision to Capital or Stock: Herein every man may use his pleasure,
for this manner of Account affoordeth many distinctions, all which several
branches or members of Account may be brought to make up the the complete
Body; for by the dismembring of an Account, Dismembring of Accounts.
separating every thing in his proper nature, you are enabled to find out many
errors and intricatenes of Accounts, by reducing the Body of it to his
perfection.

In this place may be expected a declaration of the several coins, or
calculation of moneys, wherein the Books of Merchants Accounts are kept beyond
the Seas: But because the same is founded upon the several exchanges between
Country and Countries, I have thought good to refer the same in the proper
place of exchanges hereafter following, and to conclude this Second Part of Lex
Mercatoria, with that notable question made by the Ciuilians; A Question made
by Ciuilians about Books of Account.
Whether a Merchant or a Banker, keeping two Books of Account, the one
concerning the moneys of his Bank, and the other touching trade of Merchandise
for wares, shall be censured alike for such moneys as he owes unto his
Creditors? So that the Creditors (after his decease) shall all stand in equal
degree to be paid, either in the whole or in part, if the Bankers estate be
not sufficient for the payment th^rof: Herein the Judges of Merchants do make
no difference, but the Ciuilians have made a great distinction therein, and
they say, That the Book of the Bank, is more to be credited than the other;
For, says Benuenuto Straccha, the Book of the Bank was kept publicly, and
the other (as it were) secret to himself: so that the Creditors of the one are
to be distinguished from the other, as being two negotiations, and to be
dealt therein according to their several natures, and the means thereof
extant, with such considerations as may be incident thereunto. To declare my
own opinion, I say, That the Canon and Civil Law, making no distinction in
the payment of the Testators Debts, between moneys owing for wares or for
interest; there ought not to be any difference in the nature of the debts, in
regard of the Books of Accounts. (*)

The End of the Second Part.
THE THIRD PART OF LEX MERCATORIA, OR THE Ancient Law-Merchant; concerning
Exchanges for Moneys by Bills of Exchanges, compared to the Spirit or Faculty
of the Soul of TRAFFIC and COMMERCE.
HAVING (in the First and Second Part of this Book) entreated of the Body and
Soul of Traffic, namely, Commodities and Moneys. Let us now handle the
predominant part of the course of Traffic, which is the Exchange for moneys,
by Bills of Exchanges for foreign parts, compared to the Spirit or Faculty of
the Soul. For as moneys do infuse life to commodities by the means of
Equality and Equity, preventing advantage between Buyers and Sellers: so
Exchange for moneys by Bills of Exchanges (being seated every where)
corroborateth the Vital Spirit of Traffic, directing and controlling (by
just proportions) the prices and values of commodities and money, as shall be
declared.

Many men cannot well discern the distinction of the Spirit in sundry
matters, because man (consisting of Body and Soul (that) which belongs to
the Spirit) is comprised under the name Soul: but if they be willing to
understand the necessary distinction hereof, reason in the Theoricke Part,
will demonstrate the same in the Practike Part of this discourse of Exchanges.

Saint Paul in the later end of his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, wished
a sanctification to their spirits and souls, 2 Thessalonians. 5.23.
and their bodies until the day of Judgment. For albeit the Spirit of man, is
rightly termed to be the Faculty of the Soul; The Faculty of the Soul, is
the Spirit of man.
yet the parts of the Soul concerning Understanding and Will, have their
proper relation; for that part called Understanding, is seated chiefly in the
Soul, as Will is in the Spirit, both to be accompanied with Knowledge.

The Philosophers have made this distinction by their Chimicall observation:
and such as place the Soul in the blood (dispersed through all the veins of
the body) do also place the Will of man in the spirit, residing in the heart
of man, which the Anatomists demonstrateth to be a little concauitie, where the
drops of the vital blood are placed in the heart, which are feared up, and the
place is shrunk in bodies which have been poisoned.

To make application of this comparison between the Soul and Spirit,
Application of the comparison.
we shall find by the following discourse, that even as the Spirit of man is
predominant over the Soul and Body in all the actions thereof, which by the
blood are quickened and preserved, even so is the Exchange for moneys by Bills
of Exchanges, ouerruling the course of commodities and moneys in all places
where the action of money is felt or seen, directing the same (by some due
proportions) accordingly.

CHAP. I. Of the Beginning of the Exchange for Moneys, by Bills of Exchanges.
THE Exchange for moneys is of great antiquity: for (as we have declared) the
first Silver moneys coined by the Romans is almost 1900 years since. And even
as money was invented to be made of the best mettalls, to avoid the
troublesome carriage of commodities up and down, and from one country into
another: So (upon the like consideration) when other nations (imitating the
Romans) did coin moneys, The cause of the Exchanges
Exchange by Bills for moneys was devised, to avoid both the danger and
adventure of moneys and the troublesome carriage thereof. This money now being
made by diverse Nations of several standards and diverse stamps and
inscriptions, (as a Mark of Sovereignty) caused them to appoint a certain
Exchange, for the permutation of the several sorts of coins in diverse
countries, without any transportation of the coin, but giving Par pro Pari, or
value for value, with a certain allowance to accomodate the Merchant: and the
officers to execute the same, were called Numularij, Argentarij, and
Collybistae, that is to say, Numularij of Nummus or the coin it self;
Argentarij, because the Silver coin was most usual in the course of
traffic; and Collybistae, because it signifies a reward for Exchanging.

Here now let us observe four manner of Exchanges which have been used, and
in some countries are yet continued, albeit some of them are abrogated in
England, commonly called Cambio Commune, Cambio Real, Cambio Sicco, and Cambio
Fictitio, which denomination may be admitted.

The first manner of Exchange, called Cambio Commune, I Cambio Commune.
is properly that Exchange which the said Collibistae, or common Exchangers did
use by the authority of Princes and Commonweals, for the lawful and current
moneys of their Kingdoms and Territories; which was found to be very
expedient and necessary, and was established to prevent the exportation of
money from one country into another country: and these Exchangers did deliver
in all countries the Money in one specie, for the Moneys in other species by
them received, as aforesaid. Tables of Exchange.
Whereupon King Edward the third of England caused certain Tables to be set up
at Dover and other places of the realm, declaring the value of the said
sundry species of coin of all countries trafficking with his subjects, and
the allowance which Merchants were to give to have their turns served; as may
appear by the good Laws made in his time, when there was Moneys coined in
diverse places of this Kingdom, and not in one mint only, within the Tower of
London. And this was long before the discovery of the West Indies, from whence
the ocean of Money did run into Christendom. And for the government of the
said Tables, all was at the direction of the Master of the Kings Mint at
London, and with a correspondence of other Mints, namely at Canturburie, at
Kingston upon Hull, New Castle upon Tine, Bristoll, and Exceter. And the
Exchanger for the King at London did also depute Exchangers in the most places,
except that certain Merchants of Florence, called Friscobaldi, were the Kings
Exchangers at Kingston, Friscobaldi the Exchangers.
New Castle, and Exceter, who made the said Exchanges of value for value, with
a reasonable allowance; and by their means were all the said Mints set on
work, and the transportation of our Moneys was prevented; for as Bishop
Tursids book of Arithmeticke declares, by giving par pro pari, or value for
value, there was no gain left to the transporter.

The Kings of England did constitute these Exchangers, Kings Exchangers.
even as the Cambiadores and Banquers are used in other countries, being
authorized by the King or Prince of the said countries, especially King Edward
the first of England, who had two Exchangers, the one called Custos Cambij
infra Turrim, who had the charge in buying of bullion, and to look to the
coynage of Money within the realm, now called the Warden of the Mint: the
other was called Keeper of the exchange and rechange within or toward this
realm, for Moneys to be paid in specie, by Bills of Exchanges beyond the
seas. And afterward the said Exchanges were made without naming the species,
but according to the value of the several coins, 2 Cambio Real.
and this was called Cambium Regis, or Royal Exchange, which caused Queen
Elizabeth to name the Burse in London accordingly.

This office appears to have been in the eleventh year of the said King Edw.
by an Act of Parliament made at Acton Burnel, since which time the succeeding
Kings and Queens have continued the same by sixteen several Letters Patents.
And whereas it seemed that the said two Exchangers could not execute their
offices conveniently being asunder; it fell out, that in Henry the sixth his
time, a Law was made, by which both offices were put into one man's hand, and so
continued many years, until the time of King Henry the eight, Exchanges
discontinued.
when he caused base Moneys to be made at the seige of Bulloigne, whereupon no
certain Exchange could be grounded: albeit that before that time, in the two
and twentieth year of his reign, he caused a Proclamation to be made
according to an old Statute made in the time of King Richard the second, The
Chronicle of Graston.
That no person should make any Exchanges contrary to the said meaning or Act
of Parliament, upon pain to be taken to be the Kings mortal enemy, and to
forfeit all that he might forfeit. For in his noble fathers time King Henry
the seventh, the Bankers had invented a course of merchandising by Bills of
Exchanges; and especially two other Exchanges, which they named Cambio sicco,
and Cambio fictitio.

3 Cambio sicco
This Cambio sicco, alias called dry Exchange, is in this manner: A Merchant
has occasion to use, Verbi gratia, one hundredth pounds, which they will
deliver him in London, to be paid unto their Factor at Stoad: but having there
no Factor of his own, the said Merchant is contented to make his Bill of
Exchange upon the Bankers Factor, payable to him the said Factor, with order
and advice, that when the said Bill shall be due, he shall charge him by
Exchange again, and take up the Money there, and he will pay the same with
the rechange and charges of Factoridge and Brokeridge: wherein they will be
sure to make him pay very great use or interest, of fifteen or twenty in the
hundredth for the taking up of this Money, and to make it more drier Exchange,
they will be contented to take no Bill at all, but the Merchants promise to pay
it as other men do at the same time, dealing in Exchange for the said place of
Stoad, and in like manner for other places.

4 Cambio fictitio.
Cambio fictitio is yet more pernicious, and performed in this manner: A
Merchant (to keep his credit) being driven to buy goods for a shift, when
Money is not to be had, and he will not be beholden unto others, coming unto
them (as having store of commodities at all times) they feign that they have
need of Money, and must sell their commodities for ready Money; Provided
always (say they with loving protestations) we will pleasure you thus far,
look what the goods come unto, we will take it up for you by Exchange for
Venice, Lions, or some other place, so as you will pay us for Exchange,
Rechange, or any other incident charges: whereunto the merchant agreeing, then
shall he be sure to pay soundly for the use of the Money, and loose exceedingly
upon the wares.

These two biting manner of Exchanges being discovered, were by an Act of
Parliament prohibited in the third and fourth year of King Henry the seventh:
afterward (as is noted) the Exchange being discontinued in the time of King
Henry the eight, it happened that the former abuses came to be rife again in
the reign of King Edward the sixth, Exchange was forbidden.
which caused the use of Exchange to be utterly forbidden for a short time.
But as Ships cannot sail without water, no more can traffic subsist without
Exchange in the accustomed places; so that the inconveniences appearing it was
restored again in hope of good dealing and reformation promised by other
Princes, concerning the Royal Exchange. But in the time of Queen Marie it was
again neglected; who being married with King Philip the second of Spain, did
conniue in those things, because the dominion of the Low Countries were
esteemed to be under one degree.

In the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Complaints of Exchanges.
new complaint were made of the new Exchanges, by Master Hussy Courtmaster of
the Company of Merchants Adventurers; but no man could apply or find a remedy
to moderate the inequality of Exchanges, and to have value for value, as
appears by Letters Pattents granted to the old Lord Treasurer Burghley, who
did not execute the same in three and twenty years after for want of true
direction, to the great loss of the Realm, as may be seen by a Commission
in Blanke returned by diverse Merchants: albeit the Italian Merchants in those
days could not deny the abuses thereof being expostulated withal, as by
their politic Letters appears, under the hand of Acerbo Velutelli, Suigo
Caualcanti, and others, who wanted not some vpholders to maintain their
private benefit. (*)

CHAP. II. Of the true calculation of Moneys in exchange by Bills of Exchanges,
according to Par pro pari.
The true ground of Exchanges.
THe true royal Exchange for Moneys (by Bills of Exchanges) is grounded upon
the weight, finenesse, and valuation of the Money of each country, according
to the Par, which is, value for value: and so is our Exchange of England
grounded upon the weight and finenesse of our Moneys aforesaid, and the weight
and finenesse of the Moneys of each other country, according to their several
standards proportionable in their valuation, which (being truly and justly
made) makes the price of Exchange for every place, according to the
denomination of the Money, whereupon all Exchanges are made.

These Exchanges do much differ in the name and proportion between the gold and
silver observed in most countries; so that we are to examine and compare our
weight aforesaid, with the weight of other countries, and the finesse of the
sterling standard with the finesse of the several standards of the coins of
other countries: and if we differ not with them in the proportion between the
gold and silver, The manner to calculate Exchange.
then may our Exchanges run at one price both for gold and silver, taking the
denomination according to the valuation of Moneys of each countries: and hereby
shall we find how much fine silver or gold our pound sterling contains, and
what quantity of other Moneys of Germany, Italy, France, the Low Countries,
Eastland, and elsewhere we are to have in Exchange to counteruaile the same in
the like weight and finenesse answerable unto ours, be it by the Pound, Doller,
Ducat, Crown, Imaginary and real coin.
or any other imaginary or real coin, giving always value for value, and
receiving the like, which is called Par. But this course of Exchange being of
late years abused, and (as it were) made a merchandise, Par of Exchange.
does ouerrule the course of Commodities and Moneys by rising and falling in
price, according to plenty and scarcity of Money, and in regard of
discrepaunce and distance of time and place: which made some Merchants (by
mistaking) to compare the course of Commodities and Exchange to be a like; as
if the measure of a thing, and the thing measured thereby were alone. For even
as money is Publica Mensura, or the public measures within the Realm between
man and man: Exchange the the public measure of nations, etc.
so is Exchange for moneys, the public measure between us and foreign
countries for all commodities bought and sold, which therefore requires a
certainty in the calculation of the Par aforesaid, admitting nevertheless an
advantage above the same, upon occasions on either side.

This Exchange is properly made by Bills, The manner of the Royal Exchange.
when money is delivered simply here in England, and Bills received for the
same, to have the payment thereof in some other country beyond the Seas, or
when the like is done beyond the Seas, and the money is received here in
England, and that upon a certain price agreed upon between party and party,
which is termed the price of Exchange, whereof Merchants have the only and
whole disposing, and buy and sell their commodities beyond the Seas
accordingly: without that few or none of them do look into the nature of
Exchange, as aforesaid, but only to the present object, which is, to know how
the price of Exchange goes at the time when they have occasion to deal
therewith: howbeit such Merchants as never or seldom deal for commodities,
but altogether for money by Exchange have another observation therein; and
Merchants that will be Exchangers indeed, must know perfectly the weight and
finenesse of our English coin, and of the foreign coin also, and compare the
same together to make the said calculation of Exchanges; wherein they are not
to be directed by the valuation which is uncertain and inconstant, Valuation
of money beyond the Seas inconstant.
much less by the tolleration of moneys beyond the Seas to go current above
the said valuation; so that by authority they ought to be governed and
directed herein, declaring the true value for value, or Par pro Pari, as the
very foundation of all Exchanges: because this is not a fit study for every
Merchants capacity, and may be done nevertheless with great facility, and
without interruption of traffic, as shall be declared.

But to come first to the particulars concerning weight, we are to know, that
in all places beyond the Seas, Weight of money in Exchanges.
they use for their moneys (both of Gold and Silver) the mark weight of eight
ounces, heretofore spoken of, with the division of twenty penny weight, or
twenty English, so called beyond the Seas, and the subdiuision of twenty and
four grains here, or thirty two azes or grains there. These eight ounces
compared unto our pound weight Troy of twelve ounces, are within a little all
one, ounce for ounce in weight. But upon the pound of twelve ounces, as
aforesaid, which is one mark and a half mark weight of theirs, it is found
that in the said proportion of a pound, our weight is heavier than the weight
of Germany and the Lowcountries by three penny weight; and than the weight of
France, Italy, Spain, and Scotland, by four penny weight; all which may be
considered in the price of Exchanges, in allowing more or less for the Par
according as the foundation of the Exchange lies, either upon our twenty
Shillings sterling, or upon their Crown, Ducat, Doller, Florin, or other
coin, which is properly the head or Radix Cambij, The head of Exchanges, or
Radix Cambij.
whereupon Exchanges were made. This weight is to be considered in the weight
of the piece of coin, and from the pieces to the number of them in the mark
or pound weight aforesaid.

Concerning the finenesse of moneys to be calculated in Exchange, the same is
known by weight, Finenesse of money in Exchanges.
for it must be distinguished thereby; that is to say, We ought to know how
much fine Silver or fine Gold there is in the mark or pound weight, of the
sundry coins of the several standards of moneys of all Countries, where
Exchanges are used between us and them: and to calculate the same upon the
pound sterling for some places, or upon the Crown, Ducat, Doller, Florin, and
other imaginary coins for other places, to the end we may have finenesse
answered by weight.

To understand the premises, let us suppose that a Merchant stranger comes
into the Realm, and brings with him many unknown and strange coins, to have
the coin of the Realm for it, according to value for value by weight and
finenes, and that the said Merchant (having weighed the said coins) has a
sufficient knowledge of the quantity of fine Silver and Gold which is
contained in the said weight, The manner to examine the weight and finenesse of
money.
and his desire is to have the same answered unto him by the like weight, and
by the like finenesse in weight in moneys of this Kingdom. Herein (no doubt)
he will be assured, what finenesse or fine Silver and Gold there is in our
moneys, and that he may have the same by weight in the said quantity of
coins, whereupon (after the weight of our moneys) he will calculate
distinctly what quantity of Silver and Gold there is in the said moneys, and
what quantity of Copper, and so will require the full quantity both of the
Silver and Gold, and of the Copper accordingly. So is it with the matter of
Exchange, grounded upon the very value of coins, if there were no valuation
whereby the price of coins is baptized and receives a name, which gives a
denomination of price unto the said coins, or unto the Exchanges of the said
coins, which in the manner aforesaid makes the said price of Exchange.

But so long as the calculation remains upon weight and finenes, without
respect had to the valuation; Definition of Bullion and Allay.
so long may we esteem the said coins to be in the nature of Materials or
Bullion; that is to say, Prohibited moneys to be current, which foreign
Nations call Bullion, as it were unlawful and sit to be molten down, from
whence the word Bullion is derived, or which other nations call to be
Materials, or Mass of Gold and Silver, even as Copper is called Allay or
mixture thereunto.

Valuation of moneys in Exchange.
Concerning the Valuation of moneys, we have already in the Second Part
entreated thereof, compendiously and substantially: so that in this place we
are to observe the denomination, which gives a rate or price unto Exchanges,
Proportion between Gold and Silver in Exchanges made in England.
even as it does unto the several Species of money in their kind.

Concerning the proportion between the Gold and Silver in the said Exchanges
we are to observe. That when the proportion between the Gold and Silver was
12 to one, or one pound of Silver to an ounce of Gold (which is now 13 to one;)
then the ensuing calculation in Exchange was true, namely, to account eight
Carrats of fine Gold, or four ounces of fine Silver for twenty shillings
sterling, reserving in the said rate a reasonable gain for the Merchants
toward their gains and charges. But now that the said proportion is altered,
and that thirteen ounces and part, or four penny weight is appointed to be
given for one ounce; of necessity it follows that the Silver is undervalued,
and the Gold advanced: so that in matter of Exchange there arises a twofold
consideration, the one to be established in Par, according to the Gold coins,
and the other after the Silver coins. And this measure of Exchange between us
and foreign Nations is very tender and delicate; yet Merchants occasions in
the course of traffic, do exceed the said limitation upon plenty or
scarsitie of money, and the many deliuerers or takers up of the said moneys
according thereunto, which is proper to confirm the mutabilitie of Exchanging
above the said Par, but never under the same: for it is like unto the Needle of
the Compass, which has been touched upon the fixed North Star.

Some Merchants are so far wide from the knowledge of the value of coins,
and the Exchanges made thereupon, that they are of opinion, That there can be
no certain Rate or Par of Exchange set to answer justly the value of the
coins of foreign parts, by reason of the diversity and disproportion of the
coins of Gold and Silver, and their intrinsicall and extrinsicall values. But
these Merchants are to understand, that the moneys of all Countries have a
proportionable valuation relative within themselves, according to their
several standards for weight and finenesse, only the smaller and baser coin
have some little known advantage, which may be considered of in Exchange,
Proportionable valuation of moneys for Exchanges to be made accordingly.
if there be cause that the quantity of those moneys do exceed the bigger
and finer coin. This consideration has been had heretofore; and especially
in the Par agreed upon between the Low Countries and this Realm, in the year
1575, when upon the Philip Doller the Exchange was at twenty five shillings
the Par, and the small moneys would exceed twenty seven shillings and upwards,
but the quantity did not surmount the better coin. The like was upon the Par
agreed upon with the States of the united Provinces, Anno 1586, at thirty
three shillings four pence; and with Hamborough and Stoade, to twenty four
shillings nine pence Lubish upon the Rickes Doller of thirty three shillings,
or nine marks four shillings for our pound sterling of twenty shillings,
making four Dollers and one half to answer the said Par, which Doller is
inhanced since to fifty four shillings, and were receive now but four
Dollers for the same, and so for other places accordingly.

CHAP. III. Of the Denomination of the Imaginary Moneys of all Places,
whereupon Exchanges are made by Bills.
THE Denomination of moneys, which we call Imaginary, is because there is not
any peculiar or proper money to be found in Specie, whereupon the Exchanges are
grounded, as it was in times past in many places, where some moneys were the
cause to ground the price of Exchange upon: as our Angel Noble, being coined
for six shillings and eight pence sterling, whereupon Exchanges have been
made, as now is done upon twenty shillings, and so might the new pieces of our
Sovereign King James Laureat, be taken. But it is more proper to make
Exchanges upon the silver coins; for the price of commodities is most ruled
thereby in all places, which by the quantity is five hundredth to one. Hence
did proceed the cause that when our Gold in the year 1611, The price of Gold
not so effectual, as the price of Silver.
was advanced ten in the hundredth above the Silver, the prices of commodities
did not rise, albeit foreign Nations did cause the price of Exchange to fall.
But if Silver were inhanced, presently the price of commodities would follow as
the rule thereof, and the price of Exchange would fall more, for Exchange will
ouerrule both.

In like manner do we call the moneys of other Countries, whereupon Exchanges
are made to be Imaginary, as the Dollers in Germany, the Crowns in France,
the Ducats in Italy and other places, which by the great diversity you may
understand as follows: together with

The Calculations of Merchants Accounts, whereupon their Books of Account are
kept, according to their Imaginary Moneys.
Pound Flemish.
IN Flanders, Brabant, and most places of the Low Countries, they keep their
Books of Account and Reckonings by twenty shillings Flemish, every shilling
twelve deniers or pence, which shilling is six styuers.

In Artois, Henalt, Pound Tournois.
and other places by pounds tournois of twenty stiuers, or forty pence
Flemish, whereof six called guildren or florins, make the pound Flemish in all
the seventeen provinces of the Netherlands.

Some do reckon by pounds Parasis, which are but twenty pence, Pound Parasis.
whereof twelve make the pound Flemish: but their accounts (as also the
reckonings of their Prince, or Finances) are kept by pounds Tournois, which
pound they divide into twenty shillings, every shilling into twelve pence; and
the like is done by the pound Parasis, and these have also their subdiuisions
of Obulus, Maille, Heller, Hallinck, Corte, Mites, Point engeuin, Poot, and
such like copper moneys, too tedious to rehearse.

In Germany, in the year 1520, Gold guilder.
was the gold guilder coined for a general coin, and valued in Holland for
twenty eight stiuers, which is now in specie at double the price;
nevertheless they do continue to buy and sell all that great quantity of corn
which is brought from the East countries, Poland, and other places, by the said
gold guilder of twenty eight stiuers. Their doller was coined at sixty five
Creutzers, since risen to seventy two Creutzers, Creutzers.
yet their Exchange is made upon the doller of sixty five Creutzers, which is
imaginary.

At Augusta the Exchange is made upon the said doller of sixty five Creutzers,
at three weeks, or fourteen days sight after the bill presented.

At Frankford they reckon by the guilder of sixty Creutzers, Florins of 60
Creutzers.
called in Latin Crucigeri, being pieces with a Cross, they are Florins, and
their Exchange is made upon the doller of sixty five Creutzers, payable in the
two yearly Faires or Marts; the one the week before Easter, and the other in
the beginning of September to continue for all the month.

At Norenborough their Exchang^ (...) made upon the said doller of sixty five
Creutzers, and many times upon the Florin of sixty Creutzers, which they also
divide into twenty shillings, and every shilling twelve pence, to keep their
accounts by.

For Bohemia, Bohemicos.
Exchanges are made upon the doller of twenty and four Bohemicos.

At Vienna they reckon by guilders or florins of eight shillings, of thirty
pence to the shilling, and two Heller to the penie, and Exchange is made
thereupon.

At Bauiera by guilders of seven shillings, of thirty pence, Diverse guilders.
for Exchanges and Accounts.

In Hungary by guilders of ten shillings, of thirty pence, and by florins of
twenty shillings, and twelve pence to the shilling, and Exchanges are made
upon their ducat.

At Breslo and Leypsich they reckon by marks of thirty and two grosses, of
twelve heller to the gross, Marks of 32 grosses.
and they Exchange by thirty florins Breslowes, to have at Vienna thirty and
four florins, or at Norenborough thirty and two florins.

Pounds of 20 shillings, and 12 hellers etc.
At Vlme they reckon by pounds of twenty shillings, and twelve heller to the
shilling, and their Exchange is is made upon the doller of sixty creutzers.

At Colloigne by dollers of seventy two creutzers, for Accounts and Exchanges.

Pound sterling
At Embden they reckon by guilders, and Exchange upon the rickx doller; but from
London thither and hither upon the pound sterling of twenty shillings.

Marks of 16 shillings.
At Hamborough they account by marks of sixteen shillings lubish, of twelve
pence to the shilling; Exchanges for London upon twenty shillings sterling,
and for other places upon the rickx doller before mentioned of thirty and
three shillings, now by them inhaunced to fifty and four shillings lubish, or
so many stiuers Flemish.

In Pomerania they reckon by marks of sixteen shillings snudens, and the
Exchange is upon the rickx doller of thirty and two shillings of two snudens.

Eight marks a doller.
In Sweden they reckon by marks, whereof eight make a doller, whereupon they
Exchange, and two marks make a Clipping of 9 stiuers.

In Denmark upon marks of sixteen shillings; Exchange upon the doller.

Polish guilders of 30 grosses.
In Dansieke they keep their account in Polish guilders of thirty grosses,
every guilder of eighteen pence to a gross. They buy with the great mark of
sixty grosses, or the little mark of fifteen gross, also by Scoc of three
great marks; and they Exchange upon the florin Polish, or upon the pound
Flemish, payable at fourteen days, and also one month.

Florins Polish of 18 farthings
At Riga they buy by dollers or florins Polish of eighteen farthings, whereof
the eleven make ten dollers: but their Exchanges is made upon the rickx doller.

The accounts in Barbary are kept, and commodities are sold by a ducat of ten
ounces to the ducat, and 8 eights to the ounce, valued at twelve pence sterling.

In Poland their accounts are made by marks, and the Exchanges upon the
doller, Florins of 48 shillings.
and also upon the florin of forty and eight shillings, the mark being; part
of it.

In Russia they have small coins of eleven ounces fifteen penny weight fine,
called Dengen, whereof three hundredth and twenty pieces weigh but a mark of
eight ounces. They Exchange upon the doller of Germany: but for London upon
their roble, which is double ducat, Roble or mark
double ducat, accounted to be a mark sterling, or thirteen shillings four
pence.

Ducat Di Camera.
At Rome they keep their accounts by ducats Di Camera of thirteen Iulie every
ducat, which they divide in twenty shillings, and every shilling 12 pence.
Their Exchange is also made upon the said ducat de Camera, which for Lions are
made payable in marks D'or, or of gold, so called, but are imaginary.

At Millaine, they keep their Accounts by ducat imperial, Ducat imperial.
divided by twenty shillings and twelve pence, and their Exchanges are made
also upon the said ducat, accounting eighty shillings to the ducat imperial.
But all their buyings are made by a ducat current of one hundredth and twenty
shillings.

At Venice they account by pounds Flemish, Ducat di Banes
of ten ducats of twenty and four gross, which they divide in twenty
shillings and twelve pence, also by the ducat of one hundredth twenty and four
shillings, called Ducato di Banco, or current, and thereupon Exchanges are made.

At Florence they account by crowns of twenty shillings, Ducat Largo, or
Scripto in banco.
and twelve pence to the shilling, or by a ducat called Largo, or scripto in
banco for Exchanges. Florin is twenty and four Quatrinij.

At Genoa, Crowns of 60 shillings.
all Accounts and Exchanges are made by crowns of sixty shillings, divided by
twenty shillings and twelve pence; and here are above fifteen Banks or
Exchangers.

At Verona the Exchange is made upon the Ducat of ninety three shillings, and
they make their accounts by twenty shillings, Ducat of 93 shillings.
and twelve pence to the shilling.

At Luca Exchanges are made for diverse places in Italy; and for Lions upon the
ducat.

At Naples, they account by ducats, taries, and grains, Ducat of ten Carlini.
the ducat ten carlini, tarry is two carlini or two royalls; and Exchanges are
made hereupon for the most places of Italy. But for Lions, they Exchange by
number, as one hundredth twenty and five ducats for one hundredth crowns.

In Calabria, Puglia, Exchanges are made upon the said ducat of ten carlini.

At Ancona exchange is made upon the ducat of twenty and one gross, which is
in specie twenty and three gross, Ducat of 21 gross.
and is also foureteen carlini, of six Bollidini for a carline.

At Bolognia they account by Piastra or pound of twenty Bolognesi: the
Exchange is upon the ducat of four Piastri. Piastra or pound.


At Palermo in Sisilia the ducat is thirteen tarry, of two carlini the tarry.

The five royals of Spain are six tarry, Ducat of thirteen tarry.
they account by ounces of thirty tarry to twenty grains, every tarry and
every grain of six piccolie, and their Exchanges are made upon florines of
six tarij.

At Lions in France, all their accounts by an edict made in the year 1577 are
to be kept in French crowns of sixty soulz, or three pounds tournoys, and
their Exchanges are made thereupon, Crowns of Exchange.
unless it be for some places in Italy, where they exchange for number, to
have so many ducats for so many crowns of the sum, but not in specie, which
is altogether imaginary, yet respecting value or Par.

At Paris, Roan, etc. their Accounts and Exchanges upon the said crown.

Ducat of 375 Maluedies.
In Spain, at Seuill, Madrill, and other places, their accounts are all kept by
Maluedies, whereof three hundred seventy and five are esteemed to make a ducat
of exchange of eleven ryalls, every ryall is thirty and four Maluedies, and
so makes but three hundredth seventy and four. Others keep their accounts by
ryalls of thirty and four Maluedyes in ryalls, as our English Merchants do,
and their Exchanges are made upon this imaginary ducat of three hundredth
seventy and five Maluedies, to be paid in Bank, with five upon the thousand,
which is the sallarie of the Banker; or without the bank to be paid without
the same.

Ducat de Peso or D'oro.
In Castile, their Exchanges are also made upon the ducat of three hundredth
seventy and five Maluedies, which they call in the Bill of Exchange Ducados
d'oro, or de peso, to be paid out of the bank, is better by six or eight pro
milliar.

Ducat of 12 Royalls.
In the kingdom of Arragon, Barselona, Valensia, Saragossa, and Catalonia, the
royal of plate is twenty and three dineros, and the ducat is twelve ryalls,
whereupon they make their Exchanges: and their accounts are by twenty
shillings and twelve pence for every ducat of twelve royalls, as aforesaid.

Ducat or Crusat of 400 reas.
At Lixborne they keep their accounts by Mill Reas, whereof four hundredth Reas
make a ducat, alias Crusado. Mill Reas is twenty and two royalls of ten
testons, every teston is one hundredth reas. There is also testons of four
vintains, the royal is two vintains, and the Exchange is made upon the ducat
of four hundredth etc.

Sultanees of 120 aspers.
In Turkey at Aleppo, Tripoli, and Constantinople, by Sultanees of one hundredth
and twenty aspers, or dollers of eighty aspers, every asper is ten
Macharines.

At Alexandria in Egypt, they account by ducats. There is ducat de Pargo
making three ducats of Venice, Ducat de Pargo.
also Italian ducats of thirty and five maids, and the Venice ducat is better,
and makes forty maids.

Mark Scots.
At Edenborough in Scotland, Exchanges are made upon the mark piece of silver,
which is valued in England at 13 penny, being otherwise 13 penny, or
thirteen shillings four pence Scots: So one mark and a half Scots is
twenty shillings Scots, and twenty pence sterling is one pound Scottish,
Pound Scots.
which is twelve to one. The 18 pieces of twenty shillings, is by the said
Valuation twenty shillings three pence: and the Taker up of the money at
London, pays for twelve pence the said mark of 13 pence, at two or three
months Time in Scotland, as they can agree.

Pound Irish.
At Dublin in Ireland the fifteen shillings sterling, is one pound Irish of
twenty shillings; whereupon Exchanges are made, with allowance of six pence
or eight pence upon every pound payable at London: and for want of a Mint no
Bullion is imported thither, and Exchanges are diuerted into other parts.

At London all Exchanges are made upon the pound sterling of twenty shillings,
and twelve pence to the shilling, for Germany, Pound sterling
the Low Countries, and other places of traffic: and for France upon the
French Crown: for Italy, and Spain, and other places upon the Ducat, or for
the Doller and Florin in some places, according to the Custom of the place.
Whereof more particularly is to be observed in the course of Exchanges.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Times of Payment of Moneys by Exchange, and the Terms of
Art used therein.
THE discrepance of Time for the payment of moneys by Exchange, has a regard
to the distance of the place or places where the money is to be paid: wherein
we may consider three kinds of diversities, called by the Terms of Art in
matter of Exchange; at Sight, Vsance, and double Vsance, or treble.

The taking and delivering money at Sight, At Sight.
binds the Taker up of the moneys to give his Bill of Exchange, directed upon
his friend Factor or Servant in any place beyond the Seas, to pay upon Sight of
it, or within three, four, or more days, so much money as has been taken up
by him after such a rate the Pound, Doller, Ducat or Crown, as is agreed upon
between them in foreign coin, either according to the Valuation of moneys,
or current money for merchandise, which is more ordinary, because Merchants
will admit sometimes to receive some coins at a higher rate than they are
valued, upon occasion that some Species are required for transportation, or
some other use to make paiments; Policy of Estates.
which tolleration is by authority many times suffered to draw moneys unto
their places of jurisdiction. Herein is to be noted, That if the Bill be made
payable at so many days Sight, that the number of days must be expressed in
the Bill or Bills; for commonly there are made three Bills of one Tenor for
every sum of money taken up, because if one Bill be lost, the other may
serve in place.

The second Time of payment called Vsance, At Vsance.
which is either the Time of one month, two or three months after the date of
the Bill of Exchange, as hereafter is declared, according to the Custom of
the places where these Exchanges do run: according to which Time the party
(upon whom the Bill of Exchange is directed) is to pay the same, unless there
be good cause to the contrary, as shall appear hereafter.

Double Vsance, and treble Vsance.
The third Time of payment, called double Vsance, is either two or more months,
or always double the Time of the Vsance, respecting by Custom the course
thereof: and many times Exchanges are made upon the half Vsance, which is
fifteen days. But considering the wind and other hindrances, it is better to
limit the days after Sight in the Bill of Exchange, and to send the same by
Sea and Land with a Letter of Advice, which the Taker of money commonly does
deliver with the Bill of Exchange, whereunto the Bill makes also relation, and
treble Vsance is accordingly.

Payments in Faires or Marts.
There is another Time for the payment of Exchanges, where great payments are
made, as in Faires or Marts, as at Madrill and Medina del Campo, by three
Ferias in the year; at Lions by four payments yearly, and at Frankford twice
every year, etc.

The difference of the times of payment, do alter the price of Exchanges
according to the Time, commonly after twelve, fifteen, or twenty in the
hundredth by the year: So between the pound sterling Exchanged for the
Low Countries at Sight and Vsance, is between four and five pence, and double
Vsance and Vsance, six or seven pence, which ordinarily was accounted to be
but four pence after 10 pro 100. But for the Faires and Marts it is very
uncertain, because the payments are all at one Time, and the nearer the Faires
are at hand, Consideration in Exchanges.
the more shall the Taker up of the money save by paying less interest,
because he has not had the use of the money from the beginning that Exchanges
were made for the Faires, which in questionable matters is very considerable.

Vsance from London to and from Middleborough, Amsterdam, Antuerpe, Bridges,
and other places in the Low Countries, is one months Time from the date of the
Bill of Exchange; and double Vsance is two months.

Vsance for Hamborough is two months, and for Venice three months.

Vsance from Antuerp to Rome, is two months; and from Lions to Rome one month.

Vsance from Antuerp to Venice is two months, to be paid in Bank.

Vsance at Florence is two months; and from Florence to London three months.

Vsance from Genoa to Rome and Naples, is ten days Sight; and for Palermo and
Antuerp is two months by ordinary observation, and so is Luca:

From Naples to Antuerp is two months; and the like for Palermo.

Vsance for Roan and Paris is one month, but commonly at three weeks Sight.

From Antuerp and London to Seuill is two months.

Castile payments are in three Banks, and Ferias de Villalon, Medina del Campo
and Medina del Rio Sicco; but many times prolonged by the King of Spain.

Vsance from Lixborne to London and Antuerp is two months, which Merchants are
to know, because the Bills of Exchanges do not declare the same.

CHAP. V. Of the Nature of Bills of Exchanges.
THE Nature of a Bill of Exchange, is so noble and excelling all other dealings
between Merchants, that the proceedings therein are extraordinary and
singular, and not subject to any prescription by Law or otherwise; but merely
subsisting of a reverend Custom used and solemnized concerning the same. For
the better declaration whereof, let us set down the form of a Bill of
Exchange from London to Amsterdam, and from Amsterdam to London again, viz.

Laus Deo; Adi 20 August 1622, in London -- 500 ll, 34 ss 6 d.

AT Vsance pay by this my first Bill of Exchange unto A. B. the sum of five
hundredth pounds sterling, at thirty four shillings and six pence Flemish,
for every pound sterling Current money in merchandise, for the value hereof
received by me of C.D. and put it to account, as per advice, A Dio, etc.

G.M.

On the Backeside is endorse: To my loving friend, Master W.C. Merchant at
Amsterdam, Pa.

This is the form of a Bill of Exchange for moneys delivered and taken up at
London for Amsterdam: the second Bill does differ in the addition of these
words only, At Venice not having paid by my first Bill, pay by this my second
Bill, and so in the third Bill: For there are commonly three Bills made, as
aforesaid.

Laus Deo; Adj 20 of September 1622 in Amsterdam -- 100 ll at 33 ss 6 d.

AT Vsance pay this my first Bill of Exchange unto W. M. the sum of one
hundredth pounds lawful money of England; for the value here by me received of
D. H. make him good payment and put it to your account: God keep you.

Subscribed. W.C.

On the Backeside is endorsed: To my loving friend, Master G.M. Merchant at
London, Pa.

1 This is the form of a Bill of Exchange for moneys, taken up at Amsterdam to
be paid in London, wherein the Time of payment may be made at Sight, or so
many days after Sight, or at double Vsance, according to the agreement: or the
Bill may be directed to my servant, or to himself or any other: or it may
say, Put it to the account of such a man. But the best is to refer it to the
Letter of Advice, and where the first Bill is noted Pa. the second must be 2a.
and the third 3a.

You may not say in the Bill, It may please you to pay, or I pray you to pay
(although it were to your Master;) for the Bill (of his high Nature) does
carry with it a Command without respect of persons, and most men will not use
the words (Make him good Payment) but the fewer words the more formal; neither
is there any witness unto it, nor any seal, but a small piece of paper of
some two fingers broad: and the Letter of Advice does declare for whose
account, or to what intent or purpose the said money is taken up; which Letter
of Advice, does accompany the Bill of Exchange with the like inscription, with
the words De aduiso.

Also for moneys here delivered (where the ground of Exchange is of the twenty
shillings whereupon the Exchange is made) you may not express what the
sterling money makes in Flemish money; not so much for that by miscasting you
might make your self liable, as for that it is not mannerly to cast up another
man's account: neither may you make a Bill of Exchange payable to the bearer or
bringer thereof (as you make your Bills Obligatorie beyond the Seas) to avoid
the inconvenience which might happen in derogation of the nobleness of the
said Bill of Exchange, Although now used, or abused.
which every Merchant is to maintain. All other Bills of Exchanges for
Germany, Spain, Italy, France, the Low Countries, Portugal, or any other
places between them, to and from place to place, do not differ in the form,
but in the manner of the moneys to be paid in Bank, or out of the Bank, or
in such a Fair or Mart, at such times and in such moneys according to the
Countries.

2 The Bankers and diverse Italians have a custom, Rare customs in Bills of
Exchanges.
that for the moneys taken by them, or for their company, or any other, one of
their servants does make the Bills of Exchange, and he subscribeth the name of
him, or of the Company for whom it was taken up: and the master he does write
under the said Bill Pagate come si dice, that is to say, Pay as it is said; and
this goes as current amongst Merchants as any other Bill made by the parties
own hand, and all proceedings thereupon are done accordingly.

3 They have also an ordinary custom to transfer and put over their Bills
of Exchanges before they are made, unto any other person, as for example.

One in Antuerpe does deliver by Exchange five hundredth pounds sterling, to be
paid here in London unto another Merchant there, who is to make him a Bill of
Exchange for the same: afterward within two or three days this deliverer of
money has occasion to take up five hundredth pounds for London, and having
taken the same of another Merchant, he is to make him also a Bill of Exchange
for this money, as the other Merchant was to make him for the five hundredth
pounds which he did deliver him by Exchange for London, as aforesaid. Hereupon
he knowing the name of the party in London to whom the other man's money was to
be made payable, caused the Bill of Exchange to be made payable to the said
party, as he should have done with his own proper Bill of Exchange; and
whereas the value should be mentioned to be received of the second man, that
did deliver him the money, he causes both of them to be named in the Bill, and
sometimes three or four are named in the said Bill (if it be so often
rechanged) by saying, For the value received of such a man for such a man and
such a man, upon the account of such a man. This is good at all assaies, for
the reverence which is borne to Bills of Exchanges, and by these means there
is charges and factoridge saved between the parties: besides the
commodiousnesse, that one man does writ and send this Bill of Exchange for all
those that did change and rechange there the said money, which is not done all
in one sum, and with one Bill of Exchange; but the sum may be made up by
many Bills of Exchange payable all to that man, although it be by diverse
persons: such and the like courses are daily used and practiced beyond the seas
without interruption in matter of Exchange, which may seem to be intricate.

This course of dealing is altogether strange to the common laws of England,
and cannot be determined thereby. For whereas (with the advice of Merchants)
some matters upon Bills of Exchanges have been tried upon an Action of
Assumpsit, here is neither consideration nor Assumpsit to be proved, unless
the Bill had been accepted, wherein are many observations.

To make this more apparent therefore, let us illustrate this by example. Peter
delivers five hundredth pounds to John, who is to give the Bill of Exchange
for it; Peter takes up five hundredth pounds of William, and may give him the
said Bill of John for it; William takes up five hundredth pounds of Nicholas,
and may deliver John and Peter's Bill for it; Nicholas takes up five hundredth
pounds of Francis, and does give him the Bill of John, making mention of Peter
and William. Here are four takers up of money, and but effectually one
deliverer of money, which is Francis: for albeit that Peter was the first
deliverer of the five hundredth pounds, he became a taker again of the said
money, receiving the same of William; so that gradatim, John is the first taker
up of the said five hundredth pounds, Peter is the second taker up, William is
the third taker up, and Nicholas is the fourth taker up of the said five
hundredth pounds of Francis. To this Francis is the Bill of Exchange given,
payable to his friend, factor, or servant in the place for which the money was
taken up. But the said Bill is made by John the first taker up of the said
money, declaring that the value of it was received of Peter for William and for
Nicholas upon the account of Francis, which is the last deliverer of the money:
which Bill being paid, all the parties in this Exchange are satisfied and
paid; and this is done with great facility.

4 There is also a custom, that moneys are taken by Exchange for a certain
place, by men who are not generally known, and therefore must use the credit
of another man, as a third person in the Exchange. If this man do subscribe his
name to the third or second Bill of Exchange, it is sufficient, and will be
duly performed accordingly.

5 It is also ordinary, that a master to draw money from his servant into his
own hands, or a merchant in the like case from his factor, will make a Bill of
Exchange payable to some other person, and say in the Bill of Exchange, For the
value received of such a one, naming a friend of his, as he takes the said
person to be; if the servant or factor do accept this Bill, he will be made to
pay it; and if this person whose name has been used will deal unjustly, the
master or merchant shall be remediless, unless he have some collateral
writing for the same, because the Bill of Exchange must be maintained.

6 Again if a known servant do take up moneys beyond the seas, upon his
master, and give his Bill of Exchange for it upon the said master, the master
is liable to pay the same, although he did not accept the Bill of Exchange; for
it is understood, that by his credit (and not by the servants credit) the money
has been taken up; so that until he make a public declaration, denouncing
his servant to the Brokers of Exchanges and otherwise, the master is to pay all
by the Custom of Merchants to be kept inviolable.

7 There is also a custom, that a master unto his servant, or one friend unto
another, will send Bills of Exchanges, with the names in blanke, from one
country into another, as from Hamborough to Embden, or from Antuerpe to
Amsterdam, and from thence to Dansicke: and at Amsterdam the names are put in
to whom to be paid, and of whom received; and this depends upon the credit
of him that made the Bill of Exchange, and this is also accomplished very
orderly.

8 Again a Merchant may take by Exchange (in another man's name, or in his own
name and another man's name together) money to be paid in any place where
Exchange is used, and subscribe his name, and that man's name, or that man's name
alone: and this man (whose name is used) is liable and answerable to the said
Exchange, if it be proved that it was done, or the like used to be done by that
other party with his consent or priuitie, for to avoid inconveniences in the
course of Exchanges.

9 Nay this goes yet further to be considered of in equity and so adjudged,
that if a man do take up money for any place by Exchange posito, from London to
Middleborough, and there the money is paid, and taken up again by Exchange
for Antuerpe, and there it is also paid by money taken up for Amsterdam, and
at Amsterdam it is paid, for the said money was taken up there again for
Middleborough, and at Middleborough it was again returned and taken up for
London in one or more sums running in account between all these parties
dealing therein; but here at London it is not paid, but goes back again to
Middleborough by Protest, and there the taker up of it becomes insoluent. Now
if it be proved that those moneys were originally taken up in London by the
credit of that first taker, which has been a principal cause of the
continuance of it by Exchange, this man of London is to be charged with it as
well as the taker up of the moneys beyond the seas. Thus may we see how tender
and noble a Bill of Exchange is of nature, which by the proceeding thereupon
will be made more apparent. (*)

CHAP. VI. Of the Non-acceptation of Bills of Exchanges, and Customs observed
concerning the same.
THis high nature of a Bill of Exchange, requires such preciseness of
proceedings to see the performance thereof, that every man ought to be very
vigilant to observe the same: and therefore as soon as a Merchant receives a
Bill of Exchange, whether it be payable at Sight, Vsance, or double Vsance, he
is to present the said Bill of Exchange to the party upon whom it is directed,
to know whether he will accept the same, which if he do, or promise (by writing
under it the word Accepted, First observation.
or with the addition of his name, Accepted by me A. B.) then the party is to
pay it at the time contained in the Bill: but if the said party be not
resolved to accept the same, then after twenty and four hours past, it is
convenient to present him the said Bill with a Notarie to make intimation of it
unto him, and to know whether he will accept the same, as you did before: if he
deny to accept it, then the Notarie does Protest against him in words, that
the Merchant does intend to recover all damages which he, or the deliverer of
the money beyond the seas, or himself for others might or shall sustain
thereby, whereunto the party needs not to make any reply: but if he do,
and withal desire the Notarie to declare the same in the Notariall Act or
Protest which he makes for the Non-acceptation; then the Notarie is to put it
down in writing accordingly, and to deliver the same to the Merchant to be sent
beyond the seas with all expedition, because the deliverer of the money there
may take notice of it, and secure himself of the party, if there be cause,
and in the sending of this Protest of Intimation. The opportunity of the first
Post is to be observed to send the same by.

Second observation.
If the Merchant to whom the Bill is payable were absent, or sick, or departed
this life; nevertheless any friend or servant of his may cause this Protest to
be made by the Notarie, who does declare the name of him at whose request he
does present the said Bill of Exchange.

If the party unto whom the Bill of Exchange is directed be absent or will
not be found, the Notarie may proceed nevertheless, Third observation.
and go to his lodging or dwelling house, and leave afterward the copy of
the Protest with some of the house, or throw the same within doors, and keep
a note of it against the next time. But these Protests must be made at
convenient hours, neither too early in the morning or too late in the evening,
neither upon Sabbath days or Holy days, but (as it were) Sedente Curia, when
any Courts of Justice be open.

Before the time of the payment of the said Bill, Fourth observation.
the party may notwithstanding accept the said Bill and pay it at the time; or
another man may accept the Bill for the Honor of it, if you take that other man
to be sufficient; wherein the danger is nothing, for all others remain still
answerable, and you have one man more bound by the said his acceptance: which
he does in these words, Accepted by me A. B. for the Honor of the Bill.

If this man at the time, does pay the said Bill of Exchange, Fifth observation.
because the party upon whom it was directed does not; yet he is to make
first before he do pay the same a Protest, with a declaration that he has
paid the same for the Honor of the Bill of Exchange, whereby to receive the
money again of him that had made the Bill of Exchange.

If a Bill of Exchange be accepted, and nevertheless not paid, Sixth
observation.
or that it be not accepted, as aforesaid, and remains unpaid: then must you
cause the Notarie to make a second Protest for the non payment of it, and
therein declare that you pretend to recover all damages, charges, and interests
against the maker of the Bill, or any other interest in the said Exchange and
Rechange, which must be declared in the said Protest by a sworn Broker of
Exchanges, who gives notice of the price of Exchange to the Notarie; and if
there because or hope of payment, you may keep this Protest two or three days
in your hands without danger, or else send it away to be recovered beyond the
Seas of him that made the Bill of Exchange and took up the money there.

But if this Bill were accepted here, Seventh observation.
then is it lawful to demand payment of it by Law or otherwise, both here and
beyond the Seas at your pleasure until the Bill be satisfied; neither may the
party that made the Bill leave it unpaid (without discredit) until he that
has accepted the same do pay it or be compelled thereunto by Law; for there
must be plain and honest dealing in it both ways: and if the party that did
accept the Bill, do afterward break before the time of payment, the giver
of the Bill, or any other whose credit has been used therein are still
answerable for all.

There must be great regard had of the Letter of Advice, Eighth observation.
and the Bill of Exchange, and for what account the same is to be paid before
you accept the same: For if a Bill shall say, Put it to the account of such a
man, and the Letter of Advice upon some occasion shall alter the same; you
cannot safely pay this Bill of Exchange, but must declare the same by way of
Protests, otherwise the Bill of Exchange may be construed against you, if
there be differences in account, whereupon the matter may come in question.

Ninth observation.
Again, if a man do accept a Bill of Exchange within himself, as being made
payable to himself, and he does it upon another (than either the Bill of
Exchange or the Letter of Advice does signify) he must also make a Protest
declaring the same, or he shall pay it in his own wrong by the Custom of
Merchants.

Tenth observation.
If a man do pay a Bill of Exchange before it be due, unto one that does
break afterward, he shall be compelled to pay the same again unto the
deliverer of the money, in whose power it is to divert the payment, or to cause
the Bill to be altered and made payable to another during all the time of the
payment.

Eleventh observation.
If a Bill of Exchange be intercepted by any means, and taken from the Post
that should have brought the same, and the party to whom the Bill is payable
having advice of it by other Letters, does come to him upon whom the said Bill
was directed, and desires his promise of acceptance, without that the Bill is
showed him, and afterward does pay him the same accordingly, without taking
any Bill of Exchange for it; this payment is not good nor lawful by the
Custom of Merchants, and the deliverer of the money beyond the Seas will
recover it of you again.

Twelfth observation.
If Protest of non payment be made of a Bill of Exchange, which has been set
over or transferred to many persons, as in the case before declared, where
Francis was the last deliverer: then all the parties interressed in that
Exchange are answerable for it, insomuch that Peter who was the first deliverer
of the money, and afterward became a taker, does bear adventure of all
until the Bill be paid, and so do all the other takers named in the Bill.
As for example, Francis the party who took this Bill, as being deliverer of
it at last must go a retrograde course herein, if John who made the Bill and
was the first taker up do not pay the same: Francis then seeks Nicholas,
Nicholas seeks William, William seeks Peter, and Peter seeks John, the
first taker of the money of him. Suppose John is broken, then he goes to
Peter; If Peter broken, then to William; if William broken, then to Nicholas;
if Nicholas broken, then all is lost. So that all of them are answerable to
this Bill, as abouesaid.

These twelve observations, are to be kept and maintained by the Custom of
Merchants, concerning Bills of Exchanges, as carefully and seriously as the
Romans did their Law of twelve Tables so much celebrated by them.

There happened of late a case worthy the consideration for matter of Exchange:
A case about Bills of Exchanges which were accepted.
A Merchant of Antuerp being indebted unto another Merchant there, did deliver
several Bills of Exchanges for the sum of 800 ll upon a Merchant in London,
who did accept all the said Bills of Exchanges, which were payable at Vsance and
double Vsance; after this the Merchant that gave the said Bills in Antuerp to
the other Merchant, did break: hereupon the Merchant at London (repenting
himself to have accepted the said Bills) makes Intimation by a Notarie to the
parties to whom the Bills were paiable, that he did not intend to pay the said
Bills, because the party broken in Antuerp had not received the value of the
money of the other Merchant there; although the Bills of Exchanges did
acknowledge the receipt, for the Bills were given upon accounts between them,
which were to be made up, and he was not to clear their accounts, and the
party broken did owe unto him far greater sums. The parties at London
answered the Notarie, that they looked to be paid according to the
acceptance of the Bills of Exchanges, and for other matters they had nothing
to do therewith. Interim, the party at London who had accepted the Bills
dyed, and so all the Bills returned Protested, and the matter rested
undetermined: but the opinion of other Merchants and my own is, That the
acceptor of the Bills was to pay them, and his heirs and executors are liable
thereunto, unless there were found an apparent combination and practice in it
between the two Merchants of Antuerp, as was by many suspected. Thus much
concerning the observations of Exchanges.

CHAP. VII. Of Notaries, Intimations, and Protests.
THE Intimations of Notaries well and orderly made, may be called to be true
Probation of the Originalls in the Courts of Law and Equity, whereby the
better foundation may be laid in all litigious causes, which take their
feeling beginning of a wrong done, The time of Intimations and Protests.
whereof Intimations are a manifestation, and Protests (as being more sensible)
are means of the redress thereof: both these have a tripartite reference in
the course of traffic to Commodities, Money, and Exchange of Money by Bills
of Exchanges, according to which we are to make our declaration, observing
first and foremost that the time to make the said Intimations and Protests must
be observed, both for days and hours, as has been noted; for the hours
convenient, are when the actions of men are publicly done in the day time,
neither too early nor too late, but (as it were) at such time as matters are
ordinarily heard in judicial Courts, wherein the Sabbath days and Holy Days
are excepted, which they are likewise to observe.

Commodities to be delivered by a day.
For commodities bought or sold, to be delivered at or before such a day, it is
not sufficient to make Intimation and to tender the commodities before the day;
but it must also be done upon the last day, and to take witness of it: and if
the commodities be not of the goodness that they ought to be by the contract
or bargain made, and nevertheless for some causes you do not hold convenient
to refuse them; let there be made a Notariall Instrument or Act concerning the
defectiuenesse of the commodities, with a protestation of your intention to
recover all your damages and losses sustained or like to be sustained thereby,
which will be very auailable unto you upon all occasions. This is much
observed beyond the Seas, especially upon the ladings of Ships which are to
take in the same, or else may incur a further danger unto the Charter-partie
of fraightment. And whereas the master of the ship will make a Protest against
you, if his lading be not ready at the day appointed or agreed upon, so is it
reasonable, that you make the like. Protest against the party that sold you
the commodity to be delivered at such a day: and if it do fall out that you
have committed the like fault, and thereupon a Protest is made against you, and
the Notarie will crave your answer, to be recorded, that thereupon at
convenient time some advantage may be taken against you, (the not answering
being taken to be discourteous or brutish) the ordinary answer is, Video and
taceo, or, I do hear and see; which words the Notarie does insert in his Act,
Intimation, or Protest.

Moneys payable by Bonds or Specialties.
If Intimations, Protests, or Witnesses be made concerning the receipt and
payments of moneys upon Bonds, or other evidences limited to a day, you are
then to observe the last hour of the day and to tender, or to attend for
moneys to be paid or to be received until Sun set, at the place where the
same is to be paid, and commonly stay there one hour after Sun set with
witnesses: and if the house, lodging, or place be shut up, make your tender or
demand upon the threshold of the door, but the money must be told even, and
then put up again into the bags, and to take notice and witnesses of it, under
their hand writing of the day and hour when the money was tendered; or on the
other side when it was demanded. But this last is in case when moneys are made
paiable upon reasonable demand. Money paiable upon reasonable demand.
For albeit that moneys simply acknowledged to be owing by Bill or Bond,
without limitation of time for the payment, are taken to be due ipso facto,
that is as soon as you did vnderwrite the said Bill or Bond: yet civility
requires a kind of Intimation and demand, which is the reason that by the
Civil Law, although a Bill have a time limited for the payment, yet if the
same be thirty years old, and has been never demanded, it is void of
course, and cannot be recovered by that law. And Bills made upon reasonable
demand, if they be not demanded in seven years, which is accounted for the
life of man, it is void also; for there must be a determinate course in all
things, or a continuance by way of reuiuer: therefore lands holden in quiet
possession for the space of sixty years, is a perpetual inheritance by the
said Law.

If moneys payable upon the forfeiture of a bond, Moneys taken which were
payable upon a forfeiture.
have been taken, or robbed upon the high way, or otherwise, whereby the bond
could not be paid upon the day, yet is it necessary to make Intimation of it,
at the place where the same was to be paid, to avoid all such advantages as
may be taken thereupon, upon the redemption of Lands or Leases, Jewels, or any
other commodities, wherein the Courts of Equity will relieve a man hereupon
the sooner; for it is a demonstration of a good will and intention prevented by
such a mischievous accident; Et si desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas.

Concerning Intimations and Protests to be made upon Bills of Exchanges, for
the non-acceptation of payment; it is to be noted, For non-acceptation of Bill
of Exchange.
that the first Protest which is in the nature of Intimation, requires more
celeritie than the other: and albeit, that by custom the party who is to
accept the same has twenty and four hours respite to deliberate before he
gives his answer, nevertheless it is not good to lose any time in the making
of the Protest of acceptance. For if there be no pregnant cause, the Protest
may be left in the hands of the Notarie for a while; but your diligence cannot
be discommended.

This Protest being made, For non-payment of a Bill of Exchange.
and afterward the Bill of Exchange becomes due, the Notarie is the fittest
man to demand the payment, or to Protest, unless the party upon whom the
same is directed, do give notice that he will pay the same, which done there is
an end.

If a Bill of Exchange (by contrary wind, or other occasions) be so long upon
the way, that the Vsance, or the time limited by the Bill be expired, and being
presented to the party for the payment, he will not pay the same, then the
Notarie does make the Protest, both for the non-acceptation, and for the
non-payment, reciting the Bill of Exchange verbatim. And moreover he calls
unto him some sworn Broker of Exchange, The manner of payment of a Protested
Bills.
to know how the price of Exchange runs at Vsance for the place where the
money was taken up, and he makes of it a declaration in the Protest, according
unto which, it must be answered beyond the seas, with Change, Rechange,
Brokeridge, and all Charges, which must be paid according unto Vsance from
London to the place aforesaid. As for example, Suppose the sum were one
hundredth pounds sterling, taken up at Amsterdam for London, payable at Vsance,
which is one months time, at thirty three shillings and eight Flemish money
for one pound sterling; for which was received at Amsterdam, in that money, one
hundredth sixty and eight pounds, six shillings, and eight pence. The Bill not
being paid here, and the price of Exchange being certified by the Broker and
the Notaries Protest, to be at thirty four shillings six pence from London to
Amsterdam: Hereupon the account is cast up at Amsterdam accordingly, which
comes to one hundredth seventy and two pounds and ten shillings. Add
hereunto Brokeridge, and port of Letters here and at Amsterdam, and sometimes
Factoridge, which is together one in the hundredth, which amounts to thirty
and four shillings; so he receives at Amsterdam one hundredth seventy four
pounds and four shillings for the payment of this Protested Bill, which is
five pound seventeen shillings four pence more than he had disbursed, which
he pays for the use of the money for two months, and so for other Bills etc.

CHAP. VIII. Of Reciprocal and double Exchanges.
Reciprocal Exchange.
THe like customs are observed in all Reciprocal and Double Exchanges, made
between Merchants for several places, without disbursing of any money on
either side where the said Exchanges are made, but being merely depending upon
the paiments to be made in foreign parts.

These Exchanges are either Positive between the parties, or Accidental. The
Positive Exchanges have a certain price agreed upon between both parties,
Positive price of Exchange.
Reciprocally Exchanging one with another: As for example, A. B. of London has
a continual trade of Hamshire Kersies for Venice by the way of Germany, and
makes his return altogether by Exchange: C.D. of London also has on the
other side a continual trade for Redding and Kentish color Clothes for
Antuerpe, where having made money of his clothes, he causes the same to be
made over by Exchange for Venice, to be employed there in Organsine silk, or
other commodities to be sent for London. These two Merchants (considering each
others trade, and the adventure of delivering their moneys by Exchange to
others beyond the seas, wherein they must trust their Factors or Servants, or
they must take up the moneys by Exchange themselves with some disadvantage) do
make an agreement and contract of Exchange between them, That A. B. shall cause
from time to time for and during the term of one year (all the moneys which
he shall have at Venice) to be delivered to the Factor of C.D. at Venice: and
the said C.D. shall cause in like manner all the moneys which he has at
Antuerpe to be delivered to the Factor of A.B. at Antuerpe, who makes over
this money unto him by Exchange, either directly for London, or for some other
place, as Amsterdam or Hamborough, and so from thence for London, Observation
of the course of Exchange for the most profit.
according as he observes the course of Exchange to be most beneficial for
himself; or as the Factor (if he be judicious) shall observe the same for him.
By this agreement or contract, the said two Merchants do agree and conclude
between them a set or Positive price of Exchange, as well for Venice, as for
Antuerpe, whereby the ducat of Venice shall be rated at so many pence Flemish
for the money which is received at Antuerp, or the pound Flemish may be valued
in sterling money after a rate, and the ducat of Venice likewise. And hereupon
they do clear their accounts between them once a year accordingly, which
sometimes is done with allowance of interest for the di^crepance of time, if it
be without Bills of Exchanges, and done only by Letters of Advice, or
Acquittances of receipts to reckon by, which is more usual in these Positive
Exchanges, where the price is agreed upon in certainty for such a time.

The Accidental Reciprocal Exchanges on the contrary are uncertain in their
price, Accidental Exchanges in price.
and alter from time to time as the course of Exchange runs: As for example,
A. B. calls unto him a Broker of Exchanges, and tells him, that he has
occasion to take up one thousand ducats for Venice, and that he is to make over
the said money for Antuerpe, and will know the price for both places: the
Broker answers, that he will effect the same, and that the price of Venice is
fifty and six pence for the ducat, and for Antuerpe thirty and three
shillings Flemish for the pound sterling: and presently after he comes to
A.B. the Merchant again, and tells him, that C.D. the Merchant is contented
to deliver him the thousand ducats for Venice, and to take up the same for him
again for Antuerpe either at the same prices, or thereabouts. These thousand
ducats at fifty six pence do amount to two hundredth thirty and three pounds
six shillings and eight pence sterling, for which C. D. gives Bills of
Exchanges for Antuerpe to be paid there at Vsance, which is one months time
from the date of the Bills after the rate of thirty three shillings Flemish
for twenty shillings, or one pound sterling: and A.B. gives his Bills of
Exchanges Reciprocally to C. D. for the thousand ducats to be paid at Venice
at Vsance, which is three months after the date of the said Bills: and here is
no money paid on either side at London, and yet the Bills of Exchanges say the
usual words (for the value received of each other) according to their
agreement, and both parties send their Bills of Exchanges for the aforesaid
places. Not long after, it falls out, that the Bill of Exchange that C. D.
gave for Antuerpe comes back again by Protest for the non-acceptation, and
not long after that, another Protest for the non-payment of the said Bill.
Hereupon A.B. comes or sends to C. D. for to have satisfaction for this
Bill of Exchange delivered him for Antuerpe, and C. D. gives him full
satisfaction of it, with the rechange and charges according to the said
customs, if he be a substantial man of credit and reputation: for although
the said C. D. was the first deliverer of the money unto A. B. by the thousand
ducats for Venice, and might allege that he received no money of him, but a
Bill of Exchange for Venice, whereof he had no advice whether it were accepted
or not; yet such is the precise and commendable Custom used in Exchanges, that
he may not stand upon any euasions or allegations, which might interrupt the
said course without manifest discredit unto him, unless there were cause of
doubt that the Bills of Exchanges of A. B. should not be accomplished at
Venice; neither may A. B. (without discredit) countermand the payment of the
thousand Ducats at Venice, unless there were just cause to call the credit of
C. D. in question. For the manner of these Exchanges are usual in all the
places of great Exchanges, as Lions, Bizanson, Madrill and Venice, where the
most standing Banks are, and where they do get money ingeniously by the
calculation upon their payments at the Faires or Markets, by intermissiue times
either twice or thrice within the year; in regard whereof, and to avoid this
observation in that strictness, they have used to say in their Bills of
Exchanges, Per la Valuta Cambiata, for the value exchanged with such a one, The
value of money exchanged.
and not for the value received as aforesaid, because they make their paiments
(as it were) all at one time, which is otherwise in those places where no
Banks are kept, or may be also in some of these places if the money be payable
without the Bank, as we have noted before.

Many Merchants trafficking only in Exchanges become good obseruers, and as
ingenious as the Bankers themselves, according to the Adage Fabricando fabri
fimus, whereby they know the variation of their Compass, and the points to
direct their course by, observing the Accidental causes of great payments of
moneys to be made in some places, and of employment to be made upon commodities
in some other places, or the scarcity of money for some places, and the
plenty for other places, or the generality of both, calling it as the
Spaniards say La placa e^^a larga lo estrecha, The exchange or place is
straight or plentious; so that those Merchants (running with the stream) can
make their Exchanges beneficial unto themselves, and that without Stock or
Capital of their own; but merely by taking up money for one place, and
delivering the same for another place, at an undervalue in the price of
Exchange: sending many times the moneys in specie, which have been taken up by
Exchange, when the same does yield more than the price at which they took up
the same; as in our precedent Treatise has been declared more amply.

This orderly course of payment or satisfaction to be made for Bills of
Exchanges, does admit no rescounter or stoppage, but voluntary, Rescounter in
Exchange is voluntary.
that is to say, If I owe you one hundredth pounds by a Bill of Exchange by me
accepted, and within three or four days you shall owe me the like hundredth
pounds for another Bill of Exchange by you accepted; I cannot rescounter these
payments to answer each other, unless you condescend thereunto, although the
money were due to be paid; but every Bill of Exchange is to be answered and
paid in his proper nature. For let us suppose that some countermand be made by
him that caused this money to be made over unto you, before you were to pay the
said Bill, which (for some causes) you are to conceal for a time, you are for
all that to be paid of your hundredth pounds, or the diligences which are
requisite to be done herein, are both ways to be observed accordingly. But
when it is done by voluntary consent and agreement, then is it questionless;
for Voluntas est mensura actionum, Will does regulate actions, etc.
The Will does regulate the Action: and if any Factor do the same for another
man's account without commission, he shall be answerable for it, as before is
declared in the Title of Factors and Servants, and the Commissions given unto
them.

For the better explanation of Exchanges for moneys, taken up for one place,
and delivered again for another place, let us observe this example.

Ten thousand Ducats were taken up at Antuerp for Venice, at Vsance of two
months at several prices of 113 pence, 114 pence, and 115 pence for the
Ducat, being the Medium or one with another at 115 pence, made Flemish money R.
4791 13 4 These R. 4791 -- 13 -- 4, Example of Exchanges and Rechanges of
moneys.
were made over for London at Vsance being one month, at diverse prices,
whereof the Medium was 32 shillings four pence, and made 2875 ll 0 ss 0 d
These R. 2875 sterling being received, and Factoridge, Brokeridge, and port of
letters deducted, remained 2860 ll, which were made over for Antuerp again at
several prices, and the Medium was 34 ss 2 d. 4894 ll 15 10 The ten thousand
Ducats at Venice were taken up for Frankford, at 130 Florins of 65 Creutzers,
for 100 Ducats, whereunto Factoridge and Brokeridge added, it amounted to 13130
Dollers or Florins of sixty five Creutzers, and with Brokeridge and Factoridge
at Frankford was Florins 13260 Flo. 0 ss 0 d The 4894 -- 15 -- 10 Flemish,
received in Antuerp, were made over for Madrill in Spain at diverse prices,
whereof the Medium was 106 pence for a Ducat of 375 Maluedeis to be paid in
Bank at four months time, with five upon the thousand, and made Ducats 11132
Duc. 12 ss 6 d These 11132 Ducats, twelve shillings six pence of a Ducat, were
made over from Madrill to Lixborne in Portugal, and deducting Factoridge and
Brokeridge there remained 11010 Ducats of 440 Reas for every Ducat of 375
Maluedeis, or 11 Ryalls, is 4844 U 620 Vlas and Ducats 12111 Duc. 11 ss 0 d
These 12111 Ducats or Crusats of Lixborne made over to Antuerp, Factoridge and
Brokeridge deducted, remained 11990 Ducats, at 98 pence Flemish every Ducat or
Crusat, was Flemish R. 4895 18 4 The 13260 Florins of Frankford, taken up for
Antuerp at 81 pence R. 4530 10 0 R. 365 8 4 These moneys paid Brokeridge and
Factoridge for Venice, and delivered for London, and for Madrill 38 -- 2 -- 4,
which must be deducted R. 38 2 4 So there was advanced by industry with other
men's moneys R. 327 6 0

CHAP. IX.
Of the Feats of Bankers performed by Exchanges.
WE have in the First Part of this Book made a description of Banks and
Bankers, in regard of the payments and Exchanges made in Banks, for
commodities bought and sold; and having in the precedent Chapters declared the
four manner of Exchanges, and the merchandising Exchange by denomination of
it, to be the canker of Englands Commonwealth; let us now entreat of the Feats
of Bankers. Some men of judgment have found my writing to be inuectiue and
patheticall against Bankers, wherein they are not mistaken. Banks are
incompatible in Commonweales.
For the use of Bank (unless they be countermined by other Banks) are not
to be suffered in any well ordered Commonwealth, as time will manifest more
and more. The French King Lewis the ninth, and Philip the Fair, did with great
cause confiscate the Bankers goods, and for the discovery of their debts,
ordered their subjects to pay only the principal money into their Treasuries.
Philip de valois did the like, and indicted them as Couseners of the
Commonwealth; for it was found that in a short time, Bodin de Rep.
with twenty four thousand pounds sterling, they had accumulated and gotten
above two millions four hundredth thousand pounds.

Others (which through envy, malice, or other passions, have the eyes of their
judgment blinded) have censured my writing to be Apologeticall; for the
erection of a Bank, under the color of the restoration of the ancient
Office of the Kings Exchanger; which how absurd it is, let the wise judge by
the difference between a Banker and a General Exchanger. Difference between
Banker and Exchange
The Banker does draw unto him all the moneys of other men, making his small
stock to be infinite; and the Exchanger must with his own stock supply men's
occasions. The Banker does make the price of Exchanges, with the correspondence
of other Banks elsewhere at his pleasure and most advantage: The Exchanger
has no correspondence with other Bankers, but with his Factors and Servants is
limited to deal honestly with all men.

But because it is difficult to please men's humors in the reformation of
abuses, which either for gain some would have to continue, or others through
ignorance does not understand: Therefore is there another means propounded, as
you see by this discourse.

Now coming to the Feats of Bankers, it is not since yeasterday that the same
have been observed, much less by me invented: but in the year 1576, the
wise and famous Council of Queen Elizabeth caused the same to be examined by
discreet persons, who did make report thereof, albeit they missed of the
remedy, and they did distinguish the manner of Exchange to be threefold. viz.

For the Bankers private gain and benefit.
TO lay their money with gain in any place of the world where any Exchange
lies.

To gain and wax rich, and never meddle with any Princes commodities.

To buy any Princes commodity, and never bring penny or pennieworth into the
Realm, but do it with the subjects money.

To grow rich and live without adventure at the Seas or travail.

To do great feats, having credit, and yet to be naught worth.

To understand whether in conjecture their money employed on Exchange, or
buying of wares, will be more profit.

To know certainly whether, and what the Merchants gain upon their wares they
sell and buy.

To live and increase upon every Princes subjects that continually take up
money by Exchange, and whether they gain or no.

To wind out every Princes treasure out of his Realm, whose subjects bring in
more wares than they carry out of the Realm.

To make the Staple of money run thither, where the rich Prince will have it to
be brought, and pay for it.

To unfurnish the poor Prince of his provision of money, that keeps his wares
upon interest money, if the enemy will seek it.

To furnish their need of money that tarry the selling of their wares in any
contract, until they make them come to their price.

To take up money to engrosse any commodity, either new come or whereof they
have some store, to bring the whole trade of that commodity into their own
hands to sell both at their pleasure.

For the advancing of one Commonwealth, above all other Commonweals.
TO hide their carrying away of any Princes money.

To fetch away any Princes fine money, with his own or any other Princes base
money.

To take up Princes base money, and to turn into his fine money; and to pay
the deliverer with his own and gain too.

To get upon credit into their hands for a time all the Merchants money that
will be delivered; and pay them with their own, and gain too.


To make the Realm gain of all other Realms, whose subjects live most by
their own commodities, and sell yearly the overplus into the world, and both
occupy that increase yearly, and also their old store of treasure upon
Exchange.

To undo Realms and Princes that look not to their Commonwealth, (...)
when the Merchants wealth in such, and the great houses of one Country
conspire together so to rule the ^xchange, that when they will be deliuerers,
they will receive in another place above the standard of the Mint of the
Princes money delivered: And when they will be takers, they will pay the same
in another place, under the standard of the Mint of the Princes money taken up.

To get ready money to buy any thing that is offered cheap.

To compass ready money to get any offered bargain out of another hands,
and so by outbidding the other, oftentimes to raise the wares.

For the destruction of a Commonwealth.
TO get a part and sometimes all his gains, that imployeth money taken up by
Exchanges in wares, and so make others travel for their gain.

To keep Princes for having any Customs, Subsidies, or Taxes upon their
money, as they employ it not.

To value justly any wares they carry into any country, by setting them at
that value, as the money that bought them was then at by Exchange in the
country whither they be carried.

For the better explanation of the premises, let us remember the description
of a Bank heretofore declared, Payments in Bank limited.
and therein observe that great power and command which is given them by the
commonwealth, to incorporate moneys by the means of Exchanges, making it to
become a merchandise, and to ouerrule the course of commodities.

Some men are of opinion, that the price of Exchanges are made by an
indifferent course, because the Bankers at the time of the payments of
Exchanges in the principal places (as Lions in France, Madrill and other
places in Spain, Florence and Genoa in Italy, Bizanson, and other places
elsewhere) have a meeting, and by certain tickets in writing every man does
deliver his opinion, what the price of Exchange ought to be for all places then
exchanging for the next Fair, or time of payment. And according to the same
the calculation is cast up by the Medium, that is to say, Exchanges cast up by
the Medium.
if there be seven or more voices or tickets, the said seven are added
together, and the seventh part is the Medium; if there be ten, then the same
being cast up, the tenth part is the Medium, and so for greater or lesser
numbers accordingly. But these men are ignorant of the Bankers observations,
for they all know how the plenty of money lies by Exchanges, and they concur
in making the price for their advantage, and so iumpe all to one end upon the
imaginary moneys before declared, which makes the maine ocean of Exchanges,
wherein the Exchanges of England are swallowed up as a little river or branch
of the same, taking still advantage upon our fine moneys and staple wares to
glut us with their foreign commodities at dear rates. And hence proceeds
the Primum mobile of Exchanges, Primum mobile of Exchanges.
which is the cause of inequality so much abused from the true Exchange of par
pro pari, and nevertheless admitted to be high and low upon just occasion
above the same, as money is plentiful or scarce, or the takers of it many or
few.

To this purpose, let us remember, that about seventy years past, between
this realm and the Low Countries, many of their coins (although much
differing in standards) did in the pound or mark weight, and in the very
piece and price answer the coins of the kingdom, and did contain as much
fine gold and silver as ours, Equal Exchange, or a true Par.
and were also named and valued accordingly, whereby twenty shillings here
made also twenty shillings with them, being a true Par.

As for example.
ss ss 23 car. 3 The angel at 10 The Emperors royal at 10 22 car. fine. 22
car. The French crown 6 The Flemish crown 6 ss ss 11 oun. 2 penny weight.
Ed. crown of silver 5 The Philip doller 5 10 ounces fine. English shilling 1
Flemish six stiuers 1 Ten groats silver with the Emperors florin four pence. 3

All these coins are not answered in standard for weight and finenesse, but
are altered and inhanced by valuation to double and more, as you may find by
the valuations heretofore declared: by means whereof inequality crept in by
the rising and falling of the price of Exchange, wherein our Merchants have
followed the advice of others, and lost the rule of Exchange, England lost the
rule of Exchange.
and do observe to raise the price here, when it is risen beyond the seas, and
we fall in price, as they do fall; and so the public measure of Exchange
between them and us is falsified and untrue, whereby our commodities are sold,
and also foreign commodities are bought.

This may be illustrated by a similitude; for concerning the sale of our
commodities, we do as much in effect, as if some Draper did sell his cloth at a
certain price the yard, and suffered the buyer to measure out the same by the
buyers own false yard: or like a Grocer that sells out his pepper by the
pound at a price agreed upon, and is contented that the buyer shall weigh it
out by a weight which (unknown unto him) is false, and so loses unawares, or
gets less than he made account of, because the fraud used in the weight and
measure is unknown unto him. Even so is the cunning course of Exchange
unknown unto us, and so are our moneys exported, and hindered to be imported
again. (*)

CHAP. X. Of the true reformation of Exchanges.
AS of all things and in all humane actions, the beginning, progress,
continuance, and termination or end is to be observed, for the better
judgment: so by comparing them often to their principle and original, not
only the disgression of it is made apparent, but also the longer continuance
in the same estate, is thereby procured to reduce them again to their first
integrity and goodness. For there was never any thing by the wit of man so
well devised, or so sure established, which in continuance of time has not
been corrupted: so that the matter of Exchange being made a merchandise,
requires this consideration for the reducing thereof to his first principle
and foundation, which is the intrinsique value of coins of country and
countries according to weight and finenesse, albeit the price thereof in
Exchange does rise and fall according to scarcity or plenty of money,
proceeding of the few or many deliuerers and takers thereof in the course of
traffic, not by commodities only, but also by Exchanges devised upon moneys,
in nature of merchandise.

Herein are the three essential parts of traffic (so often named) to be
considered jointly and diuidedly for the good and welfare of commonweals, The
general benefit to be preferred etc.
and not for the benefit of particular or few persons. For albeit that the
general is composed of the particular, yet it may fall out, that the
particular will breed a great inconvenience to the general, whereby private
persons may reap a benefit to the hurt of a multitude, or the whole
commonwealth, in nature of some Monopolies heretofore declared, which may as
well happen by ignorance as by premeditated practice.

For to speak ingeniously, Merchants cannot enter into consideration of the
quantity of foreign commodities imported at dear rates, and the native
commodities at lesser rates exported, respectively of former times; by the
disportation whereof, comes an evident ouerballancing of commodities.
Merchants do not regard whether the moneys of a kingdom are undervalued in
Exchange by the inhauncing of foreign coin in other countries, whereby our
moneys are exported, and foreign coin or bullion cannot be imported but at an
exceeding loss. Lastly Merchants do not know the weight and finenesse of the
moneys of each country, and the proportions observed between gold and silver,
nor the several differences of standards of moneys of gold and silver, a
matter so necessary for them to know, to drive a profitable trade, as by this
book they may now understand for the common good. Princes and Governors
therefore are to direct them according to the laws, wherein the Law-Merchant
must be the true guide and directer.

This direction must as well be established upon the coin of other nations, as
upon the moneys of the kingdom, because the payments of Bills of Exchanges
beyond the seas are made by several coins upon the valuation made thereof, at
the pleasure of Princes, whereby sometimes the moneys of the realm are not
proportionably valued according to the moneys of other countries, which are
thereby diuerted also to be imported unto us: For example, let us take the
valuation aforesaid made in the united Provinces during the government of the
Earl of Leicester, at which time the Royal of eight was valued at forty and
two stiuers, and the Rickx Doller of the Empire and also their own Doller at
forty and five stiuers, and the English shilling (at twelve pence here) being
there valued at ten stiuers made twenty shillings sterling, to be by Exchange
thirty three shillings and four pence, as a Par pro pari, or value for value.
The like for Hamborough at twenty four shillings and nine pence, as has
been noted. Now five Royalls of eight which is at forty two stiuers thirty
five shillings, are valued at forty two shillings and six pence, that is to
say, at fifty one stiuers, and yet the Exchange is taken still at the said
rate, according to which calculation the said Royal of eight is by us received
at five shillings and two pence, which is but four shillings 2 pence, or
thereabouts. The difference is fifteen upon the hundredth in less than two
months time: add hereunto the ten in the hundredth to be had by the said
Royalls of eight, that the same are better in weight and finenesse than our six
pence sterling, which is taken to answer the said Royal by a common
calculation, by reason whereof there will be given so much in his majesty's
mint, or thereabouts, that is to say, four shillings and five pence, or at the
least four shillings and four pence, after the rate of five shillings
sterling, for an ounce of that standard; so together is twenty five upon the
hundredth benefit, A treatise of Free trade 1622.
which caused a Merchant aduenturer to set down in print an interrogation in
this manner: Who will procure license in Spain to bring Realls into England to
sell them here at ten in the hundredth gain, which is less than the Exchange
from thence will yield, when he may have for the same 25 in the 100 in Holland?
A matter whereby Merchants are easily induced to divert the said Royalls from
the realm to those and other countries, and by the common understanding to
remedy the same, it is thought there is no means to meet with foreign
nations in the inhancing of moneys, but we must do the like, albeit
experience has showed long since that this is not effectual nor any true
remedy. Now if we will consider things according to the rule aforesaid, it
will plainly appear that the said fifteen upon the hundred gain, more than
in England, are but imaginary, if the Exchange for moneys were reformed: for
let five of these Royalls of eight be bought in England for twenty two
shillings, and be transported into Holland, and there buy commodities with the
same (which is according as the price of them is inhanced, for as the money
rises in price, so does the price of commodities) it may fall out the said
Merchants should become losers by the commodities, so that the same cannot be
termed Causa mouens: But the Spanish Merchants, which cause their Royalls to be
sent into Holland or Zealand, from Spain or from the Downs, rely wholly upon
the Low-Exchange, whereby they are enabled to deliver there their money by
Exchange at an undervalue, at thirty three shillings four pence Flemish and
under, for our twenty shillings sterling, whereby the Kingdom makes good
unto them the said fifteen upon the hundredth, consisting between the price of
forty two stiuers, and fifty one stiuers, which is almost eighteen pro
hundredth. If the Royal went but for fifty stiuers according to the valuation,
so that if the Exchange were made accordingly, which would be above thirty
seven shillings six pence, this gain would not be at all, and moneys would be
imported unto us, and not exported.

For the rule is infallable, A Maxim in Exchanges.
That when the Exchange answers the true value of moneys, according to their
intrinsicke weight and finenesse, and their extrinsicke valuation; they are
never exported, because the said gain is answered by Exchange, which is the
cause of transportation. To make this evident in the Rickx Doller, which is the
maine and most usual coin in Germany, Eastland, the United and Reconciled
Low Countries before their late Proclamations, and current in many other
Countries: observe we, that the said Doller was valued at two marks Lubish, A
shilling Lubish, and a stiuer Flemish was all one 1575.
every mark being sixteen shillings Lubish, or sixteen stiuers. For in the
year 1575 the said Rickx Doller was still coined in the Empire for thirty two
shillings or stiuers, and so current by valuation in the Low Countries, whereby
they were all one in denomination and effect: But the wars in the Low Countries
has been the cause of the inhancing of this Doller, which was brought to
thirty five stiuers, and in the year 1586 to forty five stiuers, or to
fifty two stiuers now by intermissiue valuations and times. Howbeit at
Hamborough, Stoade, and other places in Germany, the said Doller did remain
still at thirty two shillings Lubish, or two marks: and as the said Doller
did inhance in price, so did they in the Low Countries coin new stiuers
accordingly; sometimes lighter in weight, A great Fallacy.
and at other times imbased by Copper or Allay, and yet in account the stiuer
did and does remain the ground of all their moneys: but the said Doller
holds his standard agreeable to the first Doller, called the Burgundian
Doller with Saint Andrews Cross, coined in the year 1567, which is in
finenesse ten ounces twelve penny weight of fine Silver: and four and one
half of these Dollers were made equiuolent to our twenty shillings sterling,
as a public measure between us and the Low Countries, Germany, and other
places where this Doller went current, as you may observe in the precedent
Chapters.

These Dollers have since been imitated and made by the States of the United
Provinces in their several Mints, altering only the Arms of the several
Provinces; as also by the Archduke Albertus in the reconciled Low Provinces,
and the price of them at Hamborough, Stoad and other places was but advanced to
one stiuer or shilling Lubish more, that is to say, at thirty three shillings
Lubish went, the same went in the Low Countries for forty five stiuers, which
made the diversity of the said Par of Exchanges of thirty three shillings
four pence for the Low Countries, and twenty four shillings nine pence for
Hamborough, In the Netherlands.
being all one in substance. This Doller is since that time (as I said)
inhaunced to fifty two stiuers in the Low Countries, which makes the price of
Exchange above thirty eight shillings, or rather thirty nine shillings, and
shall the Kingdom suffer this and not alter our price of Exchange accordingly,
but be contented to take thirty four or thirty five shillings, and after
that rate vndersell all the commodities of the Realm*

In Germany.
This Doller is likewise since that time more inhaunced in Germany, from time
to time. And leaving the excessive valuation in remote places, let us note the
valuation of Hamborough, where it has been at fifty four stiuers the
Doller, which makes the Exchange above forty shillings of their money for our
twenty shillings. And although we have raised our price of Exchange, from
twenty shillings nine pence, to thirty five shillings and thereabouts, shall
we rest here and go no further? Have we reason to do it in part, and not in
the whole, according to Justice, Equity, and true Policy: and shall we be
like a man that by halting in jest became lame in earnest? Absic ignorantia.

The moneys in Christendom, which have their ebbing and flowing do show their
operation upon commodities, The course of money and Exchange, are contraties in
operation.
makes by plenty the price thereof dear, or by scarsitie better cheap, as
has been noted: but Exchange has a contrary mean of working, for plenty
of money makes a low Exchange, and scarsitie of money makes a high Exchange
and the price to rise, which is of great consideration; because it ouerruleth
money and commodities, which never entered in the politic studies of
Aristotle, Seneca, or Cicero, who were but in the infancy of Trade. And
Ciuilians can tell us that Commercium, is quasi Commutatio Mercium, but went no
further in this just and princely study of State affairs, to augment, by all
lawful means of Ius gentium, the wealth of their Kingdoms and Territories;
as also to prevent the diminution thereof, by the carrying away of their moneys
and treasure. True it is that the Statute Laws of England have had a care
hereof, but the remedies have been hitherto defective, by mistaking the
Efficient cause thereof: which remedies may be distinguished three manner of
ways.

1 First the Statute of employment for Merchant strangers, Commodities
made for three especial causes: 1 For the advancing of the price and sale of
our native commodities: 2 To prevent the ouerballancing of foreign
commodities: 3 To preserve the moneys within the Realm. 14. R. 2.

2 The lodging of Merchants strangers with free hoasts, who had an inspection
in their negotiations for commodities and moneys.

3 The keeping of Staples for Woolls, Woolfels, and other commodities beyond
the Seas, with their Correctors and Brokers to register Merchant strangers
dealings.

4 To cause Denizens to pay strangers Customs inwards and outward.

5 The sundry treaties and conferences with the Commissioners of other Princes,
about Merchandise, Moneys, and Exchanges.

6 The severe Proclamations for the observation of the Statutes made for and
concerning the same, and the Articles of Intercourse.

7 The prohibition to export commodities, but at great Ports.

8 The prohibition for strangers to sell wares by retaile.

9 The prohibition for English Merchants to ship goods in strange Bottomes.

10 The transportation of money made Felony by Act of Parliament. Moneys*


11 The attendance of Searchers, Waiters, and other Officers.

12 The strict information in the Exchequer and other Courts.

13 The swearing of the Masters of Ships, for exportation of moneys.

14 The reformation of the ouerheauinesse of our pound weight Troy in the Tower.

15 The ouerrichnesse of our sterling standard of moneys.

16 The alteration of the proportion between Gold and Silver.

17 The making of more prices out of the pound Troy by the Sheyre.

18 The inhauncing of Silver and Gold Coins in price.

19 The imbasing of moneys by Allay or Copper.

20 The use of many standards of money, and reduced to two again.

21 The increasing of coynage money to hinder the exportation.

22 The prohibition to cull out heavy pieces to melt or transport.

23 The banishing of light Spanish money, and Gold to be molten.

24 The giving more for Bullion in the Mint.

25 The prohibition for Goldsmiths to buy Gold or Bullion.

26 The making of the principal foreign Coin current in England.

27 The binding of Merchants to bring in Bullion.

28 The prohibition to pay Gold unto Merchant strangers.

29 The prohibition to take gains upon Coins.

30 The Bullion in the Mint to be delivered by weight, to restore by tale.

31 The inhauncing of Gold and undervaluing of Silver.

32 The punishment of transporters in the Star Chamber by Fines.

33 Exchange.
The prohibition by Act of Parliament, to make Exchanges for moneys for foreign
parts without the Kings especial license.

34 Money delivered to Sir Thomas Gresham Knight, out of the Exchequer, to rule
the course of Exchanges by Bills.

35 The Office of the Kings Royal Exchanger, never put in practice since the
merchandising Exchange began, erected by King Edward the first in the
eleventh year of his reign, by an Act made at Acton Burnell, as aforesaid.

Here we are to observe the Statute of employment to be defective, when
Merchants (both English and strangers) have an ability given them by Exchange
to take up money here, and to deliver a Bill of Exchange for it payable beyond
the Seas, and can send over the money in specie and be a great gainer thereby:
insomuch that if I receive here one hundredth pieces of twenty shillings, I can
send nintie pieces to pay my Bill of Exchange, and put ten pieces in my pocket
for an overplus and gain.

The like may be done by making over money from beyond the seas to be paid
here by Exchange, which being received, I can transport with 15 upon the
hundredth gains in two months and less, and advance a hundredth upon the
hundredth in one year, which exceeds all the benefit to be made by
commodities, wherewith I need not to intermeddle, neither can the said statute
be any help herein to remedy the same.

This gain arises by the vnderualuation of our moneys, in regard of the
inhancing and ouerualuation of foreign coins, so that the cause is
extrinsique, and comprised under the said Exchange of money, and not
intrinsique in the weight and finenes of moneys, which are considered in the
course of true Exchange between us and foreign nations: and thereupon it
follows, that neither difference of weight, finenesse of standard, proportion
between gold and silver, or their proper valuation of moneys can be any true
cause of the exportation of our moneys, so long as a due course is held in the
Exchange which is grounded thereupon.

Hence arises the facility of the remedy by the refo^mation of the Exchange,
in causing our moneys to be truly answered by Exchange, according to the very
value, or above the same, which cutteth off the said gain had by the
exportation of moneys, and causes also (in effect) that the foreign coins
beyond the seas are not taken in payment above their values, although they be
received at a higher rate, because the commodities of the realm are sold
according to the price of Exchange, which counteruaileth the same according to
their inhauncing of coins, or imbasing of the same by allay or copper.

All men of common understanding, when they do hear of the raising of moneys
beyond the seas, are ready to say, We must do the like. For they conceive the
saying of Cato, Tu quoque fac simile, sic Ars deluditur Art, to be a proper
application hereunto. But they do not enter into consideration what alterations
it would bring to the State, and that the matter might run ad infinitum, as
shall be declared.

But let us suppose, that this will be a sufficient remedy to inhance or
moneys, as they do theirs, to imbase our coins as they do theirs, and to
imitate ouerualuation of gold and silver as they do, which requires a
continual labor, charges, and innovation. Is it not an excellent thing, that
all this can be done by the course of Exchange with great facility? and that
without inhauncing of our moneys at home, or meddling with the weight and
finenesse of the sterling standerd; this is to be done only by his majesty's
proclamation, according to the statut of Exchanges, Prohibiting that after
three months next ensuing the same, no man shall make any Exchanges by Bills
or otherwise, for moneys to be paid in foreign parts, or to be rechanged
toward this realm, under the true Par, or value for value of our moneys, and
the moneys of other countries in weight and finenesse, but at the said rate, or
above the same, as Merchants can agree by the means of Brokers, or amongst
themselves, The way to restore Englands wealth.
but never under the said rate, which shall be declared in a pair of tables
publickely to be seen upon the royal Exchange in London, according to the
said proclamation: and the said tables shall be altered in price, as occasions
shall be ministered beyond the seas, in the several respective places of
Exchanges, either by their inhauncing of moneys by valuation, or by imbasing of
the same by allay, as has been noted; which by a vigilant eye may be
observed, and will be a cause to make other nations more constant in the course
of their moneys: and this will be executed more of course than by authority,
because gain does bear the sway and command with most men.

For the Merchant Stranger being here the deliverer of money generally, will
easily be induced to make the most of his own, receiving by Exchange more for
our moneys beyond the seas: and the English Merchant (being the taker of the
said moneys) will not be so in^urious to the State, as to give less beyond the
seas than the value of our money in Exchange, contrary to the said
proclamation: and if he would, the deliverer will not let him have it. Besides
that the takers occasions are enforced by necessity, and he can be no looser;
for by direction, he will sell his commodities beyond the seas accordingly,
because the price of Exchange does still govern the sale and buying of
commodities, as aforesaid.

English Merchants being the deliuerers of the moneys beyond the seas, and the
price of Exchange altering there accordingly, will have the like consideration,
and the Merchant Stranger will provoke him thereunto: and if there be no
takers, the English Merchant may bring over the money in specie, wherein he
shall become againer.

The course is agreeable to justice and the law of nations, or ius gentium, and
will not hinder the Exchange to rise and fall, as formerly, but keep all in
due order, with these considerations, cautions, and preuentions as shall be set
down to prevent all inconueniencies proceeding by the inhauncing of moneys,
which fall generally upon all men in the endearing of things, Inconueniencies
of the inhauncing of coins.
and particularly upon landlords and creditors in their rents and contracts,
and especially upon the king majesty's lands.

The statute of Employment must also be observed, to make the remedy more
complete, with a Register to record the moneys which foreign mariners do
receive for freight, coming from Norway and other places, making above one
hundredth voyages yearly; as also many other ships bringing corn into the
Northern and Western parts of the real me, and exporting moneys for it.

The policy of the Turk and Russian.
The Turk, Persian, and Russian have herein surpassed us in true policy, by
keeping the price of their Exchanges high, much above the valuation of their
moneys; so that they have no trade by Exchange nor moneys, but only for
commodities, whereby they prevent the ouerballancing of foreign commodities
with theirs, as also the exportation of their moneys; albeit the use of our
commodities is in those countries very great.

Objections to the remedy.
The objections made by some against this sole remedy are easily to be
answered, for they are grounded upon suppositions against assured experience.

1 Some make doubt that the price of Exchange being risen, there will be no
takers of money, and then the deliverer is more thrust upon the exportation of
moneys.

2 Others say, that those Merchants which have sold their cloth beyond the seas
shall receive a loss in the making over of their moneys from thence, by
delivering more there in Exchange than now they do.

3 Others say, that they shall not be able to vent their clothes according to
the high Exchange, especially now that cloth is out of request; and would have
the matter of reformation deferred until another time, in their opinions more
commodious.

Answers.
The first objection is answered before, That the taker is ruled by the
deliverer, who will not give his money in Exchange under the true value,
according to the proclamation to be made, and the deliverer being the Merchant
Stranger here, will sooner be thrust upon the statute of Employment, for by the
exportation of money, he shall have no gain; whereas some of the discreeter
sort would not have the said statute too strictly pressed upon the stranger,
because the trade should not be driven into their hands, Mediocria firma.

To the second, the Proclamation (limiting a time for execution) gives
Merchants ability to recover their moneys, or to sell their Bills of debts for
money, or to buy commodities for them, as the manner is.

To the third, experience makes a full answer to both, that there did not
want takers, when the late inhauncing at Hamborough caused the Exchange to rise
from under twenty and eight shillings to above thirty and five shillings,
which is more than the present alteration will be: and Wool was at thirty and
three shillings the Tod, which is now fallen under twenty shillings; so that
the vent of our Cloth was not hindered, when it was sold deerer by one full
third part; but there was above eighty thousand Clothes sold yearly, where
there is now sold but forty thousand Clothes. The time is also to be thought
more convenient to advance a commodity, being undervalued, than to do it when
the price is high: for this plurisie of the commonwealth is dangerous, and
admits no time of curing, like the fire in a city, which permits not any
inquiries to examine how the same began, but requires every man's help to
quench the same.

And whereas it is alleged in the defense of the inhancing of coin, Treatise
of Free trad, E.M.
That which is equal to all (when he that buys dear shall sell dear) cannot
be said to be injurious unto any.

This opinion is without consideration of the alteration of Weights and
Measures between us and other nations, that is Exchange for moneys, and what
the same may produce to the loss of the commonwealth, albeit that between
man and man it may prove alike in some respects.

To make this evident, Suppose two Merchants, the one dwelling in London, and
the other dwelling at Amsterdam, do contract together, that the Londoner
sending Clothes to be sold at Amsterdam, the Merchant of Amsterdam sends him
Veluets and Silks to be sold at London: and (in the account to be kept
between them) they agree to reckon the moneys in Exchange but at thirty
shillings Flemish, for twenty shillings sterling, and so make return each to
other from time to time, as moneys shall be received both here and beyond the
seas. Whereupon put the case, that there is received at Amsterdam one thousand
and five hundredth pounds Flemish for Cloth, and at London there is received one
thousand pounds sterling for Veluets and Silks, which according to the said
computation is all one in effect between them, and might by way of rescounter
answer each other in account. But the Merchant of Amsterdam knowing that (by
reason of the inhauncing of the moneys there) he can make a great gain to have
the said one thousand pounds to be sent unto him in specie, he desires the
Londoner to send unto him this one thousand pounds sterling in silver or gold
coins, Royalls of eight, or Rickx dollers, whereby he shall profit fifteen
upon the hundred by the means aforesaid, which amounts to one hundredth and
fifty pound gains. Now the Londoner having his one thousand and five hundredth
pounds Flemish, or one thousand pounds sterling at Amsterdam, cannot do the
like, because the money by the said inhauncing is received there above the
value, so that his money must be delivered there by Exchange at thirty three
shillings four pence, or under, whereby he receives here the said 1500 ll
Flemish with no gain at all. Thus the account is made even between them: but
by these means the kingdom is deprived of the 1000 ll of the Merchants money
sent to Amsterdam, which does not only procure want of our moneys, but causes
also the native commodities to be vndersold, and the foreign commodities to be
advanced in price beyond the seas by plenty of money there, and hinders the
importation of bullion.

To prevent this, the question is now, Whether it be better and more expedient
to raise the price of Exchange, or the valuation of our moneys? Surely all men
of judgment will say, That the raising of Exchange breeds not that
alteration which the inhauncing of moneys does, to make every thing dear, and
to cause landlords and creditors to loose in their rents and contracts. And
Merchants of experience do know, that we cannot do as they do: for the
inhauncing of our moneys here will be countermined by other nations, who still
will undervalue them in Exchange between us, unless it be prevented by our
own true valuation to be made known as aforesaid.

The Author of this Treatise of Free trade does say, That it is not the rate of
Exchanges, Page 104.
but the value of Moneys, here low, elsewhere high which cause their
exportation, nor do the Exchanges, but the plenty and scarcity of moneys
cause their values, which is merely Histeron proteron, whereunto I have
answered heretofore, viz.

Three ways to dissolve an argument.
There are three ways to dissolve an argument, Denial, Retorting, and
Distinction. Denial, is too hostile, sauouring more of obstinacy than of Art:
Retortion, is more witty than profitable: but Distinction is like mature
remedies, compared to Purges which cleanse and feed; but the said Author did
take the course of Denial, and proves nothing touching the matter in question.

Exchange compared to to the Affaies o^ money.
If moneys be here low and elsewhere high, how is this known but by the
valuation of Exchange? considering the diversities of moneys of several
standards, wherein the Exchange is like the Assay, whereby the finesse of gold
and silver is known, grounded upon the quantity which the Exchange requires,
according to the weight of fine silver and gold contained in the moneys of each
country, which is the intrinsic value, and not according to extrinsicke
valuation, which is altered by denomination, for the name of a thing does not
alter the value really, but the substance does it, if it be altered; much less
does plenty or scarcity of money cause their values, it being contrary to the
nature and property of money; the yeard does measure the cloth, but the cloth
does not measure the yeard. To illustrate the premises by example I have
heretofore showed the consideration incident.

Suppose that some Merchants strangers do come over into the Realm to buy a
pack of ten clothes, valued at 80 ll sterling, which they are to pay in gold
and silver, and they do not know the weight and finenes of their foreign
coin which they have brought over; hereupon to content both parties, the
moneys on either side must be tried by the subtle assay, according to their
finenes computated upon the pound weight of twelve ounces Troy, and then (by
weight) they answer each other accordingly. And so this negotiation is (in
effect) but a permutation of moneys for commodities before Exchange was
invented.

Hitherto we have handled of the reformation of Exchanges, for places where the
Basis of Exchange or foundation is made upon our twenty shillings sterling,
that is to say, When Merchants beyond the Seas (delivering moneys there for
England) will cause the Brokers of Exchanges to know how much Flemish or
Hamborough money Merchants will give there, to have twenty shillings sterling
paid in England, even as we do here to know how much in Flemish money or
other coins a Merchant will give for the said twenty shillings here,
Exchanges which are made upon foreign coin.
by an agreement to be paid beyond the Seas by Bill of Exchange. But now we
are to entreat of the reformation of the Exchanges which are made upon
foreign coins, or rather imaginary moneys of other countries: as for France
upon the French Crown of sixty soulz; for the East countries upon the Florin
Polish; for Germany upon the Rickx Doller of seventy two Creutzers; for
Venice upon their Ducat, and so for other places, as in the former Chapters we
have noted.

Herein let us observe that the course of it is directly opposite; for whereas
in the one we do procure to have much money, or at the value answered by
Exchange: so in the other we may do the like, and rather procure less to be
given in Exchange, because that the foundation of those Exchanges is made upon
foreign coin.

Nevertheless consider we, that when four Testons or three Franks in specie
were calculated for the said Crown of sixty soulz in Exchange; then every
such Teston was fifteen soulz by valuation, and every such Frank was twenty
soulz. But since that time the said pieces of Testons are made current for 16
soulz, and the Franks at twenty two soulz, being the same in weight and
finenesse, without any alteration in the standard called, Le Pied de la Monoye,
but only inhaunced in valuation, according to which, payments are made in
silver coins. Also for the gold coins, as French Crowns and Pistolets, which
are inhanced at times until 72 soulz' from 60 soulz, whereupon the said Crown
was valued at six shillings sterling; Is there any man of judgment that will
give (if he can choose) six shillings, or seventy two pence, and 72 pence,
for the said French Crown in Exchange, when the Crown in specie is paid him
in France for seventy five soulz? The like consideration are we to have of the
Dollers of Germany, of the Polish Guilders or Florins, and all other coins
inhaunced above the Par of Exchanges heretofore calculated amongst Merchants,
and especially with the admittance of Princes.

The operation hereof in the course of traffic, is of very great moment,
more than in times past, when the difference was not so sensible, which made me
to compare the same unto the serpent Aspis, which stingeth men in such sort
that they fall into a pleasant sleep until they die; which is meant by
particular persons, whose estate is consumed by running upon Exchanges. Or like
unto the cruelty of the Planet Saturn, which makes his spherecall course in
thirty years, with great operation, although we do not so sensibly perceive
his motion, which is meant in the revolution of State affairs in progress and
continuance of time.

CHAP. XI. Of Attachments and Arrest.
THE Common Law of England does not use the course of Attachments, as is used
by the Custom of the City of London, which was borrowed from Merchants
actions observed in foreign Countries, and was thereupon by Custom here
established; it being a ready way whereby men may secure themselves of present
means, if they doubt of their debtor. For if the creditor do know any debts or
goods belonging unto his debtor, he may instantly upon a specialtie to be
exhibited unto the Magistrate, have authority to attach the said debts and
goods in the hands of any person where he finds the same, only Privileged
places excepted, or Ecclesiastical persons in most places.

To this Attachment, if the party do appear and put in bail, either by
himself or his Attorney; then the Attachment is ipso facto, void, and
declaration being put in, depends in Court upon the said bail, and if no
declaration be put in the next Court day, or within three days, then the said
bail is likewise discharged by the said Custom; albeit this is not so duly
observed, as the Customarie Law of Merchants requires. But if the party do
not appear, and the Attachment do proceed three Court days, or three
defaults to be entered, then for the fourth default judgment or sentence is
given, that he who did make the Attachment shall recover the said debt and
goods, and take the same into his own possession, upon good sureties to be put
into the Court, to answer the value thereof within one year and a day, in
which time the proprietarie may disreason the said recovery, by disprouing the
other parties surmises or allegations, proving that the specialtie was paid
whereupon the Attachment was grounded. For the Attachments beyond the Seas
cannot be made upon any pretended Action, but must be done upon a Bill of
debt, and many times the Magistrates will sequester the goods or debts into
their own hands, to avoid incertainties of honest dealings. Besides, Merchants
will be advised before they make Attachments, because both the Civil Law, and
Customs of Merchants do impose great damages upon the party, if he have
made his Attachment without just cause, to the overthrow of the other parties
credit. And moreover, if it be upon debts appearing by specialties or Bills
Obligatorie, it may fall out that the said debts are transferred or set over
unto other Merchants, according to the Custom heretofore mentioned, whereby
the property is altered.

I remember a case of mine own, that happened above twenty years since,
which concurreth with the matter in hand: A Merchant being indebted unto me, by
a Bill Obligatorie the sum of 800 ll, payable at six months, was persuaded
by a friend of his (with whom I had some differences and controversies of
accounts) to suffer an Attachment to be made in his hands of the said moneys,
by the Custom of London, upon promise made unto him, That he would give him
long days of payment for the said moneys: whereupon my Debtor appears to the
said Attachment, and did acknowledge the said debt of 800 ll, relying upon the
long days of payment, and he that made the Attachment did proceed in the Law,
and had judgment thereupon, making no doubt to obtain execution accordingly.
Being advised by learned council in London, Attachments to be removed after
judgments.
we suffered him so far to proceed, and then we did speak in Arrest of
execution, and brought a Writ of Certiorare out of the Kings Bench, under the
hand of the Lord Chief Justice, putting in special bail in London to
satisfy the judgment. The record was removed to the said Court of Kings
Bench, and there we did put in other bail, and upon that brought a
Supersedias into London, and discharged our especial bail, and by the Law the
said Attachment and all proceedings were made void; and this Merchant was
taken, Pro confesso, and ordered to bring the money instantly into the Court,
whereas he had yet six months for the payment; the interest whereof was 40 ll,
whereby the Proverb took place, Fallere fallentem non est fraus.

Here the Law did prevail against Custom: but in another like matter of
attachment, Custom has prevailed against the Law.

One being indebted unto another the sum of one hundredth pounds payable at a
certain time, it came to pass that the Creditor went over beyond the Seas
before the money was due: the cautelous Debtor, upon untrue surmise to defraud
the Creditor, made attachment of this money in his own hands by the Custom of
London, and put in sureties to be answerable for it for one year and a day,
according to the manner and order of the Court, in which time the said Creditor
was to disreason the said pretended debt; but the Creditor (being beyond the
Seas and ignorant of these proceedings) came over after the expiration of the
year and a day, and the Debtor had judgment upon the said attachment, and
execution awarded unto him in his own hands. The Creditor being now come over,
demanded his money, the other denied to owe him any; in brief the Bill was put
in suit at the Common Law, the Debtor did plead the said judgment and
recovery in London, and by that practice and fraudulent means defeated his
Creditor: and being done by Law, it is taken to be no cousenage to be punished
by the Star Chamber or other Courts, only the party is A.K.

Touching Citizens or Merchants arrests beyond the Seas, there is a Custom
that no Officer may arrest after Sun set; No arrest to be alter Sun set.
such therefore as go abroad but at those times, are said to Fly with the
Owl, by a common Proverb: and it is hoped by the said Custom that the Debtor
may (by having access at some time unto his Creditor) compound with him, and
preserve the good opinion and credit wherein he lives, and thereby not only
have means to recover himself, but also be an occasion to gather in his own
debts sooner. In some places also they may not arrest upon the Sabbath days
and Holy Days, to the end they should not be deprived of Divine Service
toward God, and comfort of their souls.

The Officers or Serieants may not arrest any man upon the Bursse or Royal
Exchange, although the party to be arrested should yield thereunto, and
renounce the said privilege. It is not many years since that a Merchant of
Amsterdam (being upon the Exchange at Antuerp) had notice given him that
another Merchant had given order, that upon his going from the Exchange he
should be arrested, and that the Officer did attend him, being near at hand;
whereupon he perceiving the said Officer, called him unto him, and said, He
would obey the arrest; which for the first time is but an adiourning or
citation: the Officer did require a pledge of a piece of coin in token thereof
(as the manner is) which he gave him. Afterward this Merchant of Amsterdam
(being otherwise advised by his friends) did disclaim from that arrest,
because it was done upon the Exchange, and claimed the said privilege:
insomuch that the Magistrates and the learned Advocates on both sides, did
thereupon assemble in the Towne-house, as it were the Guild Hall, and there the
matter was debated and discussed at large, according to the laws. And it was
at last concluded and determined, that the said Arrest was void in Law: for the
renunciation of a Privilege by any particular, The renunciation of a
privilege cannot abolish the privilege.
or many persons, cannot derogate or abrogate any Custom or Privilege, not
only in the general, but also in the particular; so that within twenty and
four hours after he might have bin arrested again, but he was non inuentus,
and upon this Arrest he was to find caution to answer the law.

The like is to be understood for all privileged places, as Churches,
Chapels, Churchyards, and other places of jurisdictions: and diverse Cities
and Towns do not permit any man to be arrested upon foreign pleas for debts or
contracts made in other towns, places, or countries, which are as places of
refuge for some Merchants, as the town of Middleborough in Zealand, Towns of
refuge.
and the town of Dort in Holland, and other cities and towns in other
countries, and most cities and towns where a Nation, or a Society of Merchants
do agree to make their residence, as the Company of Merchants Adventurers and
others, commonly the said cities and towns do exempt them from all litigious
suits which happen between themselves, to be determined by their Governor or
Court master; so as only controversies happening between them and strangers or
inhabitants are subject to the ordinary course of the law, for the
determination of Merchants differences. They will also free them from all debts
owing by Kings, Princes, and States, so that the subjects goods shall not be
liable thereunto, to the end that traffic be not interrupted.

The Officers or Serieants which make these arrests are known by their habit,
Officers known by their habits.
or by a rod to be seen in their hands, and may not by stealth come upon a
man, whereby many insolences are prevented, and Serieants are not subject to be
killed, as many times they are with us. And if they have not their habits or
colors, no man is to assist them if they be abused, and the rescuing of a man
then is no offense: and howsoever, if a man Arrested, or to be Arrested, do run
away, every man gives him way, as desirous to help him, to keep him out of
troubles, accounting the Arresting of a man to be a part of the hangmans
office: and nevertheless, their hangmen are seen to be always in rich
apparel, and are reputed as necessary members in a commonwealth, whereas in
England it is very contemptible and base.

Returning to speak again of Attachments, it is a matter of great
consideration with us, not to admit any to be done either in London, or any
other city or town corporate, Attachments to be granted upon specialties.
according to the custom of London, unless it be upon plain specialties, and
also with putting in good sureties for the costs: for it is a very dangerous
thing for Merchants dwelling beyond the seas, as also Merchants which dwell in
remote places of the kingdom, having their Factors at London, if they upon any
surmise or pretense of debt shall make secretly any Attachment in their own
hands of their masters goods, either when they know their master to be dead, or
traveling in some foreign countries upon a long voyage, as occasion may fall
out, and so by practice deceive them of their estates, by pleading afterward
the said Attachment or Judgment had thereupon in bar, as aforesaid.

CHAP. XII. Of Sequestrations and Executions.
THe magistrates considering, that abuses may be committed many ways by
attachments, do commonly use Sequestration of goods by delivering them into the
hands of a third person, or taking of them into their own custody or power,
for by these means also are many attachments prevented, which men would do, if
the disposing of the goods or debts did come into their own power, wherein
they have a care not to feed the humor of contentious persons, which is
merely contrary to the course of trade, which is the cause that in the
execution of their sentences (wherein the life of the law does consist) they do
proceed gradatim, Execution is the Life of the Law.
and if any such Sequestration is made unjustly, or without cause, the Civil
Law, as also the office of Priour and Consulls (hereafter declared) will give
good costs and damages.

Considerable Executions.
In the proceeding of the said Magistrates, there are many persuasiue means
used by them, in the behalf of the debtour with the creditor, to bring him to
a composition, if not, then some Officers are sent to the parties house to
keep him, as it were, a prisoner, to whom he must give meat, drink, lodging,
and a daily fee, according to the Judges appointment, and as the matter may be
of moment, to the end that by this pecuniarie punishment, he may cause him to
pay or satisfy the creditor, which is aggrauated by sending two Officers at
the first, then two more, and so six or eight of them to eat him out of house
and home; for these men will gnaw him to the very bones, and are therefore
called Clyuers or Deuourers. But if the debtor will not endure this, and do go
wilfully to prison, then the creditor must find the debtor maintenance, at the
discretion of the Judge, who may, if he will, presently put him to bread and
water, which is seldom or never done; but when it is known that the party
has means, and will not satisfy his creditor, who (after the imprisonment of
the person) cannot come upon the goods again, according to the common laws of
the realm, then he is to be kept in Arcta custodia, with bread and water for a
time, at the discretion of the Judge. But if the debtor be so poor, and
notwithstanding has such a cruel adversary that will make dice of his bones,
that is say, to have his debtor die in prison, and to hang up a bale of dice
for him in the Crown Office, as is done by the Officer in place, or the
Jailer; then has the Law beyond the seas provided some relief for this poor
man: for the custom is (in Germany, France, Italy, Spain, and the Low
Countries) that no man is imprisoned for debt above a year and a day, in which
time the creditors have power to take, seize, and sell all the estate of the
debtor; which being done, or before, the woman in most places may claim her
dower for her relief and children, and the rest is divided amongst the
creditors as far as it will go, and so the debtor is freed from those debts for
ever: for by the Civil Law, Qui vult cedere bonis, liberatus est a debito, if
the debtor do relinquish his estate to the creditor, he is free from the debts,
and all goods falling to him afterward are his own. But this man is ever
after disabled to come to any preferment, and such a creditor as is the cause
of it, will be hated and accounted worse than a Jew or Pagan. For the manner of
Cedere bonis, or to make cession of goods, is very heinous, The manner of
Cedere bonis.
and of wonderful disgrace; so that most men will rather die in misery, than
to come unto it, because it happens not once in twenty years: yet is it
far inferior to the punishment of the pillorie, or the striking over the
leg used in Russia at the creditors instance, whereby the debtor is set at
liberty, and the debt paid. The party comes before the towne-house, and
stands upon a stone in the view of all the people, and unloosing his girdle,
he desires them, and all the world to take notice, that he has nothing left
him to pay his creditors, and so renounceth all, what may be found to be his,
or what any manner of ways he might pretend: and in token thereof, he may not
wear his girdle any more, nor be employed in any business as a living man;
yet afterward by some composition to be made with the creditors, he may be
restored by a declaration to be made by some Officer upon the said stone, and
then he is permitted to wear his girdle again.

In the said countries, no gentleman or man of quality, may be imprisoned at
all for debts, his estate only is liable thereunto, and yet with reservation
of such necessary things, as Honesty, Honor, Humanity, and Christianity
does challenge: namely, the soldiers Person, his Arms, his Apparel, Bed,
and Chamber conveniently and necessarily furnished, which may not be taken for
debt: and the like reservation is made to every other man of quality, so that
imprisonment of men bodies for debt (according to the common practice of
England) is a greater burden and bondage, than is to be found in any other
christian or heathen country.

And for as much as the mischief and incoueniences, arising to the King and
Commonwealth, by the imprisoning of men's bodies for debt, have been
propounded heretofore in Parliament, by a printed remonstrance which (like unto
a Pamphlet) may be lost, whereby good matters are many times put in oblivion, I
have thought convenient to make an abstract thereof, in the manner, as the said
reasons are laid down, to be inserted in this book, in hope of some relief
unto decayed Merchants, whose estates may remain liable to answer their
creditors, without imprisoning of their bodies, against the Law of God, the Law
of man, the Rule of justice, the Law of conscience and christian charity and
against the Practice of other countries, as aforesaid, and finally against the
creditors own profit.

The Law of God, wills and commands every man to follow a vocation to do
the honor, Against the law of God.
duties, and services, owing to his Prince and country, and Parents, and to
maintain his wife, children and family, and to instruct them, in the fear of
God; so that whatsoever, directly or indirectly forbids the said christian
duties, in the performing thereof (by an imprisonment) is against the law of
God, whereupon all humane laws ought to be grounded. No law of God, wills or
commands imprisonments of men's bodies for debt, nor is it warranted by any
example in the word of God, and the efficient means bringing men into prison
as usury is, appears plainly to be forbidden by the word of God, as has
been noted out of the old law, neither has the law of the Gospel a word of
command or warrant for imprisoning a christian brother for debt, Exodus 22.26
Deuteronomy. 23.19. Leuit. 25 35. Ezech. 18 8. Jeremy 34.14.
but rather contains a command to relieve him if he be fallen into decay, to
take care how and wherein he shall sleep, to set him free at six years end
and then to reward him.

By the Law of man it was not so, Ab initio: for by the Common Laws of England,
Against the law of man.
which are the most ancient, most eminent, and most binding laws, no man may
be taken or imprisoned for debt, but the creditor was to take satisfaction,
upon the debtors estate of goods and lands, according to Magna Char. 3. H. 3.
and 14. Ed. 3. although after accountants only were to be imprisoned until
they paid, which was made general against all debtors by the statute of the
25. Ed. 3. cap. 17. yet prisoners in Execution, might and did follow their
vocation and affairs, by bail, mainprise or baston, as by the statute of 1.
Rich. 2. cap. 12. and from that time forwards, were prisoners tied up shorter
to the writ of Habeas corpus or the Kings special mandate, upon surmises,
Habeas corpus.
that the said debtors made secret estates in trust to defraud their creditors
or were wilful and obstinate to pay them, being able. To answer these
objections, it is unjust to punish all promiscuously, as well frauders, as non
frauders, without and before any proof made; yet if the fraud were proved or
his ability and sufficiency either, there is no cause to imprison his body,
because the law does give the estate fourthwith to the creditor, whether the
debtor will or no: so it is still needless to imprison the body, for twenty
years imprisonment discounteth never a penny of the debt, and yet the debtor
has suffered more misery and punishment, than a guilty Traitor or Rebel
suffers for the highest offense.

It is against the rule of Justice and law of Nature, Against the rule of
Justice.
that men equally free borne should be deprived of the common and equal
liberty, and be given into the power of another without criminal cause or
guilt.

The debtor is either punished for guilt or cohersion: if for guilt, it is
against the rule of Justice; for to be found a debtor in the Law, is no
criminal guilt, and therefore unjust to punish him criminally: If for
cohersion, to make the debtor bring forth his estate to the payment of the
debt; it is also against the rule of Justice to enforce a man by punishment to
do that, which appears not to be in his power, or whereof the Law is
already certified that there is not wherewithal to do, according to the
purport of the Capias granted against the body by the Common Law.

It is also against the rule of Justice to thrust all kind of debtors into a
prison together in a heap, without respect to the different qualities of men,
to more or less guilt of fraud or obstinacy, or whether it be an honest or
an usurious debt, Plutarch in Solons life.
to more or less means of the debtor, whereby he must live or starve in
prison, or to the holding him one or twenty years in prison; for some are
great debts for thousands, some are small debts for trifles, some are supposed
debts not yet proved, and in truth some are no debts. But for certain all (or
nine in ten) are usurious debts and forfeitures, scarce one honest debt of a
hundred, but all by unlawful gain upon corrupt and desperate adventures.

But it will be said that imprisonment is no punishment, for prisoners live at
ease and pleasure, etc. according to the recei^ed opinion: but the miseries and
afflictions of imprisonment are inexplicable and cannot be conceived by any
that have not felt or had proof thereof.

The ancient Romans construed and reputed imprisonment to be a guard, or
sa^e keeping of slaves and bondmen; but a heavy punishment to free borne men:
and it is recorded that the Prophet Micha was sent to prison to be fed with
the bread of affliction.

For imprisonment is a corporal punishment, A description of imprisonment.
a grief and torture of the mind, a long and lingering dying, and sometimes a
short killing by plague, etc. it overthrows a man's reputation, and destroys
all that is good and dear unto him; his kindred grow strange, his friends
forsake him, his wife and children suffer with him, or leave him, or rebel, or
degenerate against him, and lie open to all disgrace and villainy of the world,
in whose miseries the prisoner suffers more than in his own sufferings:
before him the sight of all these miseries and evils, and (which is not the
least) he lies open to every arrow of scandal or calumny, that a malicious
adversary will shoot at him, which he can neither resist nor avoid, because
he is absent to confront them: behind him grief for loss of liberty,
credit, friends, estate, and all good fortunes; his bail and sureties (who
commonly are his nearest kin, or dearest friends) lie in the power of his
adversary, or are already imprisoned. To say nothing of ill air, straight
place, hard lodging, unwholesome diet, with the noise, noisomnes, pestring and
fettering the body of the prisoner, as the least of many evils.

Against Conscience and Charity.
Let this be weighed in the balance of Conscience and Christian Charity, and
you shall find that these proceedings cannot subsist, for they are against the
Law of God, and not warranted by Scripture. But to induce diverse necessary
consequences for proof hereof, we are to consider how many ways any man may
guiltlesly and innocently fall by the Law, Guiltlesly or innocently.
be convict of debt or damages, and cast into prison thereupon, viz.

By misprision or ignorance of himself or his Attorney; in pleading of the
cause by careless or unskillful Counselors, especially when false things are
cunningly laid, or true things uncertainly laid.

By the necessity of the defendant, wanting means to pay his Attorney or
Council, and by combination of the adversary with the defendants Attorney,
Solicitor, or Councellor, or with the witnesses or Jurors, for love, malice,
or ends of their own.

By perjury of witnesses, in concealing, perverting, and misapplying truth, or
deposing untruth, and by subornation of Witnesses, Jurors, or Officers in the
impannelling of Jurors, and corruption of the Judge.

By casualties.
A man may likewise be disabled and become insoluent, by as many casualties and
acts of honest and good intentions, and consequently become a debtor, and be
cast into prison thereupon; as by suretiship, bail, or security for kinsmen,
friends, or others; likewise by loan unto them, who pay not again; also by
falsehood of friends, servants, and others put in trust with moneys, evidences,
office, trade, and lands: Again by moving a just suit in Law, where might,
practice, or falsehood ouerbeareth him, or many years suit consumes him.

Also by fire, water, shipwreck, and such like sudden and irresistable
accidents at sea; or at land, by robbery of Thieves and Pirates.

By unprofitable buyings and sellings of Lands, Leases, Merchandises, etc.

By arrest, seizures, or pretenses and detriment of foreign Princes.

By sudden loss of friends or masters, on whose favor any man's estate
depends: also by errors in making or keeping reckonings and accounts, or by
losing or not calling for Acquitances, Bills, Bonds, Releases, or Engagements
and Assurances, for Warranties, Annuities, Dowers, Ioynctures, Legacies, and
such like.

By Vsurors and Usury, eating up a man's estate by interest and forfeitures,
and by a multitude of other means, whereby no man is secured but may become a
debtor and insoluent.

And this Law takes no consideration, or admits no information hereof, but in
Summo Iure, Summu^ Iu^.
gives the whole forfeiture without any conscionable respect, and the after
proceedings are suitable: for after judgment, though the debtor by his goods
discharge ninety and nine pounds, of one hundredth pounds principal; yet the
body is subject to be imprisoned, till he pay the whole forfeiture of two
hundredth pounds: and the words of the Statute are, That if he have no goods
nor chattels, or not enough to satisfy the whole, his body shall be
imprisoned for the rest, till he make payment or agreement, Marlebridge Cap.
23, Anno 52 H. 3, etc.

So every way it is in the absolute will and power of the creditor, to cast
the debtors body into prison; when in all conscience and equity, if he have
no means to pay, he ought to be let out of prison, or not to be imprisoned at
all, because the debtors body can give no satisfaction to the creditor, being
in it self considered.

Some prisoners have means and are willing, Means to pay and yet cannon
but cannot pay, either because the present power of their estates is not in
them, or in regard of the time, that they cannot sell or receive payment, or in
regard of the worth, for scarce any will buy a prisoners lands, lease, or goods
at half the worth: or in regard of others interressed, without whose consent
he cannot dispose thereof, or the estate is entangled with dowers, joynctures,
warranties, assurances, statutes, etc. Some have not means sufficient to pay
all, and some have no means at all, and are kept in prison because they have
rich friends, who for their sake live and die miserably in prison.

Some have means and will not pay, of fraud and obstinacy; but of these there
is hardly found one in a hundred: for if that were so, the creditor (who
searches the very reins of the debtor, and his estate) will rather seize and
recover the prisoners estate, than cast him into prison, where if he die he
loses all.

Now if an honest man may innocently fall in the Law, by such a multitude of
accidents, practices, and errors of others, and by doing just and friendly
offices to others, and may fail also in his estate, and become insoluent by so
many ways, casually and causelessly in himself, and by the fault and errors of
others, and cannot be a criminal debtor but one way, which is by fraud and
obstinacy only (of which scarce one example is to be found in a hundred,)
how can it stand with any charity or conscience to neglect and pass by so
many circumstances, and to fall upon the debtor with such cruelty, by laying
such a heap of miseries upon him, his wife, children, and reputation at once,
as imprisonment brings?

It is true that the ancient Common Laws of England, are very strict in this
point of maintaining Pacts and Contracts; but the contracts of those times were
simple, Recovery only against the estate.
honest, and legal, and the recovery was against the estate only, for there
were no penal bonds known, nor usury practiced by Christians when those
Laws were made; but all our contracts and bonds, or the greatest part, are
corrupted with usury and forfeitures, which are extortion in a high degree:
and to force men to perform such with the loss of their estates, credit,
liberty, and many times of life too, is most inequitable.

The penalty of Bonds unjust.
Especially being the Law prouides every creditor his full damage, without the
help of a penal Bond, which shows that all forfeitures are needless: and
they are unjust also, for they make the usurer judge of his own damage, which
of right belongs to the judgment of the Law.

But it will be said, that the Chancerie does mitigate the hardness and rigor
of the Law in vsuries for forfeitures, and that wrong judgments may be
reuersed by Attaint, Errors, Audita Quaerela, etc.

The answer is, That the remedy is worse than the disease, for all courses of
relief by Law in Chancerie, are hard, tedious, uncertain, long, and extreme
chargeable; and it is a lamentable case, that when the debtor is unjustly or
unconscionably cast in the Law, stripped of his estate, his body imprisoned, his
liberty tied up, his credit destroyed, and his friends banished; then to send
him so disabled to seek remedy by new suits in Chancerie, which are
chargeable above measure: and with the same extremity does the Statute of
Bankrupts deal with the poor debtor, as heretofore has been declared.

That prisoners are compassed with a multitude of ineffable miseries, and
heavy afflictions, and therefore some cannot choose to become weak in faith,
staggard or desperate, when there is no man to speak a word of comfort in due
season, appears by the miserable ends of many desperate persons, whereby one
with shame and distemperature loses his sense and dies, another for poverty
and want perished, one with fear and grief breaks his heart outright;
another heart that cannot break, the devil is ready to teach him
desperately how to make way: one uncharitably flies from his keeper, another
desperately adventures his life to break prison; and finally many are
careless and given to all vices. For faith is rightly compared to a Lamp,
Faith compared to a lamp.
which must have oil continually to maintain their light, which otherwise is
soon exstinguished. So does the Word of God maintain Faith by continual
preaching, whereof prisoners are destitute for the most part.

Objection.
Some men will excuse the vnconscionablesse of the Law, alleging that in
seazing the debtors body and goods, and giving way to vsuries, forfeitures,
and corrupt bargains, the Law does no more than the debtor himself has
contracted under his hand and seal: And Volenti non fit iniuria, whereunto it
is answered.

Answer.
1 First that the guilt of the Law cannot be so washed off, for in debts where
there is no contract under the debtors hand and seal, the Law gives the
debtors goods, and his body into prison at the creditors will.

2 That the debtor is not Volens, for it is against every debtors will to pay
usury or forfeiture; but he is pressed thereunto by his own necessity on
the one side, and by the creditors uncharitable will on the other, who will not
lend but for usury and forfeiture.

3 The common saying ( volenti non fit iniuria) is a false position, else it is
lawful to knock a man in the head that is willing to die, which is absurd;
for the will or consent of the party unto an act that is in it self unjust,
cannot make the act just, nor justify the actour.

It is also objected, that if men's bodies may not be imprisoned, how shall they
recover their debts?

Answer, upon the debtors estate only, as this kingdom did heretofore, and
other kingdoms now do, and therefore let the creditor ground his trust
thereupon, and trust no further than the creditors estate, for thence only can
he have true satisfaction. It is replied, That there will be no more credit
given if men's bodies may not be imprisoned, and consequently, trade and comerce
will decay. Answer; honest trade, honest contracts, and honest trust will
notwithstanding be as plentiful, for while there is the same use, necessity,
and profit by commerce, there must needs be the same effect: True it is, that
usurious contracts will be more relatiuely made to every man's estate, credit
and honesty, as they did in the times of the old law and of the Gospel, and
yet do in politic governments.

It is against the creditors own profit, Against the creditors own profit.
for all means of satisfaction must arise either out of the debtors credit,
out of his labor and industry, out of the will of his friends, or out of his
own estate; and all things that deprive or disable the debtor in any of these,
do weaken and lessen his means, and consequently tend to the creditors
prejudice and disadvantage. Herein it is not needful to rehearse all the
former miseries decreasing the debtors estate: for daily experience proves,
that many debtors have offered at the first to pay the principal debt, or
half, before they were cast in prison, which afterward by more troubles and
charges coming upon them, were disabled to pay any thing: how preposterous and
absurd is it then to cast the debtors body into prison, where his estate is
wasted, his credit spoiled, his fortunes and virtues lost, his body afflicted,
his life consumed and murdered, and whereby the creditor bars himself from all
remedy against his estate for ever?

The consideration hereof makes the debtor to retain in his hands what they
can to maintain themselves, their wives and children, and to keep them from
perishing, which makes also against the crditors profit.

The body of every subject belongs to the king, To the prejudice of the
king and commonwealth.
and every subject is a member or single part of the body of the
commonwealth, so that to take this body, and to cast the same into prison for
debt, where he must lie rotting idly and unprofitably all the days of his
life, and die miserably, is no other than to strip and rob the king and
commonwealth of their limbs and members, and consequently of the services and
endeauours of a great number of subjects yearly, of all degrees and
professions to do service to the king and commonwealth; which number of
prisoners exceeds all the prisoners in all other countries.

It is therefore in christian Charity wished, and in all Godly Policy desired,
That the bodies and endeauours of all debtors, may be free from imprisonment,
and the creditors recovery be made against the debtors lands and goods,
according to the ancient fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, being most
consonant to the Law of God, to christian Charity, to the rule of Justice and
to godly Policy as aforesaid; And that Interim, the releife of prisoners may
be permitted, which the late Queen Elizabeth granted for her and her
Successors in the 28. year of her Reign, by a large Commission recorded in
the high court of Chancerie; the exemplification whereof was by all prisoners
for debt humbly desired.

Many other reasons are alleged in the said remonstrance inuectiue against
usury and vsurors, which I have omitted; and hereunto let us add certain
observations in general concerning executions.

The Law is said to be a mute Magistrate: but the Magistrates are a living Law.
THe strength of the Law is in commanding, and the strength of commanding is in
the constraining or executing of the Law, which belongs unto Judges and
Magistrates. The consideration hereof did produce a diversity of opinions,
whether Judges or Magistrates ought to be for a time or term of life, the
often changing of them being according to the custom of the Romans, who did
instigate men to accuse those that had not discharged the place of their office
duly, Customs of the Romans about execu^ion of laws.
whereby wickedness was not only punished, but also every man (through
emulation) did endeavor himself to follow virtue and to discharge the place of
his calling. Besides whereas virtue in all commonweals is the principal
point whereat men aim, and whereunto the Law does bind them: So the
distribution of offices is a reward of virtue, which cannot be done to many,
when they are given in perpetuity to some few, which many times has been the
cause of sedition by the inequall distributions of rewards and punishments in
some Commonweals. Inconveniences of yearly officers.
True it is, that there are many inconveniences if the officers be but for one
year or a short time, to the hinderance of the public good: for they must
leave their place, before they know the duty of it, and commonly unto one that
is but a nouice in the place, whereby the affairs of the Commonwealth fall
into the Government of such as are incapable thereof and without experience.
And if they be fit for the place, their time is short, that it does vanish away
in feasts and pleasures, and matters either public or private do remain
undecided; and every thing protracted without due administration of justice:
besides how is it (in common sense and reason) possible, that he should
command, with the effectual power of a Magistrate, that within a little while
is (as it were) a cipher, without power or authority? what subject will yield
him due respect and reverence? whereas on the contrary, it his office be
perpetual and his estate assured, he is resolved boldly to resist the wicked,
to defend the good, Commodities had by Judges permanent.
to revenge the injuries of the oppressed, and even to withstand tyrants, who
many times have been astonished to see the constancy of the Judges and
Magistrates in the execution of justice, according to the law: and herein is
the common law excellent, because the Judges and Magistrates are authorized
accordingly for term of life, as the dignity of the place requires; and are
also chosen with great solemnity, in regard of their integrity, knowledge,
and experience in the laws, whereof they are the ornaments, whereas to call
the yearly Judges in question, after their time expired, is a derogation and
dishonor to the laws in other countries.

The Sherifes and many other Officers which put in every county the writs,
commandments, Subal^erne Officers annual.
and judgments of the courts in execution are removed every year, and the
same being expired, they may be called to account, to answer for any
misdemeanors committed by them during their office by the ordinary course of
the law, which makes them vigilant and circumspect in the execution of their
places which they supply, either personally, or by deputies for whose offense
they must answer.

This authority and severity of the Judges therefore does prevent many
mischiefs, putting a fear in the hearts of the offenders of the law by the
rigor thereof, which in criminal cases is called by some cruelty. But the
merciful Judge is more to be blamed in these cases than the severe, because
severity makes men to be obedient unto the laws, whereas too much lenity
causes contempt both of Laws and Magistrates. Nevertheless, as there is in
all commonweals two principal points which the Magistrates are to consider,
namely Law and Equity, so the execution of law is to be considered by the
Magistrate, who sometimes being too severe, may do more hurt to the
commonwealth than good; seeing the intention of those that made the law, Laws
intention is the common good
was to provide for the good of the commonwealth; Salus populi suprema lex
esto.

This may be said especially in regard of the statute Laws, whereof we have
the example of Empson and Dudley fresh in memory, who being privy Counselors
to king Henry 7, caused the penal laws to be strictly executed against his
subjects, whereby the king gathered much treasure with the loss of the love of
his subjects, which was much displeasing unto him, as the Chronicles of this
realm have recorded. Because there is nothing so effectual to cause the
prince to be called a tyrant than this course of strict execution of laws,
which has an affinity with the saying of Nicholas Machiauell sometimes
Secretary to the great Duke of Tuscanie, touching the condition of men in
general. It is miserable that we cannot do all things; The saying of
Machiauell.
More miserable to do that which we would do; and most miserable to do that
which we can do.

Informers nevertheless are necessary members in a commonwealth, for the
maintenance of laws, which otherwise would be fruitless, or made as it is
said by some, propter terrorem; for prevention whereof, it is very commendable
to preserve this life of the law, consisting in execution: which was the cause
that commissioners have been heretofore appointed, to retain men in their
duties, as the Nomophilats in Greece, the Censurors amongst the Romans, the
Ephores at Lacedemon, the Areopagits at Athens, the Visitors in Spain,
Commissioners to retain Officers in their duties.
and the Commissioners of Troyle, the Bastort in Edward the first his time; for
all humane actions are so flexible to evil, that they have need of a
continual remembrancer to virtue for the conservation of the public good.

If we will make a comparison between the execution of Criminal causes, and
civil, we shall in a manner find the same to be all one effectually: for the
general manner of death imposed by the law, is hanging, where in other
countries they have diverse manners of executions, according as the fact is
heinous. Murder (being a great offense) has in all ages been punished with
death, but stealing of goods was always taken to be much inferior, because the
law of God did not punish the same by death, as is now used; and yet a death by
sudden execution, is better than a lingering death by famine, imprisonment, and
other adversities, before remembered.

The effect of the kings Prerogative Royal (to be merciful even when law has
had her full course) is to be seen rather in causes civil than criminal, and
that in the relief of poor distressed prisoners and others: Justice and
Mercy in God are not contraries.
seeing the Mercy of God (whose Lieutenants they are on earth) is above all his
Works; which makes me to remember an error of the common people, which think
the Justice and Mercy of God to be contraries, for if they were, they could
not be in God, because the godhead being but one, and always like it self,
cannot admit contraries, and contraries they cannot be, being both virtues,
whereas no virtue is contrary to virtue, but only opposite to vice: so that
(respecting the Kings Prerogative in criminal causes when the law has
determined death or punishment by perpetual imprisonment or banishment) the
King (imitating Gods mercy) does restore life, freedom, and liberty, much
more may the King do the same in civil causes (when the law commands
imprisonment until satisfaction be made of the judgment) give liberty and
prolongation of time, as having an interest in the persons of his subjects, as
we have observed. I have herein been the more ample, because it concerns the
life of many honest men etc.

CHAP. XIII. Of Denization and Naturalization of Merchants.
THE manner to make Merchant strangers, Artificers^ or Handie-crafts men to be
Denizons or Naturalized, was in times past without any difference: and they did
enjoy the like liberty and privileges, and were most commonly made by his
Majesty's Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, by his Highness
Prerogative Royal; whereby they did enjoy all the freedom and immunities that
natural subjects do enjoy, and were so reputed and taken by the Laws of the
Realm, upon their oath (made in Chancerie) of allegiance to the King and the
Commonwealth. But the same was afterward called in question, upon the
misdemeanors of some forgetful persons, and then Denizons were made to pay
Customs to the King, as strangers, howbeit they might buy leases, lands and
houses as English borne subjects, and their children here borne should be
free, and pay but English Custom for goods imported and exported, and may
become freemen of London, and buy cloth in Blackewell Hall and all other
Markets, and transport the same where it pleased them, albeit the Merchants
Adventurers have infringed the same. Naturalized distinguished,
Nevertheless (some privilege to pay English Custom, being granted to some
particular Merchants, by the Princes prerogatives by Letters Pattents under the
Great Seal) it came to pass that these were named Naturalized, which might be
placed in offices, as Justices of the Peace and Quorum, high Sherifes of the
Counties, and other places of dignity, and came to be made Knights and
Barronets, and some of them buying lands and leases, made great purchases,
married their daughters unto diverse Gentlemen and others, did also sell lands
again, and bought other lands; which buying and selling of lands did require
assurances to be made, and therein some Lawyers were of opinion, that by the
Law the said assurances were not of sufficient validity without an Act of
Parliament, and then the Acts of Naturalization were made; but the making of
Denizons was always continued by his Majesty's Letters Pattents only, and
they are not subject to the Statute of Employment, albeit they pay strangers
Customs, Denizons not subject to the Statute of Employment.
and diverse other charges, which the native subjects do not pay, whereof
Merchants are to take notice.

No stranger which is a Mechanical person, is much inclined to be a natural
subject by Act of Parliament, because of the charge of it, which may be about
30 ll: albeit four or five persons may join together by petition to the
Parliament, and have one Act for them all, the form whereof is commonly as
hereafter follows. And here note that a Merchant is in no danger, if he be
neither Denizon nor Naturalized; but may deal, traffic, and negotiate at his
pleasure, but he may take no leases nor buy lands.

IN most humble manner, beseech your most excellent Majesty, your humble and
obedient Orators I. L. of Florence, your Majesty's servant T. M. etc. R. B. and
M. Q. That whereas the said I. L. the son of A. L. and L. his wife strangers,
were borne at Florence in Italy, in the parts beyond the Seas: and whereas,
etc. And whereas M. Q. being the son of M. Q. and C. his wife borne at
Bridges in Flanders, in the parts beyond the Seas in lawful matrimony, and
has (for the most part) these twenty years remained and made his abode in
London, within your Majesty's Realm of England, during which time, he has
demeaned himself faithfully and dutifully toward your Highness, and your
Laws; yet for that both he and the rest of your Majesty's Orators were borne
in the parts beyond the Seas, they cannot take benefit of your Majesty's Laws,
Statutes and Customs of your Highness Realm of England, as other your
Majesty's subjects borne within this Realm, to their great prejudice, loss
and hinderance: It may therefore please your Highness, of your most noble and
abundant grace, that it may be ordained, enacted and established by your
Highness, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That your Majesty's
most humble Petitioners I. L. T. M. R. B. and M. Q. and every of them shall
from henceforth be adjudged, reputed and taken to be your Highness natural
subjects, and as persons naturally and lawfully borne within this your
Majesty's Realm of England; and also that they and every of them, shall and
may from henceforth by the same authority be enabled and adjudged able to all
intents and constructions, to demand, challenge, ask, have, hold and enjoy
lands, tenements, hereditaments and rents, as heir or heirs to any of their
ancestors, by reason of any descent, remain, reuert, or come to them, or any
of them by any other lawful conueiances or means whatsoever, or which
hereafter shall come, etc. as if they and every of them had been your
Highness natural subjects borne; and to hold and enjoy to them, and every of
them jointly and severally lands, tenements and hereditaments, or rents, by way
of purchase, gift, grant, or otherwise, of any person or persons to all
constructions and purposes, as though they and every of them had been your
Highness natural borne subjects: and also that they and every of them from
henceforth may and shall be enabled to prosecute, maintain and avow, justify
and defend all manner of actions, suits, plaints, and other demands whatsoever,
as liberally, frankely, fully, lawfully, surely and freely, as if they and any
of them had been naturally borne within your Majesty's Realm of England, and
as any other person or persons naturally borne within the same, may in any wise
lawfully do: any Act, Law, Statute, Prouiso, Custom, Ordinance, or other
thing whatsoever, had, made, ordained, or done to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding: And your Petitioners shall daily pray for your Royal Majesty
long in honor and most safety to remain over us. This Petition in nature of
an Act of Parliament, The manner of proceeding in Parliament.
is delivered to the Speaker of the Parliament, who upon the second reading in
the Commons House, procures the same to be referred to certain Committees
before whom the Petitioners do appear, and (after examination) if there be no
apparent cause that might cross them, the Bill is returned into the Parliament,
and read for the third time, as the manner is of all Acts, and then it is
carried up to the higher house, and there it is commonly of course also read
three times and so allowed, and there it does remain until the last day of
the Session of Parliament, and then the Kings Royal Assent is had thereunto,
and there is written on the backside or within, these words Le Roy le Veult:
And if it be an^ Act which the King will not pass, the Clerk of the Parliament
writes, Le Roy S'aduiser'a, which is a clean and absolute refusal, and all
which was done is void, and cannot be revived in another Parliament without to
begin all from the beginning again. So much for England.

In France all strangers that are not borne within the Kingdom, and reside or
dwell in the same, Aubeine in France.
are subject to the right of Aubeine so called Tanquam, Alibi nati: for after
their death (if they be not naturalized) the King does seize upon all their
goods they have in France, and appropriateth the same to his Exchequer or
Finances; without that the said strangers can dispose thereof by Testament or
Will, or that their lawful heirs can claim the same, howbeit they may give
them, and dispose thereof whiles they live, by contracts made between them. A
stranger also not dwelling within the Realm, yet having gotten wealth or
means within the same, may dispose of it unto his heirs and others, although
they were strangers. Also if a stranger traveling through the Kingdom of
France should chance to die, his heirs shall enjoy his goods which he has
left at the time of his decease in France.

But when a stranger takes letters of naturalization, then may he get wealth
and possessions within the Realm lawfully and freely: which letters of
naturalization must be recorded in the Chamber of Accounts, upon pain of a
penalty paid to the King, and his lawful heirs shall enjoy the said
possessions and goods; so as he be nature of the Realm, or any other to whom
the same be given by Will or Testament, so as he also be naturalized, as
aforesaid.

But Monsieur Papon the Ciuilian says, That it is not sufficient for one to
enjoy the same, to be borne within the Realm, but it must be also of a woman
taken in marriage within the Realm: and heerevpon alleges an arrest or
sentence of the Parliament of Paris, whereby a cousin of a stranger deceased, was
preferred before the sister, because the cousin was born within the realm, and
dwelling in the same, and the sister did not dwell within the Realm, and was
borne in another country, albeit she caused her self to be Naturalized after
the decease of her brother, whereof the Court had no regard, because the goods
by succession were gotten before, which could not be made void by the Kings
Letters Pattents. Monsieur Banquet is of opinion, That a Frenchman being
departed the Kingdom, for to dwell in another country, that his goods present
and to come do appertain unto the King, and cannot dispose thereof by Will or
Testament, as it has been proved by diverse Decrees of Parliament. The King is
Lord of all vacant goods, and therefore wives and children are to take Letters
of Naturalization to purchase their quietness. And if any stranger borne and
naturalized, should be out of the Kingdom some eight or ten years upon
especial occasion or otherwise, he is at his return to take new Letters of
Naturalization, or a confirmation of the former by some approbation.

An obseruable consideration.
And herein is a special point to be noted, as a matter of record, that those
of Flanders, Millaine, and the French County of Sauoy, are not bound to take
Letters of Naturalization to dwell in this Kingdom, because the French Kings
pretend that the said countries are theirs, and were never alienated by any
consent of theirs, but are countries which at all times have belongs to the
Crown of France, who does acknowledge the subjects to be true and loyal
Frenchmen. But it is requisite if they come to dwell and inhabit within the
Realm, that they take Letters of Naturalization, to the end the Officers do
not molest or trouble them.

By the premises we see, that the Naturalizing in France is far more
compulsorie for Merchants than in England; howbeit that in both Kingdoms, if a
stranger Naturalized (after many years that he has inhabited the same) be
desirous to return to his father-land or native country, he may surrender his
Letters Pattents, and be discharged of his oath. (*)

CHAP. XIIII. Of the determination of Seafaring causes.
Having now hitherto entreated of the Customs of Merchants, with their
Adjuncts and Accidents, and therein observed Time, Number, Weight and Measure,
as also the three Simples and Essential parts of Traffic, with their Effects
and Properties: let us now consider of the Manner and Method of the
proceedings therein, to see by what means they are determined and executed;
for in the execution consists the life of all laws, and the perfecting of
men's actions which aim at some certain end. For it has been well observed
by some, that the actions of a wise man and a fool differ in this, Differences
between the actions of a wise man and a fool.
That the wise have a regard to the end in what they undertake, and the fool
without consideration permits the end to manifest in self: whereof ignorant
men judge according to the event, although the enterprise were never so
advisedly taken in hand, and as if the success did not depend upon the divine
power, to be guided by his providence.

The determination of all causes and controversies, especially of Merchants
affairs is done and executed, as follows.

1 Concerning Seafaring causes which are determined according to the sea-lawes
already written, and in the premises abridged, Four meane^ to end
controversies.
we shall in this chapter briefly declare the manner of it.

2 The second mean to end controversies, is by Arbitrators chosen and elected
by both parties to end their differences with brevity and expedition to avoid
suits in law, which unto Merchants are inconvenient.

3 The third mean, is the authority of Prior and Consulls of Merchants for
the Merchants Courts, according to the privileges which princes have granted
unto them for the advancement of their traffic, and maintenance of their
Customs, whereof most Judges are either ignorant, or contented to determine
matters accordingly.

4 The fourth and last mean, to determine questions and differences is by the
civil or imperial law, or the common law of the kingdom or jurisdiction of
the several dominions of princes, according to the fundamental laws of them;
wherein we are especially to observe, That the Law-Merchant is predominant and
ouerruling for all nation do frame and direct their judgment thereafter,
giving place to the antiquity of Merchants Customs, which makes properly
their law, now by me methodically described in this book, which allows to
every man and nation his proper right and due, and hureth no man, Three
precepts of all Laws.
according to the three general precepts of all laws set down by Caius, and
after him by Tribonianus, namely: Honest viuere, Alterum non laedere, and Ius
suum cuique tribuere, whereof the second tries and rules the two other,
whereof more hereafter.

Touching the first mean to determine Seafaring causes, it shall not be
needful to speak much of the definition of an Admiral at the seas, An
Admiral.
called by the Romans Magnus Dux Classis, and Drungarius magnus, or Admiratus,
from Amiras, a word used by the Spaniard to See, or Adelantado, as going before
the rest of ships; also by the Italians L'amiraglio, or Admiral in French,
because his calling is known to all.

But let us observe that for the readier obedience to the great Admiralls of
the seas, it is agreed by common consent of all nations, that they should have
(in regard of their power over the lives of men) a sovereign jurisdiction
only proper to themselves, The Admiralls Court.
in all Seafaring causes and debates civil and criminal, so that no other
Judge should meddle therewith; and the Judge of the court, being his deputy,
iudicially to decide them by the Aduocats and other Assistants, for the better
and just proceeding of the said court. Also the Admirals clerk is veric
necessary; and herein it has been thought convenient, that all Proctors or
Attorn'eys of that court should take their oath before they be heard, Adu^^ates
and Proctors, etc.
that they shall do nothing maliciously, but as soon as they find their action
to be unrighteous in any part of the process, they are to tell it to their
Clyent, and if the Clyent will insist, then to show it to the Judge: The
Proctors oath.
also that they shall not reveal their Clyents secrets to the adversary: and
lastly, that they shall not propound, delay, nor be peremptory against their
consciences; and the like oath is to be taken of other officers at their
admission.

The causes to be determined in the Admiraltie Court do extend very far, and
many are otherwise decreed or determined, especially by the Merchants Courts,
Causes to be determined by the Admiralty
and office of Assurances, whereas heretofore the Judges of the Admiraltie did
minister justice upon all complaints, contracts, offenses, pleas, exchanges,
assurances, debts, accounts, charterparties, covenants, and all other writings
concerning lading and vnlading of ships, fraights, hires, moneys lent upon
hazard of the Sea, and all other seafaring businesses done on the Sea or beyond
the Sea, with the acknowledging of writs and appeals from other Judges,
letters of reprizall or mart, to arrest and put in execution, to inquire within
and without liberties, by the oaths of twelve men upon all offenses and
trespasses, and namely:

First, touching the reuealers of the King and Country their secrets over Sea,
especially in time of war.

Against Pirates, their assisters or abettors, Outreaders or Receivers.

Against fortefiers of the Kings enemies, and harmers of friends.

Against the breakers of the Admirals arrests and attachments.

Against goods forbidden, and merchandise not Customed and yet transported.

Against the resisters of the Admiralls Officers in executing his precepts.

Against Forestallers, Regraters, and dearthers of corn and victuals, etc.

Finally against transporters of Traitors, Rebels, manifest transgressors, and
fugitives from justice, or casters of ballast, sand, or any other thing in
harbors or channells, extortioners by ships and boatwrights, for taking away
the boigh from the anchor, cutters of cables or towes, false weights and
measures by sea, shedders of other men's blood on sea, or in any port, or lamed
by misdemeanour, Customers and Water-bailifes taking more custom or anchorage
than they ought, for absenting from musterings in time of war, for all
transgressions committed by seamen, ferry-men, watermen, fishers, pilots,
ship-wrights, pressed men containing the Admiralls authority, and to amerce them
for his own benefit; the goods of pirates, felons, capital offenders, their
receivers, assisters, attainted, convicted, condemned, and outlawed, waife and
stray goods, wrecke on the seas, and cast goods, Deodando, that is to say, the
thing, whether boat or ship etc. that caused the death of a man, or whereby a
man did perish; Beacons to give light on the seas.
shares, lawful prises, or goods of the enemy, or Lagon, Floatson, and Ietson
before declared, with the anchorages, beaconages, swine, sturgeon, and whales
cast on shore, and all fish of extraordinary greatness, called Regal; of all
these the Admiral has authority to deal, correct, and punish according to
their deserts, and the laws provided for the same by statutes enacted, and all
other laws and means before declared.

The Clerk of the Admiral ought to be very skillful and honest, and is to
have diverse Registers for congees, safe-conducts, pasports, sea-briefes,
without which no ship in time of war is to pass, The Registers of the Clerk.
nor yet in far voyages in time of peace; another Register for the true
knowledge of captains and masters of ships, and their return; a third
Register for the names of Merchants, passengers, and owners, which the master
ought to deliver up to have them enrolled, and all pilots names (although
recorded in the office called the Trinity house) ought to be set down, and
known to the Admirals clerk; also all moneys delivered upon hazard, or
bottomarie, as is heretofore declared, called foenus nauticum, or pecunia
traiectitia.

Now the manner of proceeding in seafaring causes, The manner of proceeding.
is according to the laws aforesaid, or the customs written: and if the
debate or cause cannot be determined thereby, the last refuge is, according to
the opinion of skillful and upright men in their own trading; but all this
must be done, as the law says, Velo leuato, so briefly and summarily without
the solemnity of other ordinary courts and judgments, only looking to God
and the truth, and all complaints to be ended instantly, especially of
ship-wrecke; for it were a cruelty to vex so miserable persons with tedious
proceedings: whereupon in this case the Judges may proceed to execution upon
every interlocutorie, and make restitution presently, upon good caution to be
given to satisfy the appellation, if any be made. And herein there is a
further privilege to them: for whereas by the common rules of the law, where
no litiscontestation is past, or as we say, bill and answer depending, no
witness should be received, nisi ad eternam rei memoriam, Extraordinary
privilege.
ac aduersario ad id citato, yet in shipwrecke (as a case to be commiserated)
any of the ship-broken-men may come to the Judge of that part where the wrecke
happens, and by witness brought with him may make proof.

And as this is an extraordinary privilege, even so may merchants ordinarily,
and masters sailing together, bear witness each one to other of their
society within the ship, if they have neither to lose or gain thereby; and
especially mariners for or against the master when the voyage is ended,
Ordinary privilege.
and they free of his commandment. For by the consent of the doctors, when
truth cannot be otherwise tried, then unable persons may be heard. And to the
end that trade be not interrupted by vexation of quarrelsome persons, it is
provided, that not only the common caution Iudicio sisti, and iudicatum solui
be kept on the part of the defendant, but also that the plaintiff or pursuer
shall find caution de expensis soluendis, if he fail in proof.

Likewise if the party do not appear to defend himself or his ship after
three citations, or four at the most, called quatuor defaltae, he is taken
for contemptuous: the Judge may ordain the Marshall or Officer to put the
plaintiff in possession by his sentence or Primum Decretum: Provided that if
the party appear within the year, and pay the costs and expenses, he shall
be admitted and heard upon the propriety: and in like manner, if any
attachment be made upon the ship or goods, it shall upon caution given
summarily be heard and determined, for this law of Admiraltie intends nothing
but expedition for the better advancement of Traffic and Commerce. (*)

CHAP. XV. Of Arbitrators and their Awards.
THE second mean, or rather ordinary course to end the questions and
controversies arising between Merchants, is by way of Arbitrament, when both
parties do^ make choice of honest men to end their causes, which is voluntary
and in their own power, and therefore called Arbitrium, or free will, whence
the name Arbitrator is derived: and these men (by some called Good men) give
their judgments by awards, according to Equity and Conscience, observing the
Custom of Merchants, and ought to be void of all partiality or affection more
nor less to the one, than to the other: having only care that right may take
place according to the truth, and that the difference may be ended with
brevity and expedition; insomuch that he may not be called an Arbitrator, who
(to please his friend) makes delays and propagateth their differences, but he
is rather a disturber and an enemy to Justice and Truth: and therefore the
manner to elect Arbitrators, The manner to choose Arbitrators.
is worthy the observation. Some are contented to name four or six persons on
either side in writing, and refer the naming or electing of four out of them
by reciprocal proceeding, when one named the first person, another the second,
and then again the third, and the other the fourth person. Others putting
several names in a paper, are contented that a mere stranger shall upon the
backside of the paper prick their names with a pin, or that (as they are
numbered) the dyce shall be cast upon them accordingly by the number.

Others put their names in several papers, and cause them to be mingled and
drawn by way of lot, by an indifferent person, which course may be thought
allowable, as we have noted in the Chapter of the dividing of commodities by
lots.

Others will do the same by nomination of them, and drawing of the longest or
shortest straw, or by any other extraordinary means of pointing, numbering, or
describing, all tending to one end, to have indifferency, and that partiality
may be avoided by all means.

Consideration must be had also, whether two, three, or all four shall have
authority to determine the cause, Awards are to be given under hands and
seals.
if they can, to be done within a limited time, wherein their award is to be
delivered up, and whether they may name an vmpire, or not; all which must be
declared in the Bond of Compromise, unless the question be only upon one
point to be determined, wherein no Bond is needful but by way of assumpsit, by
delivering a piece of coin each to other, and thereby binding themselves
reciprocally upon the penalty of a sum of money to stand to the judgment,
it is ended.

And the said penalty or forfeiture by assumpsit may be recovered by Law and
the Merchants Courts, as well as the forfeitures upon Bonds, if the party do
not perform the sentence or award, if the award be lawfully made: Five points
to be observed in awards.
to which end Arbitrators are to take notice of the five points following,
which by the Law do make void all awards.

1 That the award be given up in writing within the time limited, by the bonds
of Compromise made between the parties.

2 That there be limited or appointed by the award, some reciprocal act to be
done by each party to other; which the Law requires to be Quid pro qu^,
albeit never so small.

3 That they make a final end, and do determine upon all the points or
differences produced before them by specification or otherwise, if they be
required so to do, and authorized thereunto.

4 That they do not award any of the parties to do or perform any unlawful
act or thing prohibited and against the Law.

5 That they do not award any thing, whereby any matter already determined by
decree in Chancerie, or judgment at the Common Law, or any sentence judicially
given in the cause, be infringed or meddled withal.

These points ought to be observed for the reasons following: For touching the
first, if the award be not delivered up in writing under the Arbitrators hands
and seals, if the condition of the Bond do so limit the same: then have they
no authority to do the same after the time which is limited unto them, by the
consent of the parties.

For the second point, reason requires in all humane actions, a reciprocal
act from one man to another, by deed of performance, called Quid pro quo, The
reason of Quid pro quo.
although it were a man's sallarie for his pains; which in some cases causes
men to award, that each party shall pay so much to the Scriuener or Notarie
for writing the said award: but this is no collateral act between the
parties, neither is it any matter compromitted to the Arbitrators. It is
therefore better to express and award, that each party shall seal and
deliver either, general acquittances each to other, or with some exceptions
therein as the award will lead them.

The third point is considerable, where the differences are by both parties, or
either of them delivered in Articles in writing to the arbitrators; for herein
it is not sufficient to say, That the said arbitrators shall have power and
authority to determine all questions, differences, doubts, controversies,
matters of accounts, reckonings, or any other usual or general words, from
the beginning of the world until the date of the bond: but they must give
their award upon every particular Article, and upon all of them.

The fourth point, That the Arbitrators do not award any thing which is
unlawful, is to be understood of all things which are evil in themselves,
called Malum in se, and of things called evil because they are (upon some
respects and considerations) prohibited, and therefore termed Malum prohibitum,
as the wearing of hats at all times, transportation of corn, eating of flesh
in Lent, and the like; wherein there is a further consideration which requires
a distinction. As for example, an Arbitrator or many Arbitrators do award, A
notable good distinction in Law.
that a sum of money shall be paid unto such a man, during all the time he
is unmarried, is good in Law; but to bind the party by award that he shall not
marry, because he should enjoy the money still, is unlawful and void by the
Law.

The fifth point is of very great consequence, to bind the actions of men to
the obedience of the Law; whereunto such reverence is due, that decrees,
judgments, and sentences of judicial Courts of Record, are always of a
higher nature than Arbitrators awards. Nevertheless in many doubtful
questions, the Ciuilians themselves (after long and curious debates) do
assign them to be determined by Arbitrators having skill and knowledge of the
Customs of Merchants, which always do intend expedition: and that is the
cause wherefore an vmpire chosen upon arbitrable matters, An Vmpire has
absolute authority.
has an absolute authority to himself given, to end the matter alone without
hearing the Arbitrators, if he will: for albeit this is not without some
danger, and that the ending of Arbitrators is to be preferred; yet brevity
and expedition of justice in Merchants affairs is so much regarded, that by
all means the same ought to be furthered. Hence it proceeded that the
Merchants Courts, governed by Prior and Consulls (whereof we entreat in the
next Chapter) have authority to reform or confirm the sentence of
Arbitrators, Arbitrators award subject to the Prior and Consulls.
when Merchants will appeal their arbitrament before them, rather than to go
to Law: and with this prouiso, That the appellation of the sentence of the said
Arbitrators shall not be received by the said Prior and Consulls, before the
arbitrament be performed by the party that does appeal, conditionally that
restitution shall be made, if there be cause, upon the end of the process. And
the said Prior and Consulls are to note, that no Merchant nor other, being of
their jurisdiction, can transport or make over their interest to any person
privileged, and not subject to the said jurisdiction, be it by gift, sale, or
exchange, or by any other means, to the end thereby to avoid their authority;
upon pain that the same transports or possessings shall be of no effect, and
the loss of their right and cause. And all notaries who shall receive any such
transports, shall be punished by the said Prior and Consulls in a penalty
arbitrable: and further shall be condemned to pay unto the adverse party, all
his costs and charges which he has sustained by means thereof.

Reference of causes to Merchants.
And to the end this expedition may by all means be furthered, the said Prior
and Consulls may distribute and refer causes unto the most ancient and expert
Merchants in the matters in question, to make a true report of the state of the
cause, according to the allegations and proof of the parties, without any
sallarie to be given to the said Merchants; howbeit in Italy some reward is
given upon the Ricorse of Merchants.

These Merchants are to take the advice of the Advocate, Council and Attorney
of the said Prior and Consulls in matters difficult, the better to discern the
right of the cause to make their report more complete, for the sooner ending of
it according to reason and right, by the true affirmations of the Merchants,
and not by fained, subtle, and crafty writings, which oftentimes do darken
the truth, under the color of fair phrases declared in them, causing
protraction and delays.

Difference between ludges of the Law and Arbitrators.
Marcus Tullius Cicero has truly set down the difference, which is between
Judges of the Law and Arbi^rators, inclining to the most easy and less
chargeable course, saying, The one is servile, the other is noble; the one is
bound to the Law, and the other is not; the one does consist in fact, the other
in justice; the one is proper to the Magistrates, the other is reserved to the
Law; the one is written in the Law, the other is without the Law; the one is in
the power, and the other is without the power of Magistrates: howbeit it is not
forbidden, but all Justices of Peace may compound differences, and their
authority does enable them better thereunto. And in this regard it is said,
That an vmpire does represent the Lord Chancellors authority, because that the
Commissioners, report of the Masters and others of the Chancerie, or of
Merchants, is the ground work whereupon the Lord Chancellor does deliver his
sentence, and makes up his decrees. And the said Commissioners have a further
authority and power than Arbitrators: Difference between Commissioners and
Arbitrators.
for they may examine witnesses upon oath, upon any thing in question where
there wants proof, or they may minister the said oath to either party, upon
pregnant occasions to boult out the truth: the like authority have the Prior
and Consulls of Merchants. And moreover their authority does far exceed the
power of Commissioners: for as Arbitrators have a determinate power to make an
end of controversies in general terms, without declaration of particulars; so
has the Prior and Consulls power to do the like, whereas Commissioners are to
give a reason and declaration of their proceedings to the Lord Chancellor.
Finally, the Arbitrators authority implies a voluntary command proceeding
from both parties, which the Commissioners have not, but the Merchants Court
has.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Merchants Courts, or office of Prior and Consuls.
THe third mean to end and determine Merchants questions and controversies
happening in the course of traffic, is the Courts of Merchants called Prior
and Consulls, or Il consolato, as the Italians have called the same. And here
we may say a Merchant is, in loco propri^, as the fish in the water, where he
understands himself by the custom of Merchants, according to which they are
determined: and if he do not, yet as every man is taken to be wise in his
profession, so may he be admitted to understand them, the rather when he shall
truly peruse and ponder the contents of this Book, which in my love to
Merchants I have compiled, as aforesaid.

The Ciuilians having considered of this Office of Prior and Consulls
established in many places of France, Italy, and Germany, Wherein Prior and
Consulls have no power
have made diverse questions of their authorities, saying they cannot decree any
thing contrary to the law of the land; as that the father shall be bound for
the son, or the son for the father, or any thing that is malum in se, or
naturally unjust, or against the public good, or that which sauoureth of a
Monopoly: neither may they forbid any man to go to law, or order that a work
begun by one shall not be ended by another, without the others consent: neither
are they to deal or to determine of any thing but what concerns
merchandising; for other things, as the selling of houses, lands, and the like,
do not appertain unto them. True it is, that all matters criminal or
offensive do not belong unto them to deal in, for there the Kings Attorney is
a party, and has interest therein, as falsifying of obligations, and bills of
debt, or other writings, matters of reproach, or discrediting of persons,
theft, and other evil unlawful behavior done and committed by their said
servants, or themselves, or any other Merchant, Factors, or intermedlers in
causes of merchandise, as also all others not exercising the trade of
merchandise: are forbidden to be dealt with by the said Prior and Consuls,
neither are they to deal with the contracts of Usury either fained or
otherwise unlawful, nor with the Wills and Testaments, or contract of
marriages of any persons, or with the interchanging of goods by consent, and
all other such like contracts, but only in all civil causes of merchandising.
How be it these questionable matters are not of that moment to be discussed,
considering that their authority is declared and confined by the Charters and
Privileges made unto them by Princes and Commonweals, whereunto relation is
to be had, and accordingly they are to proceed, having a respect to the equity
of the cause. Hereupon Benvenuto Straccha the Ciuilian makes a treatise,
Quomodo procedendum sit in causis Mercatorum, of the manner to proceed in
Merchants affairs, wherein are many universal things propounded which are
easier, but particular things are commonly more truer, by his own observation;
The decrees of Merchants need no other confirmation.
and he concludes that the decrees of Merchants need no other confirmation or
approbation.

The oath taken by the said Prior and Consuls to observe the Law-Merchant is
subject to punishment, if they be perfidious or forsworn, as well as the oath
of all other Judges. And writing de Consulibus Mercatorum, he says, That a
Merchant may call in question, and begin his plea before them, although it be
against one that is no Merchant, if the cause concern merchandising; and the
plaintiff herein binds the defendant to be judged by the said Prior and
Consulls, be he either a Knight or Ecclesiastical person, or a stranger not
resident in the place. In the like manner all Bankers, Shopkeepers in faires
and markets are bound to their jurisdiction for matter of money and Exchanges,
or for merchandise.

The plaintiff may in other places (where the defendant does deal or
negotiate) be at his choice to begin or commence his suit where he will, but
not in two places at one time for one cause, wherein sometimes the penalty is
by him respected to be far greater in one place than in another. Here let us
remember the controversy between two brothers which was above fortie-yeares
since, called Joan de la failia, and Jacques de la failia, who went to law in
Brabant for many thousand pounds; and afterward one of them did commence suit
in Flanders being another jurisdiction, whereupon he was compelled to pay a
forfeiture of 4000 ll; A fo^feiture for a jurisdiction.
for in truth good orders and customs are to be maintained as laws, and
nothing is to be admitted that may infringe the Law of Merchants.

The proceedings before the said Prior and Consulls is by Libell or Petition,
or by Declaration; wherein let us note the difference set down by the said
Ciuilians. Difference between a Petition and a Declaration.
The Libell or Declaration is to be made with all the form used in law, as
well for the matter of fact, as the matter of law. But in a Petition the form
is not needful, so the substance of the matter be well expressed, especially
the sum which is demanded, or the goods being lent, or unjustly detained,
must be specified; and if it be for money owing for merchandises, or lent, it
must be declared, otherwise the Consuls will reject the Petition as
impertinent; albeit some triuiall errors in Petitions are to be tolerated, and
the party is to be (by the Merchants Law) relieved.

They are to proceed summarily in all their actions, Summarie proceeding.
to avoid interruption of traffic and commerce; and they are to respect
plain and sincere dealings amongst Merchants, with a consideration to construe
all things to be done bona fide, so that trust may be preserved amongst them;
debarring (as much as in them lies) the exceptions of Prescription, Excussion,
and of promises made without consideration, quod nudo pacto promisisti, and the
like; in so much that many times a woman is admitted to be a procuratrix,
contrary to the Civil Law: A custom contrary to the civil law.
and all other exceptions upon plain bills and obligations are set a part, and
the truth is hunted after, and all exceptions proceeding of Justice and
Equity to be considered of.

The paying of Customs, Impositions, Factoridge, Portage, Carriage, and the
like charges are much to be respected by them, as also the execution of Wills
and Testaments.

The publication of witnesses before them, is without delay; and no more
witnesses are to be examined after the time of few days limited, is expired:
Sentences of the Prior and Consulls.
but sentence is immediately to be given in writing, after pronunciation
clearly made by them, according to the proof and allegations, upon pain to
be punished by the higher courts, and in France by the court of Parliament,
upon reformation of their decrees.

The manner of this summarie proceeding is so brief, that upon coming of the
parties before them in person, or by their Atturnie, they are presently to
nominate their place of residence, or else there is refusal made of their
petition or demand; then there is but one delay admitted, and in the
acknowledgement of bills of debt or obligations there is admitted but one
default: after which the bill is held as confessed and auileable, The
authority of Prior and Consulls is greater than the authority of any Judges.
wherein their authority is greater than the authority of all other Judges.
For their said ordinance does extend but to the adiourning of persons, and the
said Prior and Consulls upon one only default, and notice left at the lodging
of the offender may auerre all bills, and declare the same to be payable; which
notice is to be done by the messenger or serieant of the said office, by fixing
the copy of the demand upon the door, if he cannot find the person, and by
one witness or two to be affirmed; and hereupon they may seize upon the
parties goods, if his body be absent and cannot be imprisoned to pay and
satisfy their said sentence and decree; and the goods by them seized (upon
once warning given) may be sold by them to that end. If opposition be made
against the seizing, sale, or delivery of goods, or against the cries, or
interpositions of decrees, or against any other chief point, where opposition
may be admitted, (justice remaining duly garnished) the parties so opposing
themselves shall be sent to their Judge, and chief men of their province, to
declare before them the causes of their oppositions.

And if the party adiourned do offer surety, yet notwithstanding he shall be
caused to garnish, and lay down caution; and then have power to call his
surety; so that the sentence or judgment to be given, shall be against the
principal debtor for the principal sum, and against the sureties for the
charges, damage, and interest only: and this surety is liable after one
default also, unless he put in a third man for surety, to whom also but one
default can be allowed. How be it that ^ll delays are left to the discretion
of the Prior and Consuls, A diournme^ts and delays v^ed.
who will admit none but upon very pregnant cause: and if they find to have
granted any delay upon untrue suggestions, they may impose a forfeiture upon
the party according to their discretions, and the quality of the cause and
persons; and in the proceedings there may be two citations and adiournments
sometimes used by them, Inquiries used.
especially upon inquiries, where the witnesses are admitted with the priuitie
of the adverse party being called thereunto; otherwise all the proceedings are
of no value. The inquiries are to be done within a limited time, and may once
be prolonged upon especial cause, and not otherwise. All lawful proof must
be done before them summarily within three days, without any further
protraction, unless there be manifest contradiction, and that by default
thereof, they pay the penalty to be imposed.

Penalties imposed.
The like penalties are to be imposed, if the parties do produce any frivolous
thing in writing; for there is always expedition and brevity intended in all
their proceedings.

The Registers O^^ice.
The Register of the said Prior and Consulls, is to keep a little inventory of
all the writings that shall be produced, and shall cause the parties that does
produce them, to write their names upon every one of them: and the said
Register is not to take out any coppie of matters of moment out of the
Inventory of the said writings, neither for the one party nor for the other,
but only the cause, and the end, wherefore the said writings are produced,
upon a penalty etc.

C^arges and da^ages to be taxed etc.
All charges and damages shall be taxed by the Prior and Consuls, and be paid,
or the party imprisoned not to be released without the consent of the party.
And for as much as this course to determine causes, is the shortest and most
peremptory of all devises, inventions, and means which can be imagined, I
have thought convenient to set down the French Kings Edict concerning the
same, as the most complete.

An Edict made by the French King, concerning the Court and Authority of the
Prior and Consulls of Roan.
HENRY, By the grace of GOD, King of France; To all manner of persons of what
estate soever, greeting. As We have bin heretofore advertised, that Our City
of Roan is one of the best Cities in all Our Kingdoms, by reason of the
situation and aptness for all commerce and traffic, where diverse Merchants
(as well of this Our Realm, as of many other Nations) do usually hold an
intercourse of buying and selling: for the continuance and propagation of which
Trade, there has of late (by Our Letters missiue) been erected and
established in the same City, a Common Place for Merchants and their Factors,
to assemble themselves in twice every day at the hours accustomed, to
dispatch their affairs and negotiations in such manner as is commonly used in
the Change at Lions, Change at Lions, Bourse of Thoulouze.
and the Bourse at Thoulouze, to the intent that the foreign commodities of
other countries, may more readily be transported and exchanged away, with those
which Our own brings forth.

Be it therefore known to all men, That We (through our ardent zeal and
desire that We carry to advance the general good of Our said City of Roan,
and to augment the common benefit and ease of all Merchants negotiating there,
and in all things possible to gratify them, that they may not be distracted
and drawn from their affairs and businesses into sundry courts and
jurisdictions, by means of suites and variances arising at any time about
their traffic) by the deliberate advice of Our privy Council (together with
diverse Noblemen and Princes of Our blood) besides other great and honorable
personages, of Our own proper motion, assured knowledge, and regal authority
have approved and confirmed, and by these presents do approve and confirm
the making and establishing of the said Common Place in that Our City of Roan,
instantly ratifying the same in all points with the Change of Lions, and Bourse
of Thoulouze.

Willing and ordaining, and Our pleasure is, That all Merchants, Factors, and
all others of what Nation soever, may assemble themselves in the same twice
every day at the hours accustomed, and in their meetings shall freely use
their traffic, and pass their business, as well by exchange as otherwise,
not only in the same place, License to exchange.
but also in any other whatsoever within the liberties of Our said City of
Roan, when and where they shall think good, with all assurance and safety to
their merchandise: and withal those privileges and liberties, which Merchants
trading to Our Towns of Lions and Thoulouze do enjoy and use, according to
the grant of Our predecessors Kings of France, and of Us.

Furthermore We will and ordain, That the Merchants of the said Town of Roan
(frequenting the same place) shall every year cause a society of Merchants
to be in the lodge of the said Bourse, or in any other place in the said
City, and at such time as they shall think good: in which meeting they shall
choose out of the said number, three officers, viz. A Prior and two Consulls to
remain ^n their authority for one year, and so yearly to be changed, and
there new to be elected according to the ordinary form of most voices,
Indifferent election.
not only the Merchants of the City of Roan, but also the Merchant strangers,
being to be present and assistant in the said election: which election and
nomination being fully ended, the said Prior and Consulls shall have present
power in them to take knowledge, and to give judgment between all men of what
estate, quality, or condition soever they be, of all suits, controversies and
differences touching matters of merchandising or buying and selling in such
manner as the Conseruator of the Fair at Lions, and the Prior and Consulls at
Thoulouze do, as well for Obligations, Bills of Debt, Receipts, Blankes signed,
Bills of Exchange, General and particular associations.
answers by sureties, associations of Merchants (either general or
particular) assurances, accounts, transportations, bargains, and partenerships
for matters aforesaid, or any thing belonging thereunto, with as full strength,
and according to the judgments and condemnations of the said Conseruators of
Lions, and the Prior and Consulls of Thoulouze. And that the judgments and
sentences, decrees and ordinances, commissions and commandments of the said
Prior and Consulls of Roan, by speeches, provisions, or definitiues shall stand
in as much force and effect, for any matter judicially determined, as those
causes which the Conseruator of Lions, and Prior and Consulls of Thoulouze, and
others of Our Judges do decide. And the same shall be executed by Our
Serieants and Officers, in such manner and form, as they are in their behalf
above named; either by committing to prison, The manner of executions.
or by inflicting severe punishment, if it be so decreed and ordained; and to
that end shall Our Messengers and Officers be bound to perform the
executions. Our Gaolers and Keepers of Our prisons shall likewise be bound to
receive and keep all such prisoners in such manner, as if they were committed
unto them by Our abouesaid Judges, and with the like bond and penalt^^ (if any
escape happen) as they be bound to keep the prisoners by the authority of the
said Judges: For so We have enjoined, and do enjoin Our Messengers and other
Officers, Gaolers and Keepers of prisons, upon such penalties as the case shall
require, and according as by the said Prior and Consulls shall be set down
and declared without any default, according as the offense committed shall
require.

Moreover, We have permitted and do permit Our said Prior and Consulls to
take unto them 20 of the said Merchants, or more, or less as they shall think
reasonable to assist them in their proceeding and judgments in causes of
Merchandise, Bills of Exchange, Aid in their execution.
assurances and differences as aforesaid: and to cause to be executed their
sentences, judgments and ordinances of pawnes and consignements, provisions,
seizing of goods, and all their other condemnations sentences or appointments
to proceed therein by cries, proclamations, giving notice to themselves, or
leaving notice at their houses by proof, sales, dipositings, deliueries, and
execution definitive as the case shall require.

Likewise We give them power to direct the same process, Summarie proceedings.
and to proceed therein according to their ordinances, as well in matters
summarily, as by provision; as acknowledgement of Bills, subscriptions, and
Bills of exchange.

And the like in acts of Pawnes and Consignements by one only fault duly
proved, by summoning the person at his house, or fixing there a copy of the
commission or process in all places where it is lawful to be done. And
touching other matters, where two defaults shall be made or summoned in person,
they shall proceed, observe, and keep the course according to the Kings
ordinances. And for all matters wherein they shall give sentence of execution
according to their knowledge. We will and do permit them, as aforesaid, to
cause the execution to pass in all places of Our Court of Parliament at Roan,
and in all other places of Our Kingdom where need shall require, without any
disturbance or let to be done by any of Our Judges, Justices, or Officers
either against them or their deputies; neither shall they let or hinder any
summons or arrest, exploit or assignement to be done before them.

And to give their assistance, in all causes appertaining to their knowledge
touching matter of traffic, and all things thereunto belonging, against all
merchants trading in Our said City of Roan, and as touching their Factors,
dealers and intermedlers, of what quality soever they be (sent by them into
diverse Countries, Regions, and Provinces, as well within as without Our
Kingdom, Countries and dominions under Our obeisance, for the cause of
traffic, merchandising, and doing of business, and all other things
thereunto belonging.)

We will and ordain, Constraint to bring their Ca^^ les, etc.
That they may be constrained to bring their causes and proof for all matters
aforesaid, before the said Prior and Consulls for the time being, or that shall
hereafter execute these offices, be it either for the rendering of account and
satisfaction of part or of whole, or condemnations in penalties, or other
condemnations for amends for trespasses, and of all other things that shall be
requisite concerning and belonging to the trade of merchandise, according as
they shall deserve, whereof We have permitted them, and do give them power to
use the form, even as the said Conseruator at Lions, Prior and Consuls of
Thoulouze, and other Our Judges do. And to cause execution to be served on the
offenders, either by arrest, attachment of goods, and sale thereof, or by
imprisonment of the parties condemned, Prohibition to other Judges.
even as they shall think good, inhibiting all Our Judges to presume to take
knowledge of any matter or plea thereunto belonging; which Our command We will
be notified unto them, and unto whom it shall appertain, by the first of Our
Officers or Serieants that shall be required, whom We enjoin to perform the
same accordingly, to the intent that all those charges and extraordinary
expenses, which Merchants may be put unto in following their suits against
their Factors and dealers before many Judges, might by these means be utterly
avoided.

Furthermore We have permitted, and do give authority to the said Prior and
Consulls, Half of the forfeitures to the Prior etc.
that all such penalties of moneys as by them shall be inflicted upon men for
contempts or any other offenses shall be forfeited, the one half to Us, the
other half to the use of the said Common Place or Bourse of Roan to supply the
wants thereof: allowing them likewise absolute liberty and power to choose and
constitute one Councellor, A Councellor and one Attorney.
and one Attorney, who shall by all lawful means, labor the benefit and
advancement of the said place, and shall defend the same, to direct their
process and causes, as well before the said Prior and Consulls, as before all
other Judges.

And to the end that the Merchants may assemble themselves, as well to consult
of their common affairs, as to constitute the said Councellor and Attorney,
without being subject to repair to Us or to Our Judges for leave when need
shall require; Therefore all such judgments as shall pass before the Prior
and Consulls, being sealed with their Seals, and signed by a Register by them
appointed, be it by imprisonment, sale, disposing of goods or otherwise, shall
be held for real and lawful, being past in manner aforesaid, without any
constraint to have Our further commission or liking, even according as was
permitted by Our most honorable Our Father the King, unto the Merchants of Our
City of Lions by his letters Patents given in the month of February, Appeal
to the Parliament.
in the year of Our Lord 1535; reserving unto Our said Court of Parliament, at
Our said City of Roan for a last conclusion, and by appeal, the jurisdiction
and knowledge of the said discords and differences.

And to the end that all such appeals as shall proceed by reason of the
judgments and sentences that shall be given and declared by the said Prior and
Consuls, may be speedily and without delay ended in our said court, We have
ordained, and do ordain, inioyne, and command all Our loving and tru^tie
Presidents and Counselors (holding Our said court of Parliament) to declare to
the said Merchants without delay one day in every week, such as they shall
think convenient, to hear, determine, and dispatch the said appellations, by
order of roll for that purpose ordained. Justice with all expedition.
And in regard of the process by writing, there shall be one other roll made a
part, to the end that the said appeals may be ended in the same day, to avoid
the prolonging of suits, to the ruin and consuming of the suitor. And to the
end that the said place of meetings of the Merchants twice a day, may be quiet,
and without disturbance, Our pleasure is, and We do straightly command, that
none of Our Serieants and Officers presume to enter into the same place, No
arrest to be made upon the Burse etc.
not to make any arrest (for any cause) of any person whatsoever, during the
time of those two accustomed hours of meeting. And if such arrest should be
made during the said hours, We have declared heretofore, and do declare at
this present, the same to be void and insufficient, charging all Our Judges
not to have any regard thereunto.

And as We are informed, that the trade of Assurances is of late greatly
advanced by the Merchants of the said city of Roan, (a work so honorable
that it does even beautify and greatly advance the trade and commerce of the
said city,) We (to the end those said policies of Assurances, and all other
writings thereunto belonging may receive full vigor) have permitted, and do
permit, that all Merchants frequenting the said place (both now and hereafter
to come) to assemble themselves at all times when it shall be needful, to
choose and nominate, according to the most voices, one Merchant amongst them
(such a one as they shall think meet, being a man trusty and expert in the
knowledge of the trade of Assurances) who shall make and register the said
policies, A Register for Assurances.
whereunto the Assurors shall set their hands, at all times hereafter in the
said place and liberties of Roan, when it shall please the Merchants; whose
office shall likewise be to draw forth accounts of such arrerages as shall
happen (being thereunto called) receiving for his pains and time spent about
the business of the same Assurances, according as it shall be thought meet
by the said Merchants, and keep a perfect and true Register of the same
Assurances. To the which Register and Copies thereof, and all other Acts and
Writings by him made, concerning matter of Assurances, and by him signed, We
will and ordain, that all manner of credit shall be thereunto given, before
all Judges, and others to whom it shall appertain: without that any other
person or persons shall have to do, or meddle in the said business of
Assurances, or any thing thereunto belonging, unless he be before chosen and
admitted thereunto by the said Prior and Consuls, and by the said Merchants as
aforesaid.

And We do command and give in charge to all persons holding Our courts of
Parliament, great Consells, Admiralls, Vice-Admiralls, Stewards, and their
deputies, and to all other Judges and Officers whom it shall concern, that you
do cause to be read, proclaimed, and registered this Our present Will,
Declaration, Permission, and Ordinance, and the same to be observed and kept by
all them accordingly, that the Merchants may use and enjoy the force and
benefit thereof, plainly and peaceably without any contradiction. Moreover We
do charge and command Our Attorney general, that he do with all diligence
cause all these things to be plainly and truly executed, and that he do
certify us of his diligence so done; for such is Our pleasure, for that of Our
mere motion and power, We will have it done, and that notwithstanding any
ordinance, customs, statutes, privileges, commandments, defenses, or letters
to the contrary, the which in this cause without doing prejudice to other
causes, We have made void, and do make void. And for that men shall have
occasion to use this Our grant in diverse places, Our pleasure is that credit
shall be given to all such copies as shall be made by any Our loving and trusty
Notaries and Serieants, Secretaries, or under, in ample manner as to the
original: and to this effect, We do give you full power, authority, and
especial charge and commission, by these presents commanding all Our
Justices, Officers, and subjects, to obey you in this case. And to the end this
may remain established for ever (Our own right in all other causes reserved)
We have hereunto caused Our seal to be put. Given at Paris in the month of
March, and in the year of Our Lord 1556, and the tenth year of Our reign:
signed by the King then in Council, and sealed with green wax, with red and
green silk lace.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Laws of several Countries, whereby the Differences and
Controversies of Merchants are determined.
THe fourth and last mean to end the Differences and Controversies happening
between Merchants and others in the course of traffic, are the imperial
Laws, or the fundamental Laws of kingdoms and commonweals, where the
Merchants court of Prior and Consulls is not established, whereof the Merchants
ought not to beignorant; so that in the description of them, it is convenient
to make some declaration, for the Merchants satisfaction, appertaining to their
business and negotation.

All laws are tending in substance to the upholding of truth, maintaining of
justice, to defend the feeble from the mighty, Final end of the laws.
for the suppressing of injuries, and to root out the wicked from amongst the
good, prescribing how to live honestly, to hurt no man wilfully, and to render
every man his due carefully, furthering what is right, and prohibiting what is
wrong; summarily to be understood according to the saying of our savior Christ.

What you will have men to do unto you, do the same unto them. Mat. 7.21. Luke
6.31.
Which Alexander Seuerus the Emperor, did express thus: That which you will
not have done unto thee, do not unto others.

And to this purpose, let us note three sorts of laws, namely:

The law of Nature, whose virtue is alone, Law of Nature
and the same every way in all, or rather a very notice of Gods law ingraffed
in the mind of man.

The law of Nations, which consists of customs, manners, Law of Nations.
and prescriptions, being of like condition to all people, as we have before
declared.

The Civil law, which is an abridgement, Civil Law.
derogating many illicentious customs which grew by perverseness and
corruptnesse of nature, and is termed Peculiar, used by one kind of people,
called the the Imperial Law.

Out of these was the common law of England made, whereof we are now first to
entreat, and therein to be somewhat prolixe, for the better understanding of
Merchants, the rather because the laws do bind all men to Knowledge,
Obedience, The law binds all men to knowledge and obedience
and Punishment: for indeed no man may break them, no man may be ignorant of
them: and lastly, no man may judge of them, but according to them; and
therefore it is said, that Iudex is taken a iudicio, non iudicium a Iudice: and
more especially, because this book (as you may find) is more exactly
calculated (as the Prognosticators say) for the Meridian of England, howbeit it
may serve for all other countries and places of traffic and trade.

Of the Common-Lawes of the realm of England.
THe Common Law of England is taken three manner of ways, viz.

1 As the Laws of the realm, disseuered from all other Laws; The treatise of
Doctor and Student.
which is the cause of the often arguing in the Laws, what matters ought of
right to be determined by the Common Law, or what by the Admiraltie court, or
by the Spiritual court.

2 The Common Law is taken as the Kings court of Kings Bench, or Common pleas.

3 By the common law is understood such things as were law, before any statute
made in that point that is in question, whereby that point was holden for law,
by the general and particular customs and maxims of the realm, or by the
law of God, and the law of reason, whereunto the kings of England at their
coronation, do take a solemn oath to observe the same, and all which the
inhabitants of England successively ever observed, Five nations in England.
namely Britains, Romans, and then Britains again, and then Saxons, Danes,
and Normans.

Commendation of the common law.
Now whereas the Law-Merchant requires brevity and expedition, all men of
judgment will confess, that (having seen many devises, edicts, and
ordinances, how to abridge process, and to find how long suits in law might be
made shorter) they never perceived, found, nor read as yet, so just and so well
devised a mean found out as this by any man in Europe, albeit that the
shortness thereof is such, that if a man have many peremptory exceptions,
Peremptorinesse of the common law.
which can make the state or issue of his cause, he shall be compelled to chose
one exception whereupon to found his issue, which chosen, if he fail by the
verdict of twelve men, he loses his action and cause, and the rest can serve
him for nothing.

Antiquity of the common law.
Great is the antiquity of the common law of England, and the trial of Iuries
by twelve men: for we find the same to be from the time that the West Saxons
had the rule and domination over the countries of Hamshire, Wilreshire,
Dorsetshire, Somersetshire, and part of Glocestershire; and also the same law
was used amongst the Saxons which ruled Marshland and Medland, that is to say,
the countries of Lincoln, Northhampton, Rutland, Huntington, Bedford, Oxford,
Buckingham, Cheshire, Darbie, Notingham, and part of the shires of Gloucester,
Warwick, Hereford, and Shropshire, at such time when the land was divided into
seven kingdoms, all of them being at that time inhabited with diverse nations,
namely Picts, Scots, Danes, Normans, Vandals, and Germans; all which have
continued the proceedings of the law, until the time of William duke of
Normandy who conquered the same.

This William the Conqueror had the quiet possession of this land, and caused
(amongst other laws) the Dane laws to be collected, which ruled in Devonshire
and Cornwall, and a discreet view to be taken of sundry laws, whereunto he
did add some of his Norman laws to govern the people of the land, now called
England; in so much, that concerning the antiquity of the laws and customs
aforesaid, they were long before used by the Saxons first government, Ann^ 1198
ante Christum.
nay by the Britains themselves, which was one thousand one hundred ninety
and eight years before the birth of our savior Christ, being now in
continuance above two thousand and eight hundred years; for king Alfred caused
the laws of Marcia to be translated out of the Britain into the Saxon
tongue: and after that we find that king Lucius and king Alfred caused the
continuance thereof.

The said Common Laws are properly to be taken to consist of the ancient
Maxims of the said Laws, of the statute Laws and Book Cases, which are
yearly observations upon manners, and may be called Responsa Prudentum,
comprehending therein the Municipall Laws, Municipall Law, as gauelkind, etc.
which is proper to all Kingdoms and Governments, as an exception to the
fundamental Laws thereof; wherein many singular arguments drawn from
Divinity and Humanity are effectual, though there be no books for it. For
the principles which are taken from the Law of God and Nature, or Reason, are
many more, than those which are of man, and given by the absolute discretion of
the Judge. And concerning the prudence of the Law, which holds this Maxim,
That it is better to suffer a mischief, A Maxim in Law.
than an inconvenience, attributing the word mischief unto one or some few
men, and the word inconvenience to all persons, or the commonwealth in
general. And here let us observe, That Of the Common Law of England, there may
be made an Art or Science.

Consider we, that Ars est causarum consideratio, Definition of Art.
ex finibus assumptis: Art is the consideration of causes from certain ends
propounded; according to which definition an orderly consideration must be
taken of the causes, which cannot be without Art: For Art makes nothing but of
things already made, putting a dictinct determination, which is done with a
reformed reason properly called Logic; which (as it is the instrument of all
Sciences) so is it also the instrument of the Law: and although the Law be now
infinite in Practice, yet is the same finite in Precepts. So that as, In
infinitis omnia concurrunt, The Law being finite in her principles, may easily
be compiled or incorporated; and experience teaches, that it is easier to
understand many principles well put together, than to put many principles well
together, whereby a man may understand the Law, hearing the same delivered by a
Lawyer; yet this may be done by wisemen.

For we have our finite originalls or elements, acts, persons, things, and
their adjuncts, and concerning them, finite reasons, of which we do compound
cases infinite; yet are all those cases decided according to the finite reasons
of the finite elements. So has the Physician finite simples, though he do
make infinite compounds, yet are they all proved good or bad to that whereunto
they are prepared, by reasons drawn from the finite simples.

Now by the elements of the Law, Elements of the Law.
we must understand matter and form, not as in things natural and compound,
but Modo and forma, as they speak: so in all cases, there is matter of Law,
matter of Fact, or both, and the twelve men or jurors, are only ordained to
try the matter of Fact, for they are ignorant in the Law; so that if the
question be of the Law, that is, if both parties do agree upon the Fact, and
each do claim that by Law he ought to have it, and will still in that sort
maintain their right, then it is called a Demurrer in Law, Demurrer in Law.
which is determined by the Judges: So that if all cases were reduced under
these few titles, namely, Pleas of the Crown, of Right or Title of Land, of
Debt, of Trespass, of Account, of Trouer, and of the Case: Then might the
matter of Fact be brought nakedly before the jurie distinguished from the
matter of the Law. For all Cases are either criminal or civil, Cases
criminal, real, and personal.
or criminal, real and personal, for life, honor, and goods or lands: and
it is an easy matter to describe the nature of these and the like actions, the
Law being singular in her distinctions, which would diminish the practices
thereupon: whereas by the Civil Law the Fact is first examined by witnesses,
Originalls by the Civil law.
indices, torments, and the like probations to find the truth thereof; and that
done, the aduocats do dispute of the Law, to make of it what they can, saying,
Ex facto, ius oritur, which is long and tedious.

The pleading of general Issues, with addition of the words, Modo and forma,
makes the matter difficult many times, when the jurie conceiueth that this
means some matter of Law, when it is only matter of Fact: the jurors
therefore are principally to look whether the Issue and Evidence do concur,
which they ought to follow. True it is there is sometimes matter of Law which
alters the Case, when there must be proved a lawful consideration of Quid
pro quo, Nudum pactum what it is.
otherwise it is Nudum Pactum ex quo non oritur Actio; wherefore I have seen
some Pleas plainly distinguishing the matter: so that the jurie might perceive
the naked Issue of the Fact before them in question, with all the circumstances
which is sometimes done by way of Replication.

There is a Maxim or ground of the Law of England, That if the defendant or
tenant in any action, plead a plea that amounts not to the general Issue,
that he shall be compelled to take the general Issue, The pleading of
general Issues.
and if he will not, he shall be condemned for lack of answer. The general
Issue in Assize is, That he that is named the disseisor has done no wrong,
nor no disseisin: and in a Writ of Entry in the nature of Assize, the general
Issue is, That he disseised him not; and in an action of Trespass, That he is
not guilty, and so every action has his general Issue assigned by the Law,
and the party must of necessity, either take the general Issue, or plead
some plea in the abatement of the Writ: and the cause why this is done, is
because the matter of Law should not be put to the trial of the jurie of
twelve men.

Mr. Fortescue says, That the trial of twelve men is more indifferent than
the trial before a Judge, because it is an easy matter to find out two men
among a number of men, that may be of the parties acquaintance, so void of
charity and conscience, which for dread, love, or profit will be ready to
gainsay all truth: and to this purpose he alleges the example of the two
witnesses against Susanna, according to which president the witnesses are to
be examined asunder, and not in the hearing of one another, as is now
accustomed. And if their oath touching the matter of Fact were recorded
briefly, the Evidences would be more certain, for witnesses would be more
careful, upon which the oath of the Jury depends.

If the action be local of lands or houses, Proceeding^ of Jurors.
the Jury is impannelled of men, from as near as may be to that County where
the thing in controversy lies; nevertheless the defendant may take exception
against some of the Jurors, albeit for little or no cause, and then others are
taken in place, for there are twenty fore men warned, but twelve is
sufficient, unless it be upon an Action Real, where twenty four must be
empannelled. And the oath given to Jurors is, That they shall deal justly and
truly between party and party; but the witnesses are to speak the truth,
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, and so they take their oath. And to
the end the proceedings in Law should not be hindered, therefore if the Jurors
fall out not to be full in number, December Tales d^ circumstantibus.
then the Sherifes may take December Tales de circumstantibus, and empannell them,
that is, To take other persons of the standers by, which is done before the
Judge at the time of the Trial.

When the Jury have delivered up their verdict, Verdict, Judgment, and
Execution.
if nothing be alleged in respite of judgment, then judgment is had of
course; and also execution is awarded to be executed as the final end of Law.

Nevertheless there are three means to dissolve the said judgment and
execution, namely, By a Writ of Attaint, a Writ of Error, and an Audita
Quaerela, which Writ is grounded upon Equity by Law and Conscience.

The Writ of Attaint is not only tedious and thargeable, Writ of Attaint.
but also never or seldom tried: for the same is brought by the party
grieved, against the twelve men, and the party for whom the sentence is given.
And whereas before commonly upon the first enquest, they be all Yeomen, or men
of mean calling: now upon this Attaint must go twenty four Gentlemen of
greater quality, and forty eight must be warned to appear; then there must
in the Attaint no more evidence be brought in, but only that which was brought
in and alleged before the first enquest, which not appearing of record is hard
to be made a plain matter: again Gentlemen and others are loath to discredit
their neighbors; yet if the matter be so apparent, that they must needs find
them attainted; then means are found to defer the judgment, and it may be
the parties shall be brought to an agreement, or at the least one of them that
was of the attainted Jurors will dye in the mean time, and then the Attaint
cease: yet in this case if the party be in prison which brought the Writ of
Attaint, he may be bailed, as is in Natura Breuium.

The Writ of Error is more easy, Writ of Error.
and was heretofore usual to prolong suits in Law, before the Statute of
Ieofaile was made, meaning in good French I'ay failly. For every small Error,
if it were but false Latin, would overthrow a Cause; but now it runs into
another extreme, for if the party grieved speaks in arrest of judgment,
and shows some material Error, upon motion made, the adverse party may have
it amended as often as Errors are opened: the Record therefore ought to be
first removed, and not only by transcript be put into another Court, but the
party is to plead thereunto, in nullo est erratum, and then the danger of
opening Errors is past, if there be no tricks used in amending of the Records
under hand, wherein lies a Cerciorare to satisfy the Court, where the Record
is brought, namely, from the Common Pleas to the Kings Bench Court, from the
Kings Bench to the Exchequer, which heretofore was done in Parliament: and
therefore the party grieved and in prison of the Kings Bench cannot be
baileable upon a Writ of Error after judgment and execution, as he is upon a
judgment of the Common Pleas, in the Court of Kings Bench; for this Court of
Kings Bench, in regard of the Pleas of the Crown, challenges some prioritie
herein.

The Writ of Audita Quaerela.
The Writ of Audita Quaerela is granted out of the Kings Bench Court, if the
judgment do depend there, and returnable in the said Court, or else out of
the Chauncerie returnable in the Kings Bench: whereupon the Lord Chancellor
takes four bailes in the vacation Time, before a Master of the Chauncerie,
and the matter does merely depend upon the bail. The suggestion of the Writ
in matter of Law, is a later contract after judgment and execution; an escape
in Law, if the prisoner be by the Jailer permitted to go abroad without the
Kings Writ, or if he break prison, in which case the Jailer is to pay the
debt; or upon a payment made since the execution; also a wrong recovery by an
executor, whom the Prerogative Court does afterward disavow. Such and the like
suggestions are to be tried by another Jury, upon evidence to be produced to
prove the said allegation.

A strict Law.
This Common Law is so strict, that the Proverb is, Summum ius, summa iniuria:
for example, If a man seized of lands in Fee, has issue two sons, the eldest
son goes beyond the Seas, and because a common voice is that he is dead,
the younger brother is taken for heite, the father dyed, the younger brother
entered as heir, and alienateth the land with a warrantie, and died without any
heir of his body, and after the elder brother comes again and claims the
land as heir to his father: in this case by the Law, the eldest brother shall
be barred by the warrantie of the younger brother. Again, parteners cannot sue
each other by the Law: Parteners cannot sue each other by the Law.
if two men have a wood jointly, and the one sells the wood, and keeps all
the money wholly to himself; in this case his fellow shall have no remedy
against him by the Common Law: for as they when they took the wood jointly,
put each other in trust, and were contented to occupy and deal together; so
the Law suffers them to order the profits thereof.

The Law therefore is not complete without the Courts of Chancerie or Equity,
for the imperfection and rigor of it, are qualified thereby, called to be
Aequum and Bonum, which may be considered in this case. Two strangers jointly
did deliver in trust unto a widow woman a round sum of money, with condition
not to deliver the same out of her hands, but when they both should demand the
same: within a while after one of them comes unto her, and does assure her by
good indices and probabilities that the other his companion is dead, and
thereupon does entreat her to deliver him the money; which she did, not
suspecting any fraud, so the party went away with the money. Afterward
comes the other (who was said to be dead) and demands the money of the
woman, and understanding that she had paid the same unto the other, was much
offended therewith, and caused her to be adiourned before the Judge: The woman
appearing did declare the matter according to the truth, showing how the other
had deceived her, and she did wholly rely upon the integrity and justice of
the Judge. Example of Law and Equity.
Here an Action of the case might have been brought against the woman by the
law, and cause her to seek the party that had deceived her: but the Judge
tempering the rigor of the law, did give sentence, That the woman should pay
the money unto the party, so as he brought his companion with him to demand
the same, according to the covenant, they both jointly having reposed a trust
in her.

Here I call to mind the question which no Judge could determine: A covetous
Doctor at the Civil law would not instruct a young Student, unless he did pay
him a great sum of money, whereunto the Student did condescend, conditionally
that he should have the first cause (he took in hand) to go on his side:
whereupon it fell out, that the cause between him and the said Doctor was the
first cause, and so there could be no proceeding therein, the Student pleading
the condition in bar.

The court of Chauncerie is properly called a court of Conscience, because it
reasons on the part of the complainant, by argument taken from the Law of
Nature before mentioned, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris: for in the
Chancerie every man is able by light of nature to foresee the end of his
cause, and to give himself a reason thereof, and is therefore termed a Cause;
whereas at the common law the clyents matter is termed a Case, Difference
between Cause and Case.
according to the word Casus, which is accedentall; for the party does hardly
know a reason why it is by law adjudged with or against him.

The Chauncerie therefore upon Bill and Answer between the complainant and
defendaunt, grants an Iniunction to stay the proceeding in the courts of
common law, until the equity of the cause be examined: and if there be no
matter of equity found, Iniunction of the Chancerie.
then the cause is dismissed to the law again, with costs to the party.
Merchants causes are properly to be determined by the Chauncerie, and ought to
be done with great expedition: but it falls out otherwise, because they are
by commissions commonly referred to Merchants, to make report of the state
thereof unto the Lord Chauncellor; ^or the customs of Merchants are preserved
chiefly by the said court, and above all things Merchants affairs in
controversy ought with all brevity to be determined, to avoid interruption
of traffic, which is the cause, Staple Laws. 27. E. 3.
that the Mayor of the Staple is authorized by several Acts of Parleament to
end the same, and detain the same before him, without any dismission at the
common law which shows the necessarinesse of the Office of Prior and Consulls
before mentioned.

The rather, for that the trial of an Action of Account at the common law is
tedious. There are five manner of persons accountable by the law, namely, a
Steward or Bailife, a Factor or Servant, or a Receiver. Upon an Action of
Account the general issue to be pleaded thereunto is Ne vncques Receiver pour
account render: The trial of an Action of Account by law.
this is first tried by a Jury, and if the party be convicted, and found
accountable, then the law does appoint Auditors to take the account, by a
commission directed out of the court to Merchants and others, according to the
nature of the cause, whereunto two Atturneys of the court are joined. And when
they have taken the account, and find wherein the differences do consist, then
they are to certify all their proceedings into the court, and the accountant
must make issuable answers to be pleaded, whereupon eight, ten, twelve, or
more issues shall be made, and then a second Jury is called to try all these
several issues upon peremptory points, and so upon every issue there is
given a particular verdict, and sometimes an especial verdict, which is to be
determined by the court again. All these long proceedings make long records,
subject to many errors: and because all these several issues are tried by one
Jury, and upon one record, together with the former proceedings, whereby the
other Jury found the party accountable, if in any, or in the whole, material
error be found, then all is overthrown, and the parties are to begin again de
nouo. And it may fall out, that then they will join other issues, and so run
into a Labirinth, so that matters of account are properly to be determined of
the Chauncerie: and it were to be wished, that therein more expedition were
used, according to the laws of Arragon, which concur with the course of the
said court, as we are now to declare; leaving all other cases triable by the
common law, according to their proper natures, as the trial of an Action
Real, which is done with solemnity, and the like, to abreuiate things.

Of the Laws of the Kingdom of Arragon.
THe Laws of Arragon being peculiar to that kingdom, have especial days or
times limited to every particular proceedings of the process, whereby the
same is divided into ten (as it were) terms, which have every one their
proper observations, which the complainant must observe, and prosecute
accordingly with expedition, as follows.

1 When the party complainant calls the defendant. 2 When they do appear
before the Judge. 3 The defendant may allege certain exceptions. 4 Due
answer is made to the complainants bill. 5 The examinations of the parties,
and their proceedings. 6 Witnesses are produced, examined, and publication had
of their depositions. 7 The parties do reason of the depositions, and the
matter is brought to hearing. 8 When the Judge gives sentence or judgment. 9
When execution is had upon the sentence, or the party appealeth. 10 When the
cause departs out of that Judges power before a higher authority.
And all this is commonly done in four months, Observations of the
proceedings of the law of Arragon.
with the observations by the law required, namely the considerations incident,
which are worthy to be noted to prevent unjust dealings.

1 Touching the first time, the Judge takes not any notice thereof; for the
process is granted of course, unless it appear that the complainant has been
the slave of the defendant, or the son do commence a suit against the
father, or the servant against his master, wherein (upon good consideration)
license must be had of the Judge.

2 The second, That they must appear before the Judge at three several times
of ten days, or thirty days at any one time, which is peremptory; after
which, there lies a contempt against the party not appearing: during which
time, the Judge does proceed according to the nature of the action, and the
Maxims of the Law, which are compiled together to judge by, and serve him for
his direction; but in extraordinary causes his conscience leads him.

3 The third time, touching exceptions, is not only between party and party,
but also against the Judge for insufficiency of authority given him, if the
cause so require.

4 The fourth time, three things are to be observed upon the defendants answer.

1 Whether he denied all, or did confess part or all.

2 Whether it be requisite that the Judge iudicially hear the cause, or else
(according to the defendants answer and confession) judge him to pay or
satisfy the matter within nine days.

3 That after the contestation of the suit, there be no matter of any dilatorie
exceptions alleged to hinder the proceedings, but rather peremptory
exceptions, to bring the matter to a definatiue sentence.

5 The fifth time, four things are to be observed, namely,

1 The complainant must swear, that he is persuaded that he demands a just
and right demand; and the defendant likewise, that he defends his right.

2 That they shall speak truth to that which shall be demanded of them.

3 That they shall not require (without just cause) any time of prolongation.

4 That they have not, nor will attempt to corrupt witnesses.

6 The sixth time, upon the contestation and interlocutorie sentence, you must
observe nine things.

1 That the witnesses be presented in presence of the party against whom they
are produced.

2 That they be freemen and honest, and not hired nor corrupted.

3 That they be sworn, and the producent pays his charges.

4 You may inquire of the party that does produce the witnesses, as also of
the witnesses by certain articles, what may appertain to the cause, in regard
of their admittance for to be sworn, because their deposition is the ground
of the matter.

5 That the plaintiff having had three several times to produce his witnesses,
shall not have any other time to examine any more, unless he do swear, that
he knows not what the former witnesses have deposed, and the Judge do assent
thereunto.

6 If the witnesses have declared any thing obscurely, they may declare the
same more plainly, if the Judge do desire the same at the entreaty of the
party, according as he shall direct.

7 After publication of the witnesses depositions, there may not any other
witnesses be deposed upon the said interrogatories, or any matter touching the
same.

8 That the witnesses be examined of the time, of the place, and of the case it
self, whether they have seen or heard the same, and what they believe or know
thereof, or of the report they have heard.

9 That (to avoid charges) there be not too many examined.

A Maximo of the Law of Arragon.
The seventh time is, when all must be alleged which may any manner of ways
make for the state of the cause, and if it fall out that two witnesses tell one
tale (as it were) verbatim, their evidence is void; and the eight time the
Judge proceeds to a definitive sentence; and the ninth time (which must be
done within ten days) the party may appeal, and thereupon for the tenth
time, the pleyto or suite, with all the records, goes out of that Judges court
to a higher court, where it may not depend above a limited time.

The observations do minister an occasion, that many controversies are ended
without law, for the parties are not sure to observe these times, and the
defendants which seek delays are not contented with so short a time of
pleading: the complainant also may know whether it be safe for him to take his
oath as aforesaid, that he is in conscience persuaded of his right; To abridge
the multiplicities of suits.
and moreuer paying a fine for wrong molestation, abridged (with them
heretofore) the multiplicities of suits.

Omitting now to speak of other courts of equity, and calling law and Equity
to be the Common Law, so much commended above the Civil Law, by the said Mr.
Fortescue, sometimes Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench in the time of King
Henry the sixth, who has observed five points wherein the same consists;
let us observe many more to extol the excellency of the said Common Law, as
follows summarily.

1 First, because of the antiquity thereof, Excellency of the Common Law of
England.
for that in all the times that the Realm was inhabited by five several
nations, the same was still ruled by the said Customs that it is now governed
withal; which if they had not been good, some of the Kings of these several
nations, moved either with justice, or with reason and affection, would have
changed or abolished the same, especially the Romans who judged all the world.

2 Secondly, for that the Kings of England at their Coronation do take a
solemn oath, to cause all the Customs of the Realm to be faithfully observed
according to the former institution.

3 For that the said ancient Customs or Maxims thereof are inexpugnable, and
do stand of their own authority as Principles, which need no reason to
confirm their authority, as the Laws of Solon, Draco, Carondas, Licurgus,
Numa Pompilius, and the Law of twelve Tables, etc.

4 Because all differences and controversies, which happen between the King
and his subjects are tried and determined by the Law; and if it be done in
Parliament; or by the Judges, it is still according to the Law.

5 Because the King personally gives not any judgment, especially when
himself is a party, seeing it is against the Law of Nature to be both judge
and party.

6 For that notwithstanding the decease of the Kings of England from time to
time, the Judges of the Courts of Record, that is to say of the Chancerie, of
the Kings Bench, of the Common Pleas, which do sit as Judges by the Kings
Letters Pattents do remain authorized, and their power ended not immediately
with the King; howbeit the succeeding Kings do confirm them in their offices,
whereby all seditions are prevented during the inter Regnum.

7 For that with indifferency, without regard of persons, it commands as
well the Nobility and other persons of dignity by way of vtlagare or outlaw
as the meanest subjects.

8 For exercising a power over the Judges, which are not to judge of the Law,
but by the Law: and therefore is the word Iudicium properly attributed to their
determinations; even as the word Decretum is understood of the ordinances or
sentences of the Magistrates, following equity (as it were) without Law. For
there is the like proportion between the Law and the execution thereof, called
Legis Actio, as there is between Equity and the duty of a Magistrate called
Iudicis Officium.

9 For that the officers thereof are authorized according to the quality and
due execution of it, by a proportionable distribution, namely, The Judges for
term of life, and officers subalterne changing from year to year, to the end
the administration of justice may be more indifferent.

10 For the diversity of the trial thereof in several Courts, according to
Law and Equity, is the cause of an agreeing and most necessary discord, as it
were, Concordi Discordia, whereby the body of justice is supported by
striving, as the stones upholding a vault, as Cato says.

11 For that the Judges in criminal causes do change from time to time their
circuits, and inferior Judges of the Court do execute the place as well as
superior Judges, whereby partiality is prevented.

12 For that the Law tends most carefully for the good and preservation of
life and goods of every good and honest man; seeing that even in criminal
causes, it has provided (as much as may stand with justice) a help and
favor, permitting the Judges to order the pleading of offenders and to
instruct them to avoid mispleading, and giving them leave to except against the
Jurors, which they dislike.

13 For that it does forbid the sale of offices, thereby intending due
administration of justice; for where offices are sold (as it were) by the
Great, there justice is commonly sold by Retaile.

14 Because the same is most agreeable with the nature and disposition of the
people, and the quality of the country, which by reason of the fertility,
affords very convenient means for the trial thereof by Iuries of twelve
men, the nature of the people being gentle.

15 Because men are to reduce the state or issue of their cause upon one
peremptory exception to be tried by the verdict of twelve men, whereby
matters are determined with expedition.

16 For that it commands not any thing, but what is honest, reasonable, and
possible in it self, and all impossibilities are excluded thereby.

17 For that thereof may be made an Art or Science in manner before declared,
seeing the same is finite in her Precepts, according to the old Maxims or
Principles, whereunto every thing being reduced and explained, as aforesaid,
all ambiguities and dark sentences would be taken away, and the Judges should
easily give a clear understanding thereof, according to the order of Solon,
who made the Arropagits of Athens to be as Guardians of the Law.

18 For that the trial thereof by a Jury of twelve men upon one point
peremptorily or in certainty is brief and substantial, because the witnesses
which are produced before them (by whose evidence the state of the cause is
made) must be approved by the verdict of twelve men, as aforesaid.

19 For that the matter of Fact is distinguished from the matter of Law, and is
accordingly decided either by the Jury, upon the matter of Fact, or by the
Judges upon Demurrer or otherwise upon the matter of Law.

20 For the indifferency of the trial of controversies and questions between
the native subjects and aliens for they may have their trialls Per medietatem
linguae, that is to say, half the Jury of strangers and the other half of
English subjects, to avoid partiality.

21 For that the Serieants and Counselors at the Law are to give counsel, and
to help the poor, which are not able to prosecute Law at their own charges,
which they do in forma pauperis by direction of the Lord Chancellor, and the
Lords chief Justices of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas.

22 Finally, the Common Law is excellent for having fewer faults and
imperfections, than any other Law, being most sufficient to uphold the
commonwealth in quietness.

Thus the Common Law of England, has like a Queen a Predominant power, from
whence proceeds mutual love and sure amity from the Prince to the subjects;
and from the subjects again due obedience to the Prince in a most pleasant
harmony and concord, deserving the name of a Law received, published and
recorded, without any reason to be rendered for the same (as it were) Lex cum
Prologo, wherewith Seneca found fault when he said Iubeat lex, non suadeat. And
as the Law is derived a ligare to bind, so is the whole State of the
Commonwealth bound to the head, and may be made easier in practice: For as the
sa^d Seneca says, Nil est quod pertinax opera, and diligens cura, non expugnat.

Of the Laws of the Kingdom of France.
THe Laws of France are either written or customarie, and according to this
division the country is divided. Acquitanie, and a part of Celtica next unto
it, is called Pays de Droict escript, because the Civil Law of the Romans ^^
there in force: Written Law.
the reason whereof is thought to be, because the Romans did continue long in
those parts after the Frankes had made a thorough conquest of the other.
Belgica and the other part of Celtica is called Coustumier, because for the
most part they are governed by their ancient customs, Ancient Customs.
which amongst them have the force of Laws: howbeit neither the Civil Law,
nor the customarie are further in force than they are agreeable with the Edicts
of the King.

Under the Law written are comprehended, The Civil Law. The Kings Edicts and
Ordinances made by advice either of the privy Council, or of the three
estates, and The Arrests or Ordinances of the Courts of Parliament.


In the erections of their universities of Law, the King expressly declares,
That they are not bound to the Civil Law, neither receive it for further use
than to draw instructions of good government and reason from it, as appears
in the Charter at Orleans, by Phillip le Bell, Anno 1312, wherein he shows
that this Realm is governed by Custom, and not by the Civil Law; except in
some Provinces, which the Kings have permitted in some cases so to do, not as
bound, but as willing to continue the Law which their subjects of ancient time
have used. So that the Civil Law generally is not in force, but only for
direction and form of pleading and proceeding in the order of the process:
and where it is most in force the Courts of Parliament have authority to
construe and interpret it, as they think good.

Of all the written Laws in France, the Ordinances and Edicts of the King are
most in force; insomuch as they are acknowledged for the only Laws, and all
other have their life from them, and are so far forth auailable as they are
strengthened by them.

The arrests of the Courts of Parliament are of great authority, being
pronounced in the name of the King, and are as Laws to be followed in all
cases.

In like manner their Ordinances are to be followed only during the time that
the King provides, not otherwise, and in their own circuit only; for they
have not authority to make Laws general and perpetual.

The Customs which diverse Provinces claim, are of late years drawn into
writings and published in print, for the more easy understanding of them, and
the avoiding of confusion; so that now all the Laws of France may be said to
be written Laws: this was begun in the time of Charles the seventh, Anno 1453,
and ordered also in the time of Henry the third, Anno 1579.

Subsidies and jmpositions.
This manner of government causes subsidies and jmpositions to be made as
revenues of the Crown by the Kings authority; which were at the first granted
by the three estates, upon urgent necessity of the affairs of the Realm
only, Clergy, Nobility, and Com^ina^le.
but now they are grown to be ordinary. Charles the seventh was the first
that made them ordinary for the payment of soldiers. Francis the first, and
Henry the second did the like.

Personal subsidies are taken by the pole, whereof Ecclesiastical men,
Noblemen, and Officers of the King, Queen, and children are exempted.

Real or patrimoniall subsidies are levied by lands in some provinces, as
Languedoc and Prouence, whereof no persons are exempted.

Mixed subsidies are levied of the yeomandrie, and some persons of means.

The greatest imposition is upon Wines, now fifteen soulz upon every mewe.

And upon Salt, appointed by Philip de Valois, Magazins of salt.
called Magazins or Gremers for salt, forbidding Merchants to traffic for it,
setting a rate of four deniers upon every pound of salt. Francis the first
made the same perpetual, as the domaines of the crown; and all men are
compelled to buy it at the Magazins, upon pain of punishment. This impost is
letten to farm for two millions of crowns, or six hundred thousand pound
sterling yearly.

The right of the sea belongs to the King, and he may lay impositions thirty
leagues from the land into the sea, if no other soueraign prince be not within
that precinct.

There are eight courts of Parliament in France, and eight chambers of account.

At Paris erected 1302 by Philip le Bell. At Paris. Courts of parlements.
At Tholouze also, and confirmed by Charles the 7. In Britaigne. At Grenoble
1453 by Lewis the 11. At Dion. Courts of accounts.
At Bourdeaux 1462, by Lewis the 11. At Monpellier. At Aix 1501, by Lewis the
12. In Dolphine. At Dion 1476, by Lewis the 11, for Burgondie. In Prouence. At
Roan 1449, by Lewis the 12 for Normandy. At Blois. At Rheames 1553, by H. the
2, for Britainie. At Roan.
Of the Salique Law of France.
IT is an usual received opinion, that Pharamond was the author of this law:
others think it was so called of the Gauls, that were called Salie, amongst
whom that law was established; for the ancient Gauls termed all their laws
either Ripuarie or Salique, and in the time of Charlemaine they were called
Saliques. Nevertheless it is thought to have been invented of latter time, as
by Philip le Long, to frustrate the daughters of Lewis Huttin, or else to have
had the first strength from an usual custom of all Barbarians, which was
never to suffer the females to inherit the crown: and so being begun in the
first and second line of the kings, it has continued in the third, and by
custom it is rather confirmed, than to be proved to be a law at any time
ordained, having been little account made thereof, until the controversies
between Philip le Long and Ends duke of Burgondie, who claimed it for his
niece Jane, daughter to Lewis Huttin, and Philip de Valois with Edward king of
England. The book of the Salique laws is but a collection, howbeit, there is
no example ever heard of, that any woman governed.

Of the laws of the higher and low Germany, concurring with the Civil Law
and the Courts of Equity in substance.
THe courts of Equity beyond the seas, after bill and answer, replication and
reioynder, and sometimes duplication, and at last conclusion, with the
examination of witnesses in serious manner; The whole proceedings are delivered
to certain Doctors or learned men which are as masters of the Chancerie, or
belonging to certain Universities) to be abreuiated, which is called ad
rotulandum, who do cut off all superfluous things which upon the matter are
confessed on both sides, To abreuiate long process.
or are not material to the state of the cause, to bring the differences
between the parties to certain points or heads, whereupon the said parties
(with the advice of the advocates or learned counsel) do dispute and debate
the said differences to bring them (as it were) ripe and perfected before the
Judge. For if the defendant will take (covertly) any exceptions against the
Judge of that jurisdiction, he may have the whole process made up in the name
of A.B. and C.D. as it were complainant and defendant, without naming either of
the parties, and the same to be sent under the town seal unto Doctors, or
other learned men of Universities, elected thereunto in other jurisdictions,
which do give their sentence or judgment thereupon, and return the same back
again under seal, before the Judge where the cause was depending; who calling
both parties before him, demands of them, whether he shall open the process,
and whether they will stand to the judgment therein contained? and if the
complainant descend thereunto, then is the defendant thereby concluded, seeing
he had his choice, and did (in a manner) appeal from the Judge, whereupon
execution is presently had, and matters are ended with expedition.

By the premises we may observe, how other laws are variable, and subject to
alteration, and that the Law-Merchant is constant and permanent in her
customs, which therefore are not to be infringed, but seriously to be
maintained by all the four precedent means, or some selected course of
execution to be devised, concurring with the same. For the better furtherance
whereof, and more exact explanation, by contraries, I have for a Corrollarie of
this work added hereunto three Paradoxes alluding to the said three Essential
parts of Traffic, which will illustrate the most material consideration to
be had in the course of Traffic and Trade.

CHAP. XVIII. Three Paradoxes alluding to the three Essential parts of
Traffic.
Having heretofore published a Treatise entitled Englands view in the
unmasking of two Paradoxes, which had been presented unto the French King
Henry the fourth, as a matter of great consequence, and considerable in the
government of commonweals; and finding that the true understanding of them
(with a third Paradox observed by me) did properly allude to the contents of
this book, or the three Essential parts of Traffic, namely Commodities,
Money, and Exchange for Money, I did resolve to handle the substance of them
for a Corrollarie of the same, Paradox, what it is.
the rather because Paradoxes are things contrary to the vulgar opinion, and
will also make all the premises more manifest and apparent by their conclusion.

The said two Paradoxes presented by Monsieur Malestroit one of the officers of
the Finances or Treasury in France, were as follows, saying, 1 That to
complain of the general dearth of all things in France was without cause,
Commodities.
for there was nothing grown dear these three hundredth years. 2 That there
is much to be lost upon a crown, Money and
or any other money of gold and silver, albeit one do give the same in payment
at the price he did receive the same.


The third Paradox which I have added hereunto, is,

3 That the imaginary moneys supposed in Exchanges for money, Exchange.
made by Bills of Exchanges, do ouerrule the course and property of Real and
Substantial moneys in specie.

Monsieur Malestroit says, that since the ancient permutation has been
changed in buying and selling, and that the first riches of men (which
consisted of cattle) was transferred to the gold and silver, whereby all
things have received their estimation; Gold and Silver are the Judges of good
cheap or dearth.
it follows that those mettalls are the right judges of good cheap or dearth
of all things.

We cannot say that any thing is deerer than it was three hundred years ago,
unless that for the buying thereof we must now give more Gold and Silver than
we did then: But for the buying of all things, we do not give now more Gold
or Silver than we did then; therefore (says he) nothing is grown deerer in
France since that time.

To prove this, he does allege, That during the reign of King Philip de
Valois, in the year 1328, the French crown of the flowerdeluce (as good in
weight and finenesse as the French crown of the Sun now) was then worth but
twenty soulz tournois, commonly accounted to be two shillings sterling. In
those days (says he) the French elle or yard of Velvet was worth four
livers, which is four crowns, or eight shillings sterling: the said elle of
Velvet does now cost ten livers, or twenty shillings, and the French crown
which was then valued at two shillings, is now valued at fifty soulz, or five
shillings; so that four crowns do make the said twenty shillings, yet the
said French crowns do not contain more gold in weight or finenesse than
before; and consequently the velvet is not now deerer than it was then.

The gentleman that has now five hundredth livers by the year to spend, has no
more than he that had one hundredth livers to spend in those days: and in like
manner he proceeds for Corn, Wine, and other commodities, and thereupon
concluded, That the dearth of all things, is but imaginary, and a vain
opinion to conceive that things should be deerer now than in those days.

The second Paradox.
THere is much to be lost upon a Crown, or any other money, although the same
be given in payment at the price it was received.

This (says Monsieur Malestroit) is an old and common error, rooted in the
judgment of most men, that are far from the mark and without their reckoning,
as he will manifest in the former terms.

In the aforesaid time of King Philip de Valois, the French crown aforesaid
was worth but twenty soulz, which is now current for fifty soulz.

The gentleman that had fifty soulz rent or income, did receive for it two
crowns and ahalfe, or so much in silver accordingly; for which two crowns and
a half he had half a yard and half a quarter of velvet, after the rate of
four livers the yard, which was the price of velvet then: now for this fifty
soulz the gentleman does receive but one crown, or so much of silver money,
and for that one crown now he can buy but one quarter of a yard of velvet
after the rate of ten livers that velvet is now worth, whereas before he had
half a yard and half a quarter, although he have given the same in payment
for fifty Sols, which is the price for which he received the said Crown; and
so proceeds with other the like examples in the buying of commodities with
silver coin, or in the receiving of rents or incomes, adding further
thereunto, that if any man will object and say, I care not what the crown,
liver or soulz is worth, so as I having a hundredth livers of rent paid me,
and that I can pay out again the said hundredth livers. This man (says he)
must then make proof that he can have now as much ware for two soulz, as he
could have had in times past for two soulz which were of fine silver, and now
almost of copper, and in doing so he should make a third Paradox more strange
than the former: for he should go about to prove every thing to be become
better cheap, which cannot be proved.

The substance and intention of these two Paradoxes is (says he) to show that
the King and his subjects do buy all things as dear as in times past, for
that they must give as great a quantity of gold and silver as in times past:
but by the inhauncing of the price of the moneys of gold (from whence of
necessity proceeds the abating of the silver moneys; Inhauncing of gold
abateth the silver, in regard of proportion between them.
) the King does not receive in payment of his revenues, such a quantity of
gold and silver, as his predecessors. In like manner, Noblemen and Gentlemen
that have great revenues and incombes, do not receive such a quantity of gold
and silver as in times past, but are paid (as the King is) in copper in liew
of gold and silver. For which copper, according to the second Paradox, they
cannot have so much wares, as they might have for the like quantity of gold
and silver: so that the loss which we have by the growing dear of all things
comes not by giving more, but by receiving less quantity of gold and silver
than before; whereby we see manifestly that the more we do inhaunce the
price of money, the more we lose.

Monsieur Bodine, the famous and learned Politician, The great French
Politician.
took upon him to make an answer unto those two Paradoxes, being of another
opinion, and sets down other causes of the dearth of things, which are five
in number, namely; 1 The principal and almost only cause: The abundance of
gold and silver, now extant in the Kingdom more than in times past. 2 The
Monopolies. 3 The Want of things causes by excessive Trade and wast thereof. 4
The Pleasure of Princes that advance the price of things. 5 The alteration of
the Valuation of Moneys.


To prove the first case and principal, he alleges diverse examples: Plutarch
and Pliny do witness, Examples of great wealth,
that Paulus Aemilius after the conquest of Macedon against the Persians, did
bring such abundance of gold and silver to Rome, that the people were freed of
all Imposts, and the price of lands advanced unto two third parts suddenly. The
Emperor Augustus brought such great treasure from Egypt, that the price of
usury did decrease, and lands became much dearer: and the like at Jerusalem by
the coming of the Queen of Candace: and in the West Indies by the Spaniards
conquest there: and heereunto he makes a comparison of the want of moneys in
times past, The French King John in England, etc.
for the payment of the ransom of Princes taken prisoners in those days, and
the means of the increase of wealth by the discovery of the West Indies; the
propagation of the people in France, their trade for Turkey and Barbary, their
Bank at Lions, and other accidents.

Concerning the second cause of Monopolies, he does pass over the same as a
matter not considerable, and does limit Monopolies only to the combination of
Merchants and Artificers, in the setting of a price to commodities, or their
handie work by augmenting their wages.

Touching the third cause of the dearth of things, by the want or waste of
them, he observes some especial things; that corn and wine are better
cheap during the time of war, than peace: because the Husbandman is driven
to sell and to make money of his wares, and the Gentleman finding the same
perishable, when the Merchant dare not lade his ships, does abate the price of
commodities, and makes the people to live good cheap; which according to the
Proverb ( France can never be famished) would always continue, The Fertility
of France.
if by the means of the stranger their storehouses were not emptied.

Concerning the fourth cause of the pleasure of Princes, imposing a price upon
commodities, which they do affect: Plato says, That it is a general rule in
State matters, That Princes do not only give Laws unto their subjects, but
also by their example they do change the manners of men: The example of
Princes, does change the manners of men.
to which purpose he does use the example of their King Francis the first, who
being hurt in the head, caused his hair to be cut off, wherein the people did
presently imitate him: We have seen (says he) three great Princes striving,
(as it were) who should have the most learned men and best artificers, namely,
the said great King Francis the first, Henry the 8 King of England, and Pope
Paul the third, insomuch that the King of England could never have the learned
and reverend Beda; and the French King, did pay seventy two thousand Crowns
for a Diamond, rather than King Henry should have had it. Hereupon presently
the people did give themselves to study and to buy precious stones, when the
Nobility did imitate the King: and when the King gave over the same, the price
of them was much abated.

If any man should here object (says Monsieur Bodin) that if things should
still become deerer, partly through the waste, and partly for the abundance of
gold and silver, no man should be able to live because of the dearth of things.
It is true, but the wars and calamities happening to a Commonwealth, do
stay the course of it, as we may note, that the Romans have lived with
scarsitie, and to speak properly in want and misery almost five hundredth
years, when they had but copper moneys of a pound weight, Copper moneys of one
pound weight.
and without stamp: for their gold and silver came unto them in one hundredth
and twenty years by the spoil of all the world, which was brought to Rome by
the Scipions, Paul Emilyus, Marius, Sylla, Lucullus, Pompey, and Caesar,
especially by the two last: for Pompey did conquer so much land, Great wealth
of the Romans.
as made the revenue of the Empire to be eight millions and a half of
Crowns. Caesar notwithstanding all his prodigalities, brought to the treasury
forty millions of Crowns, having given at one time unto Paul, Consul, 900
thousand Crowns to hold silence; and unto Curion, Tribune, 1500 thousand
Crowns to take his part. Mark Anthony went further, as Plutarch and Appian
have written, for he gave unto his army for their service done 200 thousand
Talents, being 120 millions of Crowns: so did Adrian the Emperor to have the
good will of forty Legions give ten millions, whereby appears great
abundance of gold and silver to have been at Rome, but it did not last ever:
for in less than three hundredth years the Parths, Goths, Hercules, Hongres and
other cruel Nations did overcome the Empire and all Italy, and overcame the
Romans, burned their City and took the spoil of them. The like does happen
unto all Commonweals to wax and increase by little and little, and to
flourish for a time in wealth and power, The property of Commonweales.
and afterward to grow old and decline, until they be utterly ruinated and
destroyed.

Touching the last cause of the dearth of things by the alteration of money,
he shows how Monsieur Malestroit has mistaken the matter in the moneys
themselves made within three hundredth years. For whereas he says, That Saint
Lewis caused the first sols to be coined, worth twelve deniers, whereof sixty
four pieces went to the mark weight of eight ounces; and that in Philip de
Valois his time, the Crown of the Flower de Luce without number, and as good
as the Crowns now, was valued but at twenty sols, and that afterward King
John caused the Frankes to be made of sine gold, which were but valued twenty
sols, and that the sols of silver was worth five of our sols: he does not say
of what weight and finenesse the moneys were in those days, and in conclusion
he says, That the price of things is not altered by the Valuation of moneys.

But if Monsieur Bodine (according to his wisdom and deep judgment in other
matters) had duly considered of these two Paradoxes, he would have made a
direct answer thereunto before he would have proceeded in his former discourse.

The first Paradox being considered with the second, will show a manifest
contradiction or contrariety: The contratierie of the Paradoxes.
for the first does consist in giving of more gold and silver for commodities
now, than in times past, which he denies: and the second, in receiving less
commodities for the gold and silver now, than in times past, which he
affirms; which both ways is to be taken in nature of commutation.

Now if we do not give more quantity of gold and silver for commodities than
in times past; how can we receive less commodities for the gold and silver,
and thereby receive a loss, as in the second Paradox is alleged?

Again, if we do receive less quantity of commodities for gold and silver
than in times past, according to the second Paradox, whereby we sustain a
loss; how can the first Paradox be true, That nothing is grown dear, for
that we give no more quantity of gold and silver than in times past,
commodities and moneys lying by this comparison in an equal balance?

But let us admit, that Monsieur Malestroit had an intention, which he might
have expressed in few words, if he had the true ground, and understood the
matter he went about, by proouing only that when moneys do alter in weight,
or in finenesse, or in valuation, Causes of the denomination of moneys, etc.
or in all three, the price of things does alter only by denomination, if the
valuation be made accordingly: yet Monsieur Bodine had not made a good
interpretation of the said Paradoxes, and mistook the true ground of the
matter in question touching the prices of commodities, which he compared
within themselves in the Realm of France, whereas the comparison ought to be
of the inhauncing of the price of the commodities of one country, with the
price of the commodities of other countries, and thereby find out, whether
things are grown dear with us or with them in effect. So that they both
mistaking their grounds, we have showed in the said Treatise, That they (having
lost Ariadne her line, wherewith they entered into the laborinth of moneys and
their properties before declared) are like unto a man who having lost his way
amongst the woods, the further he goes, the more he erreth from the right
way.

To entreat therefore of commodities and money, in the course of traffic
between Kingdoms and Commonweals is not sufficient: but the exchange of
moneys, being the public measure between them must be regarded, as the
principal and ouerruling part thereof.

For if a man should frame a silogisme in manner following, he shall find the
same full of fallacies and misprision, nay a very Dilemma.

Nothing causes Merchants to export more money out of the Realm than they
bring in, but only the bringing in of more commodities into the Realm than
they carried out;

The vnderualuation of our moneys, causes no more commodities to be brought
into the Realm than is carried out;

The maintenance of Free Trade.
Ergo, The vnderualuation of our moneys, causes not more money to be carried
out of the Realm than is brought in, as is declared in our last Treatise to
hinder the inhauncing of our moneys, which by the Treatise of free Trade
(lately published) was insisted upon.

We do also find, that in the year 1577, Monsieur Garrault one of the French
Kings Council did exhibit two Paradoxes concerning moneys, which may (in
regard of the former) seem more paradoxicall or strange, nor only to the
vulgar opinion, but also to the judgment of the wiser.

The first is an assertion, That moneys have not changed their values.

The other, That by the inhancing of the coin, or the price of moneys, To
other Paradoxes.
the price of commodities becomes abated and good cheap; and that by the
reduction and abatement of moneys every thing becomes deerer.

And for as much, says he, that the matter of money is full of probleames,
and may be disputed on both parts, his desire is, that some gentle spirit might
be stirred up to discourse of the reasons which may be alleged.

Touching the first, That the value of moneys is not changed, (omitting to
speak of the Cicle of the Hebrews, the Staters of the Persians and Greeks, and
the As or Denier of the Romans,) he says, That K. Lewis 11 did reduce the
disorder of moneys unto their former estate of K. saint Lewis, when the Denier
of gold was esteemed (in weight) unto 12 deniers of silver, which is properly
to be called the proportion between the gold and silver heretofore noted: and
hereupon he shows how the said proportion has bin altered; yet so, that the
silver was always made correspondent to the gold, and when the gold either in
the mark weight of 8 ounces, was inhanced, and consequently in the pieces or
coins; the silver was likewise inhanced proportionably, observing the said 12
to 1, or sometimes thereabouts, either a little over or under; and this caused
him to say, That moneys had not changed their values, it being only a
comparison made between the gold and silver, which is by weight, and not by
valuation, to be applied unto every piece of coin, especially to the French
crown of the flouredeluce or sun; and the piece of silver called Douzaine,
alluding to the said 11 to 1, and the application thereof unto the price of
commodities is more absurd. The weight of 12 of silver to 1 of gold makes not
the valuation of the mark weight of gold and silver, much less the valuation
of the pieces coined of the said mark, whereby we see how one distinction is
able to dispell and disperse the foggie mysteries of deceitful fallacies, as
the Sun drives away the wind and the clouds, heretofore by me observed.

Concerning the second Paradox, he says, That many are of opinion, that the
inhancing and augmentation of the price of moneys engenders a deerenes of all
things, quia su^ praeciarerum: And that even as, pro imminutione quae in
aestimatione solidi forte tractatur, omnium quoque praecia rerum decrescere
oportet, pari ratione, si quod tractatur incrementum quoque and praecia rerum
crescere debent, Which opinion (says he) is grounded upon the polliticke
rule, That the value of moneys gives estimation unto all things, which is not
ordinarily observed: for Princes and Magistrates are many times constrained to
endure the incommodities of the time, by their prudence and understanding; so
that all laws are not observed, by consequence following each other, whereby
it comes to pass, that the price of wares follows not the price of moneys,
but the common custom; for money was made to no other end, but to maintain
and continue the trade of merchandise, by means whereof the commodities and
necessaries are brought from one place to another to avoid the ancient
painful and troublesome permutation: which traffic is twofold, namely,
within the realm, and in foreign countries: within the realm the money is
more commodious than necessary, but for the stranger most necessary, and
therefore must be of a fine substance, as Gold and Silver, to be enclosed in a
small room, to transport great matters from one place unto another. And if we
will merely consider of this substance and effect of strange negotiation, we
shall find nothing but a masked permutation of one thing for some certain
quantity or weight of Gold or Silver: for he that trafficketh in foreign
countries has not such regard to the value imposed upon money, as to the
intrinsique goodness which gives the value, A good observation to be had by
Mer-chants.
and has the same function in other places, according to which inward
goodness he sets a price unto his commodities, to make thereof the like
quantity of Gold or Silver as he has laid out, over and above his charges
and profit; so that the moneys remaining stable and firm, the price of Wares
and Merchandises remains certain without any augmentation, to show that
there is no inhauncing of the price, because of the augmentation of the price
of moneys, which will make us hereafter to see the good cheapenesse of all
things (as he says,) for he that causes some foreign commodities to come
within the realm, knowing the alteration of the price of moneys, according to
the unbridled will of the people, will make the price of his commodities
accordingly. And this the said Monsieur Garrault does declare by examples of
veluets and other commodities, and therefore he is of opinion, that moneys
inhaunced should be reduced again to their price, and that all debts made
before that time should be satisfied a lequipollent, according to the rate, vt
pecuniarum vna and ^adem sit semper potestas, and perpetua estimatione
difficultatibus permutationum, aequalitate quantitatis subueniat etc.

The power of money transferred to the Exchange of money.
Many other reasons (concurring with the former) are by him alleged, which I
omit, because the whole foundation of the said Paradox is merely an abuse of
the people, as himself has noted, admitting also the transportation of money,
and finally confessing the inhancing of the price of moneys, and consequently
the sale of commodities accordingly. All which is far from the present course
of traffic, when the course of exchange is not considered withal, as shall
be declared. True it is as the Ciuilians say, concerning contracts of
commodities sold before the inhauncing of moneys, that valor monetae
considerandus and inspiciendus est a tempore contractus, non antem a tempore
solutionis: but this not being observed was the cause that many Merchants do
agree to pay for commodities in current money for merchandise, others that sell
commodities agree to be paid in species of so many ducats, dollers, French
crowns, or other coins, which is of late years established to prevent the
inhancing of coin, and yet it cannot be sufficient to prevent the said
incertaintie of the price of commodities. If the standards of the said moneys
were by allay of copper altered, much less would the advice given that
Merchants accounts should no more be kept in livers and soulz, but in French
crowns to hinder the inhauncing of moneys, which in some countries is secretly
practiced to be done of mere policy, when by public authorie it is
forbidden, and might be effected, as within the realms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, and other his Majesty's dominions, where the moneys are not
inhaunced between man and man, and remain current according to their price,
until the kings authority do alter the valuation by Proclamation, albeit by
exchange it is not so; and therefore according to my third Paradox, we shall
find,

That the imaginary moneys in exchange do ouerrule the substantial moneys
in specie: The third Paradox.
For the Merchants valuation of moneys in exchange does ouerrule the Kings
valuation of moneys within the realm. For when the King has valued the
shilling piece at twelve pence, Merchants undervalue the same in exchange at 11
d, and 11 d, not only in the price of exchange, but also receiving beyond the
seas the inhanced moneys above their values, and not valuing of them in
exchange accordingly, as before has been observed concerning the valuation of
moneys and the imaginary coins, or rather moneys, whereupon exchanges are made
for so many several places.

The late Earl of Donfermelling (Lord Chancellor of Scotland) did propound
unto the Kings majesty in the year 1610, Proposition of the Earl of
Donfermelling.
a certain proposition touching the inhauncing of gold, his lordship being of
an excellent judgment in mint affairs, That the French crown of the Sun
which went never in England (to use his own phrase) all Queen Elizabeth's
time, above six shillings English money, went now for seven shillings and three
pence, and that the English double soueraign of twenty shillings went in
France for eleven francque or twenty two shillings, and that both ways there
had bin no alteration in the standard. Whereupon he did demand, in writing,
what was the cause of the said difference or alteration, if this proceed (said
he) from the goodness of the gold, that it is better in finenesse and allay, or
in weight, or from the weakness of the silver, that it be worse than it was
either in finesse and allay, or in weight? then is the cause intrinsic and
substantial, and may be easily considered and resolved, if it be good or
evil, to be entertained, maintained, and set forward, or rejected, and stayed
from all further course: if there be any other cause or reason, it must of
force be extrinsicke and accidental, let the same be searched out: if it be
good to the Prince and estates weal and commodity, it should be assisted and
continued: if it be tried evil, proceeding from the policy and craft of
tradesmen, tending only to private gain and commodity, prejudicial to the
Prince and State to be gainestood and expelled. This proportion being sent unto
me by a great personage then in high place, was made plain by demonstration,
to proceed of an accidental cause by advancing the Valuation of gold partly in
England, when Crown gold was valued from fifty five shillings the ounce to
three pound, and partly in France, when they did advance the French Crown in
specie five soulz; aduising therewithal that to remedy the same, it was not
to be done by inhauncing of our gold still more and more, but in the price of
exchange between France and us, otherwise we should undervalue too much the
silver of the Realm to our exceeding loss, showing withal how easily this
might be done, without alteration of the proportion observed between gold and
silver for most places. But the contrary was approved, and Crown gold was
more inhaunced to sixty six shillings the ounce, by two several
Proclamations, November 1611.
which has proved the loss of our Silver in bullion or weighty coin, daily
breeding greater inconveniences by the want of our moneys, which by reason of
the vndervaluation in exchange, and not by vndervaluation in specie, are
continually exported, none imported but diuerted (by gain) for other places,
as has been declared. All which comes to pass for want of true judgment
and experience in mint affairs, with the consideration of the said Essential
parts of traffic so often mentioned, whereof I hope (that in general
meetings for the public) more regard will be had, to the end it be not
recorded of us, as it has been of some Parlements in France, that in populi
republica sententiae numerantur, non ponderantur: and then we shall be said to
understand the Par, by right distinction between the active and passive.

P^ys. 3. lib. ca. 3.
Aristotle says, that Action and Passion are merely Relatiues, and that they
differ no more than the way from Thebes to Athens, and from Athens to Thebes:
let us discern therefore the one from the other, and we shall find that as the
Liver (Money) ministers spirits to the Heart (Commodities) and the heart to
the Brain (Exchange) so does the Brain (Exchange) minister to the whole
Microcosme, or the whole Body of traffic. Let the Heart therefore by the
Liver, receive his tintured Chylus by his own Mouth and Stomach, and the Blood
(full of Spirits) shall fill all the Veins, and supply the want of moneys,
the easy course and recourse of whose Exchange shall bring all things in tune,
and serve all men's turns. For even as there are two courses observed of the
Sun, Two courses of Exchange like the two courses of the Sun.
the one annual, and the other by daily declination rising and going under
within the Aecliptique line, even so must we observe in Exchange two courses,
the one according to par pro pari, or value for value, the other rising or
falling from time to time, as has been sufficiently declared: whereof the
said Aristotle, Seneca, nor Cicero, nor any other Philosopher or Orator could
take notice in the infancy of trade, Exchange not being then invented; neither
do we find that any Temporal or Civil Lawyer has entered into this important
study, for the welfare of kingdoms and Commonweals (by the rule of
Equality and Equity) hitherto.

To conclude therefore this Paradoxicall discourse, I cannot omit to do the
same, with another Paradox by me observed, in the making of moneys of gold and
silver, namely; That a man may commixe Bullion to make a certain standard of
moneys, either of gold and silver, A very strange Paradox.
and after the commixture made, shall alter the standard and make the same
better or worse, without putting any allay or silver and gold unto it.

That is to say, I will melt down eleven ounces and two penny weight of fine
silver, and eighteen penny weight of copper, both one pound Troy of twelve
ounces in weight, making the sterling standard, and yet my moneys made thereof
shall be but ten ounces fine. In like manner I will melt down ten ounces
of silver, and two ounces of copper and more to make a standard of ten ounces
fine, and yet my moneys made thereof shall be eleven ounces fine, or sterling.

To understand this mystery or Paradox, we are to note that in the making of
a standard of moneys, three things must concur and have an equality
proportioned upon the pound weight of twelve ounces Troy, namely, Finenesse,
Allay, and Weight of the pieces made out of a pound, which is the ground work
of the subtle assay; according to which all Assaymasters make their
calculation by the mark of eight ounces, or the pound of twelve ounces, making
one mark and one half.

Suppose now that (as in ancient time of King Edward the third) one pound
weight being divided into twelve ounces, every ounce was divided into twenty
pieces, or is now divided into sixty pieces, or three pound making sixty
shillings, which then made but twenty, and that these twenty pieces or sixty
shillings were diminished by the sheyre, and there is made twenty two pieces,
in regard of the twenty or sixty six pieces, in the liew of sixty pieces,
which is ten in the hundredth that the said pieces are lighter than before,
considering piece by piece: Now an Assaymaster received one of these pieces to
make an assay thereof in manner by us declared (in the Second Part of this
Book, in the seventh Chapter of the assayes of Bullion and Moneys) and having
weighed the same, he calculateth how many of these pieces do make or weigh one
pound, and he finds twenty two or sixty six pieces or thereabouts, because
of the unevenness of the sheyre, which being tried, he makes report of the
finenesse accordingly: so that wanting in regard of the pound, ten in the
hundredth by weight, there must needs be wanting so much in finenes, and so
eleven ounces molten down, is found to be but ten ounces fine: and in like
manner, etc. All which in matter of exchange can be considered of and prevented
as it shall please the Kings Majesty, and his Highness privy Council.

Ebbing and flowing of waters, compared to the falling and rising of exchange.
The predominant Power of exchange rising and falling in price, may be compared
to the ebbing and flowing of the Seas, whereof no reason can be rendered, albeit
we find the course thereof to concur with the increase and decrease of the
Moon, which borrows her light from the Sun, whereunto we may attribute a
natural Primum Mobile of moving.

This motion is not so perceptible in the maine Ocean Seas, as visible in the
rivers, streams, and branches thereof. Even so in the seas of exchanges, we
are to ascribe the first motion of rising and falling in the price of exchange
unto the Bankers, albeit the operation of it be not so apparent in those maine
exchanges, as upon the banks of the course of traffic by commodities and
moneys (subject to inundation) in the particular exchanges of some countries,
which run into the maine ocean of exchanges, as a river or branch of the same.

As this ebbing and flowing is aggrauated by accidental causes of rain, snow,
and the like by the alteration of weather: so does the rising and falling of
exchange, increase and decrease by the alteratiof State affairs between
contending Princes, according to the use of moneys. And even as the seas are
girt in by Gods commandment, that they cannot ouerflow the main banks of the
earth; so the course of the rising and falling of exchange in price, may be
girt in by the Kings commandment, A great consideration beyond the common
capacity of men.
that it shall not ouerflow the course or banks of traffic to the inundation
of our home commodities and moneys.

This Simile puts me in mind to remember the Poetical fixion of the serpent
Hidras with many heads, whereof one being cut off by Hercules, forthwith
another did appear, alluding therein to the river Nilus which had many
branches, whereof the one being stopped in one place, caused another to ouerflow
in another place, augmenting Hercules Labors, being therein like unskillful
Physicians, which (to cure a disease) do many times cast the body into a more
dangerous sickness: whereas the learned Physician will find an easy cure,
knowing the efficient cause of the disease, without which conceited remedies
are but mere shifts and extremities.

Aristophanus has painted forth the agony of an aged man, altogether
shipwracked by usury, who thinking to have found out the way to be eased of
his slavery, did propound unto Socrates this demand, That if he should (by the
enchantment of a witch of Thessalia) fetch the Moon out of heaven, and bring
it away, and afterward enclose it in a case of glass, and so keep it, as if
he would keep a fly in a box: Socrates demanding, what good that would do
him? he answered, if the Moon do never rise again, I being constrained to
pay money by the new Moon shall be freed of that trouble. A strange shift that
this poor man was driven unto (apprehending a shadow for a reason) to pluck
by violence the Moon out of heaven for his help, for in truth the witch did
her best, and began to charm the Moon, which when the vsuror understood, did
put him in such a pelting chafe as was wonderful to behold; for accusing this
poor man of enchantment, at last he went himself to another witch, not only
to keep the Moon from coming out of heaven, but also to hasten the course of
her faster, to recover his usury the sooner. Good God what a trouble was the
Moon put unto between these two witches? What storms and tempests did arise?
What horrible wind did blow? What great rain did fall? What floods ensued
every where? So that countries were almost drowned, and under water in many
places.

The moral of these Metaphores, concurring with our former comparison, does
not only show unto us the operation and conjunction between the Moon and
waters, but also the folly of vain conceited remedies.

The propounded remedy therefore for the reformation of the abuse of
exchanges, is grounded upon the rule of Equality and Equity, whose Antitheta
are inequality and iniquity, which every man ought to suppress: Equality
is amiable and accompanied with ease and facility, but inequality is hated
and associated with trouble and difficulty. The difference whereof is like
unto this Geometrical Axiom, in commendation of the invention of round wheels
to draw and carry loads with a small strength, Circulus tangit planum vnico
puncto: For if the wheels should have been made square, or in any other
polyangle and proportion, forty horses would not so easily draw them being
laden, as two does now with speed and ease: what easier thing can there be,
than to set and command a price in exchange to be observed according to the
value and equality of moneys domestical and foreign; A most easy remedy,
a^ aforesaid.
and to let all Merchants exchange one with another by Bills of Exchanges as
they now do, and can agree amongst themselves, but never under that price
seeing it is against all reason, nature, and policy to undervalue the Kings
money by exchange, and all the commodities accordingly to the incredible loss
of the Realm. Will not this be as easy to be done, as we see the rudder of a
ship does govern the greatest carracke or vessel, being but a small piece of
timber fastened upon the parallel of the keelne of the ship, whereby it is
directed according to all the variations of the Compass, as we have said
elsewhere?

Let the practice hereof assure us, and we shall not need to seek the golden
Fleece in Colchos, which we have within our own Island of Great Britannia; our
feeble pulses will be felt, when our hammers shall beat in the Mint, for
moneys and bullion, are (to the State) a second life.

If any Hedgmint (for so do the States of the United Provinces of the
Netherlands call the Mints of petty Lords, Hedgemints what they b^.
which by falsified standards do imitate to coin the money of other Princes)
should seek to maintain inequality, all their imaginations will prove to be
but chymeraes and toys: for it will be easier for the King to alter the price
of this equality of exchange accordingly, than it is for a Miller to turn his
mill to grind his corn with all winds; insomuch that when it shall be once
established and known, there will not want some backbiter or Momus to make
little estimation of this Columbus voyage to the rich Indias, and go about to
disgrace this great service to the King and Commonwealth, for they shall be
able to set an egg on the end (by way of imitation) as others did when they
saw it done before.

Prerogative Royal to set a price for moneys.
By these means shall the ancient Office of the Kings Royal Exchanger be
supplied, and it is one of the greatest prerogatives the King has to set down
a price on his own coin, and thereby to give a certain measure to buy and
sell, which is by the Merchants exchange and conniuence of tolleration by
foreign States abridged, and in a manner frustrated: and it imports the King
more to reform this exchange, than any other Prince; because God has so
blessed England, that no Nation of Christendom trafficketh so much in bulk of
Staple commodities as this Realm, which Boters (though altogether Spanish in
times past, and no friend to England) confesses, that two years before the
taking of Antuerp, An. 1584.
all the wares of Christendom being valued and summed (by the officers of that
City) which were vented there in one year (the whole being divided into six
parts) the English amounted to four parts thereof; which is the cause also
that England has the head of exchange, The Basis of Exchange.
which is our Basis and foundation of our twenty shillings sterling, whereupon
most exchanges are made, and this head may command the members and parts of the
body more conveniently by the Kings commandment, as before has been declared.

I have in this Chapter thought convenient to remember this important matter
again, with a variety of style to revive and recreate the spirit of the
Reader, to the end (all the premises) may in his apprehension and conceit give
more delight and pleasure even to natural mother wit, whose commendation may
not be omitted.

CHAP. XIX. The due commendation of natural Mother Wit.
FOr as much as all humane actions being fallen from perfection to
imperfection, are to ascend again from imperfection to some measure of
perfection; Natural Mother Wit casting her eyes back, Per varios casus, per
tot discrimina rerum, challenges the precedencie of Art by way of Prosopopeia,
by her ingenious observation of number, weight, and measure, under which she
has noted, that all substantial things under the cope of Heaven are subject.
Who will deny (says the intellectual part of Wit) that even as forma dat
esse rei, so I caused dame Nature to perform her function by producing spotted
lambs, when I overcame the eie-sight in generation, Genesis 30. ver. 37
so when the teeth of infants come forth orderly and conjoined by my
observation, are they made an object for the tongue to play upon? did not I
teach those that could not pronounce the letter R, to lay little pimble stones
under their tongue, to eleuate the same, to make them apt thereunto, as also to
cause the ligaments to be broken, without which the Grammarian cannot ascribe
to himself, Grammatica.
Vox literata and a^ticulata, debito modo pronunciata? By which ability, the
Caldean, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin letters were afterward by Arts invented,
ypon which foundation Logic was builded, whereby I caused verum and falsum to
be distinguished, and truth to be descerned, which the Logitians have so much
obscured by their Sillogismes and Arguments founded upon Distinctions,
Divisions, Subdiuisions, Logica.
Quillets and Exceptions by variety of terms, that without my help the
truth can hardly nakedly be known, which by Art should be made plain and not
intricate; for a ripe Wit will dispell the foggie mysteries of deceitful
fallacies, as the Sun drives away the winds and clouds. Poets are beholding
unto me, whose Natural witty faculty makes them famous, according to the
proverb, Nascimur Poetae fimus Oratores. But now Art steppeth in, Rhetorica.
and claims the honor of Rhetoric, as devised by her with the help of the
facunditie and fluencie of speech, and is called Ornatus persuasio, whereunto
the celeritie of Wit occurreth, saying, soft sir, do not take me to be all Wit
without wisdom, like unto trees full of fair leaves without fruit,
Arithmetica.
for lo, yonder comes Arithmeticke, which is the original and ground of all
the seven liberal Sciences or Arts, without which, non of them can subsist;
her poesy is Par and impar. This foundation was laid by me amongst the
heathens and unlearned creatures of America, and other countries, to
demonstrate numbers by fingers and toes, telling two, three, four, and so to
ten, then ten and one, and ten and two, and so forth, still making signs as
they speak, and when they will reckon twenty, they will hold down both their
hands to their feet, showing all their fingers and toes, and as the number is
greater, so will they double and augment the sign, observing the same by a
little bundle of sticks laid or tied together, and separated a sunder,
observing thereby their paiments and promises, according to Number, Weight,
and Measure. This is that accounting by scores yet used, whereof their
Arithmeticke gave denomination before any of the said Arts were invented; and
this is properly to be attributed unto me ab origin. For I have noted, that in
things created and engendered the Elements are numbered, proportionated, and
weighed, which is the cause of the diversity of things existant of Matter,
Form, and Deprivation, whereof even the letters (to describe them) are
numbered, and the figures of the leaves of herbs and plants do declare their
virtues. Upon this ground of natural Arithmeticke is Geometry builded:
Geometrica.
for the proportions of all measures drawn from unity, which is the fountain
of numbers, whereby measures are described, before the art of it was invented.
Is it not my only and first observation that Music was practiced by the sound
of the hammers of Tubalcayn upon the Anuile, Mu^^ca.
whereby so many and sundry musical instruments have been devised? Lastly
for Arts Liberal, Astrologi^.
Is not Astrology observed by the Wit of the Egyptians in many hundredth
years, whereby they have found out the course of the Heavens and Stars, with
their distances and dimensions, explaned by Arithmetic and Geometry, whence
the Inch, Thumb, Finger, Palm, Hand, Cubit, Brace, Foot, Pace, and all other
measures and proportions have been derived? The little infant not three years
old was taught by me to discern his portion, in eating pottage with the pig,
saying take a spoone pig, when the slabbering of the pig carried away the
bigger part; for I did note before Euclide, that the whole is bigger than his
part, which divided into equal parts are all alike.

You that are passing by, stay and pause a while, look upon Natural Mother
Wit, that has observed the beginnings, progress, continuance, and end of all
things, wherein I do supply and disguise many defects and deformities both in
the mind and body of man: and when there is found by me ability of Nature,
then Art gives facility; as a Maxim in Physic I found, A Maxim in
Physic.
that contraria contrarijs curantur, and that the frantic man is excepted out
of this rule, for he must be fed in his humerous disease; for he that did
imagine that he was dead, and therefore forbear to eat, was made believe (by
the sight of counterfeit dead men eating) that dead men did eat, whereby he
fell to his victuals and saved his life, and at last was cured.

I made the deaf Musician of Bridges to understand all men in three several
languages, Master Verh^uen. An^o 1585.
only by observing the motion of the lips without hearing of any voice or sound
at all.

It was I that made the blind man in Antuerpe to make (in a dark place) rare
wooden trumpets of excellent sound, and carved images of his own invention, as
also by the imitation of other pictures, only by the sense of feeling: and unto
me belongs the invention of spectacles, prospectiues, and other
preservatives of sight, and remedies for all the other senses.

It was I, that (by orgaines of the mouth, being touched by a stick held upon
the virginalls, and resting upon the teeth) caused the deaf musician to teach
men's children to play upon them, whereby he got his living.

I did teach the maiden to sow and write with her feet, when both her hands
were lame and impotent. And unto others I did show means to cure lamenesse,
giving strength to the sinowes, only by rubbing and conducting the blood into
the veins, by a warm hand, without art; for I did observe that in the
Microcosme, The natural cures of the body.
or the little world of man's body, there are diverse natural cures and
remedies, namely, The spittle dissolved into water, and powered into the ear
cures deafness, takes away itching or ebulition of the blood, and cleanses
inuetorated wounds and scratchings. The sweat of the feet by smelling cures
the palsy. The ear wax anointed in the nostrils, comfort the smelling.
The urine laid on with brown paper, asswageth the pain of the gout. The
excrement laid on, qualifieth the immoderate heat of the body. The pairing of
the nails takes away the drowsines of the brain. The fleagme dissolved
opens the conduit pipes: The coldness of the hands applied to the head
takes away the dolor of the brain, and many other observations may be used in
liew of other remedies.


The judgment which Solomon gave between the two women which were st^iuing
for the child, Natural witty judgments.
upon the dividing and partition of it; did it not proceed of mother wit by
natural reason?

Alphonsus King of Naples (upon a denial that a father made who would not
acknowledge his son because of some private quarrel) was advised by me to
command the son to be sold for a slave, and then nature could not fail to
show her operation: which in like manner caused Claudius the Emperor to
command a malicious mother to marry her son (denied by her) who rather than
to do the same, did acknowledge and confess him to be her son.

Natural wit made the Bees to discern the natural flowers from the
artificial flower, although the same was made of wax, and did retain the
smell and sweetness of honey. And I have observed the natural and violent
passion of the love of parents to their children, in so much that not many
years since, a father (thinking to have beaten his son) received a mortal
wound at his sons hands, being thrust in with a sword through his belly, did
not cease to cry until death, that his son should fly thereby to escape
the punishment of justice. Infinite are my experiments in Nature, before Art
was; but tell me Art, can thou make any thing but of things already made,
putting a distinct determination between things for the better understanding?
whereunto Art replying said and plainly confessed, that she could do no more
without Mother Wit, than an artizan or crafts-man can do without materials and
tools in matter of his profession or occupation. And hereupon did Mother Wit
conclude not only to have the precedencie of Art, but also to be able to
control Art without either Logic or Rhetoric.

Natural Logic.
The country Coridon having a scholar to his son, demanded of his son what
rare things, and exceeding his ordinary knowledge, he had learned, whilst
they were at dinner: the son seeing two roasted chickens in a dish, told his
father, that he could make him believe that these two chickens were three,
which was admirable both to his father, and all his guests; the son being
thereby inflamed, said look sir, here is one, pointing at the chicken, and
here is two, pointing at the other chicken, and no man can deny but that one
and two are three: but Coridons Wit did prove active, for he gave his wife one
chicken, and took the other chicken to himself, and willed his son to take
the third chicken for his learning, if he could find it, whereby Art was
controlled. (*)

CHAP. XX. Of the Ancient Government of the Staple.
THE precedent short commendation of Mother Wit, ministers an occasion to
enter into a retrograde consideration, how the course of Trade was managed
heretofore; remembering in this particular the Prouerbiall speech, Nil nout sub
Coelo, the rather for that so many good Acts of Parliament have been made, long
since concerning the same, when the Staple of our commodities did flourish,
both here and beyond the Seas, in the time of King Edward the third. The
maintenance of ^ree Trade, Anno 1622.
And having of late published ten causes of the decay of Trade, it may be
thought convenient to examine the same upon the said points.

1 The vnderualuation of our moneys by Bills of Exchanges, and the
ouerualuation consequently of foreign coin unto us, which is the Efficient
Cause of the want of money in England. 2 Usury Politic practiced by many, and
abandoning Trade. 3 The litigious suits in Law, to the hindrance of Trade. 4
The neglect of the fishing Trade, preoccupied by other Nations. 5 The endraping
of Wool in other countries, of late much increased. 6 The policies of
Merchants of several Societies. 7 The false making of Cloth and other
manufactures. 8 The exportation of the materials of Woolls, Woolfels, etc. 9
The wars of Christendom, Pirates, and Bankerupts. 10 The immoderate use of
foreign commodities within the Realm.
But before we come to this examination, The beginning of the Staple.
let us observe the beginning of the Staple, and their privileges in the
government thereof.

The most ancient foundation of Merchants and merchandising in this Kingdom,
both for Trade and Government, had by continuance of time before King Henry
the third, did obtain the name of Staple; the commodities of the Realm, as
Woolls, Leather, Woolfells, fells, Lead, Tin, Butter, Cheese, Clothes, and
other commodities were called Staple Merchandise: The Ports from whence the
said commodities were to be transported, were called Staple Ports, as London,
Westminster, Hull, Boyston, Bristoll, Southampton, New Castle, and other
places: The places of residence of these Merchants, both within this land and
beyond the seas, were called the Staples; the Laws and Ordinances made by the
said Merchants, were called Staple Laws: under their government (consisting
of a Mayor, two Constables, and other Officers) has the trade of this Kingdom
time out of mind flourished, to the great enriching of the Kings and Kingdoms:
and it has been supported and assisted by the wisdom of the State in all
ages, as may appear by the several Acts of Parliament made for that purpose in
the times of Henry the third, Edward the third, Richard the second, Henry the
fourth, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, and King Henry the seventh. So
that comprehending the Merchants adventurers Society with them, which began in
the said time of King Henry the seventh, it is above four hundredth years
standing, that the said Society has been, as we have noted. For by the
providence of all those Princes, the Staple Trade was from time to time
established, and especially by King Edward the third, in whose reign a great
number of memorable Laws were made for the purpose, appointing the said
officers and their fees to prevent extortion; and all the Kings subjects, that
would bring their goods to the Staple and trade, The ancient free Trade.
according to the Laws and Ordinances thereof, were admitted to be Merchants;
such was the free trade of this kingdom in those days, wherein the subjects
of all sorts upon all occasions might freely participate under government.

At these Staples were the Kings Customs duly collected, and by the officers
of the Staple, at two several times, paid into the Kings Exchequer; and by
their government were many inconueniencies prevented, whereby the former causes
of the decay of trade, were either moderated or reformed, namely:

1 The moneys of the Realm were required to be answered in true exchange,
according to their intrinsike value, and their Doller, or other foreign coin
was by the Mayor and Constables valued accordingly; for there was no
merchandising exchange used, neither were Bankers known: and when there wanted
money in the kingdom, or was like to want, order was taken by them to import
Bullion, either the 1/^ or 1/^ part of the value of commodities exported: The
debts between Merchants were transferred or set over by bills to be registered
before the Mayor or Constable, which was current without the strict proceedings
of our Common Law. And the like may be done now by a Register authorized by his
Majesty's letters Parents.

2 In those days usury was accounted to be an abominable thing, for it was
not used by any course politic: but seeing it is now so general in all
countries, the best remedy to abate the same in price, is to procure plenty
of money within the Realm by the means before mentioned, which will be more
effectual of course, than any law that will be devised for the moderation
thereof.

3 To avoid the litigious suits in law, the said Mayor and Constables of the
Staple had authority to determine them with all expedition: and if it were
upon a difference between a Stapler and a Merchant stranger, there were two
Merchants strangers admitted and joined with the Mayor or Constables to
determine the same, and that with a present execution without delay, especially
upon a Statute Staple acknowledged before the Mayor or Constable, as aforesaid.

4 The fishing Trade was not preoccupied by foreign nations, as it has been
within these hundredth years, as has been noted; albeit such Ships as were
permitted to fish in the Kings Seas and dominions, paid six pence for every
tun burden, which is now eighteen pence, and this trade might be established
with us, notwithstanding that the several Societies of the Merchants
Adventurers, Russia, and Eastland Merchants, are of opinion that England cannot
maintain the same, and the cloth Trade together, as they have certified.

5 The indraping of wool or making of cloth, being of late much increased
beyond the Seas, and less cloth made with us, may give the better means to
establish the fishing Trade, as aforesaid.

6 The policies of Merchants of several countries is to be met withal, as
the Staplers did in times past, looking to the sales both of woolls, and all
other Staple commodities, and the prices of foreign commodities, to prevent
the ouerballancing in price of the said foreign wares with our native
commodities.

7 To prevent the false making of cloth, let us observe that at these Staples,
Merchants goods were always diligently and carefully viewed and subscribed, by
the Correctors and other Officers of the Staple; to the end that all goods
exported might be answerable in goodness to their expectation upon the view
required: whereby this Staple Trade continued without any interruption, for
they were the sole Merchants of the Realm without competitors, until the time
of King Henry the fourth; at which time certain Mariners and Mercers of
London, using to barter English clothes in Holland, Zealand, Brabant and other
places, had by the said King Henry the fourth, a governor set over them only
to be a judge to hear and decide their controversies and to punish their
misdemeanors, with license that they might congregate themselves for that
purpose, as by the grant appears. This license they in short time perverted,
to the great disturbance of the ancient course of the Staple, whereby the trade
of the Realm greatly declined, and the Kings Customs decreased: so that from
160 thousand pounds yearly paid out of the Staple, the Customs came short of
120 thousand pounds. The Fraternity of Saint Thomas of Becket.
These new Merchants terming themselves, The fraternity of Saint Thomas of
Becket, were by Act of Parliament, and by direction under the Great Scale of
England, in the time of King Henry the sixth, prohibited from doing any act
that might prejudice the Staple; and so it continued until the two and
twentieth year of King Henry the seventh, and then there was another great
complaint in Parliament against the said fraternity, for decaying of trade, and
a very strict law made against them, with especial order that they should
admit any of the Kings liege people into their socitie paying unto them ten
marks, which under pretense of some privileges has been interrupted, and
especially by his Majesty's Proclamation, in the fifteenth year of his
Highness happy reign, by reason of the controversy for the dressing and
dying of cloth: nevertheless in all their graunts, exception is made, That the
Staplers should not be prejudiced, which in the wisdom of a Parliament will be
found most necessary to be united again, to make a free trade under
government.

8 The exportation of the materials for cloth, as woolls, Fullers earth,
woolfells, and woodashes, is prohibited lately by his Majesty's Proclamation,
with good orders for the execution thereof, according as heretofore was done
by the Correctors of the Staple for other commodities.

9 Touching the wars of Christendom, let us observe that King Edward the
third, had also great wars in his times with France and in Ireland; and
nevertheless he did receive a very great assistance by subsidies of fifty
shillings upon every sack of wool exported for, and during the time of six
years, which amounted to 1500 hundredth thousand pounds, when one ounce of
silver was valued but at twenty pence, which would now amount to four
millions and a half.

10 And lastly, the immoderate use of foreign commodities, was by the Mayor
and Constables of the Staple, had in consideration; for they had always an
especial care to the enriching of the Kingdom, because the provident care of
the King did put them in mind thereof: insomuch that when the said King became
forgetful therein, by reason of the wars, and that the Kingdom wanted
chaffer, wares, and necessary provisions, the Parliament did absolutely deny to
give him any subsidy, as appears by the Chronicle of Grafton, in the one and
fiftieth year of his reign: so that by the premises things have bin (in some
measure) considered of, when least disorder in trade appeared.

A Conclusion to the judicious Reader.
THe triuiall vice of Envy is said to be the mother of wickedness, and
accounted to sit in an im^ginarie Theater: Her Palace is a dim and hollow
vault, wherein she waxes pale and wan, as having the consumption of the liver;
looking a squint, as borne under Saturn; never resting, as though she were an
arm of Ix^ns wheel; engendered and hatched by the ugly Megara of Hell, that
feeds and crams her gorge with Dragons, and fomes out again deadly poison.
This v^ce has sent forth triple headed Cerberus under the shadow of Zoilus,
Momus, and Mastix, Three envious Satyies.
to perform her intended tragedy: but Zoylus (remembering that his railing
Commentaries presented by him to Ptolome king of Egypt, and his presumption to
be better learned than Homer did work his overthrow) goes by with silence,
and shaking his head, seems to be discontented, and under hand he does
instigate Momus and Mastix to follow their envious humors: whereupon Momus (with
his carping eyes dimmed with passion) having cursorily read over this book,
takes upon him to be a great Pollitician or Statist, and finds fault that
many things therein contained (which he terms Mysteries) should be published
and made known, especially such as may concern Princes in their revenues, or
secrets of their mints. Unto him therefore I frame this answer, confessing and
avoiding, that true it is, That the ancient Monarchies, Empires, and
Commonweals held the knowledge of their revenues in such reverence and
secret, that none (but the officers which had the managing thereof) were made
privy of them, as being sacred things, not fitting that the people should take
notice thereof, which was truly observed in the Roman Empire, and
Commonweales of the Grecians. But as times produce variety, and the manners of
men do change, breeding corruption of laws and customs; so was it found, that
by this secrecy officers were both emboldned and enabled to deceive the
Princes thereby, and the people would pretend ignorance to gi^e unto them their
dues: whereupon the Senators of Rome (by mature deliberation) did ordain, that
from that time forward, the revenues of their treasure, and the dependances
thereupon should be published and made known, not only unto the people, but
unto strangers also, which the Emperor Justinian caused to beobserued, and
other Emperors succeeding him, as appears by the Code and other Books, which
the French Kings have imitated ever since; willing and commanding, that these
things should be known of every one, yea even of the mere strangers of other
countries; so that this objection is of small moment, especially this book
being moderate in the handling thereof.

Now Mastix riding a false gallop on a hackney horse (being full fraighted of
conceits) comes to town, and makes two exceptions to the method and
contents of the book: first he will not allow the terms of Art, by dividing
of the same according to the three essential parts of Traffic: next he will
not have Merchants secrets laid open, or their trades divulged.

To the first, concerning the being, essence, or existance of things, he will
make no difference between natural things, and things artificial, and so
there is but two essential parts of Materia and forma, albeit that some
Philosophers have established three beginnings of natural things, Matter,
Form, and Deprivation: The Matter has no other office or function, but the
changing from one Form into another, Deprivation giving an inclination
thereunto; for Deprivation is an imperfection so conjoined to the Matter, that
without her, if she were separated, nothing would be ingendered; and therefore
in Heaven there is no Deprivation, and consequently no generation ne
corruption. The Form therefore gives perfection to the thing and being also,
and without her the Matter is more imperfect than the eye is without the
faculty of seeing, or the ears without hearing. But in artificialls, the
being has her parts, as Traffic has three, namely, Commodities, Money, and
Exchange: so other things may consist of more being or simples, wherein the
terms of Art are not excluded, neither can they avoid Mastix his envy.

To the second, the whole contents of this Book manifests to all judicious
Merchants how necessary the knowledge is of the matter therein contained, to
maintain Equity and Justice by the Law of Nations; and that there is no
particular secret of any Merchants trade revealed, to the prejudice of any man
or nation: in so much that they are much pleased with it, as being desirous to
advance the good, and to banish the evil, observing that virtue makes a
stranger grow natural in a strange country, and the vicious becomes a mere
stranger in his own native soil. Let virtue therefore enjoy her freedom, and
possess her privileges by the right of Law, and all the people shall flourish
with equity, Justice shall maintain Peace; Peace shall procure Security;
Security shall nourish Wealth, and Wealth Felicity. No man is to be dismayed
at his small tallent, or to grudge at another greater prosperity; for without
doubt, Nature has by her secret motion denied none, some perfect quality to
supply that want, which in himself breeds discontent or mislike: for even as
the fish (having no ears) has a most clear sight; so though want of dignity
be a disgrace to some, though want of coin discontent diverse: and though lack
of wealth impaires the credit of many, yet nature has supplied that outward
ornament with such an internal reward, as a loyal and loving heart
(notwithstanding many hard measures) will with constancy spend all his time
for the good of the commonwealth being thereunto employed.

This work thus at length happily concluded, and commended to the kind
acceptance of all gentle and well disposed minds, is not compiled to please
the vain appetite of some men, according to their nice opinion, but is
referred to the judicial and affable judgments of this age, to whom I shall
(during the remainder of my days) always be ready to supply any thing which
in the next impression may be desired; not doubting but they will measure it by
the just desert, and censure thereof as their own kind natures have ever been
accustomed.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

