A STRANGE AND WONDERFVLL Prognostication: Or rather, PRENOMINATION of those
Accidents which shall, or at least are likely to happen, as may be coniectured
by the heavenly Influences; Foretelling the wondrous direful Events which
shall fall out in all Christendom, as may be collected by the Rules and
Directions of Astrology, in this year 1624.

Written by Anthonio Magini, an Italian Professor of the Mathematickes, and
much experienced in Astronomy: And now faithfully translated into English.

Printed at London for Nathanael Butter. 1624.

The Preface, showing in what manner this Calendar or Prognostication is to be
understood.
TO come to our Almanacke and Prognostication, which has above two hundred
declarations or points, and therefore if the one half, or the fourth part, be
but true it will be well.

Furthermore, it is to be understood, that the things happen not just the same
time, hour, or day they are predicted, but are deferred sometimes for a little
while; for you know that water in a Kettle hanged on the fire boyles not
presently, and even so is it with the operation of the Planets or Signs of the
Firmament.

A small proof of the last year. 1623.
Said he not what was to happen betwixt the Rhyne, Elbe, and Weser, and in the
Northern parts of the world?

Did he not likewise speak of a Match, as also where the war should be, and
how far it should extend?

He predicted likewise a battle of a certain Prince, and the defeat of his
soldiers upon the thirteenth of August, of which the Boers of Westphalia
should tell strange things.

Likewise he talked much of treason, and of a simultated peace, as is known to
Holland and Hungary. And made also mention of the Forces that should march upon
the frontier of Turkey and Hungary, designing the invasion of Bethlem Gabor.

Moreover, he predicted also that the plague should reign mightily in the
Northern Lands, as has afterward been seen in Polonia, Lituania, Sweden,
and East-Friesland, in which lands there died above 200000 persons of the
Sickness.

Observe likewise what he says of the dearth, the like being hardly known by
any man now living.

And concerning the East Indies, have not the Protestants made such an invasion
in it as was never done before.

Likewise we will not forget that which he told of the West Indies, and of the
great alteration in the Roman Empire.

Moreover, he predicted that the Northern Lands should want both bread and
wine, which seemed to be unlikely, seeing it was a fertile year, and that all
the fruits of the field were ripe, and carried into the barnes, and there was
also great store of fish caught, upon which accident the prices of al other
victuals are used to fall, but the dearth increased daily against all
expectation.

He says also that about the Harvest or August, many should be slain upon the
frontiers of Hungary.

Here begins the Italian Sooth-sayer, or Prognostication, practiced by
Anthonio Magini, Professor of the Mathematickes at Bononia in Italy.
January.
THe years in former times took not their beginning as they do now, a 1. Circ.
of Chr. b 2. Steph. oct. c 3. S. Ioh oct. d 4. Titus. e 5. Edward f 6. Three
Kings.

for some began it when the Sun was in the midst of the Firmament; and others,
when it was nearest unto them; and we make the beginning of it when the Sun
is furthest from us, to wit, in Capricornus.

So that our Winter begins upon the the 22 of September. And I find, having
ouer-looked all the celestial Signs, that Saturnus and Jupiter going into
Leo, go backwards as the Crabs do, Mars in Aquarius, Venus and Mercurius in
Sagitarius, and Luna near at hand, traveling as a messenger up and down; when
the Moon shall be in Taurus, and begin to increase, then we shall have the
eight after the birth of Christ, and the same is the first day of the year,
and shall be governed as follows, by the power of God.

The 5, being full Moon, are Saturnus and Jupiter declared Lords of this year,
and Luna is also to be an aid of them. And first to speak of her government,
Sunday.
G 7. Valentius. a 8. Erhardus. b 9. Iulianus. c 10. Paulus her. d 11. Higinus
pa. e 12. Benedictus. f 13. Hilar. Epis.

she shall cause a cold, unhealthful, dear, and miserable time.

Concerning Saturnus, he shall also use his wonted cruelty, and go about to
spoil even the child in the Cradle; and in several places, as upon the height
of 48 and 53 degrees, do great hurt, as in Bohemia, Hungary, Morauia, Silesia,
Germany, Polonia, and other Countries bordering upon the Low Countries.

Sunday.
G 14. Pontian. a 15. Jesus nam. b 16 Marcellus. c 17. Anton. op. d 18. Prisc.
virg. e 19. Herental. f 20. Fab. Sebast.

The 13, with the last quarter of the Moon, is Mars in Pisces, which is
certainly an ill sign (for bad trees give bad fruits, and lame messengers
bring bad news) and he causes the Sea to be set on fire, through the power
of Neptunus, and shall also go about to break the Peace, which could be
concluded in these times, making great steps even into the Indies, and incites
the Waterlanders (or Hollanders) to the battle, showing them all the riches of
the world, so that many nations of Europe shall hearken to him, being desirous
to be delivered from the cries of the hungry, and to find a better Country then
they inhabit.

Sunday.
G 21. S Agneta. a 22. Vincentius. b 23. Emerent. c 24 Timotheus. d 25. Paul's
co^u. e 26. Policarpus. f 27. Ioh. Chrisost.

The 20, with the full Moon, was Venus and Mercurius above the head of
Sagitarius, the one being somewhat whorish, and the other somewhat knauish.
About this time will much treason and deceit be intended, and that shall even
come from lands that lie far off at the other side of Hell, seeing that
Lucifer reigns, therefore look to your self, so shall it happen that the
Crane shall inuit the Fox, who shall find himself deceived at last.

The 27, being the first quarter of the Moon, ought his Holiness to look a
little to the Alps, for there shall strange signs be seen, and many
conspirations be made with them of S. Marck (the Venetians.)

The 28 comes the Sun into Aquarius, Sunday.
G 28. Carol. Mag a 29. Valerius. b 30. Septuages. c 31. Isaac.

who running swiftly to the war, in the hot Countries, seems to confirm the
former, leaving the cold countries behind infested or vexed with famine,
pyracies, and inundations.

The last of this Month shall Jupiter and Mercurius be opposite, as likewise
Saturnus and Venus, and there was a strange trick played, but it seemed not
cleanly to be done. But Luna although she was in Cancer came nevertheless to
them which dwell under the Creuice, namely, the Sea-cocks, and brought tidings
that Shield-bearer would aid them upon the frontiers of Turkey.

February.
d 1. Bridget. e 2. Marie. f 3. Blasius Bish.
Sunday.
G 4. Rembertus. a 5. Agatha. b 6. Dorothea. c 7. Richardus. d 8. Solomon. e 9.
Apolonia. f 10. Ireneus.

THe 4, being full Moon, is the Sun yet in Aquarius, and Saturnus, and
Jupiter in Leo, and do not cease yet from running these ill courses, and to
use ill devices, to take the gold from one another, giving iron only in lieu
of it; which news being brought into Spain, upon 35 degrees it will cause
great murmr and coffeehouse. And Jupiter shall go about to remedy it by
the means of his goodness, and make many friends with gifts, whereby the
purse will be emptied, nevertheless he will keep counsel.

The 11, being the last quarter, was Mars in Aries, or in the hurting Ram,
walking very desperately, showing that his children under the government of
Saturnus and Jupiter, in the Northern parts of Europe suffered famine, and
that he would revenge it in the South. To which effect he had caused the
Fleet of Neptune to be gathered together by Triton, and would himself in
person visit the cashes of India, to relieve his children with them.

Sunday.
G 11. Desiderius. a 12. Gandent. b 13. Tranquil. c 14. Valentius. d 15.
Craton. mar e 16. Iuliana. f 17. Constantia.

This shall cause joy on the one side, and heaviness on the other, for there
breeds continually quarrel wheresoever is question made of having and
keeping: for the one shall think that by reason of his long possession,
another good is his own. Therefore ye Commanders look too that through
treason you be not frustrated of your design.

Sunday.
G 18. Simon bish a 19. Sabinus. b 20. Gallus con. c 21 Coronat. d 22. S.
Peter's. e 23. Bissext. cor. f 24.

The 18, being new Moon, was Venus in Capricornus, and gave order to Mercurius
that he should look to his business, and play his part well, seeing that
almost the gods were out of their own houses, seeking help and aid of other,
and especially betwixt 35 and 46 degrees. And the Bird of Jupiter had lost many
of her chiefest feathers, and he sent to the Peacocke and the white Eagle, to
borrow other feathers to aid himself in time of necessity with flying. By this
present meeting are understood all the allies of Spain, the Emperor and all
his States, but concerning their demand it is yet uncertain whether they
shall obtain it.

The 19 comes the Sun into Pisces, which is a good sign for the Fishers,
but ill for them that go to catch Birds.

Betwixt the 23 and 24 you shall find this year a day to be removed, and it is
certain that nothing is steadfast without alteration or commotion, and even in
such manner shall the heaviness remove from the one place to the other: and if
it should be told unto which they should happen, it would but bereave them of
their joy. The Gods to prevent all this, had caused Argus with his 100 eyes to
keep watch. But Mercurius having cut off his head, presented the eyes unto the
Bird of June, which is the Peacocke, whom the Gods have set on the high
Mountains to watch what Austria, Germany, Italy, France, England, the Low
Countries, and Polen, do.

The 25, being the first quarter, the Hollanders receive tidings of their
victories in foraine Countries. And Luna was in Cancer, which is her water
Creuice, and is a good sign for them; and when it happens to her, that
decreased mightily the Romish Empire. Therefore look to yourselfe, that you
show them in the dream through the Angel of Jacob, another way into the
Empire, yea even with a play in Lent, but take heed of the end.

March.
THe 5, with the full Moon, was Saturn still in the midst of heaven in the
fiery Lion, and Jupiter walked up and down on the same height, intending to
assuage the former anger of the Lion, but he minded something else, seeing that
Sol came toward him, so that all the Elements showed their power to go toward
the Northern places of the West Indies, whereupon the Sun, Moon, Winds,
and Waters drove with great force under the Equator or Line toward the
Islands of Cuba and Hispaniola, even in such manner that many did marvel at
it. And Jupiter, who would show his power, lost a piece of his beard, thinking
only to stay the streams: but alas, it was in vain, seeing that Jupiter
(whose Masts reach unto the skies) was himself in the Fleet which carried in
her colors Batauia and a Lion) whom Jupiter thought to tie so fast that he
should not be able to move a vain, but he lost idly his labor.

The 12 being the last quarter, Jupiter commanded his Bird the Eagle, to take
the pan by the tail to look how many eggs the Boers threw into the pan; and
to learn his subjects to live sparingly, in Lent, whereupon many were black
and starued.

O poor husbandmen that live betwixt the East and the black Sea, and
especially you that live about the rivers of Elbe, Weser, Rhyne, and Donow. In
the same time was Mars in the house of Death, namely, in Taurus, or the wild
Bull, with his steeled or strong horns, using there such violence, that he
will make mankind almost weary of their lives. And even in the same time there
shall also be a Basilisque or Cokatrice that shall brood eggs, of which the
young ones shall be seen in many places. Venus was in Aquarius, and Luna in
Capricornus, all the Planets being in strange houses, which surely betokens
some strange thing, as the Stars also of the East, South, and North passage
upon the height of the Spanish and Netherlandish Seas. Toward Turkey and France
is also something seen which is not pleasing to the Gods.

The 19 being new Moon, there is also about Mexica or Noua Hispania a
darkness in the Sun seen, which will cause great alteration in those lands,
as likewise in Congo, the red Sea, Goa, and other places of the East Indies,
for they are almost all upon one clymate.

The Sun coming into Aries, there shall a strange and wonderful joy be heard,
and night and day shall then be of one length, and the grains in the Northern
parts shall be sold better cheap then they were at the last Harvest when all
the barnes were full.

The 26, being the last quarter, there shall at the beginning of the sweet time
be spoken of great warlike preparations, but they shall not all come to effect,
by reason of some small Gods (understand thereby neutrall Princes)
nevertheless there shall upon the appointed time a Fleet of Neptune be set
abroad, and he that shall go with it under the earth, shall have good
success, for the Sun is in a good Climate, and this is likewise a fertile
year in general, few Countries only excepted, in which shall deadly vapors
and mists rise out of the earth, and poison both fields and trees, and are
shortly even against nature out of the East to come into the West, contrary to
the forementioned course of the Firmament.

April.
THe 3, being full Moon, are Saturn and Jupiter yet in Leo, and puffed up
with pride, thought the Kings House to be their own: upon the same day
toward the evening they were on a sudden afraid, for there happened in the 10
degree of Libra, a darkness in the Moon by reason of a faintness she fell
in, as shall be seen in Europe, and shall last above 3 hours. During this
darkness there shall be some traitors who shall seek to cover or excuse
themselves, and many thieves shall seek to bring their booty into other
Lands, and many scores shall not be paid, by reason of sudden sickness.

The tenth, being the last quarter, when the eggs of Easter shall be divided,
so shall Mars be in Gemini, which shall cause pitiful cries of disarmed
people, which shall howl and lament as women and children. Therefore seeing
that Saturnus a deuourer of children, is Lord and Governor of this year, it
will be best for the disarmed and faint-hearted to give themselves in good time
under a Protector who may defend them, or they may otherwise timely go under
the earth, and fly to the other world.

The hot Fevers shall reign mightily, and especially in the lands which have
great Rivers to run to the Sea, for the waters shall be spoiled through bad
confluences, and they that shall drink of them shall suddenly die, look then
to the streams of Donaw, Elbe, Weser, Ems, Mase, Rhyne, Schelde, Lore in
France, and the Po in Italy.

The 17, being new Moon, you shall have a darkness of the Sun being yet in
Pisces, and shall be seen by them which lie under the Meridian of Italy, as
likewise by them which dwell about the Straights of Magellan, as the Patigones
and other nations about them, where it shall do his operation as well as in
these parts.

The 18 comes the Sun into Taurus, at which time there shall many go to
the war, and the Merchants which have great store of munition provided, may
make then good cheer. Venus being then still in Pisces, she shall very
cunningly seek to make a match, but she and all her adherents shall get
disgrace for thank. But on the other side, there shall the next month
something else appear in the Northern land, and shall be against the Roman
Empire. Now husbandmen look to it, for Mars is now in action, and Neptune
goes on with his resolved enterprise, and comes into a Country in which
Ceres and Bacchus shall be honored, nevertheless keep your horse sadled, for
some think to surprise you with an ambush, and to make havoc of your goods.
All manner of beasts shall be sold at dear rates under Taurus, and especially
about the Rivers of Ems, Rhyne, Weser, and the Donow: But on the other side,
they shall in the West Indies be given for almost nothing, and there shall new
Towns and Cities be built by a Nation, whose eyes are as brown as the eyes
of Whitings: and this shall be done before the Sun comes again into
Taurus.

May.
THe third (being full Moon) upon Crosse-day, was Saturn in the 12 degree,
and Jupiter in the 22 degree above Leo, at great strife, the one would have it
thus, and the other so: and in the mean time gathered S. Jacob his Schalpes:
Jupiter would feign have had peace to rest himself a while, but Saturnus would
not condescend unto it; whereupon Leo considering their debate, showed the
door to them both, and gave them leave to walk. But Jupiter saw from above
that the Eagle (his Bird) was in great distress, and had a heavy cross on
his neck or back. This will without question draw great misery and calamity
upon Polonia, Germany, or some other parts of the Empire, unless there happen
some alteration in Gemini,

The 9, with the last quarter, was Mars in Gemini, and walked toward the
Creuice, which can turn at the left and right side, and chiefly by water, and
is with his armed Cizers to bring Mars over into the West, for both the wind
and stream will favor him. At the same time shall the Waterlander (or
Hollander) have good success by water, and especially in some Lands which lie
far from his own Country, and under another Climate, as likewise under this,
but there is yet one new tiding to be told, which time will reveal. At the
same time shall Pegasus begin something in the Northern parts, about the
height of Lituania and Polonia, where the King of the Gods intends to make some
great enterprise, and hangs the Eagle a shield or Skushion about the neck. And
cast now a little an eye upon Transiluania, about the Flood Irydanus, the
Peacocke hangs her tail down, and shall be destroyed by many children of
Saturnus. The Lilies or Fleurs du lis rise both about the sides of the water,
and in the Mountains of Swisserland; and even about the same time a most
joyful tidings shall be heard.

The 17, being full Moon, Venus is on the Ram, and makes great haste to come
upon Taurus that horned beast, meaning thereby Europe.

Luna is likewise seen in Taurus, but the Peacocke the Bird of Juno can tell
you how she is pleased, look but upon her actions.

The 20 began the joyful play, for Luna went from Gemini, and Sol came with
his golden beams in her room, and there shall be heard a harmony of many
instruments; Mercury plays upon his pipe, Neptunus blows the horn of
Triton, sitting upon the wooden horse, and every one did as he was minded:
Mars being yet in Gemini.

In the mean time comes Mathusalem with the fearful Deaths head, whose
heirs are Serpents, and they all dyed that saw it, therefore look not about
at that time, but go straight on your ways.

The five and twentieth, being the first Quarter, leapt Venus from Taurus and
came in Gemini, in which the Sun ran her course, and would as well as the
rest eat of the banquet sugar: all sweet Meats shall be good cheap, and
she did eat so much of it, that her belly began to swell: but whether it be
now poison of Traitors, or that she shall breed sweet twins, you shall
perceive it under Virgo, by three that bears Roses, and if she happen to
rest there; so shall it be an ill time for them which were used to get their
living under Mars, but nevertheless they shall play the bride of Whitsontide,
although there be not an Ear or Grain in the Barnes, but they shall shake
it, if it be not within it is without: Venus having in the mean time gotten
her Horses to her Chariot, rides with a Thundry noise through the Air, until
she comes in Leo; and if Mars be not assuaged in this time, take your
tools in your bag and walk to the Black Mountain.

Junius.
THe first, being full Moon and all Fruits increasing, Mars was sick or
seemed or fained at least to be so, having a cloth tied abut his Head. And
Saturn and Jupiter were in Leo, and Sol in Gemini. Venus sits now upon Europa
as a rider upon his Horse, and willing (with sweet or woollen kisses which she
has stolen from the lame) to set one of her friends upon her (Europa) the
Angels rose out of their sleep, and took Roses and Lillies in the hand.
Whereupon all the branches of Bohemia (seeing that Luna was in Sagitarius) rose
up. Mercurius played so well that some were fallen in a sleep, but if he
keeps no better watch then Argus did, and continue his piping, all is spoiled,
and he sits as dangerously as a Lowse upon a Comb.

The 8. th, being the quarter of the Moon, were many Trees that stood very
fair, but were not yet peeced about their nether-parts, and many fruits pulled
on their boots, with intention to see what doings there were abroad, but
before they were almost ready, the Devil was in such a rage, that they had
presently in their Spring, their head bitten off by Taurus, and their roots
almost pulled out by Leo. Whereupon was Jupiter compelled to go from Leo, and
Saturnius followed him close at his heels. And Mars coming in the mean time
in Cancer, was very much discontented, by reason that there were so many that
had conspired to kill him, and told to his Widows, that he was again on
horseback under Cancer, seeing he had gotten Mercurius on his own side, and
were running both in one spur, (or took both one course) and would make it
so, that the Calues-skinnes (young men he means) should suffer much.

The 12. th, being new Moon, came Luna likewise in Cancer. Conferring this
time by the former as I observed, that whenever they come so many Butchers in
Cancer, that the Sea-cocks have much wind in their head, and that even to
their own good. Therefore look to the Turkish Pirates, the black Sea-cockes,
and upon the Gulf of Venice, the Mediterranean Sea, and all Rivers that are
Nauigable, as likewise upon the East Sea, betwixt Polonia, Russia, and Prusen,
and chiefly to the water called the Zouth-Sea, and see whether it ends not all
in batteries or Battles; to be brief, they shall there euerywhere be in
action, some publicly, and some privately, but you must not understand that it
shall only be on the Water, but they that shall Command over them shall put
on their iron Gauntlets, fearing to be pinched of the Creuice.

The 15. th, shall there be a Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, and they shall
seek to cover one another: When this shall happen I would wish the Husbandman
not to pay his Rent aforehand, seeing that the Children of Mars will demand
it again of them.

Hereupon, so comes Sol again upon the 19. th, with his golden armor in
Cancer, and walks so with Mars toward the West. This is a sign, that Mars
or his Messengers, shall get great booties of Gold and Silver in the West, and
especially they that are mentioned on the 12. th day here before, and it shall
go as Ebb and Flood, for that which is taken from the one shall be given to
the other; Whither this will smart, you may even by the Elements and her
Children perceive. To be brief, the fortune of the one is the mishap of the
other.

The 24. th, being the first Quarter, so shall the catchers of Crabbes get good
returns out of the East Indies, of a Treasure that was long buried betwixt
Brasill and Guinea, about a bank on which Sol keeps his Dinner, and Mars
shall happen to burn there his fingers.

The last day, it is full Moon, then you shall find many Chests that are
full, but more hollow bellies and empty Barnes, but be patient for a while,
for you shall shortly have plenty enough of all kind of Fruits.

Julius.
THe 7. th, being the last Quarter, so was Leo delivered from the rage of
Jupiter and Saturnus, upon pasport given unto them. As Soon as Jupiter came in
Virgo, asked the Maid with a heavy mind, where that the provision of Corn
was? and he promised to send it within few days, and wished that her Children
that dwell in the Low-lands, and about the ouer-watring Rivers, should not eat
it Green; which if they did, the moisture of it should engender burning and
hot Sicknesses, and many thousands should dye before they should come to the
taste of the Flower of the new Corn, of which the Catchers of the Crabbes
shall have a part, namely upon the 52. 54. and 46. Degrees. And he will
neither excuse the Maidens on the fields themselves, of which many shall
account themselves happy, as giving no suck, nor being troubled with
children, nevertheless, they will grieve much for their beloved which are gone
to the wars, and other voyages.

The 14. came Mars with the new Moon to Leo, desiring aid of him before his
death; the Lion standing in some need of him, began to give ear unto him: and
when they were yet walking together, the Cannon began to thunder, whereupon
these two friends cast both their eyes down, and seeing the play to go on, it
seemed that they took delight in it, for walking yet in the Heaven, they
looked very merrily, and they seemed rather to be inclined to laughing then
crying, and their Boys understanding this, besides Saturnius (who was yet in
Leo) they made together such noise with laughing, that the whole earth quaked:
And it may be that this insatiable dire (thought to get his belly full of
Children) To be brief, the wicked shall have the upper hand, but alas, they
walk with the Devil and the Death.

The 21. came Sol likewise in Leo; I seeing that they were enlightened by the
brightness of the Sun, it seemed unto me, that the gods took pleasure that
mortal men set so one upon an other with slashing, striking, murdering, and
firing: yea, stony hearts would have cried if they had seen the damps and
vapors that were in Polonia, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the Low Countries:
France and England being excepted, in which the Stars had not their will.

The 23. being the first quarter, they were busy about the burying of the
dead, but they could not agree amongst themselves upon the division of the
goods of the dead: whereupon they took one another by the hair, although the
Governors had forbidden it, for their blood was too hot. The Region turns
also much to the West, so that it is likely that there is also something to
do, and chiefly about the Zouth Sea, where the Griffons or gold-eaters dwell.

The 30. was very perfectly by clear Mooneshine written with three crosses,
which Mercurius (being in Leo) could see very well, and was to draw them very
skilfully off as was commanded unto him; but he taking great delight in the
ruin of another, he leapt presently up, and went amongst the rest, and threw
cunningly a Pedlers stall under the feet by a trick which he had. Whereupon
there came other which took the Wares presently up, and he set them at work
being fit for Wars, but consumes many men. But the new governing Godds make
no difficulty therefore, and say, who is slain he is paid.

Augustus.
THe 6. being full Moon, were both Mars, Saturnus, Venus, Sol, and Luna
altogether appearing in the course of the Sun, as well by water as by land,
with their burning Torches; and commanded Mercury to conduct the Wagon in
such manner, that the Advocate or Speaker of the Husbandman was driven to say
Quisquis delirat plectuntur Achiui.

That is to say, the Boar must pay for the ill deeds, actions, and dycing,
ill play of these great Masters (which if it were but the Boar alone) for such
great Armadoes or Armies need not to be set forth to play only the poor
Boar, but it is to bring some great Masters either in or out of their
Kingdom, under the Government of this Zodiac, for I find none that will
give over or desist: and concerning Jupiter himself, he is as Herbinger gone
before, to procure that Virgo shall have something to bring to the Table.

The 12. so shall there be a conjunction of Saturnus and Mars, and the
operation of it shall be seen before 14. days run at an end (or are
expired.)

The 14. being new Moon, so begin they to do their operation, and that not
only by water under Neptunus, but also by land under Mars, and chiefly in the
Northern lands of Europe, the Armies are marching in several places, and the
Husbandman lets his Plowe rest, and the Shipper hoyseth his Sails up, the one
makes room for the other, and that which the one has gathered, the other
consumes: to be short, the world goes quite contrary, and the Netherlanders
themselves also shall go with their heads downwards, to diue after the
earthly gold; others will go to fill the air with their renown, which stands
as firm as a Castle in the sky: there shall also another come forth, which
shall be desirous to have a Star as well in heaven as his Confederates: but to
be brief, every one strive for the higher board or place, whereupon there is a
great strife to happen, both betwixt Beasts and Birds, and after the end of the
battle, so shall the air be infected, by the noisome smell of the dead
carcasses.

The 19. comes Sol in Virgo, leaving yet some of the aforementioned
Counselors in Leo, where they are railing being almost in a rage: And there
shall without any doubt, many desperate spirits be found; yea, as well amongst
beasts as men.

The 20. being the first quarter, so shall the conjunction before mentioned
show her self more plain, and especially toward the Southern Lands, Poland
has likewise to expect something out of Sweden. Look upon the King of the
Gotts, and Hungary, which drink other drink: of Italy we have spoken before,
Spain get shelles, and Signeur will cover himself with Letice and Roses
(which is seen in Baetauia it self) and that in a laughing manner, but when
the one laughs, so weeps the other, that is the course of this year.

The 28. being full Moon began the streams of the Ocean Sea to cease, and to
stand still, to harken after the rumor that was spread abroad of the Sun who
should turn his head to the South, leaving the Northern quarters with many
sicknesses and dead ones, but he shall keep a certain limited course, even as
the fierce thunders, and the hurlewindes do: In the East and West Indies shall
the servants of Mars fight, and Mars shall receive a deadly wound, but recover
his health again, Saturnus shall burn his head, by reason that his anger
shall be greater, when he comes in Virgo.

September.
THe 4. being the last quarter, is Lucifer only in Leo, he is to do much
hurt, and shall use such cruelty, as Mars himself never imagined; yea, he gets
so much vantage, that he can show his power according to his own pleasure, but
I pity them upon whom it lights: And if his reign might have been of any
continuance, he would have destroyed the one 4. part of mankind, and sent
them to the earth, to look what is become of their Ancestors. And thereupon,
so shall the Mountains in Italy, Sicilia, and they also that are in the East
and West Indies cast up both fire and smoke; and there are likewise to happen
fierce Thunderbolts and Earthquakes, and other elementary alterations, which
shall mightily move the world to her self and repent if it be not too late
(according to the Proverb) to boil a Posset when the man is dead: therefore
look to it, it concerns your own self.

The 12. is the new Moon, upon Thursday against the evening are both Sol,
Jupiter, Mars and Venus, in Virgo, being altogether very sorry and heavy, and
at the same time so grows the Sun dark upon 52. degrees by the Line in the
South, and upon 51. to 54. on the North side of the Equinoctial shall the blow
be felt, so that Italy and Spain shall be in great danger. Mercurius as a
swift Messenger, brings tidings of a certain battle, and was therefore as
sorry as a Soldier is, when a louse of his falls in the fire. It seems
that the aforementioned Gods would feign put the Woolfes skin off, and draw
the Sheep skin on, and to overrule Mars, seeing that he had played such a
crooked or left handed trick, and desired him to consider what damage the
Towns and Countries had received, and how much precious blood of man there was
spilled: as likewise how much hurt mankind had received by famine, misery,
pestilence, and the other plagues which the God of Gods appointed unto it.

The 20. is the first quarter of the Moon, and you shall then find out, that
Mercurius is in Libra, to weigh over all the Merchandises, but the Messenger is
too light, and the Justice too meek, not avoiding many wicked accidents which
it could do, for to do ill, aids to feed the war, and the war makes some
rich, but they resemble the Beast which deuoures the gold, and the more it
eats grows more hungery, so that all will be ill, unless the instigators
and ringleaders be set in the forefront at the approach.

The next day being the 21. comes Sol in Libra, and makes both night and day
of one length, but the goods and Lordships shall still unequally be divided.

The 26. is full Moon, and Sol being in Libra shall be above the Netherlands,
end bordering Countries which are near it. Upon this day, there shall in the
evening about 9. of the clock, a darkness on the Moon be seen even under
Pisces, what this signifies shall the time show. But it is certain, that the
learned hold it for an ill sign, and to presage a general ruin, robbery,
and violence, and causes also some to die, but especially them unto whom it is
shown. But the wicked will not cease to oppress the innocent, and take no
warning, and think on these plagues only when they are sleeping, and leave
all care to the Birds which have small legs.

October.
THe 4. it is the Last quarter, Saturnius departs then from Leo, which is a
good sign, but nevertheless, there are many things here before mentioned,
which shall do their operation in this month, the experience it self
teaches this unto us, and it needs no proof being here before expressed, and
especially in the year of 22. and 23. Now upon the same day aforementioned, so
shall Saturn, Jupiter, and Mercury be in Virgo, and Mars, Venus, Sol, and
Luna in Libra, which are good Signs of peace, and without doubt so shall the
one or the other Potentate be delivered of the War which shall go to
another.

The 12. it is new Moon, and then go all the aforementioned Signs equally
one with another, which happens but seldom, and will without question presage
something, but that will expect such a time as it was in the year 1618. (in
which I wrote this) he shall be mistaken: But let us set this aside and behold
other confluences, and Signs, which are not known to the common people; And I
find that at this time there shall many places be fiered upon the 45. degrees
about the River of Donaw, and the fields betwixt the Rivers of Elbe and of the
Rhine, and they which dwell about the Mase and the Scheld shall see the smoke
arising thence. The West Indians shall likewise about the same time see many
Sails or armed Ships (as well in the North as South Sea) being laden with
hope; the Brasilians shall also receive a greeting at the same time.

The 19. being the first quarter, is Sol, in Scorpio, and brings this
aforementioned Company in this order; yea, even by a tyding which comes out
of the East Indies, some degrees in the South by the Equinoctial line,
declaring, that both heaven and earth were full of the rumor and certain
news of the miserable state of the Roman Empire; for the Gold Mines are
destroyed about the same time, and Neptunus, the friend of March has lent his
helping hand too it. And the Hollanders (according to his relation) carry
themselves so, both in the East and West Indies, that the Spaniards shall feel
it. Upon the same they went in such manner to work, as if Mars and Saturnus
would before their departure turn all topsie turnie, casting all things to the
ground, and amongst other, a Nation that carries the red Lion, which made a
great breach with other that carried Luna in their arms.

The 29. reigned yet all the former Planets, and sought to effect that which
was intended, but war going an uncertain time on, as well by water as by
land, many fled in the mean time from the one Land to the other; some to
escape the wars, others the Plague, and some the dearth and famine. And even
about this time, so shall there fall upon the Earth much fire, and flames
rising from the poisoned and inflamed Stars, the place on which it falls
are to be shunned, for this is a sign of the Plague which is out of the
Northern Lands, to come to the West and Southwest.

These are all heavy Thunderbolts, and showers, after which is many times a
fair Sunshine seen, and the like shall happen to some Nations, of which was
almost no help.

About 150. years ago was likewise an alteration in Christendom (the Planets
standing then as they stand now) but it euanished quickly.

November.
THE second day after All-Saintes is the last quarter of the Moon, the Sun
is yet in the poisoning Scorpio, and you shall seldom as long as he abides
there, have any good issue, and he shall chiefly annoy them, which are
nearest unto him, for upon the same time, viz. In illo tempore, went great
forces out of Africa into Spain, and there shall likewise a great number go
to the Northern lands, as also to Gallia, Batavia, and Hungaria, but they
shall not have any good success, as the Histories shall declare at large. And
when I consider the matter well, so find I that yet to stand firm, which is
written in the great Opera to the full in an ample manner, but it is not for
every man's diet, but I will put my finger in the earth, and smell in what land
I am. But it is enough for the learned.

The 10. is full Moon, and Luna is in Scorpio, and Saturnus and Jupiter in
Virgo, but Jupiter is very heavy.

Mars and Venus being in Libra, although they make yet little or nothing of the
matter, are nevertheless better now then in the last Summer to be spoken
withal. Having now taken the hight of some Corpora that reign. I perceive
that there will be yet a great alteration on the foot of the Alps, whence both
the Rivers, namely the Rhine and the Donaw take their beginning: as likewise
along the Strand toward France behind Sicilia (perhaps Sicilia and Portugal)
and in other strange Countries which are opposed against them. There shall
likewise many rise in the North about Polonia and Lituania along the Eastern
Sea, and go toward the South.

The 17. is the first quarter: And then shall there an Army be divided to
surprise another, but the design shall partly be discovered, the fight will
not end without shedding of blood, and there are many materials to be left
behind, although the assalted shall not quite be overthrown. Upon the same
time is there likewise some sudden exploit to be made in manner of an
excursion in Lituania, and Tartaria, nevertheless, men shall be sold as
beasts.

On the 19. is the Sun in Sagitarius, and it will then mend shortly, for the
great courage and heat of many shall be spent, whereby the wars will slacken
and decrease.

The 24. is full Moon, and diverse aspects of the Planets are come toward the
South, and Southwest, coming there out of the East; the North-landers shall be
glad therefore, and fill their Chests with booty.

December.
THe third being the last Quarter, so was Mars, Jupiter, and Venus, in the
Aspect, which will cause a great alteration; for seeing that Saturnius, Luna,
and Jupiter were found in Virgo, there shall be some great Masters, that shall
become faint-hearted, and be desirous to lay their Arms down, to move
thereby other to do the like, thinking that they will dance as he pipes before
them. But his lesser will not condescend to it, seeing that Mars was on the
same day yet in Scorpio, and gave to him a great and manly courage, and said
that it was now the right time to take revenge of the Enemy. Moreover, so was
Neptunus likewise come by the shadow of Luna under the Tropicus to give aid
unto him, that is to say, that the Heathens which pray to the Moon, shall aid
the Lutherans, (to hitte the nail right on the head) and the proof or
demonstration is to be seen on the cross Star.

The 5. is Saturn, Jupiter, Mars and Mercurius in the fourth aspect, and
Mercurius sitting on the Stern, seeks by policy and craft to conduct the
Ship into another port, yea, under the Maiden Brit.

The 10. it being new Moon, and the waters very high in several parts of the
world, The Sun being yet in Sagitarius, causes strange fortunes and
accidents, both in Hungaria and Polonia, and likewise in other parts of Europe,
but especially about the River of Rhine. Venus being at the same time very
heavy, was in the Ram, and cried then for the loss of some of her lovers which
she had in former times, but it went with her as the Proverb says, the cries
are all loud and the tears hot, true love is soon forgot, and returned so
again toward us with a fainted heaviness. Jupiter and Mercurius; which are
in the fourth Aspect, with diverse other Conjunctions and Aspects presage that
it is a dangerous and deceitful time, as will appear shortly upon the hight
of Spain and Italy, so that all the Northern lands shall have reason to look
to themselves, for there is some danger hanging over their head, and chiefly
over them where the war was this last Summer.

The 17. it is the first quarter, and Luna in Aries: when the Sun shall go
from Aries, then shall many things (of which we have spoken here before) be
manifested and appear, and especially concerning the Indies, to the great
grief of the Bird of Jupiter, or of the Eagle, and to the joy and comfort of
them that dwell in the Wood of unmercifulness: whereby is understood, Batauia
or Gallia inter Rhenum, and their next neighbors shall be sorry because they
prosper and do well, but their heaviness will shortly turn in joy, when they
shall also receive some part of the booty. But shall still think that the
meat is fatter in their neighbors dishes then in their own.

The 19. is Sol in Capricornus and Saturnius (the Ruler of this year) in
Libra, and shall loose there his Government, and shall the next year not be
set so high, by reason of his cruelty. Hereupon, shall the plague decrease in
Europe, and every one shall have time to inroll his dead ones, which died
within the last four months, both by war and her ordinary followers.

The 24. it is full Moon, and then shall the persecution against an innocent
Nation cease, whereupon, if some other which are of a worse humor and life,
do not mend themselves, Mars when he comes from Scorpio shall shoot a
poisoned Dart into their intralls. You shall yet before the end of this year,
hear strange tidings, both out of Greece, Persia and Turkey, and shall tend to
great prejudice of the Bird of Jupiter. There are yet other things to be told,
but seeing that mine Incke begins to freeze, and my Parchment to shrink, I
will therefore make an end, and commend you to the most merciful God.

FJNJS.

