A SERMON PREAched at Paul's Cross the 13. of June, 1602.
Genes. 9. verse. 27. The Lord shall allure Iapheth, and he shall dwell in the
tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be their servant.


AFter that Moses had finished the story of the drowning of the old world, he
begins to speak of the restoring of the earth to Noah again. And he
mentions the thankfulness of Noah and the blessing of God upon him and his, by
bestowing both benefits, laws and promises upon them. By name he prospered the
handie work of Noah in the vineyard which he had planted. And by occasion
thereof, is chronicled Noah's fall by infirmity into drunkenness, and the
little regard which he had of his honor in his drunkenness, which appeared by
his discovering of himself in the midst of his tent. From hence (as it
follows) his son Cham took occasion to dishonor him, both by impious
looks, to the forfeiture of his own reverence, and also by impious and
scornful report of that he saw, to draw his brethren to the like. But he
failed of his purpose: for Shem being affected with due piety, as the author of
this filial duty, and Iapheth being induced by his brother Shem to be a
ready coadiutor in the same, came to the succor of their fathers dishonor:
and throwing his garment that lay by upon their shoulders, with their faces
from him, covered him with the same, reserving their reverence unto him, by not
seeing. When Noah awooke, and his drunkenness was clean departed, and had
received some informatio^ (someway) of the matter concerning the behavior of
his sons, all perturbation of mind removed, as became the Prophet of the
Lord, he was moved by the holy Ghost to publish unto them by way of oracle,
what should severally befall them after this deed, especially in their
prosteritie. So this oracle has the commendation of the full recovery of his
sobriety, and of his due notice of the cause. And first, as the vengeance of
God upon Chams impiety (who before is called Cham the father of Canaan) he
denounces a curse against this Canaan being Chams son, Verse. 22.
because (as Aben Ezra supposes) this Canaan abused his grandfather to, (I
know not upon what ground) or rather because Moses from Gods oracle (not to be
examined by man's rule) purposed to make the name of the Canaanites odious to
the Israelites, for whom he wrote this story, as they were now on their
journey to the land of Canaan to win it.

The curse he denounces against Canaan is, Genesis 10.21.
that he shall be a servant of servants to his brethren. The other two (which
are after called brethren for their joining in this deed) he joins in a
blessing.

First he blesses Shem the author thereof, though otherwise younger then
Iapheth. In his behalf he blesses the Lord in a right fervent blessing, as
for some high benefit reueiled. Giving intitling intimation in his blessing,
that Christ should descend of him, in whose ly also from that time forward true
religion continued.

Next, he blesses in this text Iapheth Shems helper in this work of piety.
Him he blesses in his posterity, that is, in the Gentiles, which should dwell
far distant in Asia and Europe, as Rupertus observes specially; for as for the
opinion of the Jews that he means the nations bordering on the holy land, it
may go amongst the rest of their vanities. He prophecieth then, that howsoever
some generations of Iapheths offspring should grow wild and barbarous, and
forsake the religion of Shem; yet the time should come that the Lord by the
virtue of his Spirit would reclaim the^, and call them home to his grace. And
that he would work upon their wildness and fierceness with his sweet and
amiable allurements of the Gospel, and as it were to break their hearts with
kindness, to draw them both to return, and also to abide in the tents of
Shem. Speaking after their manner of dwelling then, but meaning that the
Gentiles (whereof, as I have said, a good part descended of Iapheth) should be
won to the religion of Christ the son of Shem in Gods fatherly piety to
them; according to his eternal election, and according to the grace and
filial piety that God wrought in their father Iapheth, when he help Shem to
cover his father Noah. For from hence God moved Noah to promise Iapheth thus
much as from the occasion, but not the cause of this blessing. And further he
promises to Iapheth (as before he promised to Shem) that Canaan shall be his
servant, because they should both successively participate in this dominion
over Canaan (as Moses indeed has it plurally in both places.) But Iapheth has
this difference, first, that Canaan, which is promised to be his servant, is
not to be understood literally, but is to be taken (under that name) for the
enemies wherewith the Church of the Gentiles in general should be annoyed. And
secondly, that the servitude of Canaan shall be annexed to Iapheths dwelling
with Shem, and so conditional to Iapheth to continue during his continuance in
the tents of Shem. Thus the promise has two parts, the first that he shall
communicate with Shem in the covenant, signified by dwelling in Shems tents and
the second that he shall participate with Shem in ruling over the enemies of
the church, signified by Canaans servitude under him.

So this text is, disposed into two parts, that is, into two promises. The
proposition of the former promise is that Iapheth, that is, Iapheths
posterity, according to his name, which signifies allurable, shall show
himself a Iapheth, that is, allurable, and shall receive a vocation. Which is
described first from the author, The Lord: secondly, from the means, shall
allure Iapheth: thirdly, by the effect, that he may dwell in the tents of Shem.

The proposition of the latter promise is, that Canaan shall be their servant,
where Canaan is put figuratively. And this first is inferred with that Hebrew
copulatine Vau, which is of so many significations, and here stands for Le
magnan, as it does Leu. 18.5. Let a man keep my statutes and he shall live in
them, that is, Then (as it is well rendered) or upon that condition. Secondly, it
is denounced under the term of servant, which signifies one that is held
from having interest in himself.

As if Noah had extended this reverend breuity into a larger discourse thus. As
I have already partly in the right of a father, and more amply in the duty of
a Prophet blessed my son Shem for his piety to me, wherein he was the
principal: so now likewise in the like right and duty, I bless my son
Iapheth his coadiutor. To whom as by Gods direction I gave the name of Iapheth,
which carries the signification of aptness to be allured, so I prophecy to
him in the behalf of his posterity, that he shall in it (answerably to his
name) be allured in the good part to good, as my son here has now been by his
brother Shem in this work of piety to me. For although there shall be a long
and a grievous departing away of Iapheths posterity from Shem, with whom shall
remain the truth of religion with the oracles thereof, and of whom the Messiah
shall descend: so that their Gentilisme and idolatry shall alienate them, and
Satan shall a long time entise in the ill part from the true God of Shem, so
far that they shall be past all man's recovery: yet the time in due season
shall come that the Lord himself shall take the matter into his hands, and by
the omnipotent virtue of his holy Spirit shall convert them. And for the manner
of converting them, it shall not be done by violence, but (as I said) by
entising, and by the sweet allurements of almighty God, even by the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and the godly endeavors of the servants of Christ, who shall
both by their life and doctrine allure them. And these are the means which the
Lord will sanctify by the might and grace of his holy Spirit to their
conversion. And whereto shall the Lord allure Iapheth? even to dwell in the tents
of She^, that is, in the Church of Christ which is the statio^ of felicity and
the greatest benefit that God can bestow on man, who otherwise is the mirror
of wretchedness. In these tents of Shem the Lord shall allure them to dwell,
that is, they shall come thither, and abide there when they are come: so that
the Church shall not be removed from the Gentiles, though some parts thereof
shall be greatly ecclipsed. And this shall be the first blessing, to
communicate with Shem in the blessing of Christian religion.

And to this there shall be added a second blessing, wherein he shall
communicate with Shem likewise, by succession from the Jews to the Gentiles:
and that is in the dominion over such enemies of the Church, as shall be in
their several times. For as the very nation of the Canaanites shall be subject
to the Jews, which descended of Shem: so those which shall succeed the
Canaanites in enmity to Gods Church, of (...) nation soever they be, shall be
brought in subjection. And their subjection shall consist not only in
suppressing them from usurping authority, but also from usurping liberty and
impunitie in their maliciousness. And this second blessing shall be so annexed
to the former, that it cannot be enjoyed apart. But so long as Iapheth shall
dwell in the tents of Shem, so long shall Canaan be their servant. But when
their love of religion shall quail, their enemies shall prevail against them.

This is the exposition of this oracle: now it remains to make our
observations according to it: and there are six conclusions to be drawn out
of this Text.

The first conclusion is, Noah urges Iapheths posterity with an argument
taken out of the signification of his name Iapheth, wherewith also he
polisheth his speech saying, Iepth Iapheth, as much as (by like agnominatio^)
the allurable shall be allured, (...) Ghost propounds unto us thereo^^ the
edification of names, that it is our duty to edify our selves by those names
of importance, which the Lord by his providence and ordinance has allotted
unto us. And amongst the rest by this particular name of Iapheth (which is ours
by descent) to edify our selves in the grace of tractablenesse and easiness
to be allured to our own good, that we may be Iapheths indeed, as well as in
name. The holy Scriptures are found to have a great felicity in these
notations and agnominatio^s in their original, both by the like sound of words
which pleased well, and also for the deriuations sake, as those that can skill
may see in many places of the original. Thus it is Zepan. 2.4. thus Isai.
24.4. thus Act. 8.30 thus Romans 12.3. and thus Jacob in his blessing both
decketh his speech, and also makes matter of the several names of the
Patriarchs, Genel. 49. And yet always with the sobriety of wisdom, not
giving liberty to make matter of Etymologies without a cause, nor to be vain
in affecting the sound of words, but showing their completenes in joining sweet
and profitable together. Specially this is so in these ample Oracles, which
were certain Holy grauings.
Hieroglyphics (as they were wont to call other conceits) in the Church of God
graven in the memory with a divine skill. Here the holy ghost dispe^seth with
the impropriety of the word, for the pleasant affinity of the sound: for to say
the truth, this verb Iepht properly signifies to intise in ye il part, or to
deceive, as Exo. 22.16. but because it sweetly sounds with the name of
Iapheth, he uses it in the good part. So the^ this name of Iapheth which we
have now under hand, wherewith the holy ghost charge the conscience of the
Gentiles of Europe descended from him to whom the gospel is tendered, and
amongst the rest specially of these very Islands (as some men undertake to
particularize) it ought to move us (as we have said) to tractablenes, that
there be not a stubborn and unflexible mind in us that will not be allured to
true religion, that we be not (as David says) Like the deaf Adder that will
not hear the voice of the charmer, Psalm. 58.4.5.
though he charm never so cunningly. We must (says Solomon) cause our ears
perforce to hear, Pro. ^.1.2.
and incline our hearts to understanding. It is an heavy judgment of God to
be hard hearted. This sin is the punishment of another sin, even of
continuance in sin. And it is vnspeakablie horrible to be given over to a
reprobate sense, that is, to hold a lie in our right hand after demonstration
of the truth. He is indeed a fool (as Salomo^ says) that believes every
thing, Pro. 14.15.
and is carried up and down with every wind of doctrine. But he is a worse and
more woeful fool that shows his vntractablenes against God, and his
stubbornnes against his word when he goes about to reclaim him. There is a
better stifnes to be stiff in the truth. The Papists defame the land with a
pretense of praise, that they find many tractable persons in the same: but who
so is of a wise heart will disdain the devils praises, and will remember that
amongst whoremongers austeritie is the defense of chastity. Well I am sure
that there are many poisoned with a prejudice against the religion of Jesus
Christ, and they will not hear with any patience what may be said for the
truth. And there are again which although they will hear, will not be
persuaded to an effectual conversion. Moved they are, but not removed. The
stifnecked Papists if they will suffer themselves to bear their denomination
where they have their dependence (I means of the Pope) are grievous offenders
in this kind, by name in this sin of obfirming and hardening themselves
against counsel and persuasion. They have the property of the Adders before
mentioned in the Psalm, which (as Augustine and Cassiodorus say) make a shift
with the earth on the one side, and their tail on the other, to stop both
ears, that they may not be charmed. Obfirmation is a Cardinal tradition of
popery, and in this they are so resolute that they will turn to any shift
rather then be persuaded by the truth. First, some will not hear. Secondly,
some will not confer. Thirdly, some that will reason will not yield when they
confess they are overcome, but will lay the blame in their own unskillfulness,
and the subtilty of their adversary, whom they refer to those of their side
that are better learned: and so themselves remain obstinate. Fourthly, some
will be tried by certain writers, and then if they be taken in their own
snare, they will pretend some forgery in the impressio^ (they muse as they use,
as their index expurgatorius bears mention.) Fifthly, others will stand upon a
Doctor where his exposition may advantage them; and otherwhere when they are
like to be losers by his sentence, they depose him and appeal to the
exposition of the Church. Sixthly, they will authorize books, as Montanus,
Iansenius, Ferus, and other, they will permit others to be printed by couen.
And if there be advantage for the Protestants in either, then (forsooth) they
are judgments of particular men and not of the Church. To be brief,
whatsoever the text says, or whatsoever the gloss says, though indeed at the
first both text and gloss be of their own edition and approbation, if they
fall not out to serve their turn, they will contradict them. For they are
resolved to be Papists still, being no Iapheths, but of an vnreachable spirit.
They are for great Clerks sold to the world by their ostentation of
Manuscripts, but their mayn ground is obstinacy. They are so far from
yielding themselves to the spirit of God, that they be not governed by the
common sense of man which is reason; but by the common sense of beasts, which
is will. We stand all before the Lord, in whose sight it is damnably dangerous
to bear false witness either against Papists or other, if any be worse then
they. All this which we have spoken is under the manifold experience of many,
and they are a generation which may inure us to S. Paul's speech, 2. These. 3.2^
Pray for us that we may be delivered from evil and absurd men, for all have
not faith. Nay they are so far from faith, and so hardened in infidelity,
that they will not be allured by God himself. They have cast the word of the
Lord behind them, and they shall see (as Jeremy says) what will come of it at
the last.

And this for those Papists that are more stubborn and resolute. Now there are
others moved (as I said) but not removed, which although they begin to show
some sign of flexiblenes when means are made to them, yet they persist not in
a tractable spirit. They come part of the way by some work of conscience
within them, but they are soon drawn back again. The reuocation of Satan is
stronger with them then the vocation of God. These persons have great need to
look to themselves, and to examine duly what kind of sin this may be which
is in them, which causes these fearful relapses either in their religion or
in their conversation. The examination is this. If a man cannot be effectually
enticed to hate sin, it is to be imputed to the flesh which resists the
grace of God. And this cause is to be considered distinctly to be, either
because the flesh remains in him, that hinders the proceeding of his
sanctification though it be begun, or else because he is in the flesh and has
no true grace begun in him at al.

And if we affect to be of the first kind, let us mortify our corruption and
the vnteachablenes of our carnal man. And if we fear to be of the second,
let us terrify our selves from that condition with the word of God which
says, that they that are in the flesh cannot please God: Romans 8.8.
now (if there be any other insta^ce under heaven) to be settled in popery is to
be in the flesh. And let us remember the example of Simon the witch and S.
Peter's censure of him. His example is that being so far converted that he was
baptized, he revolted so far that he offered to buy the holy ghost to play
the impostor. Saint Peter's censure is not that the gall of bitterness was so
deeply settled in him that it was not clean purged out: but I see (says he)
that thou art set in the gall of bitterness. Act. 8, 23
For these two sins differ as much one from another, as his case in whose
belly the water is still after that he has been pulled out of the sea, and
his that himself is still in the water and overwhelmed with the sea.

The times are very enticing to corruption in religion, as they were before
the flood. At that time the holy Ghost says, they that had any syncerity in
them began more effectually to call on the name of the Lord, Genesis 4.26.
as we read in the 4. of Genesis or to be called or entitled after the name of
Iehoua, as we are now entitled Christians after the name of Christ. They began
when they saw the rest of the world to fly off from the Church, to aggregate
and to flock to the church of God. Is it not a venerable president for these
dangerous times? And if ever there were a time for those that are newters by
infirmity, and have carried themselves loosely and doubtfully in the matter of
religion to fasten upon a resolution, it is now. It concerns our freehold to
embrace the religion, which by the gracious benefit of her Majesty's laws has
been now so many years and is still (and that exclusiuely) afforded and
authorized unto us. It is even this time into which we are fallen, in which our
tractablenes and our allurablenes to religion and godliness is instantly
required. Let us not be half Iapheths as Agrippa was at the hearing of Saint
Paul, Act. 26.28.
but whole Iapheths: let us be fully and confirmedly won to this true and
holy religion, which the Lord has vouchsafed us so long. When men are lost
this way, they are lost to God, and they are lost to their prince: there is not
a Papist made, but Queen Elizabeth loses a subject.

But shall we consider the reason of this selling up to error? it may appear
in the former example before the flood: where the Sethites were seduced by the
carnal entisements of the Cainites, by their men, who as may appear Genesis 4.
were men of parts; and by their women, who as may appear Genesis 6. were
beautiful. Voluptuousnes then is the witch, for look how a gorged and
surfetted stomach makes an il aching head by the vapors ascending, as appears
by drunkards (who will rue their gorge if they repent not) so a voluptuous
heart infects the judgment, and smokes out the eye of the understanding.
Popery has no new arguments but the old colworts in a new dish, but
infatuate flesh worms cannot judge of false dice: they have drunk of the
whores wine, and have lost their wits.

But alas how many are there which answer to the name of Iapheth, as Abshalom
answered to the name of Abshalom (which signifies the fathers peace) which
bring as much tractablenes to the Church as he brought peace and comfort to his
father? David and Noah when they gave those names, spoke as they would have it:
but the wicked will do as they lust.

Yet the lord has said enough to melt the obstinate though they were rocks,
because he knows that they are obstinate, Isaiah. 48.3.4.
and their neck is an iron sinew and their brow brass. And therefore who can
come after him to say any more? All that we can do is to repeat his sayings, If
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, Phil. 2.12.
if any fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy, let us be like
minded, having the same love, being of one accord and of one judgment. Let
Iapheth come to Shem, for Shem may not come to Iapheth: no the Lord has
forbidden it by Jeremy. Ier. 15.19 Isaiah. 11.6.7
It is a prophecy of the fiercest if they be not reprobates, that the Wolf,
Leoparde, Lion, and Bear shall be made innocent, and sociable to the most
harmless and helpless creatures.

Iapheth is determined to be by the only power of God, it is therefore
required of necessity that the Lord himself by his spirit perform it. The
Lord (who only can) shall entise Iapheth. For although this text does expressly
contain neither the addition of necessity, that it must needs be the Lord
that must do it; nor the exclusive that none other can do it: yet under this
zealous contemplation of Gods mercy and power in this affectionate speech The
Lord, it has them both by implication, by presupposing that seeing the Lord
will needs have it done, he must need do it himself, because none others
can. If any do still object that this point that it is Gods only work to
convert, cannot be concluded out of this Text without adding the word only
unto it, let him again understand that it is not added presumptuously but only
in sense supplied, where otherwise it is understood and meant already. And
this supply is after the example of Christ's collection out of those words of
Moses, that we must serve God, from whence he gathers that we must serve god
alone: Deuteronomy. 6.13. Math. 4.10.
teaching us to conclude in like case, that if the scriptures do show that
there is not any other power of conversion besides the spirit of God (as we
shall see they do) then where it is said that the Lord conuerteth, it is there
meant that he only conuerteth and none other. So then this text teaches us
that true conversion is not the work of any inferior power, but is one of the
peculiar works of the holy and omnipotent spirit of God. And if the question
should be to whom it did appertain to prevail by persuading, would we not
have recourse and refuge to this scripture for solution, The Lord shall
persuade Iapheth?

This likewise appears unto us by the evidence of other scriptures. First,
the exclusive is plain, 1. C^^. ^.7.
that he that planteth is not any thing at all, that is to say, in the work
of true conversion.

And the necessity is as plain where Christ says, no man ca^ come to me
except the father which has sent me draw him: John. 6.44.
he himself must of necessity draw him. For this is true of every perfect
gift that it comes down from the father of lights, I am. 1.17.
and he reserueth the donation to himself. And therefore the Prophet says,
Lord thou have wrought all our works for us. Isai. 26.12
The scriptures before the Lord reuiueth us, call us dead, Ephesians. 2.1.
yea dead in trespasses and sins. And the son of God says, that our
reviving from this death, John. 5.25.
must be by hearing the voice of the son of God. And Saint Paul says, that
our quickening (meaning this first quickening) must be by no less then by the
spirit of him that raised up Jesus. Romans 8.11.
And he likewise otherwhere ascribes faith to the working of Gods mighty
power. Ephesians. 1.19.
So that if there follow either will or deed in us, God works that also of
his good pleasure and will. Phil. 2.13.
As Fulgentius more largely expresses it: Fulgen. lib. 1 ad Monimu^.
Dei est vt and bonum facere velimus, and vt bonum facere valeamus: Our will
and our power of doing well are both to be ascribed to God. And Augustine
says, Quos spiritus sanctus intus non docet indoctirede unt, August in Epost.
Ichan. tract. 3.
whom the holy ghost teaches not inwardly they depart unlearned.

There are two principal causes why we should lay this to heart. The first,
that we may not err in the truth of religion in ascribing any thing to our
selves, as if we were able to stir up our selves. For as Saint Paul says, We
are not sufficient of our selves so much as to think any thing as of our
selves, 2, Cor. 3.5.
but our suffciencie is of God. And perpetual experience reuealeth it, that
they which continue in this opinion of free will are egregious inueterate
hypocrites, dying either desperate or senseless.

The other cause is, least we should err in the truth of affection, that is to
say, in thinking that a lesser measure of affection will serve in applying our
selves to our conversion then will. For when we hear tell that (what other
power soever of the keys is in the Church) Christ himself carries that key of
David, Rauel. 3.7.
that shuts and no man can open, it will make us to lift up our hearts above
all that is called the world. And certainly the Spirit of God himself by this
holy meditation lifts us up to such a zealousnesse in prayer, and such a
contention of Spirit in making toward God in all kind of duties, as they that
are informed that none can convert us so as we shall be converted, that is, so
as our conversion shall stand good, but only he. We may be well assured, that
the Spirit of God works not effectually in us if our affections be cold in
turning unto him: And therefore we had need to arise and make toward him. Men
pride themselves in a few remorsfull thoughts, and break ye back of Gods mercy
with wilful wickedness; they offer sacrifice to their own hypocrisy, and think
highly of themselves for a thing of nothing.

We had more need to divide our prayers, and one while to supplicate
seriously unto him for stronger affections, and another while to desire him to
bless those affections which he has bestowed upon us with divine
encouragements, that we may feel the finger of God to work powerfully within
us. For besides the secret sins of prayerlesnes, and a kind of indeuotion
tending to Atheism which we commit this way, our very outward endeavor at
public prayer and at the hearing of the word is so profane, and so slight,
as testifies to our faces that we have forgotten our selves, and seem to
think that some lesser power will serve the turn to allure us, then the Lord
himself. For if we were otherwise minded in the truth of our hearts, we would
most certainly enforce our selves to be holy as he is holy.

In the day of our visitation when our conscience will stand upon strict terms
with us, whether we be indeed converted or no, our copper conversion will not
go for current. And when it is detected unto us how impossible it is for us to
convert our selves, or for any creature to convert us: nay when it is detected
unto us what counterfeit converting there is in this world, wherein lightly the
converted are unconverted; then we will hold up our hands to this truth (take
heed least too late) Then we will cry, Convert Thou us O Lord, Lam. 5.21.
and so shall we be converted indeed. Then discouragement will seize upon us
in an unseasonable time, and our sure foundation will be to lay when the rain
falls, and the floods come, and the winds blow. Matt. 7.26.27.
A great part of men when they fall sick of their last sickness, are like
them which commit themselves to the raging seas in a riuen ship. Their religion
and their faith is not the strong operation of the Lord within them, but a bare
conceit of faith and a conceit of religion. And many professors are like
fresh water soldiers which brawle in Tauernes, and make frayes in Smithfield,
before they com^ to true employment; but after in due season do show neither
courage nor hardiness. Much talking there is and much disputation of religious
matters: but let us take heed that our courage fail us not then, when we must
either stand fast or stick fast. If ye Lord have wrought effectually in us,
he has wrought it by the power of his might, and we have the sense of his
omnipotence in co^quering those temptations, which none but the Spirit of God
could have conquered. And if we find not this work, let us not drive off til
night: for we will find it a long march for such a dark, and durtie and
tempestuous night. Let us cry strongly to the Lord to give us his Spirit, and
let us beseech him to inlighten us that we may discern between our own
spirit and his Spirit. For although there be a spirit in man, yet it is the
inspiration of the Almighty, Job. 32.3.
it is the inspiration of the Almighty only that gives understanding. Psalm.
3.8.
And David says, Salvation belongs to the Lord.

I demand of thee, art thou converted? Thy answer likely will be that thou
trustest so. Let me ask thee again, have thou felt the combat betwixt the
flesh and the Spirit within thee? It is likely that to this also thou will
answer affirmatively. For he that feels not so much in case is of a palpable
outcast. But give me leave to ask of thee a third question: Did dest thou
feel comfort in that combat by the victory of the Spirit over the flesh? If
thou do, thou do certainly acknowledge the truth of this point by
experience that God himself was the man of war, and that it was the Son of
God himself that by his Spirit destroyed the power of darkness within thee.
Thou can remember many a secret and deep sigh, many a fervent prayer. For
it is most certain, that howsoever hypocrites do abuse these things, yet they
are the music of this war: this war I say wherein the holy Ghost strikes
the stroke, and does all our things for us. The free will which man has
without special grace, extends no further then civil moralities or
frustrate devotion, which yet hypocrites; not being able to wade out of hell,
make account of, according to the proverb, as if there were no other heaven.
But the freewill of a true Christian is another kind of thing, it is to
partake in the divine nature, the divinity of true Christians is not after the
vulgar sense of dogmatizing, but there is besides another manner of divinity of
preaching, a divinity of hearing, a divinity of praying, even to feel the
divine finger of God working in us in these exercises; without which the breath
is but scattered into the air. This kind of divinity is the life of God in a
man; and it is the lowest degree of grace that can be named, if a man have no
true sense thereof, to bewail his senslesnesse. It is certain that he which
is not stirred inwardly with religion as with a miraculous operative, has not
the bowels of the child of God within him. Coldness is a curse; and to make no
conscience of coldness, is to have Gods curse under seal.

This is indeed the freewill that we profess, when God gives us free hearts
to set manfully upon, our corruptions, as Augustine faith. Liberum arbitrium
non euacuatur per gratiam, August. de spiritu and litera. cap. 30.
sed statuitur quia gratia sanat voluntatem: Freewill is not avoided by grace
but established, because grace heals the will, that is, gives us a will to
righteousness.

I do the rather insist upon this point, least any man should deceive his own
heart, in thinking that conversion is either an easy matter, or of easy
means, Good brethren for your lives think nor such a thought, but remember
that if Iapheth be to be allured, the Lord must allure him.

The fall of man as it can be relieved by no mercy but the mercy of God: so
neither can it be relieved by any power but the power of God. To despise the
means is great presumption, for the Gospel is the power of salvation, that
is, the holy Ghost exercises his power by it. But to ascribe to the means that
that is due to the Lord, must be far from us.

But thou will say unto me that if the Gospel be but the instrument, and the
power be the Lords; then all this contention of preachers to deliver the
Gospel powerfully is needless, because the power is else where.

But mark the answer, that the power of God is not reserved within God apart
from the word, but God is in the spirit of the Preacher to deliver the word,
Gal. 2.8.
as S. Paul says the holy Ghost wrought in Peter and him toward their
several hearers, and is in the Spirit of the hearer to receive the word. And
again, the hearers shall fall on their faces and say, of a truth God is in you
indeed. 1. Cor. 14.25.
And therefore brethren, though ye try the spirits, which spare not to do by
the Scriptures, let them not pass away untried though they seem never so
spiritual; yet reject not the spirits of the zealous because they are zealous.
For as there is a doctrine that is of God: so there are spirits that are of
God, in whom the holy Ghost works mightily. Now if thou say to me, that then
it will follow, that where the preaching has no good effect, there the
Preacher spoke not from the Spirit of God: Understand for answer, that no such
thing will follow. For the holy Ghost may work in a man, and yet not work by
him upon others, but his prayer and his preaching may return into his own
bosom. And Noah's meaning in this prophecy was, that the conversion of the
Gentiles should be wrought through the holy Ghost by the perswasiue spirit of
the teachers, and the perswasible spirit of the hearers. The Lord therefore
increase among you men of a gracious persuasion, that may confirm you with the
confirmations of God in the religion of God. And the Lord reveal his arm so
in the ministry, that we may have occasion to ascend into that same speech
of Saint Paul, O the deepenesse of the riches of God, wherein Augustine says
is contained the solution of that question, August. de^ spiritu and libera.
cap. 34.
why some are converted rather then some.

The Lord shall allure Iapheth, signifying that the allurements of God are in
the doctrine of the Gospel and in Evangelical examples. For although we
read how that the Lord has laid violent hands upon some as upon Saint Paul in
the way to Damascus, Act, 9.
yet we must make a difference between his consternation which tended to his
conversion, and his conversion it self, which was wrought when Ananias came
with the word of comfort in his mouth. It is true indeed that our word ought
not to stand in the entising speech of man's wisdom, 1. Cor. 2.4.
for the allurements are spiritual. But in the mean while they are
allurements still. For as the Prophet Hosea says, Hos. 11.4.
The Lord leads us with the cords of a man, even with the bands of love, and
is to us as he that takes off the yoke from our jaws, and lays meat unto
us. How kindly alluring his Church to let him in is Christ induced by Solomon,
Cant. 5.2.
Open unto me my sister, my love, my dove, etc?

How amiably does Saint Paul quite himself in his embassage, 2. Cor. 5.20
We are (says he) Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
through us, we pray you in Christ's steed that you would be reconciled to God.
It does then appear that the true doctrine of Jesus Christ is alluring
doctrine, and replenished with sweet inducements.

But here (likely) some man bethinketh him upon occasion of this speech of
allurement, that it is then a course to be taken with the Papists, that they
might hear of this alluring attractiue. But as Saint Paul says in a matter
not much unlike, Romans 10.18
I demand, have they not heard? Have they not been mercifully dealt with by
her Majesty, and lovingly entreated by their brethren? The Lord be judge
between them and us concerning this thing. Whatsoever good course has yet
been unassayed which tends to their allurement, the Lord direct the hearts
of his fathfull servants to take it. Always provided that their lenity be not
abused, and that foolish pity mar not the city. I cannot come after with any
supply of new allurements: but I do only repeat these two motives. The
first, that the Papists of this land which are aforehand brought and sold like
sheep by their false brethren the Papists beyond sea, shall escape the Butcher
by running from the Drouer.

The second, that they shall return to a God which will in holy mercy do that
to them which a man may not do for his wife, if when he has put her away for
her lewdnes for a time to humble her she disdain him, and become another man's.
Shall he return unto her? should not then this land be polluted? But they have
played the harlot with many lovers, yet turn again to me, says the Lord.

But let us come to the point. It is confessed on both sides both by our
adversaries, and by us, that the Gospel allureth. But in the mean while the
controversy is grown on which side this alluring doctrine may be, on their
side or on ours. It shall be therefore very pertinent both to the text and time
(if your attention will revive it self) to discuss this point, though not in
such measure as it may indeed be discussed, yet according to the measure of
the gift of God.

The Papists have already furnished out maine confident allegations that their
religion is most political, going about by a long induction to conclude, that
it sorteth best with the good government of the common wealth. In which
disputation, as they do often go beyond the profession of divinity: so even
there where they keep best compass, their divinity is turned into humanity.
For their very arguments do betoken but an earthly well being (if they could
have hit that) and they manifest themselves to have forgotten that life is of
the duall number. In this point likewise they are very out-bearing, and the
success which they have found in their allurements has made them arrogant
enticers. For they are indeed though very scorpions, yet such (as Saint John
says) whose faces are like the faces of men and they have hair as the hair
of women. Reave. 9.7.8
And to confess the truth, what affliction soever they pretend to have been
imposed upon them: yet they have enjoyed so much peace and pampering, that they
have thriuen by it in eloquence, and in the music of Marmaids, even like the
Naphthalites with ease and prosperity they have learned ^o give goodly words.
Genesis 49.21.
But the question between them and us is not who are ^he cunninger enticers,
or the better painters they or we, but whose doctrine has more reason to allure
the child of God, theirs or ours.

As let the conte^tion first be, whether a man being compos mentis (as we say)
will rather be allured to Gods free grace which the Spirit of truth teaches by
us but of Gods holy word, or to his own merits, which the spirit of error
teaches by them out of their own brain.

They say that we sell Paradise good cheap, because we hold it at the Lords
express rate, as it stands in the Prophecy of Isaiah, where we are called
to buy indeed, but to pay nothing, having nothing to pay (as he says. Isaiah
55.1.
) And we say that they sell hell very dear, when they make men to pay their
merits for it, which otherwise cost-free, that is, without that blasphemous
arroga^cie, should have it over soon, for their impenitencie of dead works.
What man that is not bewitched out of the wit of a man, will forsake the
doctrine of trusting in Gods free grace, but once to lean to trust to
himself? We in the sacrament of the Supper do offer Christ spritually to the
faithful receiver. They offer him carnally, that is, monstrously and
irksomelie, and that to the unfaithful. On which side is the better
allurement? They offer the pardons of men, we offer the pardon of God to the
penitent. They require bodily penance for sins, and put in contrition for
fashions sake. We require spiritual as the acceptable sacrifice, and value
bodily exercise at a low rate. We teach that the preaching of the word must
be heard, which pierces and enters into the soul. They teach that mass
must be heard which biteth not: for this is the hypocrites comfort, missa non
mordet. As for their preaching, it is the hu^ming of a Drone without a sting,
except they be disposed to play the Termagants against the truth. We teach
that a man's purgatory consists in respect of merit in Christ's death, and in
respect of spirit in the mortification of our corruptions whiles we live here,
by the power of Christ's death. They teach, that if the Priests be not be better
paid, a man must abide in purgatory long after his death. Let as many as are
not sophisticated with the devils mists see with their eyes, ^ea let them feel
with their hands, which of these doctrines are more likely to be true. But let
us to it again. They say that priests may not marry with a good conscience.
And we say that all those of them which cannot live continently, are bound in
conscience to marry. Their reason is, an unlawful vow. Our reason is, that
they, their prayers, and their preachings may not be polluted with damnable
hypocrisy, by reason of their wilful pollutions. They allege that we teach
voluptuousness, when we teach thus the avoiding of fornication. But we
allege that they by consequence teach stolen voluptuousness, which burns
and wastes the conscience: for thus to frequent relapses, is to cauterize the
spirit and vastare conscientiam, as the schoolmen aptly term it. Are there
any but bewailed wretches that cannot see on which side the truth stands?
Their doctrine is, that it is presumption by any means to be rid of the fear
of damnation ordinarily. Our doctrine is, that whosoever loves the Lord out of
a pure conscience, that is, out of a conscience enlightened by Gods word, and
not offended by living in sin against the conscience so enlightened, may
justly upon that ground receive from the holy ghost assurance of his salvation,
though the Fathers of Trent condemn this persuasion never so much. They
affirm that a man has free will to do things truly good, which is a devise
of the devil to teach men to presume of that they have not, that they might
err unto perdition. We teach that a man has no free will in his nature to do
any true sanctified and spiritual good, that men acknowledging their bondage
may seek free will of God.

To be brief, concerning the scriptures (whereby all must be tried) they teach
that the vulgar translation which is so grossly faulty, is only authentical.
We teach that the original text in Hebrewe and Greek is only authentical.

These differences are so manifest, and these faces are of so contrary hue,
that it is no marvel if the holy ghost say, that men must be first drunk
before they can be deceived in them. Revel. 14.8. and 17.2.
Otherwise their delusions are as easy to discern, as that Iezabel had
borrowed her face then she looked out at the window. The whore of Babylon is
highly mounted, finely painted, and terribly armed, and these be her
allurements. The doctrine of the gospel has beauty in it self, inward
comfort, and constant color, and these are her allurements.

But peradventure some man will say unto me, I pray you what allurement is in
your doctrine of mortification which you so much urge?

And which you extend so far; that a man can have no peace in his conscience
that favors and retains any sin in himself against his conscience?
Which determines that a man is in a damnable case whatsoever good deeds seem
to be in him, if he yield not to the work of the holy ghost for a leaving but
of any one known sin which fights against the peace of his conscience?
Dearly beloved, I beseech you in the bowels of Christ to take this answer,
cast it into the balance and mark well the scales.

I confess in deed to begin withal, that this doctrine fawneth not upon
hypocrites, but remooueth them to their woe, and the weal of the Church. But
why is it? is it not because they are hypocrites? To the rest may it not be
truly said of this doctrine, Matt. 11, 29 30.
that it is an easy yoke and a light burden? Is it not an alluring doctrine
that has but one only difficulty, and is otherwise accompanied with most
certain consolation? The difficulty is to shake off the unconscionable sin
that cleaves so fast to us, and tarrieth behind to mischief us. Were it not
damnable doctrine to dispense with that which admits no dispensation? should
we take upon us to heal with sweet words like witches? Be strong in the
Lord, and of a good courage in throwing away that sin, and then the maine brunt
is over and the worst is past. Hold thee there, and thou may enjoy
perpetual, that is, vndiscontinued consolations notwithstanding a thousand
infirmities. For so long as the power of mortification destroys thy sinful
affections as they rise, and so long as thou art unfeignedly displeased with all
sin, and do mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, thy case is the
case of salvation. And when thou art once soundly confirmed in this resolution,
thou art not only in the case, but also in the state of salvation, thou shall
live and not die. What would a man have more then this? But the Papists have
found an ease for this matter. For they which accuse the doctrine of the
gospel to be a doctrine of liberty, because of the article of justification
by faith only, do themselves by indulgences, by pardons, by merits of Saints,
and by setting of good deeds against ill, teach foolish virgins that oil is
to be begged or bought, whereby they are induced into a damnable sleep and
security.

It would allure a pyrate indeed to be of their religion, if he might be sure
to buy out his punishment after his death with the robberies and rapines of his
life. In the mean time such doctrine as this, has brought Atheism into the
world, and that also of the vilest kind. For a Popish Atheist is an hideous
mungrell, even a very Centaure. As to say the very truth, Popery and Atheism
are very coincident, and their differences very obscure. Popery is a sensual
dissembling with Gods, and Atheism is a sensual mocking of God. The Papist is
a make-god, and ye Atheist is a mock-god. And you may be sure, that the maker
will be so bold as to be a mocker in time. The Papist deludeth his conscience,
and the Atheist derideth his conscience. Popery (being copia cornu of sensual
ceremonies, for every sense a play-fellow, a merry religion, the
good-fellowes religion) comfort the flesh, and Atheism suppresseth the
spirit. Brethren, observe it well, and you shall find that Popery to them that
have heard the Gospel soundly and sincerely taught, mark well what I say, to
them that have heard the Gospel soundly and sincerely taught, has nothing in
it to allure any but hypocrites, nor any thing in it to detain any such in
that religion, but those which are in a fair forwardness to degenerate into
Atheism.

But peradventure it will be alleged that there are many even in the bosom
of the Realm, that after the hearing of the Gospel are drawn away in their
very consciences to Popery. But I ask who are they? Are they not they of
whom a man may say, O how great is that darkness when their very Mat. 6.33.
light is become darkness? when the candle of their conscience is put out?
Are they not they which are given over to a forlorn sense? whose thoughts and
conscience (as Solomon says) are little worth, Prou. 10, 20
because (as Saint Paul says) themselves being defiled Infidels nothing is
pure to them, Tit. 1.15.
but even their minds and consciences are defiled. It is no great matter which
way the consciences of these men do wagge. I will tell you (dearly beloved)
what may be observed of many that are suddenly reconciled Papists in this
kingdom, that if there were no other respect but the loss of them for the
good that was in them when they were Protestants, they are better lost the^
found, and become that Synagogue better then this Church, for they suite it
better. Men of a proditorious, imperious and luxurious disposition.

But what should I talk of conscience? seeing that kind of religion is the
refuge of the vnconsc^ionable: whose trade is first to promise what they lust,
the^ to make heretics whom they lust, and at the last to break promise with
them when and how they lust. Their religion it self is spied well enough by
many of ye professors of it. And there are many that are Papists even against
their conscience, if conscience were to be stinted at this apprehension; that
Popery is a false and fraudulent religion, haeresis Catholica impostura magna,
the imposture of the world. But to say the truth, they are not Papists against
their conscience, because they have no conscience secundum sensum.

And therefore as for the examples and lives of men whereby we are to allure
one another, they need not to boast so much as they do, considering that their
religion consists by consequence of the profession of many great crimes.
Against the third commandment they profess resolution of perjury, if it
serve their turn when they are sworn to those that they call here-tikes.
Against the fist commandment they profess disobedience to their princes, if
their holy father incite them to it. Against the sixth commandment they
profess murder upon the like warrantie. Against the seventh commandment by
barring marriage, and express preferring the faults of single life before it,
they profess filthiness and unchastity in those that ought to be most pure.
Against the eight commandment they profess making merchandise of souls.
Against the ninth commandment under pretense of reconciling to the Church,
they profess alienation of subjects from their natural princes, and are the
most renowned artificers of mischief and debate that ever were heard of. All
these they do directly or indirectly profess besides the rest.

As for us which profess the Gospel, it behooves us on the other side to
allure by our example in better manner then we do, and not to cause the name of
God to be blasphemed by these Papists through us, but rather to let our light
so shine before men, that they may glorify our father which is in heaven.
Matt. 5.16.
For the truth is, that we are to too short in this kind of allurement. The
doctrine which we profess is indeed Gods alluring doctrine, but our examples
are not such. The works of the Papists especially many of their Antichristian
piles, are monuments of their errors. And our works are monuments of the
profanation of Gods truth, as our antisabbatarie play houses. But who does
any common good? The merits of an arrogant Papist are carried after him with a
doleful Item fit for a black Sanctus, that they will not go for payment. And
our works, if we repent not, will follow after us and give us our payment,
because we in our generation have not been so gracious in alluring, as the
Papists have been witching in theirs. The Lord give us grace to repent.

The fourth conclusion out of this text is, that all those true Iapheths who^
the Lord shall take in hand to allure, shall dwell in the tents of Shem, that
is, shall come to the true Church, and shall abide therein. If God be not
merciful unto us in this thing, all his mercies are frustrate unto us. And
unto this blessing he after a sort exhorts them, to wit, to lay hold upon it.
For it is the greatest favor that God bestows upon men in this world, to
make them true members of his true Church. And this is the grace if we be not
utterly ungracious, which above all worldly things we will desire and affect,
though it should cost us all we are worth to purchase this field. As David
says, One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will require, and will not
alter this petition into another, Psalm. 27.4 5
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his temple. For as he says. Psalm. 48.2, 3
Mount Sion is the joy of the whole earth, to wit, as far as God has any
people in the earth belonging to his election. For in it (says the Prophet) he
speaks forth all his glory. This is the Arc, Psalm. 29.9.
out of which there is no salvation: all else is a flood fifteen cubits above
the highest mountains. They therefore which cannot be allured to come and
dwell in the tents of Shem, must perish. For even the children of God
themselves are no better then wretches so long as they are withheld from hence.
Whose state is represented in the prodigal son, that was feign to feed on
swill and swads. Luke 15.15, 16.
And David complains of his banishment from the Church, which yet he was not
guilty of, Psalm. 120.
Woe is to me (says he) that I remain in Meshech, and dwell in the tents of
Kedar.

But you will say unto me, that I shall not need to urge this point because it
is alredie confessed. But I am constrained to reply, that the confession of
the truth of it is not much more general, then the disauowing and rejecting of
the practice. For how many are there which hold off, and almost take a pride
to be unstayed in the matter of religion? How many which by pretense of
disagreements in the Church, cannot tell what to make of themselves?

The Papists they have sought up their gods again, which they had cast to the
backs and to the moules, they frequent Mass in corners, and they behave
themselves so as the Familists in their assemblies: and that company of them
which are called Jesuits, may more worthily be called Adamites, which were
the first founders of the Familists. For these Masse-monges watch Tammuz in the
nights, and these night-birds keep little better then the feasts of Isis and
Osiris in this city. As for the rest, if the name of Recusant should be taken
strictly for every one that refuses so to dwell in the tents of She^, as the
Lord would take in good part, the Recusants of this land are innumerable. When
we consider how long the Gospel has continued amongst us, and compare it with
the great heaps of people in this City which make no difference of the Sabbath
day at all for conscience sake, we may truly cry out of a prodigious wickedness.
It can not be denied but yt there are now more sufficient preachers of Gods
word amongst you, then ever there were. But the ignorance of the most that
profess, and the rudeness of the troops of those that scorn to profess is
very offensive and loathsome. There are they say belonging to diverse several
paririshes many thousand people, peradventure more to some then the parish
church can contain; though I know not the case, yet I propound it to you. And
how do you think are a great part of this people occupied, when they should
be present at the hearing of the word? I would demand of the frowardest man
in all this presence, whether he do not think in his conscience, that the
greatest part of them are so frarre from being in the tents of Shem, that they
are in the tents of Cham. For I pray you tell me, are not these drunken
Tauernes and victualling houses, these play houses and brothell houses the
tents of Cham, where all the rest of their villainies are accomplished and made
up with the scoffing at Noah? Assuredly (dearly beloved) if that which is
called conscience be any better the^ a jest, and that which is called Gods word
be any better then a stale, these are damnable things to be done, and therefore
horrible things to be suffered.

I confess unto you that my skill extends not duly to limit forth the blame
of the rulers, to lay it justly where it is. Unfeignedly I speak it, I forbear
that particular course for no other cause, but because I would not reprove
sin with sin by speaking into a matter before I know it. But well I am
sure, that if they which are charged with the reformotion of this abuse by the
places which they sustain, did busy themselves therein more zealously then
yet they do, they should please God better then in any thing else for the most
part wherein they are forward.

They that come out of the world into the Church, come out of a desert and they
that come into the Church, as most men are come in, come into a desert, and are
like sheep without a shepherd. This great forest of London is full of covert
for wandering creatures, and there are too many privileges for sinners. I
beseech you hear me this one thing with patience, and vouchsafe to weigh it
well. The Magistrates being annoyed with the disorders of loose and wicked
persons which swarm about this city, do perform a laudable office indeed in
reuising the orders of Bridewell, and in urging better execution of the good
laws which tend to a remedy. But except the tents of Shem were surueyed
likewise, and the appearance there were better urged, it is to small purpose to
endeavor this external reformation. For this one thing be sure of, that these
loose persons, these disguised conycatchers have informed themselves of their
state what it would be, if they should change their course with that which the
Magistrate would urge, to wit, that it would be both more poor and more
painful. And therefore they are resolved rather to venture the uttermost
penalty, then to submit themselves to this change. So that there is nothing
that can effectually reclaim them but only this, to marshall them to the
tents of Shem. For there they shall find allurements to quiet their minds in
obedience. They shall find that they are not bidden to loss, but that they
shall better their state by the change. For to dwell rightly in the tents of
Shem, is in some measure to dwell in heaven. And I would the magistrates would
duly consider, how much they are beholding to the Ministers of the Gospel in
this behalf: (assuredly the Magistrates are unthankful if they use them not
respectively and kindly.) And I would the Ministers would likewise endeavor to
bring hither their forces. For so should they directly satisfy their own
duties in bringing men to Gods Church, and consequently assist the Magistrate
in the reformation of the commonwealth.

And as for the people themselves which are run wild, be they poor or rich,
I would they would consider what wrong they do themselves with this out-lying,
and what benefit it would be to them to come and dwell in these tents. And it
were to be wished that some even of those which resort to Paul's Cross and
will not come at their own Church, and when they are here delude the law with
walking and talking, were better ordered: for their resort hither is like the
piller-prayers of many which kneel down only for fashion sake. I say, I
would not only the poor, but also the rich offenders would observe it of what
quality soever. For as Augustine says, Quisquis ille est and qualiscunque
ille est, Aug. sermon. 181. de tempore.
Christianus non est qui in Christi Ecclesia non est. Be what he may be, he is
no Christian that is not in Christ's Church: though his head were of brass.

Pardon my liberty of speech of these Libertines. These Conycatchers and
vagrant Caines, which have gotten a perpetuity of haunting Tauernes and
infamous house without difference of days, and without respect of the time
either of prayer or preaching are no better then the devils rogues. But if they
would come to Shems tents their priu^ledges should be great.

For first, Ephesians. 2, 12.
whereas they are now a sort of maisterlesse hounds and Atheists in the world
(as S. Paul says) they should be received into the service of God, and so come
under his tuition, which would be a rolling away of their shame: for this non
appearance is a shameful crime of irksome reproach.

Secondly, by being in checke-roll in his tents they should be capable of the
benefit of his servants, to be preferred to the grace of the holy Ghost. For
these wild men, these Faunes and Satyrs (as I may say) are a kind of demo
niacks, and are not so much as capable of the Spirit of God, til they have
submitted themselves to be members of Gods Church.

And thirdly, by tarying their turn they should be not only capable, but it
should even be unto the^ according to their faith. And there would be a
marvelous change worthy to be celebrated with a song of Angels. Whereas now
they are often inco^bred with the horrors of conscience, so that the sound of
fear is ever in their ears. Against this Satan cannot otherwise succor them,
then by teaching them to make out a power of blasphemies and derisions both of
heaven and hell, or to earth themselves in the caves of oblivion, that the
judgment to come may not come into their minds. Then they should be able to
pacify their consciences with sound arguments of their salvation: and the
grace of God would persuade their consciences to take part on their side. And
when their heart was become their friend, it would persuade their affection to
dine and sup with their conscience. Which would be a royal amends to the
poorer sort for the hard fare they should find in the world by changing their
course, and a dish beyond all their dainties to the rich.

This second part was not uttered for lack of time, but was likewise by
authority thought fit to be annexed in the print.
NOw follows the second part of the text of Iapheths participating with
Shem, or rather his succeeding of Shem in dominion over Canaan; And Canaan
shall be their servant, that is, let Iapheth continue in the tents of Shem, and
then he shall hold Canaan in servitude. For the servitude of Canaan under
Iapheth, is annexed to Iapheths dwelling in the tents of Shem. And so grows
the fifth conclusion out of this text, Canaans brood, do foster disdain and
enmity. But in the mean while as Solomon says, When a man's ways please God,
Prou. 16.7.
his enemies shall be contented to be at peace with him. Therefore the
Psalmist says, O that my people had harkened unto me, and Israel had walked
in my ways: Psalm. 81.13.14.15.
I would soon have humbled their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries. The haters of the Lord should have been subject unto him, though
fainedly, and their time of ruling should have endured for ever. On the other
side the scripture says, Deuteronomy. 28.43.44.
That when we cease to walk in the ways of the Lord (whereof a principal
part is to uphold his religion) our enemies shall be the head, and we shall be
the tail. And such likewise are the examples of the word. When Eli suffered
Gods service to be corrupted by his sons, ^. Sam. 2.30.32.
the Lord removed him (you know how) and said unto him, Them that honor me
will I honor, and they that despise me, shall be despised. And further he says
to him, And thou shall see anguish in the habitation of the Lord, in stead of
al those things wherewith God would have blessed Israel. And of the children of
Israel the scripture says, Judge. 2 13.14.
They for sooke the Lord and served Baal and Ashtaroth, and the wrath of the
Lord was hot against Israel. And he delivered the^ into the hands of spoilers
and sold them into the hands of their enemies round about them, so that they
could no longer stand before their enemies. So we read of Solomon, 1. King.
11.14.23.26.
how he went to wreck when he had once yielded to the corruption of religion,
at the instigation of his wives: The Lord stirred up enemy upon enemy against
him, even those which before served him. In the recital of these scriptures,
we have need to make use of two worthy sayings of S. Paul. The first, Romans
15.4
That Whatsoever things are written, are written for our learning, to comfort
and animate us to hold our religion. The second, that these examples of Gods
vengeance on them that forsook it, are ensamples to us to terrify us from
once meditating of such a sin. 1. Cor. 10.6
Let it not come into our minds, that there is any wisdom in yielding any
thing from the truth of God. Let us not think that others will think that we
deal wisely if we take that course. For the scripture affirms that our
strict holding of our religion is our wisdom, Deuteronomy. 4, 6.
and our understanding in the sight of the people.

Great is the praise of Queen Elizabeth, for holding her own, or rather Gods
own in this behalf, especially when we consider how she has been urged. The
laws which have been made for the repressing of idolatry are all still in
force, and we do yet abide in the tents of Shem. And assure your selves
brethren, that as ye thoughts of God are tender toward us, if we will serve
him; so the thoughts of Queen Elizabeth his servant and daughter, our Queen
and mother, are tender toward us in this matter of preservation of religion.
If we will be quietly zealous and charitably tractable, we shall see, that as
her entrance was graced with the restoring; so her proceeding shall be honored
with the constant conseruing of religion. So long as weekeepe us within the
limits of wise zeal, and descend not to the heady courses of the vast vulgar,
but do maintain the true service of God, as followers and not forerunners of
wise government, not preventing it by headiness; we shall be able to keep
these Canaanites in subjection, though they did exceed us in number never so
much.

If any say that our holding religion will not hold down our enemies, because
the most religious at some times are oppressed. I answer, that martyrdom is
but in particular places, or of particular persons. But the like cannot be made
to appear of a whole land by any story. It Iapheth dwell in Shems tents,
Canaan shall surely serve him. The word of God ought to suffice to confirm us
in the truth of this point. But let us wade into the matter by reason, because
reason (as they say) impugneth it, seeing the Papists are so many.

Our entrance into the first reason is out of an usual saying that we have
amongst us, that one true man is too hard for two thieves by reason of his
confidence. This certainly is most true in the matter of religion, that
confidence gives courage. This is an only grace to daunt these theenish
Canaanites, Josh. 1.7.
as the Lord said to Joshua, Only be thou strong, and of a most valiant
courage. According to the promise in the Law, Deuteronomy. 28.7.
The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise against thee to fall before thy
face. Josh. 23.10.
They shall come out against thee one way, and shall flee before thee seven
ways. And again, one of you shall chase a thousand of them. And we may be
sure that if the speech of the men of Judah (being fewer) was fiercer then the
speech of the men of Israel (being more) by reason of their spirit, 2. Sa,
19.43
that then much more the spirit of one true Christian, will ouer-match the
spirit of many Papists. And so we have the sentence of S. Luke (a man of God
for his observations) in the story of S. Stephen, But they were not able to
resist the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke. Acts 6.^^
This reason is fortified further by the circumstance of our adversaries
person. For as the matter now stands, a contentious Papist is a double
thief, both in the cause of religion, and also in the question of law and
obedience to the Prince: and therefore false hearted. And certainly if they be
duly stood to, specially by those to whom it does appertain, they will take
their heels. And mark what I say to you, the magnanimity of our most
excellent Prince may put metal into us. And this is the first reason.

The second reason is taken from the protection of God over his Church. For
although the flock of Christ were less, and this herd of goats were never so
numbrous: yet if the sheep will cleave to their shepherd, the Lord has
promised to create upon every place of mount Zion, Isaiah. 4, 5.
and upon the assemblies thereof a cloud and a smoke by day, and the shining of
a flaming fire by night. For upon all the glory shall be a defense.

This protection of God by discourse of reason may be thus manifested unto us.
Consider the protection of God over the political state of the world, I mean
sustaining the state of common wealths, whereby every man has the benefit of
enjoying his own. There is no man well advised that ascribes this security
wholly to civil government. For we see that if the people were numbered by the
pole and due notice taken of every man's disposition, that there are three to
one which had rather live of the spoil, and those also courageous and valiant
unthrifts. And in other particular Cities and towns where it is more easy to
take a true survey then in this, it is an apparent case that there are enough
penurious and idle malcontents every night couching, to expel all the
substantial inhabitants of the town out of their houses before morning. For
the well and ciuilly disposed in a common wealth are but an handful to those
that are stroy-goods and of ill behavior. And yet ye see what the Lord does
for the protection of the civil conversation of men. And will ye not believe
that his protection will be greater over his Church? Certainly he that checketh
the sea with the tender sand, Iere. 5.22. Psalm. 104.22.23.
and makes the wild beasts of the forest toretyre to their dens when man
goes to his labor will deliver us from the enemies of our souls, though they
were double as many, and compel them to serve us, if we will serve the Lord.

But peradventure thou will say unto me, that it suffices us to hold our
own, though we stand not upon terms of keeping others in subjection.
Consider diligently what must be answered, that Papists are not to be held in
subjection under us as they are men, but as they are Papists; not in respect of
their person, but in respect of their religion. In which regard we are bound to
hold them under in Gods behalf. For who are we, that we should presume to
depart with Gods right? If the Lord have trusted us, and we let them go, how
shall we escape that sentence that our life shall go for theirs? 1. King. 20.39.
And think with your selves, that if Asa thought it necessary to put down
Maachah his grandmother from her estate because of her idolatry: 1. King.
15.13.
how much more necessary is it for Gods Church that Papists be put down,
because of their Popery? And if any man think that Popery is not idolatry,
the same man (there being now no time to debate this cause otherwise must also
think of necessity that our religion is not Gods verity.

Now follows the sixth and last conclusion out of this text, that Canaan
should be brought into bondage, that the enemies of the church should be held
down. As it appears by the law of God, Josh. 23.12, 13.
that when the Lord in mercy brings them in subjection, they ought to be
held in subjection. So as they may in no sort break the yoke and relinquish
their obedience, much less prevail over us, and usurp any privilege. And to
this purpose Solomon says, that it is a point of wisdom to ( catter the
wicked, Pro. 20, 26.
and to cause the wheel to turn over them. And king David voweth, Betimes
will I destroy all the wicked of the land, Psalm. 101.8.
that I may cut off all the workers of iniquity from the City of the Lord.
And according to his vow so was his practice, not only at home, 2. Sam. 8, 1,
2, 14,
but also amongst the borderers: for he subdued the Philistims and destroyed
the Moabites to the third man, he put a garrison in Edom and made them his
servants. By this means the throne of righteousness is established, Pro. 25,
4.5.
as Solomon says, Take the dross from the silver, and there shall proceed a
vessel for the finer: So take away the wicked from the king and his throne
shall be established in righteousness.

On the other-side it is threatened if they be not held down, Josh. 23.13.
they shall be a snare and destruction unto you and a whippe on your sides, and
a thorn in your eyes till you perish. This is the word of God concerning the
enemies of the Church. And this is the means for the Church of God, to lay
hold upon his blessing and promise here given. For it is incredible else to
what insolency the enemies will grow, and how much they would take upon them.
It is chronicled of Solomon, that he as it were surucied the roll of his
recusants; 2. Chron. 2, 17, 18,
he numbered all the strangers that were in the land of Israel, and finding them
to be an hundredth and three and fifty thousand and six hundredth, he set
seventy thousand of them to the burden, and fourscore thousand to hew stones
in the mountain, and the rest to ouersee. He was not terrified with that
multitude, but thought that if Pharaoh by ungodly policy held down Gods
people, then he might by godly policy hold down Gods enemies. And it is the
direction of the spouse to his friends to catch both the Foxes and the cubs
that destroy the vines. Cant. 2, ^5.
Was it not a marvelous arrogant speech of Aram and Apostaticall Ephraim to
say, let us go up against Judah, Isaiah 7, 5, 6
and let us rouse them and make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the
midst thereof, even the son of Tabeel, that is, such a one as shall set up
idolatry.

No less pride then this is in the hearts of Papists. They meditate terrible
things, and are more arrogant them Iannes and Iambres which resisted Moses. 2.
Tim. 3, 8
For they had Pharaoh on their sides to countenance them. But these have our
gracious Queen against the^, whose clemency they have most vngratiously
abused, and are therefore to be well watched that they break not from us, and
duly suppressed by those which ought, according to the direction of her royal
authority.

The Lord in the fourth commandment says, That the stranger that is in our
gates shall not break the Sabbath, that is, shall not be suffered to break
it, but shall be held at the least from the manifest contempt of Gods
commandment. For (as I say) without holding them down by authority, according
to the trust reposed by her Majesty in the Magistrates, it is not to be hoped
that the Lord will hold them down. For we shall be guilty of contemning of
the means by which the Lord both spiritually and outwardly treads down his
enemies, as it is written, Romans 16.20
The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet: mark what he says,
Your feet. And be sure of it that if this serpent will turn again and bruise
our heel, Genes. 3, 15
though we tread upon him, and break his head; that then if we tread not upon
him he will not be contented to bite at our heel, but will fly in our face.

But the Papists are instant, that violence ought not to be offered to their
consciences. This is not other objection then has been made by heretics of
old; yea it is one of the things wherein Saint Augustine reformed his
judgment. Although it be true indeed, that whosoever seems to embrace true
religion, if he do it against his conscience, sins for his conscience sake;
and on the other side, if he embrace it not, he sins for the trueths sake,
and so sins perplexed, that is, whatsoever he does, as long as his
conscience is blinded, in which respect he seems to be thrust upon his
damnation by urging; yet understand that here that saying ought to take place,
that it is better to admit a mischief then an inconvenience, because this
mischief in particular Papists is not to be compared with the inconvenience,
that comes to the whole Church of God by suffering them to go untied. The
administrations of the Church ought not to be subject to the conscience of
vnreclaimable heretics, to the hurt of the Church; no more then the
administrations of the common wealth ought to be subject to the irregularitie
of the licentious in any other kind, to the hurt of the commonwealth.
Moreover, observe well that that whereunto they are urged, is negative, that
they shall not be reconcilers or peruerters. They cannot say that this is to
urge their conscience, when they are pressed only with negative laws: for
this case differs from that of urging them to come to the Church and to
receive the Sacraments, which is by the virtue of the affirmative laws
extending only to other penalty. But these men cannot be content to escape
with their Recusancie for a pecuniarie mulct, which they pay to the halues, but
do complain that violence is offered to their conscience to the peril of
their souls, except they may be suffered to infect and supplant our Church by
Massing and reconciling. And where they threaten us with their argument, that
Compulsion does no good, nor works any conversion; and therefore better
left. It is plain enough that the same consideration which gave satisfaction
to Saint Augustine in the same point concerning the Donatists, may satisfy us
likewise; that as in the commonwealth; so in the Church malefactors are
utterly to be repressed for a common good, whether the malefactors themselves
get good by it or no.

There are all means to be used to win them, and all gentleness and
forbearing to be used toward those, of whom in godly charity there is good
hope by reason of their tractablenesse. They also that are of a quiet
disposition among them, are not to be proceeded against with like severity as
the turbulent. So that we bear in mind what Pliny says of Serpents, Plin.
natural. historiae lib. 8. cap. 23
Vulgatum est colorem plerosque terrae habere qua occultentur: Most of them are
of the color of the earth that they may not be discerned: and that some of
them do gather in their bodies like birds to entice birds. Otherwise let there
be no fraud, Jude 22.
and then (as Saint Jude says) put a difference. And whether it be by loving
wisdom or by wise love, let those that can prevail with them have their
forth.

Only let two rules be observed: First that their doings be warrantable by
the word of God: and secondly that their hearts be sound to the Church of
God. For whatsoever is don ought to be done out of our love to the religion
already established to amplify it in the first place, and out of our
compassion to our seduced brethren to reduce them in the second place. Where
this course will take no place, it behooves us to carry a quick eye and a steady
hand in suppressing the Canaanite that is still in the land. So as our love to
God and our Prince therein may appear.

But principally let us have our part with Shem, that consequently we may
succeed in dominion over Canaan. Let us al hold of our renowned Shem our Shem
in deed Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor
and glory now and evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.
Friendly Reader, I pray, thee mend one fault in the fourth page and 15. line,
for ly, read family,


