THE Voyages and Travails of Sir John Maundeuile KNIGHT. Wherein is treated of
the way toward Jerusalem, and of the meruailes of Inde, with other Lands and
Countries.

depiction of two ships or galleons in port

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Este.

The Preface. Here begins a little treatise or book named John Maundeuile
Knight, borne in England in the Town of S. Albone, and speaks of the ways
to Jerusalem, to Inde, and to the great Caane, and also to Prestor John's land,
and to many other countries, and also of many meruailes that are in the holy
land.
FOrasmuch as the land over the Sea, that is to say, the holy land, that some
call the land of Bihest, among all other lands is most worthy and sovereign,
for it is blessed, hallowed and sacred of the precious blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in the which land it liked him to take flesh and blood of the Virgin
Marie, and to enuiron that land with his own feet, and there he would do many
miracles, preach and teach the faith and the law of christian men, as unto his
children, and there he would suffer many reproues and scorns for us, and he
that was king of heaven and hell, of earth, of air, of sea, and land, and of
all things that are contained in them, would alonely be called king of that
land, when he said, Rex sum Iudaeorum, I am King of the Jews: For at that
time it was the land of Jews, and that land he chose before all other lands,
as the best and most worthy of virtues of all the world. And as the
Philosopher says: Virtus rerum in medio consistit, that is to say, the virtue
of things is in the midst: and in that land he would lead his life, and suffer
passion and death of the Jews for us, to save and deliver us from the pains
of hell, and from death without end, the which was ordained to us for the sin
of our father Adam, and our own sins also: for as for himself he had none
evil done nor deserved, for he never thought ne did any evil, for he that was
king of glory and of joy might best in that place suffer death. For he that
will do any thing that he will have known openly, he will proclaim it
openly, in the middle place of a town or of a City, so that it may be known
to all parties of the city. So he that was king of glory and of all the world
would suffer death for us at Jerusalem, which is the midst of the world, so
that it might be known to all nations of the world, how dear he bought man,
that he made him with his hands to his own likeness, for the great love that
he had to us: Ah dear God, what love he had to his subjects, when he that
had done no trespass would for his trespassours suffer death: for a more
worthy cattle he might not have set for us, then his own blessed body, and
his own precious blood the which he suffered for us, right well ought men to
love, worship, dread and serve such a Lord, and praise such an holy land that
brought forth a Lord of such fruit, through the which each man is saved, but
if it be his own default. This is that land prepared for an heritage to us,
and in that land would he die as seized, to leave it to his children. For the
which each good christian man that may and has wherewith, should strength him
for to conquer our right heritage and purchase, out of the evil peoples
hands, for we are cleped christian men of Christ our father, and if we be the
right children of Christ we ought to challenge the heritage that our father
left us, and take it out of strange men's hands. But now Pride, Couetise, and
Envy, has so inflamed the hearts of the Lords of the world, that they are
more busy to disherite their neighbors, then to challenge or conquer their
right heritage aforesaid. And the common people that would put their bodies and
their cattle for to conquer our heritage, they may not do it without lords:
for assembling of the people without a chief Lord, is as a flock of sheep
without a shepherd, the which depart asunder, and wot not whither they shall
go. But would God the worldly Lords were at a good accord, and with other of
their common people, would take this holy voyage over the sea, I trust well
that within a little time our right heritage before said, should be reconciled
and put into the hands of the right heirs of Jesus Christ.

And forasmuch as it is long time that there was any general passage over the
sea, and that many men desire to hear speaking of the holy land, and have
thereof great solace and comfort.

Wherefore ye shall hear by me John Maundeuile Knight, which was borne in
England, in the town of Saint Albones, and passed the sea in the year of our
Lord Jesus Christ, a thousand iii. C. on the day of Saint Michael, and there
remained long time, and went through many lands, and many provinces, kingdoms
and Isles, and have passed through Turkey, and through Armony, the little and the
great, through Tartary, Persia, Surry, Araby, Egypt the high and the low,
through Libia, Chalde, and a great part of Ethiope, through Amazony, through
Inde the less and the more, a great part, and through many other Isles which
are about Inde, where many people dwells of diverse laws and shapes. Of the
men of which lands and Isles I shall speak more plainly: and I shall declare
part of the things what they are when time shall be, after it may best come to
my mind, and specially for them that will and are in purpose for to visit the
holy city of Jerusalem, and the holy places that are thereabout, and I shall
tell the way that they shall hold thither; for I have many times passed and
ridden it with good company, and with many Lords.

The Voyages and Travails of Sir John Maundeuile Knight.
He that will go toward Jerusalem on horse, on foot, or by sea. Chap. j.
IN the name of God Almighty He that will travail to Jerusalem may go many
ways, both by sea and by land, after the country that he comes from: but
think not I will tell all the Towns, Cities and castles that men shall go
by, for then should I make too long a tale, but only the most principal
countries, cities and towns that men shall go by and through, to go the right
way.

First, if a man come from the West side of the world, as England, Ireland,
Wales, Scotland, and Norway, he may if he will go through Almaine and
throughout the kingdom of Hungary, which King is a great lord and a mighty,
and holds many lands and great, for he holds the land of Hungary, Sauoy,
Camony, a great part of Bulgary, that men call the land of Bugres, and a great
part of the kingdom of Russie, and that lasts to the land of Milland, and
marches on Ciprus, and men pass thus through the land of Hungary, and through
the City that men call Cipanum, and through the castle of Nurburgh, and by the
I Will Torn, toward the end of Hungary, and so by the river of Danubie, that is a
full great river and goes into Almaine, under the hills of Lumbardy, and it
takes into it forty other rivers, and it runs throughout Hungary, and
through Cresses and Crochie, and goes into the sea, so strongly and with so
great might that the water is fresh thirty miles within the sea, and afterward
men go to Belgraue and enters into the land of Bugres, and there men pass a
bridge of stone that is over the river of Morack, and so men pass through the
land of Pinseras and come to Greece to the city of Stermisse, and to the city
of Affinpane, that was sometime called Bradre the noble, and so the city of
Constantinople that was sometime called Bessalneron, and there dwelled commonly
the Emperor of Greece.

depiction of a naked male figure wearing a crown, or the emperor Justinian,
seated on a horse pointing at the sun

At Constantinople is the best and the fairest Church of the world, and it is
of Saint Steven. And before this Church is a guilt Image of Justinian the
Emperor and it is sitting upon a horse and crowned, and it was wont to hold a
round apple in his hand, and men say there, that it is a token that the
Emperor has lost a part of his lands, for the apple is fallen out of the
Images hand: and also he has lost a great part of his Lordship For he was
wont to be Emperor of Room, of Greece, and of all Asia the less, of Surry,
and of the land of Judea, in the which is Jerusalem, and of the land of
Aegipt, of Percia and Arabia, but he has lost all but Greece, and that land he
holds only, men would put the apple in the Images hand, but it will not hold
it. This apple betokens the Lordship that he had over all the world, and the
other hand he lifts up against the East, in token to menasse misdoers. This
Image stands upon a pillar of marble.

Likewise at Constantinople is the cross of our Lord, and his coat without
seame, the sponge and the reed with the which the Jews gave our Lord gall to
drink on the cross, and there is one of the nails that our Lord Jesus Christ
was nailed with to the Cross. Some men think that half the cross of Christ
is in Cipres in an Abbey of Monks, that men depiction of four Passion relics
of Jesus Christ: the rod and sponge of vinegar; the seamless garment; a nail;
and the crown of thorns call the hill of the holy cross, but it is not so, for
the cross that is in Cipres is the Cross on the which Dysmas the good thief
was hanged, but all men wot not that, and that is evil done, but for the
getting of the offering they say that it is the cross of our Lord, and ye
shall understand that the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ was made of four
manner of trees, as it is contained in this verse following.

In Cruce sit Palma, Cedrus, and Cypressus, Oliua.

depiction of the cross of Jesus Christ

For the piece that went right up from the earth unto the head was of Cipres,
and the piece that went overthwart to the which his hands were nailed, was of
Palm, and the stock that stood within the earth in the which they had made a
morteys, was of Ceder, and the table above his head was a foot and a half
long, on which the title was written, that was of Olive, the Jews made this
cross of these four manner of trees, for they thought that our Lord should
have hanged as long as the cross might last, therefore made they the foot of
Ceder, for Ceder may not in the earth ne in water rot, they thought that the
body of Christ should have stoncken, they made the piece that went from the
earth upward of Cipres, so that the smell of his body should grieve no man that
came by, and that overthwart was made of Palm, in signification of victory.
And the table of the title was made of Olive, for it betokens peace, as the
story of Noe witnesses, when the Dove brought the branch of Olive, that
betokened peace made between God and man.

And also you shall understand that the Christian men that dwell over the Sea,
say that the piece of the cross that we call Cipres, was of the tree that Adam
eat the apple off, and so they find written, and they say also that their
Scripture says, that when Adam was sick he said to his son Seth, that he
should go to Paradise, and pray the Angel that keeps Paradise that he would
send him oil of the tree of mercy, for to annoint him that he might have
health, and Seth went, but the Angel would not let him come in at the gate,
but said unto him, that he might not have of the oil of mercy, but he took
him three carnels of the same tree that his father eat the apple off, and bad
him as soon as his father was dead, that he should put these carnels under
his tongue and bury him, and he did so, and of these three carnels sprang a
tree as the Angel said, and when the tree bare fruit, then should Adam be made
whole. And when Seth came again and found his father dead, he did with the
carnels as the Angel commanded him, of the which came three trees, whereof a
Cross was made that bare good fruit, that is to say, our Savior Jesus Christ,
through whom Adam and all that came of him should be saved and delivered from
everlasting death, but if it be their own default. This holy cross had the
Jews hid under the earth in the rock of the mount of Caluery, and it lay there
two hundred years and more, as they say, unto the time that Saint Elene found
it, the which saint Elene, was the daughter of Coel king of England, that then
was called Britain, and after married to Constantius, first, Consul, and
after Emperor of Rome, who had by her issue Constantine the great, borne in
England, and afterward Emperor of Rome, which Constantine turned the name of
Bezansium into Constantinople, he reedified that City, and made it the
monarcal seat of all Europa, and Asia Minor: also ye shall understand, that the
Cross of our Lord was in length viij. cubits and the piece that went
overthwart was three cubuites and a half.

depiction of three Passion relics of Jesus Christ: a nail; the spear-head; and
part of the crown of thorns

A part of the crown of our Lord Jesus Christ wherewith he was crowned and one
of the nails, and the spear head, and many other relics are in France at
Paris in the chapel of the kings, and the crown lies in a vessel of
cristall well dight and richly, for the French king bought these relics
sometime of the Jews, to whom the Emperor had laid them to pledge for a great
sum of gold. And although men say that this Crown was of thorns, ye shall
understand that it was of Ioukes of the sea, which be white and pricketh as
sharp as thorns, for I have seen and beheld many times that at Paris, and
that at Constantinople, for they were both of one, and made of Ioukes of the
Sea. But men have departed it in two parts, of the which one part is at Paris,
and the other part at Constantinople, and I have a point thereof that seems a
white thorn, and that was given me for a great friendship: For there are many
of them broken and fallen into the vessel, when they show the crown to great
men or Lords that come thither. And ye shall understand that our Lord in that
night that he was taken, he was lead into a Garden, and there he was
examined sharply, and there the Jews crowned him with a Crown of Abbespine
branches that grew in the same Garden, and set it on his head so fast, that the
blood ran down by many places of his visage, neck and shoulders, and
therefore has the Abbespine many virtues, for he that bears a branch of it
about him, no thunder, nor no manner of tempest may hurt him, nor the house
that it is in may no evil ghost come, nor in no place where it is. And in that
same garden saint Peter denied our Lord thrice, and afterward was our Lord lead
before the Bishop and Ministers of the Law into another garden of Anne, and
there he was examined, scourged, and crowned often with a swee Thorn, that men
call Harbareus that grew in the same Garden, and that has many virtues. And
afterward he was lead to a garden of Caiaphas and there he was crowned again
with Eglentine, and after that he was lead to a chamber of Pilate and there
he was crowned, and the Jews set him in a chair, and clad him in a mantell
of purple. And then made they a crown of Ioukes of the sea, and there they
kneeled to him and scorned him saying. Aue rex Iudeorum. That is to say, hail
king of Jews. And of this crown, half is at Paris, and the other half at
Constantinople, the which our savior Jesus Christ had on his head, when he
was nailed on the cross. And the spears shaft has the Emperor of Almaine,
but the head which was put in his side is at Paris, they say, in the holy
chapel: and often times says the Emperor of Constantinople, that he has the
spears head, and I have seen it, but it is greater then that at Paris. Also
at Constantinople lies saint Anne our ladies mother, whom saint Elene caused
to be brought from Jerusalem, and there lies also the body of saint John
Chrysostom that was Bishop of Constantinople. There lies also Saint Luke the
Evangelist, for his bones were brought from Bethany where he was buried: and
many other reliquies are there, and there is of the vessel of stone, as it were
marble, which men call Hidrius, that evermore droppeth water, and fills
himself every year once. And ye shall wit that Constantinople is a fair
city and well walled, and it is three cornered, and there is an arm of the
sea that men call Hellespon, and some men call it the bunch of Constantinople,
and some men call it the brach of saint George: and this water encloseth two
parts of the city, and upward to the sea upon that water, was wont to be the
great city of Troy in a fair plain, but that city was destroyed by the
Greeks.

depiction of a mountain or Mount Athos reaching the clouds

Of the Islands of Greece. Chap. ij.
ABout Greece be many Isles that men call Calastre, Calcas, Settico, Thoysoria,
Minona, Faxton, Molo, Carpate, and Lempne. And in this I Will is mount Athoes that
passes the clouds, and there are diverse speeches and many countries that are
obedient to the Emperor of Constantinople, that is to say, Turcoply, Pincy,
Narde, Comage, and many other, Thracy and Macedonie, of which Alexander was
King. In this country was Aristotle borne, in a City that men call Strageris,
a little from the city of Tragie, and at Strageris is Aristotle buried, and
there is an Alter on his tomb, and there make they a great feast every year
as he were a Saint, and upon his alter the Lords hold their great counsels
and assembles, and they thinck that through the inspiration of God and him,
they should have the better counsel. In this Country are right high hills,
there is an hill that men call Olimphus, that parts Macedonie and Thracia,
and is as high as the clouds, and the other hill that men call Athoes is so
high, that the shadow of him stretches unto Olimphus, and it is near lxxvij.
mile between, and above that hill is the air so clear that men may feel no
wind there, and therefore may no beast live there the air is so dry, and men
say in the country that Philosophers sometime went up to these same hills and
held to their noses a spounge wet with water for to have air, for the air was
so dry there, and above in the powder of the hill they wrote letters with their
fingers, and at the years end they came again and found those letters which
they had written the year before without any default, and therefore it seems
well that these hills pass the clouds to the pure air. At Constantinople is
the Emperors Pallaice which is fair and well dight, and therein is a place
for iusting, and it is made about with stages that each man may well see and
none grieve other, and under these stages are stables vauted for the Emperors
horses, and all the pillars of these stables are of marble. And within the
Church of saint Sophie, an Emperor would have laid the body of his Father when
he was dead, and as they made the grave they found a body in the earth, and
upon the body lay a great plate of fine gold, and thereupon was written in
Ebrew, Greek and Latin letters, that said thus. Jesus Christus nascetur de
virgin Maria, and ego credo in eum: That is to say, Jesus Christ shall be borne
of the virgin Marie and I believe in him. And the date was that it lay in the
earth two hundredth year before our Lord Jesus Christ was borne, and yet is
that plate in the treasury of the Church, and men say that it was Hermogenes
the wise man And nevertheless, if it be so men of that Greece be Christians,
yet they vary from our faith, for they say that the holy Ghost comes not out
of the son, but all only of the father, and they are not obedient to the
Church of Room, nor to the Pope, and they say, that their Patriarks have as
much power over the sea, as the Pope has on this side the sea. And therefore
Pope John the xxij. sent letters to them, how Christian men should be all one,
and that they should be obedient to a Pope that is Christ's Vicar on earth, to
whom God gave plain power to bind and to assoyle, and therefore they should
be obedient to him. And they sent him diverse aunsweres, and among other they
said thus. Potentiam tuam summam circa subiectos tuos firmiter credimus.
Superbiam tuam summa^ tollerare non possimus. Auaritiam tuam summam satiare non
intendimus. Dominus tecu^ sit, Quia Dominus nobiscum est, Vale. That is to say.
We believe well that thy power is great upon thy subjects. We may not suffer
thy pride. We are not in purpose to fulfill thy couetise, our Lord be with
thee, for our Lord is with us, Farewell. And other aunsweare might be not have
of them. And also they make their sacrament of the Alter of therf bread, for
our Lord made it of therf bread, when he made his maund, and on sherthurs day
make they their bread in tokening of the maund, and they dry it at the Sun and
keep it all the year, and give it to sick men in stead of Gods body. And
they make but one unction when they christen children, and they anoint no sick
men, and they say there is no purgatory, and souls shall have neither joy nor
pain until the day of dome.

And they say that fornication is no deadly sin, but a kindly thing, and that
men and women should wedde but once, and who so weddeth more then once, their
children are bastards and gotten in sin, and their priests also are wedded,
and they say that usury or simonie is no deadly sin, and they sell benefices
of holy Church, and so did men of other places, and it is great slaughter, for
now is simonie king crowned in holy Church, God amend it when his will is. And
they say that in lent men should not sing Mass but on the Saturday and on the
Sunday, and they fast not the Saturday no time in the year, but if it be
Christmas or Easter even. And they suffer no man that is on this side the
Greek sea to sing at their Alters, and if it fall that they do through any
hap, they wash their Alters as soon without tarrying with holy water, and they
say that there should be but one mass said at one Alter in a day. And they say
that our Lord did never eat meat, but he made a token of eating. And also they
say that we sin deadly in shauing of our beards, for the beard is a token of a
man, and a gift of our Lord, and they say that we sin in eating of beasts
that were forbidden in the old Law, as Swine, Hares and other Beasts.

And this they say, that we sin in eating of flesh on the days before
Ashwednesday, and in eating of flesh on the Wednesday, and when we eat cheese
or eggs on the friday, and they curse all those that eat no flesh on the
Saturday.

Also the Emperor of Constantinople makes the Patriarchs, Archbishops and
Bishops, and he gives all the dignities of Churches, and depriueth them that
are unworthy. Although it be so that these touch not each way, nevertheless
they touch not that which I have behight to show a part of the custom, manners,
and diversity of countries, and for this is the first country discordant from
the faith, and lets our faith on this side the sea, therefore have I set it
here that ye may see the diversity between our faith and theirs, for many men
have great liking to hear speak of strange things.

To come again to Constantinople for to go toward the holy land. Chap. iij.
NOW come we again for to know the way from Constantinople. He that will go
through Turkey, he goes through the city of Nike, and passes through the gate
of Chiuitot that is right high, and it is a mile and a half from Nyke, and who
so will go by the brach of Saint George, and by the Greek sea there as Saint
Nicholas lies, and other places.

depiction of a tomb

First men come to the I Will of Silo, and in that I Will grows masticke upon small
trees, as Plumtrees, or Cheritrees. And then after men go through the I Will of
Pathmos, where Saint John the Evangelist wrote the Apocalips, and you shall
understand that when our Lord Jesus Christ dyed, Saint John the Evangelist was
of the age of xxxij. years, and he lived after the passion of Christ lxiii.
years, and then dyed. From Pathmos men go to Ephesim which is a fair City
and near to the sea, and there dyed saint John, and he was buried behind the
high Alter in a tomb, and there is a fair Church, for christian men were wont
to hold that place, but in the tomb of Saint John is nothing but Manna, for
his body was translated into paradise and the Turks hold now that city, and
the Church, and all Asia the less, and therefore is Asia the less called
Turkey, and ye shall understand that S. John did make his grave there in his
life, and laid himself there all quick, and therefore some say he died not,
but that he rests there until the day of Judgment, and therefore, truly
there is a great marvel, for men may see there appertly the earth of the
tomb many times stir and move as there were a quick thing under. And from
Ephesim men go through many Isles in the sea, unto the city of Pateran where
saint Nicholas was borne, and so to Marca where he by the grace of God was
chosen Bishop, and there grows right good wine and strong, that men call wine
of Marca. From thence men go to the I Will of Creete, which the Emperor gave
sometime to Ionais. And then men pass through the Isles of Cophos and Lango, of
the which Isles Ipocras was Lord, and some say that in the I Will of Lango is
Ipocras his Daughter in manner of a Dragon, which is an hundred foot long as
men say, for I have not seen it, and they of the Isles call her the lady of the
country, and she lies in an old castle, and shows her self thrice in the
year, and she does no man harm, and she is thus changed from a damsel to a
Dragon through a Goddess that men call Diana, and men say that she shall
dwell so unto the time that a knight come that is so hardy as to go to her and
kiss her mouth, and then shall she turn again to her own kind and be a
woman, and after that she shall not live long. And it is not long since a
knight of the Rodes that was hardy and valiant, said that he would kiss her,
and when the dragon began to lift up her head against him, and he saw she was
so hedious, he fled away, and the Dragon in her anger bare the knight to a rock
and from that cast him into the sea, and so he was lost.

Yet of the Dragon. Chap. iiij.
depiction of a mythical creature, a dragon with feminine facial features
emerging from a doorway behind a knight in armor

ALso a young man that wist not of the Dragon, went out of a ship and passed
through the I Will, till he came to the castle, and entered into a cave and went
so long till he found a chamber, and then he saw a Damsel that kembd her
head, and looked in a Mirror, and she had much treasure about her, and he
thought her to be a common woman that dwelled there, to keep men; and he
abode the Damsel, and the damsel saw the shadow of him in the mirror, and
she turned toward him and asked him what he would, and he said he would be her
paramour or lemman, and she asked him if he were a knight, and he said nay,
and she said then might he not be her lemman, but she had him go again to his
fellows and make him knight and come again on the morrow and she would come
out of the cave, and then he should kiss her on the mouth, and she bad him
have no dread, for she would do him no harm, although she seemed hidious to
him, she said it was done by enchantment, for she said she was such as he saw
her then, and she said, that if he kissed her, he should have all the
treasure, and be her Lord, and Lord of all those Isles. Then he departed from
her and went to his fellows to the ship, and made him Knight, and came again
on the morrow to kiss the Damsel, and when he saw her come out of the cave
in form of a Dragon, he had so great dread that he fled to the ship, and she
followed him, and when she saw that he turned not again, she began to cry
as a thing that had much sorrow, and turned again, and soon after the knight
dyed, and sithen hitherto might no knight see her but he dyed anon. But when
a knight comes that is so hardy to kiss her, he shall not dye but shall
turn that Damsel into her right shape, and shall be Lord of the country
aforesaid. And from thence men go to the I Will of Rodes, the which the
Hospitallers held and governed, and that they took sometime from the Emperor,
and it was wont to be called Colles, and so yet the Turks call it Colles: and
Saint Paul in his Epistles writes to them of the I Will Collosenses. This I Will is
near C.lxxx. mile from Constantinople. And from the I Will of Rodes men go into
Cipres where are many vines, the first is red, and after a year they wax all
white, and those vines that are most white, are most clear and best smelling,
and as men pass that way by a place where was wont to be a great city that
men call Sathalay, for all that country was lost through the folly of a young
man, who had a fair Damsel that he loved well, and she dyed suddenly, and
was buried in a grave of Marble, and for the great love he had to her, he
went in a night to her tomb and opened it, and went and lay by her, and a
while afterward returned home again, and when it came to the end of ix.
months, a voice came to him and said in this manner, as in the next Chapter
follows.

Of a young man and his lemman. Chap. v.
depiction of a mythical creature, a monster with a bird-like head and a human
face on its back, emerging from a tomb toward a young male figure

GO unto the tomb of the same woman that thou have lain by, and open it,
beehold well that which thou have beegotten on her, and if thou let it go,
thou shall have a great harm, and he went and opened the Tomb, and there
flew out a monster right hidious for to see, the which monster flew about the
city and country, and soon after the city and the country sanck down, and
there are many perilous passages. From Rodes to Cipres is five hundred mile
and more, but men may go to Cipres and come not to Rodes. Cipres is a good I Will
and a great, and there are many good cities: there is an Archbishop at
Nichosy, and four other Bishops in the land. And at Famagost is one of the
best havens on the sea that is in the world, and there are Christian men and
Sarazins and men of all nations.

In Cipres is the hill of the holy cross, and there is the cross of the good
thief Dismas, as I said before, and some think that there is half of the
cross of our Lord, but it is not so, and they do wrong that make men to
believe so. In Cipres lies Saint Simeon for whom the men of the country make
great solempnitie, and in the castle of Amors lies the body of Saint
Hillarion, and men keep it worshipfully, and beside Famagost was Saint
Bernarde borne.

Of the manner of hunting in Cipres. Chap. vi.
depiction of a papion or large spotted cat

IN Cipres men hunt with Pampeons that be like to Leopardes, and they hunt
wild beasts right well and they are somewhat bigger then Lions, and they take
more quickly wild beasts then hounds. In Cipres is a custom that Lords and
other men eat upon the earth, for they make ditches within the earth all about
the hall deep to the knee, and they paue them, and when they will eat they go
therein and sit there, this they do to be more fresh, for that land is hotter
then it is here: and at great feasts and for strange men they set forms and
boords as they do in this country, but they had leauer sit on the earth. From
Cipres men go by Land and by Sea to Jerusalem, and in a day and in a night he
that has good wind may come to the haven of Tire that now is called Sur, and
it is also at the entry of Surry, there was sometime a fair city of
Christian men, but the Sarasins have destroyed the most part thereof, and they
keep the haven right well for dread that they have of Christian men. Men might
go right to that haven, and come not to Cipres, but they go gladly to Cipres
to rest them on the land, or else to buy things that they have need of to their
voyage. Upon the sea side men may find many rubies, and there is the well that
holy writ speaks of. Fons hortorum and puteus aquarum viuentiu^. That is to
say, The well of gardens and ditch of waters living. In the city of Tire said
the woman to our Lord Beatus venture qui te portauit and vbera quae succisti.
That is as much to say, Blessed be the body that bare thee, and the pap of
which thou suckest, and there our Lord Jesus Christ forgave the woman of Canaan
her sins, and there also in that place was the stone on the which our Lord sat
and preached, and on the same stone was founded the church of saint Savior.
And upon that sea is the city of Saphen, Sarep, or Sodom, and there was the
dwelling of Elias the Prophet, and there was raised by Jonas the Prophet the
widows son. And five mile from Saphen is the city of Sydon of the which
City Dido (that was Aeneas wife after the destruction of Troy) was Queen,
she founded the city of Carthage in Affricke and now is called Didonsart. And
in the city of Tire rayned Achilles, the father of Dido, and a mile from
Sidon is Beruth, and from Beruth to Sardena, is three days journey, and from
Sardena is five mile to Damas.

Of the haven called Iaffe. Chap. vij.
WHo so will go longer on the sea and come nearer to Jerusalem, you shall go
from Cipres by sea to the port called Iaffe, for that is the next haven to
Jerusalem, for from that Haven is but a days journey and a half to
Jerusalem, and that Haven is called Iaffe, and the town Affe after one of
Noes sons that men call Iapheth that founded it, and now it is called Iops,
and ye shall understand that it is the eldest town of the world, for it was
made before Noes flood, and there be the bones of a Giaunts side that be xl.
foot long.

Of the Haven of Tire. Chap. viij.
ANd who ariueth at the first haven of Tire or of Surrey before said, may go by
land if he will to Jerusalem, and he goes to the City of Acon in a day,
that was called Tholomoda, and it was a city of Christian men sometime, but
it is now destroyed, and it is in the sea. And it is from Venice to Acon by the
sea two thousand and lxx. mile of Lumbardy, and from Calabre, or from Cicil it
is to Acon a thousand three hundred miles of Lumbardy.

Of the hill Carme. Chap. ix.
ANd the I Will of Greece is right in the mid way, and beside this city of Acon
toward the sea some viij hundred furlongs on the right hand toward the South is
the hill Carme where Elias the prophet dwelled, and there was the order of
Carmes first founded. This hill is not right great ne high, and at the foot of
this hill was sometime a good city of christian men, that was called Caiphas,
for Cayphas founded it, but it is now all wasted, and at the left side of the
hill is a town that men call Saffre, and that is set upon another hill, there
was Saint James and Saint John borne, and in worship of them is there a fair
church made. And from Tholomoda that men now call Acon depiction of a stream
flowing into a pool inside a rock, in which sit vessels of various shapes, with
a male figure nearby to a great hill that men call Ekale de Tyrees is an
hundred fourlongs, and beside that city of Acon runs a little river that
men call Belion, and there near is the fosse of Minon all round that is an
hundred cubits or shaftments broad, and it is all full of gravel clear
shining, whereof men make white glass clear, and men come from far countries
by ship, and by land, with carts to take of the gravel, and if there be never
so much taken thereof on a day, on the morrow it is full again as ever it was,
and that is great marvel, and there is always wind in the fosse, that
strikes away the gravel and makes it trouble. And if a man put therein any
metal, as soon as it is therein it waxes glass, the glass that is made of
this gravel if it be done into the gravel turns again into the gravel as
it was before, and some say that it is a gulf of the sea gravel.

How Sampson slew the King and his enemies. Chap. x.
ALso from Acon before said, men go three days journey to the City of
Philisten, that now is called Gaza, that is a rich city, right fair and full
of folk, and it is a little upon depiction of a long-haired, bearded male
figure or Samson pulling down a pillar on which sat a castle full of people; in
the background a male figure blowing a hornthe Sea, and from that City
brought the strong Samson the gates of the City to an high hill, and was
taken in the said City, and there he slew the king in his seat, and many
thousands more with him, for he made an house to fall on them. And from thence
shall men go to the city of Cesarien, and so to the castle of Pillerins,
and then to Askalon, and so forth to Iaphat, and so unto the holy city
Jerusalem.

The way to Babylon whereas the Souldan dwells. Chap. xj.
AND who so will go through the land of Babylon where the Souldan dwells, to
have leave to go more securely through the churches and countries, and to go
to mount Sinay before he come to Jerusalem, and then turn again by
Jerusalem, he shall go from Gaza to the castle Dayr. And after a man comes
out of Surry, and goes by the wilderness: where the way is full sandy, and
the wilderness lasts eight days journey, where men finds all that them
needs of vittailes, and men call that wilderness Archelleke, and when a man
comes out of this depiction of a female figure opening her arms to a male
figure with arms closed desert, he enters into Egypt, and they call Egypt
Canopat, and in an other language men call it Mersine, and the first good town
that men find is called Beleth, and it is at the end of the kingdom of Alape,
and from thence men come to Babylon, and to Kayre: and in Babylon is a fair
Church of our Lady, where she dwelled seven year, when she was out of the
land of the Jews, for dread of king Herod. And there lies the body of Saint
Barbara virgin, and there dwelled Joseph when he was sold of his brethren, and
there caused Nabuchodonosor to put the children in fire, for they were of right
truth, the which children men call Anania, Azaria, and Misaell (as the Psalm
of Benedicite says) but Nabuchodonosor called them thus, Sidrac, Misac and
Abednago, that is to say, God glorious and victorious, God over all kingdoms,
and that was for miracle, that he made Gods son as he said, go with those
children through the fire. There dwells the Souldan, for there is a fair
city, and a strong Castle, and it stands upon a rock. In that Castle is
always dwelling to keep the castle, and to serve the Souldan, above eight
thousand persons, that take all their necessaries of the Souldans Court. I well
know it for I dwelled with him Soldier in his wars a great while against the
Bedions, and he would have wedded me to a great princes daughter right richly,
if I would have forsaken my faith.

Yet here follows of the Souldan and of his kingdoms that he has conquered
which he holds strongly with force. Chap. xij.
ANd ye shall understand that the Souldan is Lord of seven kingdoms, the
which he has conquered and gotten to him by strength, and these be they, the
kingdom of Canopate, the kingdom of Aegipt, the kingdom of Jerusalem,
whereof David and Solomon were kings: the kingdom of Surry, of the which the
city of Damas was the chief: the kingdom of Alape in the land of Dameth, and
the kingdom of Arabia, which was one of the three kings shat made offering to
our Lord when he was borne, and many other lands he holds in his hand, and
also he holds Calaphas, that is a great thing to the souldan, that is to
say, among them of Royes I Will, and this vale is cold.

depiction of a crowned female figure with a halo or Saint Catherine of
Alexandria with hands joined in prayer; behind her a male figure with a sword
raised behind his head

And then men go upon the mount of Saint Katherin and that is much higher then
the mount Moses.

And this saint Katherin was graven in no Church ne castle, ne other dwelling
place, but there is an hill of stones gathered together, about the place where
she was buried there was wont to be a chapel: but it is all cast down, and
yet lies there a great part of the stones.

depiction of three birds carrying olive branches in their mouths to a church;
in the doorway stands a monk

But under the foot of mout Sina is a monastery of Monks, and there is the
Church of saint Katherin, wherein be many lamps burning and they have oil
olive enough to eat and to burn, and that they have by miracle of God, there
come certain of all manner of birds every year once like pilgrims, and each
of them brings a branch of olive in token of offering, whereof they make
much oil.

For to return from Sina to Jerusalem. Chap. xiij.
NOw sithen a man has visited this holy place of saint Katherin, and he will
turn to Jerusalem if he shall first take leave at the Monks, and recommend
him specially to their prayers, then those said monks give with a good will to
Pilgrims, vittails to pass with through the wilderness to Surry, and that
lasts well xiij. days journey. And in that wilderness dwell many Arabins
that men call Bedions and Ascoperds, these are folk that are full of all
manner of ill conditions, and they have no houses but tents the which they make
of beasts skins, as depiction of a bearded figure or Bedouin, kneeling, turning
a whole poultry-bird on a spit with his left hand and holding up a fish toward
the sun in his right hand of Cammels and other beasts the which they eat, and
there under they lie, and they seek to dwell in places where they may find
water, near the red sea, for in that wilderness is great default of water, and
it falls often where a man finds water one time, he finds it not another
time, and therefore make they no houses in those countries. These men that I
speak of till not the Land, for they eat no bread, except it be such as
dwell near a good town, and they roast their fishes and flesh upon hot stones
against the Sun, and they are strong men and well fighting, and they do
nothing but chase wild beasts for their sustenance, and they set not by their
lives, therefore they dread not the Souldan, nor no Prince of the world. And
they have great war with the Souldan, and the same time that I was with the
Souldan they bare but a shield and a spear for to defend them with, and they
use none other armor, but they wind their heads and necks in a great linen
cloth, and they are men of full ill kind.

depiction of a male figure wearing a flowing head-dress, with a shield and
spear

As men are passed this wilderness again coming to Jerusalem. Chap. xiiij.
AND when men have passed this wilderness toward Jerusalem, they come to
Barsabe that was sometime a fair and a rich town of Christian men, and yet is
their some of the churches left, and in that town dwelled Abraham the
Patriarch, this town of Barsabe founded Vrias wife of whom David begat Solomon
the wise, that was king of Jerusalem, and of the xii. Tribes of Israel, and he
reigned xl. year, and from thence men go the vale of Ebron, that is from
thence near xii. mile, and some call it the vale of Mambre, and also it is
called the vale of Tears, forasmuch as Adam in that vale bewailed an hundred
year the death of his son Abel that Caine slew. And this Ebron was sometime
the principal city of the Philistines, and there dwelled giants and there it
was so free, that all that had done evil in other places were there saved. In
Ebron Joshua and Caleb, and their company came first to epsy how they might win
the land of promise. In Ebron David reigned first viii. year and a half, and
in Jerusalem he reigned xxxij. years and a half, and there be the graves
of the Patriarks, Adam, Abraham, Jacob, and their wives, Eve, Sara, Rebecca,
and they lie in the side of the hill: and beside this hill is a right fair
Church builded after the fashion and manner of a castle, which the Sarasins
keep right well, and they have the place in great worship for the holy
Patriarchs that lie there, and they suffer no christian men ne Jews to come
therein, except they have special grace of the Souldan, for they hold
christian men and Jews but as hounds, that should come to the holy place, and
they call the place Spelunke, or double cave, or double grave: or one lies on
an other: and the Sarasins call it in their language Caryatherba, that is to
say, the place of the Patriarchs, and the Jews call it Arboth, and in that
same place was Abraham's house, and that was the same Abraham that sat in his
door, and saw three persons and worshipped but one as holy writ witnesses,
saying: Tres vidit and vnum adorauit. That is to say, He saw three and
worshipped but one, and him took Abraham into his house.

Here follows a little of Adam and Eve, and other things. Chap. xv.
depiction of a naked male figure and female figure, or Adam and Eve, with fig
leaves

AND right near to that place is a cave in a rock where Adam and Eve dwelled
when they were driven out of Paradise, and there got they their children. And
in that same place was Adam made as some men say, for men called that place
sometime the field of Damasse, for it was in the worship of Damasse, and from
thence he was translated into Paradise, as they say, and afterward he was
driven out of Paradise and put there again, for the same day that he was put
into paradise, the same day he was driven out, for as soon he sinned. And
there begins the I Will of Ebron that lasts near to Jerusalem, and the
Angel bad Adam that he should dwell with his wife and there they begat Seth,
of the which kindred Jesus Christ was borne. And in that vale is the field where
men draw out of the earth a thing the which men in that country call Camball,
and they eat that in stead of spice, and they bear it to sell, and men cannot
grave there so deep, nor so wide, but it is at the years end full again up
to the sides through the grace of God, and two miles from Ebron is the grave of
Lot that was Abraham's brother.

Of the dry Tree. Chap. xvj.
depiction of a tree on top of a mountain

THen a little from Ebron is the mount of Mambre, of the which Mount the dale
took his name, and there is an oak tree that the Sarasins call dypre, remaining
since Abraham's time, that men call the dry tree, and they say that it has been
from the beginning of the world, and was sometime green and bare leaves, unto
the time that our Lord dyed, and so did all the Trees of that kind in the
world, and yet is there many of those in the world. And some prophesies say
that a Lord or Prince of the West side of the world shall win the land of
Promise, that is the holy land, with the help of christian men, and he shall
worship God under that Tree, and the Tree shall wax green and bear fruit
and leaves, and through that miracle many Sarasins and Jews shall be turned
to the Christian Faith, and therefore they do great Worship thereto, and keep
it right charily. And yet though it be dry it has a great virtue, for
certainly he that has a little thereof about him, it heals a sickness
called the falling evil, and has also many other virtues, and therefore it is
holden right precious.

From Ebron to Bethlehem. Chap. xvij.
FRom Ebron men go to Bethlehem in half a day, for it is but five mile, and
it is a fair way, and through Woods full pleasant. Bethlehem is but a little
city long and narrow, and was walled and enclosed with a great ditch, and it
was wont to be called Ephrata, as holy writ says. Ecce audiuimus eum in
Ephrata, etc. That is to say, Lo we heard of the same at Ephrata. And toward
the end of the city toward the East is a right fair and goodly Church: and
it has many towers, and pinnacles full strongly made, and within that Church
is four and forty great pillars of marble, and not far from this Church is
the field which flourished very strangely as ye shall hear.

Of a fair maiden that should be put to death wrongfully. Chap. xviij.
THe cause is, forasmuch as a fair maiden that was blamed with wrong, that
she had done fornication, for the which cause she was deemed to die and to be
brent in that place to the which she was lead. And as the wood began to burn
about her, she made her prayer to our Lord, as she was not guilty of that
thing, that he would help her, that it might be known to all men. And when
she had thus said she entered the fire, and anon the fire went out, and those
branches that were burning became red Roses, and those branches that were not
kindled became white Rosiers, full of white Roses, and those were the first
Roses and Rosiers that any man ever saw, and so was the maiden saved through
the grace of God, and therefore is that field called the field of God
flourished, for it was full of Roses. Also beside the Quire of that Church
aforesaid, at the right side as men come downward xij. steps, is the place
where our Lord was borne, that is now full well dight of marble, and full
richly painted with gold, silver, and asure, and other colors. And a little
thence by three paces is the crib of the Ox, and the Ass, and beeside that is
the place where the Star fell that lead the three kings, Jasper, Melchisor and
Balthasor, but men of Greece call the kings thus, Galgalath, Saraphy,
Galgalath, these three kings offered to our Lord, Incence, Gold and Mirre, and
they came together through the miracle of God, for they met together in a
city that men call Chasake, that is iiii days journey from Bethlehem, and
there they were at Bethlehem the fourth day after they had seen the Star.
And under the Cloister of this Church xviii degrees at the right side is a
great pit where the bones of the Innocents lie, and by that place is the tomb
of Saint Hierom, that was a Priest and a Cardinal that translated the Bible and
the Psalter out of Ebrew into Latin, and beside that Church is a Church of
Saint Nicholas where our Lady rested her when she was delivered of child, and
forasmuch as she had so much milk in her paps that it grieved her, she
milked it out upon the red stones or Marble, so that yet may the traces be
seen white upon the stones. And ye shall understand that all that dwell in
Bethlehem are Christians, and there are fair vines all about the City, and
great plenty of wine, but their book that Mahomet betook them, the which
they call Alcaron, and some call it Massap, and some call it Harm, forbids
them to drink any wine, for in that book Mahomet curses all those that
drink of that wine and all that sell it, and some men say, that he once slew
a good hermit in his drunkenness whom he loved much, and therefore he cursed
the wine and them that drunk wine, but his malice is turned to himself as
holy writ says. Et in verticem ipsius iniquitas eius discendit. That is to say
in English. His wickedness shall descend on his own head. And also the
Sarasins breed no Geese ne they eat no swines flesh, for they say it is
brother to man, and that it was forbidden in the old law. Also in the land of
Palistine and in the land of Egypt they eat little Veale and Beef, except it
be so old that it may no more travail ne work, not that it is forbidden, but
they keep them for tilling of their land. In this City of Bethlehem was king
David borne, and he had forty wives, and three hundred Concubines.

At Bethlehem toward the South side is a Church of saint Markerot that was
Abbot there, for whom they made much sorrow when he dyed, and it is painted
there how they made dole when he dyed, and it is a pittious thing to behold.
From Bethlehem to Jerusalem is two mile, and in the way to Jerusalem half a
mile from Bethlehem is a Church where the Angel told the Shepherds of the
birth of Christ: in that way is the tomb of Rachel that was mother to Joseph
the Patriarch, and she dyed as soon as she had borne Benjamin, and there
she was buried, and Jacob her Husband set xij. great stones upon her,
betokening that she had borne xii. children. In this way to Jerusalem are many
Christian Churches by the way which men go to Jerusalem.

Of the City Jerusalem. Chap. xix.
FOr to speak of Jerusalem, ye shall understand that it stands fair among
hills, and there is neither river nor well: but water comes by conduite from
Ebron, and ye shall understand that men called it first Iebus, and sithen it
was called Salem unto the time of king David, and he set those two names
together, and called it Jerusalem, and so it is called yet, and about
Jerusalem is the kingdom of Surry, and thereby is the land of Palestine and
Askalon, but Jerusalem is in the land of Judah, and it is called Judah for Judas
Machabeus was king of that land, and also it marches afterward on the kingdom
of Araby, on the South side on the land of Egypt, on the west side on the
great sea, on the North side on the kingdom of Surry, and the sea of Cipres.
About Jerusalem are these cities. Ebron at eight mile, Ierico at six mile,
Barsebe at eight mile, Askalon at eighteen mile, Iaffe at twenty and five
mile, Ramatha at four mile.

This Land of Jerusalem hary been in the hands of diverse Nations, as Jews,
Cananites, Assyrians, Persians, Masedonians, Greeks, Romans, and Christian
men, also Sarasins, Barbarians, Turks, and many other Nations. For Christ will
not that it be long in the hands of traitors nor sinners, be they Christians
or other. And now has the misbeleeuing men holden that Land in their hands
threescore years and more, but they shall not hold it long and if God will.

Yet of this holy City Jerusalem. Chap. xx.
AND ye shall understand that when men first come to Jerusalem they go first
a pilgrimage to the church, where that the holy grave is, the which is out of
the city on the north side: but it is now closed in with the wall of the
town, and there is a full fair Church round, all open above, and well
covered with lead, and on the west side is a fair Tower and a strong for
belles: and in the midst of depiction of a round tower with an oil lamp
hanging to one side the church is a tabernacle made like a little house, in
manner of half a Compass, right well and richly of gold and asure and other
colors well dight and on the right side is the sepulcher of our Lord: and the
tabernacle is viij. foot long and five foot wide, and xj. foot of height:
and it is not long since the Sepulcher was all open, and men might then touch
it: but because men that came thither, spoiled and also brake the stones in
pieces to powder, therefore the Souldan has made a wall about the Sepulcher
that no man may touch it. On the left side is a window, and therein is many
lamps light, and there is a lamp that hangs before the sepulcher light
burning, and on the Friday it goes out by it felfe, and lighteneth again by
it self, at the hour as our Lord rose from death to life. And within that
church upon that right side on the mount Caluary, where our Lord was crucified,
and the cross was set in a morteys in the rock, that is white of color, and
mingled with a little red, and upon that rock dropped the blood of the wounds
of our Lord when he was pained on the cross, and that is called Galgatha, and
men go up to that Galgatha upon steps, and in that mortyes, was Adams head
found atter Noes Flood, in token that the sins of Adam should be redeemed in
the same place, and above that rock made Abraham sacrifice to our Lord, and
there is an altar, and before that altar lies Godfray of Boleyn, Bawdewin,
and other that were Christians and kings of Jerusalem. And there as our Lord
was crucified is this written in Greek. O Theos, basilon ysmon, persemas,
ergast, sothyas ayos. That is to say in Latin. Hic Deus, Rex noster ante secula
operatus est salutem in medio terrae. That is to say. This God our king before
worlds, has wrought health in the midst of the earth. And also upon this rock
where the Cross was fixed is written within the rock, Gros guyst basys tou
pestes thoy thesmosy. That is to say in Latin, Quod vides est fundamenta
totius mundi and huius fidei. And it is to say, that thou see is ground of
all the word, and of this faith. And ye shall understand that our Lord when
he dyed was thirty and two year old and three months, and the prophecy
of David says that he should live forty years, when he says thus.
Quadraginta annis proximus fui generationi huic. That is to say, Forty year
was I neighbor to this kind, and thus should it seem that Prophecy were not
true, but it is. For in old time men called years of ten months, of the which
March was the first, and December the last. But Caius Caesar that was Emperor
of Room did set to these two Months January and February, and ordained the
year of twelve months. That is to say, three hundred days without leap
year the proper course of the Sun, and therefore after the accounting of ten
months to the year he dyed in forty year, and after our years of twelve
months it is thirty two year and three months.

Also within mount Caluery at the right side is there an alter where the pillar
lies that our Lord was bound to, when depiction of four pillars, one with a
rope wound around it, the other three with water drops falling off them he was
scourged, and thereby are three other pillars, yt always drop water, and some
say that those pillars weep for our Lords death, and near this altar in a
place xlii. steps deep was found the very Cross by the assent of Saint
Eleyne under a rock where the Jews had hyd it, and it was assayed, for they
found three crosses, one of our Lord, and two of the thieves. And saint Eleine
assaied them on a dead body, that rose as soon as the very cross of our Lord
was laid upon him. And thereby in the vale is the place where the four nails
of our Lord were hid, for he had two nails in his hands, and two in his
feet, and with one of those nails the Emperor of Constantinople did make a
bridle for his horse to bear him in battle, for by the virtue that it had,
he overcame his enemies, and won all the land of Asia, Turkey, Damasse the more
and the less, Surry and Jerusalem, Araby, Persia, and Mesopotamie, the
kingdom of Alebe, Egypt the high and the low, and other kingdoms many, full
nigh all unto Ethyope the low, and also unto Inde the less, that then was
christened: and there was in that time many good men and holy hermits, of whom
the book of the Fathers lives speaks, and there are now in them Panims and
Sarasins, but when God will as these lands are lost through the sin of
Christian men, so shall they be won again by christian men through the help
of God. And in the midst of this Church is a compass, in the which Joseph of
Aramathia laid the body of our Lord when he had taken him often the cross, and
upon the same place did he wash the feet of our Lord, and that compass men
say is the midst of the world.

Of the Church of the holy Sepulcher. Chap. xxi.
IN that Church by the Sepulcher, on the North side, is the place where our
Lord was imprisoned, and there is a part of the chain with the which he was
bound, and there he appeared first to Marie Magdalene when he was risen from
death, and she thought he had been a gardener. In the Church of the
Sepulcher was wont to be Cannons of saint Benet, and they had a Priourie, and
the Patriarch was their Sovereign: and without the doors of the Church on the
right side as men go up xviii. steps, our Lord said to his mother, Mulier,
Ecce filius tuus. That is to say: Woman behold thy Son. Deinde dixit
discipulo. Ecce matter tua. That is to say: Then said he to his Disciple.
Behold thy mother. And these words he said when he hanged upon the Cross,
and upon the steps went our Lord when he bare the Cross upon his shoulder,
and under these stairs is a Chapel where the Priests sing. And near there
is the stone where our Lord rested him when he was weary with bearing of the
Cross. And ye shall understand that before the Church of the Sepulcher is the
City most strong and the great plain that is between the City and the
Church, on the East side without the walls of the City, is the vale of
Iosophat that comes to the walls.

In this vale of Iosophat without the City is the Church of Saint Stephen
where he was stoned to death, and thereby is the gate builded that may not be
opened. Through this gate our Lord entered on Palm Sunday upon an Ass, and
the gate opened unto him when he would go to the Temple, and yet are the
steps of the Ass seen in three places, the which stand in full hard stones.
Before the Church of the sepulcher two hundred paces is a great hospital of
Saint John, in the which hospital are liiii pillars made of stone. And to go
depiction of a male figure or Saint Stephen kneeling, while two other men, one
wearing a helmet and the other wearing a crown, throw stones at him toward the
East from the hospital is a right fair church that men call our Lady the
great, and then is there another church by that, that men call our Lady of the
Latin: and there it. was that Mary Cleophe, and Mary Magdalene rent their
hair when our Lord was put to death,

Of the temple of God. Chap. xxij.
AND from the Church of the sepulcher, toward the East at xvii. paces is
Templum Domini. That is a fair house and it is all round, and right high, and
covered with lead, and it is well paued with white marble, but the Sarasins
will suffer no Christians ne Jews to come therein, for they say, that so
sinful men should not come into that holy place, but I was suffered to go in,
and into other places where I would, for I had letters of the Souldan, with his
great seal, and commonly other men have but of his signet, and men bear his
letter with his seal before them, hanging on a Spear, and men do great
worship thereto, and kneel against it as it were against Gods body, for those
men that it is sent to, before they take it, they bow thereto, and then they
take it and lay it upon their heads, and afterward they kiss it depiction of a
temple with a statue of a human figure on either side of the door, and a head
above the door and then they read it all bowing with great worship, and then
they proffer them to do all that the bringer will. And in this Templum Domini
were wont to be Chanons regulers, and they had an Abbot to whom they were
obedient. In this Temple was Charlemaine when the Angel brought him the
Prepuis of our Lord when he was circumcised, and after king Charles brought it
to Acon into our Ladies chaypell.

Yet of the Temple of God. Chap. xxiij.
AND ye shall understand that this is not the temple that Solomon made, for
that temple lasted but a thousand an hundred and two year. For Titus
Vespasianus son, that was Emperor of Rome that laid siege about Jerusalem,
for to discomfite the Jews, for that they had put Christ to death without
leave of the Emperor, when he had taken the City, he did burn the Temple,
and cast it down, and took all the Jews, and put to death eleven hundred
thousand and the other he put in prison, and sold xxx. for a penny, for he
said that they bought Jesus Christ for xxx. pence. And since gave Julian
Apostatate leave to the Jews to make the Temple of Jerusalem again, for he
hated Christians, and yet he was a Christian, but he forsook his law. And
when the Jews had builded again the Temple then came an earthquake (as God
would) and cast down all that they had made. Since that Adrian the Emperor
who was of them of Troy made Jerusalem again, and the Temple in that same
manner that Solomon made it, and commanded that no Jew should dwell there but
Christians, and although he himself was not a Christian, yet he loved the
Christians more then other men, save men of his own faith. And this Emperor
did enclose and wall the Church of the holy Sepulcher within the city, that
before was far without the city, and he would have changed the name of
Jerusalem and called it Heliam, but that name lasted not long. And ye shall
understand that the Sarasins do great worship in that Temple, and they say
that place is right holy, and when they go therein they go bare foot and
kneel many times down. And when I and my fellows came therein, we put off
our harneise, and came bare foot into the Temple, and thought that we ought
to do as much or more then they that were Infidels. And this Temple is
threescore and three cubits in wideness, and as much in length, and thirty
two cubits in height, and covered with lead, and it is within full of pillars
of marble. And in the midst of the Temple is an alter of twenty and four
steps of height, and good pillars all about. This place the Jews called Sancta
sanctorum. That is to say, holy of holiest, and in that place comes none but
their prelate that makes their sacrifice, and the people stand all about in
diverse Seats, as they are of dignity and worship: and there be four
enterings into the Temple, and the doors are of Cipres well dight, and within
the East door our Lord said, here is Jerusalem. And on the North side within
the door is a fountain but it runs not: of the which holy writ speaks
and says, Vidi aquam egredientem de templo. That is to say, I saw water
coming out of the Temple. And upon the other side is a rock that men called
some time Moryach (but after it was called Belet) and the ark of God, with the
relics of the Jews. This arc did Titus carry with him to Room, when he
had discomfited all the Jews. In that same arc were the ten commandments,
and Aarons rod, and Moses rod, with which he parted the red sea, when the
people of Israel passed through on dry foot, and with that rod he did many
wonders, and there was the vessel of gold full of manna, and clothing and
ornaments, and the tabernacle of Aaron, and a table square of Gold with twelve
precious stones, and a box of Iaspes graven with four fingers, and eight
names of our Lord within, and seven candlestickes of Gold, and four censers of
Gold, and an altar also of fine gold, and four Lions of gold, upon the which
they had a Cherubin of Gold twelve spans long, and a Tabernacle of Gold, and
also xij. trumpets of silver, and a table of silver, and seven Barley loaves,
and all other relics that were before the nativity of Jesus. Also upon this
rock slept Jacob when he saw Angels go up and down, and said. Vere locus
iste sanctus est, and ego ignorabam. That is to say, Surely this place is holy,
and I wist not. And there the Angel changed Jacobs name and called him Israel.

And in that same place David saw the Angel that slew the people with a sword,
and put it all bloody in the sheth. And in this rock was Saint Simeon when he
received our Lord into the Temple, and on this rock he set him when the Jews
would have stoned him, and the rock rent in two, and in that rest he hid him,
and after came down and gave him light.

And on this rock sat our Lady and learned her Psalter. And there forgave our
Lord the sins to the woman that was taken and found in Adultery, and there
was our Lord Jesus Christ circumcised, and there the Angel denounced to
Zachary the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, and there offered first
Melchisedech bread and wine and water to our Lord, in token of the Sacrament
that was to come, and there fell David praying to our Lord for mercy, for him
and for his people, when he saw the Angel slay his people, and our Lord anon
heard his prayer, and therefore would he make the temple in that place, but
our Lord Jesus Christ forbad him by an Angel, for he had committed murder in
consenting to the slaying of the good knight Vrias, for to have his wife. And
therefore all that he had ordained for to make the Temple, he betook it to
Solomon his son, and he made it, and he prayed our Lord that all those that
prayed in that place devoutly and with good heart, that he would hear their
prayer, and grant that they asked right wisely, and our Lord granted it, and
therefore Salomons son called it the Temple of counsel and help of God.

Without the doors of that Temple is an altar where Jews were wont to offer
Doves and Turtilles, and in that Temple was Zachery slain, and on the pinnacle
the Jews set Saint James that was the first Bishop of Jerusalem. And a little
from this Temple on the right side is a church covered with Lead, that is
called the school of Solomon. And toward the South is the Temple of Salon that
is a full fair and a great place, and in this place dwell Knights, who are
called Templers, and they were the founders thereof and of their order, and in
that Templum Domini dwelled Chanons.

From this Temple toward the East xxvi. paces in a corner of the City, is the
Bathe of our Lord, and this Bathe was wont to go to Paradise, and beside is
our Ladies bed, and near there by is the Tomb of saint Simeon. And without
the Cloister of the Temple toward the North is a right fair Church of Saint
Anne our Ladies mother, and there was our Lady conceived, and before that
Church is a great tree, which began to grow that same night. And as men go
down from the Church xxij. steps, lies Ioachim our Ladies Father in a Tomb
of stone, and there near was laid sometime Saint Anne, but Saint Eline did
translate her to Constantinople. In this Church is a well in manner of a
cesterne, that is called (Probatica piscina) that has five entrings, and in
that cesterne was wont an Angel to descend and stir the water, and what man
that bathed him first therein after the stirring, was made whole that was
sick, what sickness so ever he had: and there was the man of the Palsy made
whole, that was sick xxxviii. year, and our Lord said to him in this manner
of wise (Toll grabatum tuum et ambula) That is to say, take up thy bed and
walk. And there beside was the house of Pilate, and a little thence was the
house of king Herod that did slay the Innocents.

Of Herod the King. Chap. xxiiij.
THis king Herod was a full wicked man and a fell, for he did first and
foremost slay his wife, whom he loved full well, and for the great love of her,
he went out of his wit, and so was he a long time, and afterward he came
again to himself. And after he slew his own children that he had begotten
of the said wife, and commanded likewise his second wife to be slain, and a
son that he had begotten of her, and after that he slew his own mother,
and he would also have slain his own brother, but his brother dyed
suddenly, and thus he did all the ill that he might. And then he fell sick,
and when he saw that he should dye, he sent for his sister and all the great
Lords of the country, and when they were there, he did put all the Lords into
a tower, and said to his sister, he wist well that the men of the country
would make no sorrow for him when he was dead, and therefore he made her for
to swear unto him that she should smite off the heads of the Lords every one
after his death, and then would men of the Country make sorrow for his death,
in regard of the Noble men's death, and then he made his last testament. But his
sister fulfilled it not as pertaining unto the death of the Lords, for as soon
as he was dead, she delivered the Lords out of the tower and sent every one
home to their houses and told them what her Brother commanded her to do unto
them. And ye shall understand that in that time was three Herodes of great
name. This of whom I speak, was called Herod Ascolonite, and he that did
smite of Saint John Baptists head, was called Herod Antipa, and the third was
called Herod Agrippa, and he did slay Saint James, and put Saint Peter in
prison.

Of Saint Saluators Church. Chap. xxv.
A Little within the City is S. Saluators church, and therein is Saint John
Chrisostomes arm, and the most part depiction of the disembodied, haloed head
of Saint Stephen and the disembodied arm of Saint John Chrysostom with two
fingers and thumb extended in blessing of Saint Stephens head.

And on the other side toward the South as men go to mount Sion is a fair
Church of saint James, where his head was smitten off, and there is the Mount
Sion, and a fair depiction of a haloed male figure, or Saint James, kneeling
with hands joined in prayer; behind him a male figure with a sword raised
behind his head Church of God and our Lady where she was dwelling, and died,
and there was sometime an Abbey of Chanons regulars, and from that place she
was borne of the Apostles unto the vale of Iosaphat. And there is the stone
that the Angel bare to our Lady from mount Sinay, and it is of that color
that the rock of saint Katherin is of, and there beside is the gate where our
Lady when she was with child went through to Bethlehem. And at the entering of
mount Sion is a Chapel and in that Chapel is that Stone great and large,
with which the Sepulcher was covered when Christ was laid therein, the which
stone, as it is written, the three Mary's saw turned upward when they came to
the Sepulcher, and they found an Angel that said to them, that Christ was
risen from death to life, and there is a little pillar to the which our Lord
was bound and scourged: and there was Annas house that was bishop of the Jews
at that time: and in that same place, denied saint Peter our Lord thrice before
the Cock crew: and there is a part of the table on which Christ made his
Maunde with his disciples: and yet is there the vessel with water out of which
the Discipels feet were washed: and thereby also is Saint Stephens grave: and
there is the altar where our Lord heard the Angels sing: and there appeared
Christ first to his Disciples after his resurrection, when the gates were shut,
and said Pax vobis, that is, Peace be to you, and upon that mount appeared
Christ to saint Thomas, and bad him assay his wound, and that was the viij. day
after his resurrection, and then he beeleeued perfectly and said. Dominus
meus, and Deus meus. That is to say, My Lord my God. In that same chapel
behind the high altar were all the Apostles on Whitsunday, when the holy
Ghost descended on them in likeness of fire, and there made God Paske with his
disciples: and there slept saint John the Evangelist on the Lords breast, and
saw in his sleep many secret things of heaven.

Also mount Sion is within the city, and it is a little higher then the other
side of the city, and that City is stronger on that one side then on the
other, for at the foot of mount Sion is a fair castle and strong which the
Souldan did cause to be made there.

On mount Sion was king David buried and Solomon, and many other kings of
Jerusalem, and there is the place where Saint Peter wept full tenderly, when
he had denied our Lord: and a stones cast from that is another place where our
Lord was judged, for at that time was Caiphas house there, and between the
Temple of Solomon and mount Sion is the place where Christ raised the maiden
from death to life. Under mount Sion toward the vale of Iosaphat is a well that
men call Natatorie Silo, there was our Lord washed after he was baptized. And
thereby is the tree on the which Judas hanged himself for despair when he
had sold and betrayed Christ.

depiction of a male figure or Judas Iscariot hanged in a tree, while a winged
demon or devil removes the personification of his soul via his stomach

And thereby is the Sinagogue where the Bishops of the Jews and Pharasies came
to hold their counsel, and there Judas cast the xxx. pence before them and
said. Peccaui tradens sanguinem iustum, That is to say, I have sinned in
betraying the innocent blood.

Of the field of Acheldemack which was bought with the xxx. pence. Chap. xxvi.
ON the other side of mount Sion toward the South a stones cast, is the field
that they bought with those xxx. pence for the which Christ was sold, that men
call Acheldemack, that is to say, the field of blood, in that filled is many
tombs of Christian men, for there be many pilgrims graven. And also in
Jerusalem toward the West is a fair Church, where the tree grew of the which
the cross was made, and thereby is a fair Church where our Lady met with
Elizabeth when they were both with child, and Saint John stirred in his
mothers womb, and made worship to our Lord his maker: and under the altar of
this Church is a place where Saint John was borne, and thereby is the Castle
of Emax.

Of Mount Joy. Chap. xxvij.
TWo mile from Jerusalem is the mount Joy, that is a fair place and a liking,
and there lies Samuel the prophet in a fair tomb, and it is called mount
Joy, for there those that travail see first Jerusalem. And in the middle of
the vale of Iosaphat is a little river that is called Torrens Cedron, and
overthwart this, lay a tree of the which the Cross was made that men passed
over. Also in this vale is a Church of our Lady, and there is the sepulcher of
our Lady, and she was lxxij. years of age when she dyed, and there near is
the place where our Lord forgave Saint Peter all his sins and misdeedes that
he had done. And beeside that, is a Chapel where Judas kissed our Lord, that
men call Gethsemaine, and he was taken of the Jews, and there left Christ his
Disciples before his passion, when he went to pray, and said. Pater si fieri
potest transeat a me calix ista, that is to say in English. Father if it may
be done, let this Cup pass from me. And thereby is a Chapel where our Lord
swet both blood and water, and there is the tomb of king Iosaphat, of whom the
vale had the name, and on the side of that vale is the mount Oliuet, and it is
called so, for there grows many Olive trees, and it is higher then
Jerusalem, and therefore from that hill men may see into the streets of
Jerusalem, and between the hill and the City is nothing but the vale of
Iosaphat, and that is not very large, and upon that hill stood our Lord when
he went into heaven, and yet seems there the step of his left foot in the
stone, and there is an abbey of black Chanons that was great sometime, but now
is there but a Church. And a little thence xviij. paces is a Chapel, and
there is the stone on the which our Lord God sat, when he preached and said
thus. Beati pauperes spiritu, quoniam ipsorum est regnum coelorum, that is to
say in English. Blessed be they that are poor in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven, and there he taught his Disciples their Pater noster.
There also is a Church of that blessed woman Mary Egyptian, and there is she
buried. And upon the other side toward the East three bow shootes from thence
stands Bethphage, where our Lord Jesus Christ sent Saint Peter and Saint
James for to fetch an Ass on Palm Sunday.

Of the Castle of Bethania. Chap. xxviij.
THere toward the East is a castle that men call Bethania, and there dwelled
Simon the Leper that harbored our Lord and them that were baptized of his
disciples, and he was called Julian, and was made Bishop, and that is he that
men call on for good Harbor. In that same place our Lord forgave Mary
Magdalene her sins, and there she washed his feet with tears and wiped them
with her heir, and there was Lazarus raised, when he was four days dead.

Of Jericho and other things. Chap. xxix.
IN the retourning to mount Olyuet, is the place where our Lord wept upon
Jerusalem, and thereby our Lady appeared to Saint Thomas, after her assumption,
and gave him her girdle, and thereby is the stone on the which our Lord sat
often and preached, and thereon he shall sit at the day of judgment, as
himself said. And there is mount Galile, where the Apostles were gathered when
Mary Magdalene told them of Christ's rising. Between mount Oliuet and mount
Galile is a Church, where the Angel told our Lady when she should dye.

And from Bethany to Jericho is five mile. Jericho was sometime a little city
but it was wasted and now it is but a little town, that town took Joshua
through the miracle of God and bidding of the Angel, and destroyed it, and
cursed all those that builded it again Of that city was Rahab that common
woman, that received messengers of Israel, and kept them from many perils of
death, and therefore she had a good reward as holy writ says, Quando accipis
Prophetam in nomine meo, mercedem Prophetae. etc. That is to say, he that
takes a Prophet in my name, he shall receive the reward of a Prophet.

Of the holy place between Bethany and the river Iordane, and other things.
Chap. xxx.
ALso from Bethany men go to the river of Iordane through the wilderness, and
it is near a days journey between. Toward the East is a great hill where our
Lord fasted xl. days, and upon this hill was Christ tempted of the Devil, when
he said to him Dic vt lapides isti panes fiunt. That is to say, Command that
these stones be made bread: and there is an hermitage where dwelled a manner of
Christians called Georgiens, for saint George converted them, and upon that
hill dwelled Abraham a great while, and as men go to Jericho, sat many sick
men crying Jesus fili David, miserere nobis: that is to say, Jesus the Son of
David have mercy upon us. And two mile from Jericho is the river Iordane, and
ye shall understand that the dead sea parts the land of Inde and Araby, and
the water of that sea is right bitter, and it casts out a thing that men call
Aspatum as great pieces as an horse, and Jerusalem is two hundred fourlongs
from the sea, and it is called the dead sea, because it runs not, neither
may any man or beast live therein, and that has been proved many times, for
they have cast therein men that were judged to death: nor no man may drinck of
that water, and if men cast iron therein, it comes up again: but if a man
cast a feather therein it sinketh, which is against kind.

depiction of two fruit trees, one with leaves

And thereabout grow Trees that bear fruit of fair color and seem ripe,
but when a man breaks or cutteth them, he finds naught in them, but coals
or ashes, in token that through the vengeance of God these Cities were burnt
with the fire of hell.

And some men call that lake the lake of the Alphited, and some call it the
poole of the devil, and some call it the stinking poole, for the water thereof
stinketh. There sancke these five cities through the wrath of God, that is to
say, Sodom, Gomor, Aldema, Solome, and Segor, for the sin of Sodom that
reigned in them, but Segor through the prayer of Lot was saved a great while,
for it stood upon an hill, and yet appears much thereof above the water, and
men may see the walls in clear weather, and in this city of Segor, Lot
dwelled a great while, and there he was made dronk by his daughters and lay by
them, and they thought that God would have destroyed all the world, as he did
with Noes flood, and therefore they lay by their father, that men might be
borne of them into the world: but if he had not been dronken he had not lain
by them. And at the right side of this sea, stands Lots wife in a pillar of
salt, because she looked back when the city sanck down.

Of Abraham and his generation. Chap. xxxj.
AND ye shall understand that Lot was Aarons son, Abraham's brother, and Sara
Abraham's wife was Lots sister, and Sara was xc. year old when she bare Isaac,
and Abraham had an other son named Ismaell that he had gotten of his maiden
Agar, and he was xiiij. years of age when Isaac was borne, and when Isaac was
viij. days old he was circumcised, and his other son Ismael was Circumcised
the same day, and was xiiij. years of age, therefore the Sarasins that be of
the generation of Ismael, do circumcise them at xiiij. years of age, and the
Jews that be of the generation of Isaac, do circumcise them the eight day
of their age.

And into that dead Sea aforesaid, runs the river Iordane, and makes there
an end, and this is within a mile of Saint John's Church, and a little beneath
that same Church Westward, were the Christians wont to bath them, and a mile
thence is the river Loath, through which Jacob went when he came from
Mesopotamia.

Of the river Iordane. Chap. xxxij.
THis river Iordane is no great nor no deep river, but there is much good fish
therein, and there comes from Mount Lybany two Wels, that men call Ior and
Dane, and of them it takes the name, and upon the one side of that river is
mount Gelboe, and there is a fair plain. And on that other side men go by
Mount Libany, to the desert of Pharaon. These hills part the Kingdom of Surry
and the Country of Phenys. On that Hill grow Ceders that bear long apples
which are as much as a man's head. This river Iordane deuideth Galile, and the
land of Idumea, and the land of Botron, and it runs into a plain that men
call Meldam in Sarasins language, and in English fair, because often times be
there kept great depiction of a fruit tree faires, and in the plain is the
tomb of Job.

In this river Iordane our Lord was baptized, and there was the voice of the
father heard, saying: Hic est filius meus dilectus, in quo acquiesco, ipsum
audite. That is to say in English: This is my beloved son in whom I am well
pleased, hear him. And the holy Ghost descended on him in likeness of a Dove,
and so was there in this Baptising all the Trinity. And through the river
Iordane passed the children of Israel on dry foot, and they set stones in the
midst of the water, in token of great miracle. And also in that River Naman
the Assyrian bathed him, who was leprouse, and he was made whole. And a little
from thence is the City of Aye, the which Joshua assailed and took. And about
the river Iordane are many Churches where Christians dwell. Also by the River
Iordane is the Vale of Mambre, the which is a fair Vale and a plenteous.

Of many other meruailes. Chap. xxxiij.
AND ye shall understand that as we go from the dead Sea afterward out of the
march to the land of promise, is a strong Castle that men call Carran or
Sermoys, that is to say in English, the Kings hill. This Castle did a King of
France make, whose name was Baudewin, who had conquered all the land, and put
it into the hands of Christians to keep, and under that castle is a fair
town that is called Sabbath, and thereabout dwell many Christians under
tribute.

Then men go to Nazereth, of the which our Lord had his name, and from
Nazareth unto Jerusalem is three days journey. Also men go through the
province of Galile, through Romatha, through Sophyn, and over the high hill of
Effraine, where dwelled Anna that was the Prophet Samuels mother, and there was
he borne, and after his death was buried at mount Joy, as I have said before.

And after men come to Sybula, where the ark of God was kept under Helie the
Prophet. And there made the people of Israel their sacrifice unto our Lord,
and there spoke our Lord first unto Samuel. There also ministered God the
Sacrament. Near there by at the right side is Gabaon, Rama, and Benjamin, of
the which holy Writ speaks. After that men come to Sychem, that some men call
Sycar, and this is in the province of the Samaritaines, and sometime there was a
Church but it is all wasted, and it is a fair vale and plenteous, and there is
a good City that men call Neople, and so from thence it is a days journey
unto Jerusalem, and there is the well where our Lord spoke to the woman of
Samaria, and Sychem is ten mile from Jerusalem, and it is called Neople, that
is to say, the new town. And there is the Temple of Joseph, Jacobs son that
governed Egypt, from thence were his bones brought and laid in the Temple, and
thither came Jews often in pilgrimage with great devotion, and in that City
was Diana Jacobs Daughter ravished, for whom her Brethren slew many men, and
thereby is the City of Corasim where the Samaritaines make their sacrifice.

On this hill would Abraham have sacrificed his Son Isaac and there near is
the vale of Dotyane, and there is the pit wherein Joseph was cast by his
Brethren before that they sold him, and it is two mile to Sichar, and from
thence men come to Samary, that men call Sabasten, and that is the chief
city of that country, and in that City was the seat of the twelve kings of
Israel, but it is not so great as it was, and there was Saint John Baptist
buried between two prophets, Heliseus and Abdon, but he was beeheaded in the
Castle of Markerin beeside the dead sea, and he was translated of his
depiction of an angel holding the upraised sword arm of a male figure or
Abraham; nearby the kneeling figure of a boy or Isaac; in the foreground a
sheep or ram in a bush Disciples and buried at Samarie, but there did Julius
Apostate take his bones and burn them, for he was that time Emperor, but
that Finger with the which he showed our Lord saying. Ecce agnus Dei, That is
to say. Behold the lamb of God, would not be burnt but saint Tecla the virgin
did bring it unto Alphen, that is in the mountains, in the which place they
do great worship, and there was saint John's Baptists head closed in a wall,
but the Emperor Theodosius did take it out, and found it lapped in a cloth all
boudy, and bare it to Constantinople, and there is yet the one half of the
head, and the vessel wherein his head was laid, when it was smitten off is at
Geane, and they do it great worship, Some say that saint John's head is at
Amiens in Picardy, and some say it is saint John's head the Bishop, I wot not,
but to God it is known.

Of the Samaritaines. Chap. xxxiiij.
depiction of two male figures and a female figure with flowing head-dresses

FRom Sebasten to Jerusalem is xij. mile, and among the hills of this country
is a well that men call fons Iocob. That is to say, Iocobs well, that changes
his color four times in the year, for sometime it is red, sometime clear,
sometime green, and sometime thick: and men that dwell there are called
Samaritaines, and they were converted by the Apostles, and their law varyeth
from the law of Christians, and Sarasins, as also from Jews and Panims. They
believe well in one God that all shall judge, and believe the Bible after the
letter, and they lap their heads in red linen cloth that they may be known
from others, for Sarasins wrap their heads in white cloth, and Christians that
dwell there in blew choth, and Jews in yealow, and in this country dwell many
Jews paying tribute as christians do.

And if ye will know the letters of the Jews, they are these following, and
are thus called. Alpha for a. death b. gymel c. he d. van e. zay f. ex g. ioth
i. karph k. lam l. men m. sameth o. ey p. phe q. lad r. cloth s. fir t. soun v.
than x. lours y. Now you shall have the figures. D. li. xh. rz. S D S li. n h R
f cc' h n d i k.

Of Galile. Chap. xxxv.
FRom this country that I have spoken of, men go to the plain of Galile, and
leave the hill on the one side, and Galile is in the Province of the Land of
Promise, and in that province is the land of Naim, and Caparnaum and Corasim,
and at Bethsaida was S. Peter and Saint Andrew borne: at Corasim shall
Antichrist be borne, and as some men say he shall be borne in Babylon:
therefore said the Prophet (De Babilonia coluber exiet qui totum mundum
deuorabit) That is to say. Of Babylon shall come a Serpent that shall devour
all the world. And this Antichrist shall be nourished in Bethsaida, and shall
reign in Corasim, therefore says holy writ. Vae tibi Corasim, vae tibi
Bethsaida, That is to say, Woe be to thee Corasim, woe be to thee Bethsaida:
and the Cave of Galile is four mile from Nazareth: of that City was the
woman of Canaan, of whom the Gospel speaks, and there our Lord did the first
miracle at the wedding of the Archdecline, when he turned water into wine.
And from thence men go unto Nazareth, that was sometime a great City, but
now there is but a little Town and is not walled, and there was our Lady
borne, but she was begotten at Jerusalem, and our Lord took his name of this
City.

At Nazareth Joseph took our Lady to wife, when she was fourteen years of
age, and there the Angel saluted her saying, Aue gratia plena, Dominus tecum.
That is to say. Hail full of grace, the Lord be with thee. And there was
sometime a great church, and now is there but a little chapel to receive the
offering of Pilgrims, and there is the Well of Gabriell, where our Lord was
wont to bathe him in when he was little. At Nazareth was our Lord nourished,
and Nazareth is to say flower of garden, and it may well be called so, for
there was nourished the flower of life, even our Lord Jesus Christ. About half
a mile from Nazareth is the blood of our Lord, for the Jews lead him upon an
high rock to cast him down and slay him, but Jesus Christ passed them and lept
on a rock where his steps be yet seen, and therefore some when they dread
them of Thieves or else of Enemies, say thus: Jesus autem transiens per mediam
illoru^ ibat: and they say also these verses of the Psalter three times. Irruat
super eos formido, te pauor in magnitudine brachij. Domine fiant immobiles
quasi lapis, donec pertranseat populus tuos Domine, and populus iste quem
redemisti. And so when this is said, a man may go without any letting. Also
ye shall understand and know that our blessed Lady bare her Child when she
was xv. years of age, and she lived with him xxxij. year, and three months,
and after his passion she lived xxij. years.

The way of Nazareth to the mount or hill of Tabor. Chap. xxxvj.
ANd from Nazareth to the mount Tabor is three mile, and there our Lord was
transfigured before S. Peter, Saint John and saint James. And there they saw
spiritually our Lord and Moses and Elias the Prophet. And therefore Saint
Peter said, Bonum est nos hic esse, faciamus tria tabernac. etc. That is to
say, It is good for us to be here, let us make three tabernacles. And our Lord
Jesus Christ bad them that they should tell it to no man, unto the time that
he was risen from death to life. And upon the same hill shall four Angels
sound their Trumpets, and raise all men that are dead to life, and then shall
they come in body and Soul to the Judgment, but the Judgment shall be in
the Vale of Iosaphat And also a mile from mount Tabor is the mount Hermon, and
there was the City of Naim, before the gates of this City our Lord raised
the son of the widow that had no more children.

Of the Sea of Galile. Chap xxxvij.
ANd from thence men go to a City that is called Tyberias that butteth on
the Sea of Galile, and though it be called the Sea of Galile, it is no Sea nor
arm of the sea, for it is but a stream of fresh water, and it is more then an
hundred forlongs long, and xl. broad, and therein is many good fishes, and by
that same sea stands many good cities: therefore this sea changes often his
name after the Cities that stand thereupon, but it is all one water or sea,
and upon this sea our Lord walked and there said he to Peter when he came on
the water, and was near drowned: O exigua fide praedite, quid dubitasti? That
is to say, O Thou of little faith, why did thou doubt?

Of the table whereon Christ eat after his resurrection. Chap. xxxviij.
IN this city of Tyberyas is the table that Christ eat on with his Disciples
after his resurrection, and they knew him by breaking of bread, as holy writ
says: Et cognouerunt eum in fractione panis. That is to say. They knew him in
breaking of bread, and about the hill of Tyberyas is a city where our Lord
fed five thousand people with five Barley loaves and two fishes, and in that
city did men cast in anger a firebrand or burning stick depiction of a male
haloed figure or Jesus Christ followed by another male figure; between them a
tree growing from among flames after our Lord, but that same burning stick did
fall on the earth, and incontinent grew out of the same stick a tree, and is
waxen a big tree, and there grows yet, and the scales of the tree be all
black. Ye shall understand that the River Iordane begins under the hill of
Labany, and there begins the Land of promise, and it lasts unto Barsabe of
length, and from the North part to the South, is nine score mile, and of
breadth from Jericho to Iaffe, it is forty mile, and ye shall understand that
the land of promise begins at the kingdom of Surry, and lasts unto the
wilderness of Araby.

Of strange manners and diverse. Chap. xxxix.
depiction of a male figure releasing two birds or pigeons with letters tied to
their necks

AND in this country and in many other lands beyond the sea, it is a custom
when they have war, that if a city or castle be besieged so strongly that
they may send no messengers to any Lords for succor, then they write their
Letters, and bind them about the necks of Doves, and let them fly their
ways, because the Dove is of that nature that he will return again to the
place where he is bred, and thus they do commonly in that country. And ye
shall understand that among the Sarasins in many places dwell Christians under
tribute, and they are of diverse manners, and sundry sorts of monks, who have
diverse laws, though they be all Christians and believe all well in our Lord
God, the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, but yet they fail in the
Articles of our says and they are called Iacobins.

depiction of a bearded male figure kneeling next to a fire above which is a
cloud or avatar of God

For Saint James converted them to the faith, and Saint John Baptized them, and
they say that men need only confess their sins unto God, and not unto man, for
they say that God bad not man confess him unto another man. And therefore
says David in this manner. Confitebor tibi Domine in toto cord meo, That is
to say, Lord I will confess my self unto thee in all my heart. And in another
place he says thus. Peccatum meum cognitum tibi feci: that is to say, my
trespass I have made known unto thee. And in another place. Deus meus es tu,
and confitebor tibi. That is to say, Thou art my God and I will confess my
self unto thee. And in another place. Quonia^ cogitatio hominis confitebitur
tibi. that is to say, The thought of man shall be known unto thee: and they
read often the Bible and Psalter, but they say it not in Latin, but in their
own language, and they say that David and other Prophets have said it. But
Saint Austen and Saint Gregory say. Qui scelera sua cogitat, and conuersus
fuerit venia^ sibi credat. That is to say, Who so knows his sin, and turns,
he may believe to have forgiveness. And Saint Gregory says thus. Dominus
potius mentem quam verbum confiderat. That is to say, Our Lord takes more heed
to thought, then to word. And Saint Hilarious says Longoru^ temporu^ crimina
ictu oculi perient si cord nata fuerit temptatio. That is to say, Sins that
are done of old time perish in twinkling of an eye, if despising of them be
borne in a man's heart. And therefore say they, by these authorities, that men
shall confess them only to God, and this way the Apostles taught: but Popes
that came since have ordained that men shall shriue them to priests and men as
they are, and the cause is this. For they say that a man that has sickness, men
may give him no good medicines, except they know that kind of sickness, also
they say a man may give no couenable penance, except he know the sin.

depiction of a female figure and a male figure wearing a long pointed hat

For there is a manner of sin that is grieuouser to one man then it is to
another, and therefore it is needful that a man know and understand the kind
of sin. And there be also other men that are called Surriens, and they hold
half our faith, and half the faith of the Greeks, and they have long beards
as the Greeks have.

And there be other that men call Georgiens, whom saint George converted, and
they do more worship to Hallowes of heaven then others do, and they have
their crowns shaven, the clarks have round crowns and the lay men have
crowns square, and they hold the Greeks law. And there be other that men call
christians of girding, because that they wear girdels depiction of two
tonsured men, one holding a censer and the other a book underneath, some other
called Nestoriens, some Ariens, some Nubyens, some Gregrours, and some Indiens
that are of Prester John's Land, and every one of those have some articles of
our belief. But each of them vary from other, and their variance were too much
to declare.

For to return again on this side of Galile. Chap. xl.
NOw seeing I have told you of many manners of men that dwell in the countries
aforesaid. Now will I turn again to my way for to turn upon this side, for
he that will turn from the land of Galile that I spoke of, to come on this
side, he may go through Damas that is a fair city, and full of good
marchandises, and it is three days journey from the sea, and five from
Jerusalem, but they carry merchandise upon Cammels, Mules, Horses, Dromedaries
and other manner of Beasts. This city of Damas founded Helizeus that was
Abraham's servant before Isaac was borne, and he should have been Abraham's
heir, and there he named that city Damas, and in that place slew Caine his
Brother Abel, and beside Damas is the mount of Syry, in this city be many
Physicians, and that holy man Saint Paul was a Physician to save men's bodies
before that he was converted depiction of a male figure or Cain holding a
scythe over a prone male figure or Abel and after he was a Physician of souls.
And from Damas men go to a place called our Lady of Sardmarch, that is five
mile from Damas, and it is on a rock, and there is a fair Church, and there
dwell Christian Monks and Nuns in that Church. Between the city of Dark,
and the city of Raphane is a River called Sabatory, for on the Satterday it
runs fast, and all the week else it stands still and runs not, or but
a little. And there is another river that on the night freeseth fast, and upon
the day no frost is seen. And so men go by a city that men call Berugh, and
there those that will go to Cipres take ships, and they ariue at a haven of Sur
or of Tyry, and then go men to Cipres, also men may go right from the haven
of Tyry, and come not at Cipres, but ariue at some haven of Greece, and by
these ways men come into the countries before spoken of.

How a man may go furthest and longest in the countries that are here
rehearsed. Chap. xli
NOw have I told you of ways by the which men go furdest and longest, as by
Babylon, and mount Sinay, and other places many, through the which men turn
again to the land of promise. Now will I tell you the shortest way to
Jerusalem, for many will not go the long way, some for want of company, and
many other reasonable causes, and therefore I shall tell you shortly how a man
may go with little cost and in short time.

A man that comes from the land of the West he goes through France,
Burgoyn, Lumbardy, and to Venice, or to Gene, or some other haven of those
marches, and takes there a ship and goes to the I Will of Griffe, and so ariueth
he in Greece, or else in port Myroch, or Valon, or Duras, or some other haven
of those marches and go to land for to rest him, and goes again to the sea,
and ariueth in Cipres, and comes not in the I Will of Rodes, but ariueth at
Famagost, that is the chief haven of Cypres, or else at Lamaton, and then
enter ship again, and pass beside the haven of Tire and come not to land, and
so passes by all the havens of the coast till he come to Iaffe, that is the
next haven to Jerusalem, for it is xxviij. mile between. And from Iaffe men
go to the city of Ramos, and that is but little thence, and it is a fair
city, and beside Ramos is a fair Church of our Lady, where our Lord showed
him self unto her in three shadows, betokening the Trinity, and there near
is a Church of Saint George where his head was smitten off, and then to the
Castle of Emear, and then to the mount Joy, and from thence pilgrims see
Jerusalem, and then to mount Modyn, and then go to Jerusalem. At mount Modin
lies the Prophet Malache and over Ramatha is the town of Donke, whereof Amos
the Prophet was.

Of other ways for to go by land to Jerusalem. Chap. xlij.
FOrasmuch as many men may not suffer the savor of the sea, and better it is
to go by land although it be more pain, and a man shall go to one of the
havens of Lumberdy, as Venice or an other, and ye shall pass into Greece to
Port Myroch or an other, and ye shall go to Constantinople, and shall pass
the water that is called the brath of S. George, that is an arm of the sea.
And from thence ye shall come to Puluerall, and then to the castle of Synople,
and so to Capadocia, which is a great Country, wherein is many great hills, and
ye shall go through Turkey, and to the City of Nike, the which they won
from the Emperor of Constantinople, and it is a fair City and well walled,
and there is a river that is called the Lay, and then men go by the Alps of
Mormaunt, and through the vales of Malebrynes, and the vale of Ernax, and so
more easily to Antioche, which stands richly on the River, and therabout are
many good hills and fair, and many fair woods and wild beasts. And he that
will go an other way, he goes by the Roman coast, and the Roman sea: on
that coast is a fair castle that is called Florage, and when a man is out of
the hills, he passes through the city of Moryach, and Artose, where is a
great bridge upon the river of Fern, that men call Fassor, and it is a great
river bearing ships: and beside the city of Damas is a river that comes
from the mount of Libany, which is called Alban: at the passing of this river
Saint Eustage lost his two Sons, when he had lost his wife, and it runs
through the plain of Archades, and to the red sea, and then men go to the
City of Fermine, and so to the City of Fern, and then to Antioche, and
that is a fair city and well walled, and it is two mile long, and there is a
bridge over the river, and has at each pillar a good tower, and is the best
City of the kingdom of Surrie. From Antioche men go to the city of
Locuth, and so to Geble, and to Tortouse, and thereby is the land of Lambre,
and a strong castle that men call Mambeke. And from Tortouse men go to
Tripelle on the sea, and by this sea men go to Dacres and there is two ways,
to Jerusalem, by the way on the left hand men come first unto Damas by the
river Iordane, and on the right side men go through the land of Flagme, and so
to the City Caiphas, in which City Caiphas was Lord, and some call it the
castle Pellerins, and from thence is four days journey to Jerusalem, and
they go through Cesary, Philyp and Iaffe and Ramas, Eumaux, and so forth to
Jerusalem.

Yet an other way by land toward the land of Promise. Chap. xliij.
NOW have I told you some ways by land and by water how men may go to
Jerusalem. And if it be so that there be many other ways that men go by,
after the countries that they come from, nevertheless they turn all to one
end, yet is there a way all by land to Jerusalem, and pass no sea but to
France or Flanders but that way is full long and perilous and of great
travail, and therefore few go that way, but he that will go that way, must
go by Almaine and Pruse, and so to Tartary, this Tartary is holden of the
great Caane, of whom I shall speak afterward for thither lasts his Lordship,
and all the Lords of Tartary yield to him tribute. Tartary is a full evil
land, sandy and a little fruit bearing, for there grows but little corn or
fruit, but Beasts are there great plenty, and therefore eat they flesh
without bread, and they sup the broth, and they drinck milcke of all manner of
Beasts, they eat cats and all manner of wild beasts, as rats and mice, and
they have little wood, and therefore they dress their meat with horse doung,
and other beast doung when it is dry. Princes and other Lords eat but once in
the day, and that is very little, and they be foul folk, and of evil
liking, and in Summer there is many tempests and thunders that slays many men
and beasts, suddenly it is right cold, and again on the sudden it is right
hot. The Prince that governs that land they call Roco, and he dwells at a
city that men call Orda, but very few men do desire to dwell in that Land,
for it is good to sow thorns and weeds in, but other good there is none, as I
heard say, for I was not that way, but I have been in other Countries marching
thereon as in the land of Rossie and Nisland, and the kingdom of Grecon, and
Lectow, and the kingdom of Grasten, and in many other places, but I went never
that way to Jerusalem, and therefore I cannot well tell it, for I have
understood that men may not well go that way but in Winter, when the waters
and mires that be in that land be frosen and covered with snow, so that men
may pass thereon, for were not the snow, there might no man go in that land
but he were lost. And ye shall understand that a man must go three days
journey from Pruse to pass this way, before he can come to the land of
Sarasins that men dwell in.

And if by chance any Christians pass that way as once a year they do, they
carry their vittaile with them, for they should find nothing there but a
manner of thing that they call Syles, and they carry their vittailes upon the
Ise on sleds, and chariots without wheels, and as long as their vittailes last
they may dwell there but no longer. And when the spies of the countries see
Christians come, they run to the towns and castles, and cry aloud, kara,
kara, kara, and as soon as they have cried, then does the people arm them.
And ye shall understand that the Ise there is harder then it is here, and
every man has a stew in his house, and therein they eat and do all things
that them needs, and that is at the North part of the world, where it is
commonly cold, for the Sun appears nor shines but a little in that country,
and that land is in some places so cold that there may no man dwell therein, and
on the South side of the world it is in some places so hot that there can no
man dwell, the Sun gives so great heat in those countries.

Of the faith of the Sarasins, and of the book of their law named Alkaron.
Chap. xliiij.
IN as much as I have told you of the Sarasins and of other Lands, I purpose to
set down a part of their law and of their belief, after as their book says,
that they call Alkaron, and some call that book Mysap some call it Harm in
diverse language of countries, which book Mahomet gave them, in the which
book he wrote among other things as I have often read and seen, that they
that are good shall go to Paradise, and the evil folks to hell, and that
believe all Sarasins. And if a man ask of what Paradise they mean, they say
it is a place of delights, where a man shall find all manner of fruits at all
times, and waters and rivers running with milk and honey, wine and fresh water,
and they shall have fair houses and good, as they have deserved, and those
houses are made of precious stones, gold, and silver, and every man shall have
ten wives and maidens, and he shall every day once have to do with them, and
yet shall they still be maidens. Also they speak often of the blessed virgin
Mary, and tell of the incarnation, that Mary was learned of Angels, and that
Gabryel said to her that she was chosen before all other from the beginning of
the world, and that witnesses well their book: and Gabriell told her the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, and that she should conceive and bear a child,
and they say that Christ was a holy Prophet in word and deed, and also meek
and right wise to all men, and one not any blame worthy: and they say that when
the Angel told to her of the incarnation, she had great dread for she was very
young, and there was one in that Country that practiced sorcery who was called
Takina, that with inchauntments could make him like an Angel and he went often
and lay with maidens, and therefore was Mary the more afraid of the Angel, and
thought in her mind that it had been Takina who went to maidens, and she
charged him in the name of God to tell her if he were the same Takina, and the
Angel bad her have no dread, for he was for certain a true messenger of
Jesus Christ.

Also their book of Alkaron says that she had a child under a Palm tree,
then was she greatly ashamed and wished her self dead, but as soon as her
child was borne, he spoke and comforted her saying, Ne timeas Maria. That is
to say. Be not afraid Mary. And in many other places says their book Alkaron,
that Jesus Christ spoke as soon as he was borne, and the book says that
Jesus Christ was sent of almighty God to be ensample to all men, and that God
shall Judge all men, the good to heaven, and the wicked to hell, and that Jesus
Christ is the best Prophet of all other, and next to God, and that he was a
holy Prophet, for he gave to the blind their sight, and healed all diseases,
he raised men and was taken quick into heaven, and if they may find a book
with Gospels, namely, Missus est Angelus, they do it great worship, for they
fast one month in the year, and eat only on the night, and they keep them
from their wives, but they that are sick are not constrained to it. And their
book Alkaron speaks of Jews and says, they are wicked people, for they
will not believe that Jesus Christ is of God. Also they say that the Jews
speak falsely of our Lady and her son Jesus Christ, saying that they did not
hang him on the Cross, for Sarasins believe so near our faith, that they are
easily converted, when men preach the law of Jesus Christ, and they say that
they know right well by their Prophesite, that their law of Mahomet shall fail,
as does the Law of the Jews, and that the law of Christians shall last to the
worlds end. And if a man ask them wherein they believe, they say that they
believe in God Almighty, that is the maker of heaven and earth, and all other
things, and without him is nothing done, and at the day of Judgment every man
shall be rewarded after his deserving, and that all things is truth that
Christ said by the mouths of the Prophets.

Yet further concerning Mahomet. Chap. xlv.
ALso Mahomet had in his book Alkaron, that every man should have two wives or
three or four, but now they have nine and as many lemmans as them likes, and
if any of the wives do wrong to their husbands, he may drive her out of his
house and take in an other, but he must give to her part of his goods.
Moreover where men speak of the Father, and the Son and the holy Ghost, they
say that they are three persons but not one God, for their book Alkaron
speaks not thereof, nor of the Trinity, but they say that God spoke or else
he was dumb, and that God had a Ghost or else he was not alive, and they say
Gods word has great strength, and so says their Alkaron, and they say that
Abraham and Moses were greatly in favor with God, for they spoke with him,
and Mahomet was a right messenger of God, and they have many good articles of
our faith, and some understand the Scriptures, Prophets, Gospels, and the
Bible, for they have them written in their language, in their manner they know
holy writ, but they understand if not but after the letter, and so do the
Jews, for they understand it not but after their letter spiritually, and
therefore says Saint Paul, Litera occidit spiritus autem viuificat. That is to
say, the letter kills but the spirit quickneth, and the Sarasins say that the
Jews are wicked, for they keep not the Law of Moses the which he took to
them, and also Christians are evil, for they keep not the commandments of
the Gospels, that Jesus Christ sent unto them, and therefore I shall tell you
what the Souldan told me upon a day in his chamber shutting out all other men,
as Lords, Knights and other: for he would speak with me in counsel, and
then asked he me how Christians governed them in our country, and I answered
him and said, right well thanks be to God, and he said secretly nay, for he
said that our Priests made no force of Gods service: for they should give good
example to men to do well, and they give ill example, and therefore when the
people should go on the holidayes to Church to serve God, they go to the
Tavern to sin in gluttony both day and night, and eat and drink as beasts that
wot not when they have enough, and also Christians (he said) forced them to
fight together, and one to beguile other, and they are so proud that they know
not how they may cloth them, now short, now long, now strait, now wide, of all
manner of fashions. They should be simple, meek and soft, and do their alms
as Jesus Christ did, in whom they believe, and he said they are so couetouse,
that for a little money they sell their children, their sisters, and their
wives, and one takes another man's wife and none keeps his promise to
another, therefore said he, for their sins God has given these lands to our
hands, and not through our strength, but all for your sins. For we wot well,
that when that ye serve well your God, that he will help you, so that no men
shall win of you if that ye serve your God as ye ought to do, but while they
live so sinfully as they do, we have no dread on them, for their God shall
not help them. And then I asked him how that he knew the state of Christians
in that manner, and he said that he knew well both of Lords and commons, by
his messengers which he sent through all the countries as it were merchants
with precious stones and other merchandise to know the manner of every country.
And then he did call again all the Lords into his chamber to us, and then
showed he unto me three persons that were great Lords of that country, who
showed unto me the manner of my country, and of all Christendom, as though
they had been men borne in the same parties, and they spoke french right well
and the Souldan also, and then I had great marvel of this slander of our
faith, and so they that should be turned by our good examples to the faith of
Jesus Christ, they are drawn away through our evil living, and therefore it
is no wonder if that they call us evil, for they say truth, but the Sarasins
are true, for they keep truly the commandments of their Alkaron.

Of the birth of Mahomet. Chap. xlvj.
AND ye shall understand that Mahomet was borne in Araby: and he was first a
poor deruill and kept horse and went after merchandise. And so he came once
into Egypt with merchandise, and Egypt was the same time christened, and there
was a chapel beside Araby, and there was an hermit, and when he came to the
chapel that was but a little and low house, as soon as he entered, it began
to be as great as it were a Palace gate, and that was the first miracle that
the Sarasins say that he did in his youth. After began Mahomet to be wise and
rich, and became a great Astronomer, and since was the keeper of the land of
the prince Corodan, and governed it full well, in such manner that when the
Prince was dead he married the Lady named Quadrige. And Mahomet fell often in
the falling evil: wherefore the Lady was wroth that she had taken him unto her
husband, and he made her to believe that every time that he fell so, he said
that Gabriell the Angel spoke to him, and for the brighnesse of the Angel he
fell down. This Mahomet reigned in Araby, in the year of our Lord six
hundred and twenty, and he was of the kindred of Ismaell, that was Abraham's
son, whom he begat of Agar, and other are called Sarasins of Sara, but some are
called Moabites, and some Ammonites, after Lots two sons. This Mahomet loved
well a good man an Hermit that dwelled in the Wilderness, a mile from mount
Sinay in the way as men go from Araby to Calde, and a days journey from the
sea where merchants of Venice come, and Mahomet went so often to this Hermit
that all men were wroth, for he heard gladly the Hermit preach, and his men did
walk all the night, so that they wished that this hermit were dead. So it
befell on a night that Mahomet was sore dronken with strong wine, so that he
fell in a sleep, and his men took his sword out of his sheath whiles he lay
and slept, and therewith they slew the Hermit, and when they had done they put
up the sword again all bloody, and upon the morrow when that he found the
Hermit thus dead he was very angry in his mind, and right wroth, and would
have put his men unto depiction of a male figure lying on the ground while
another male figure holds a flame to his foot the death, but they all with one
accord, and with one will said that he himself had slain him when he was
dronken, and they showed his own sword all bloody, and then he believed that
they said the truth, and cursed the wine, and all those that drank it. And
therefore Sarasins that are devout drink no wine openly least they should be
reproved, but they drink good beuerage sweet and nourishing, that is made of
Calamels, and thereof is sugar made.

And it befell sometime that Christians became Sarasins, either through
poverty, simpleness or wickedness, and therefore their Archbishop when he
received them said thus, Laelles ella Mahomet roses ella, that is to say: There
is no God but one, and Mahomet his messenger. And sithen I have told you a part
of their law and of their customs: Now I shall tell you of their letters, with
their names.

First, they have for a almoy, bethat for b. cathi c. ethoti e. for d delphoye.
for f thy. garophing g. hecum h. iochi i. kathi k. lothun l. malach m. nahalht
n. orthy o. thoziri p. zothij q. rucholat r. routhi s. salathy t. chotimus v.
yrichom x. mazot z. zalepin and. ioheten con. these are the names. These four
letters have they yet more for diversity of their language, forasmuch as they
speak so in their throts, as we have in our language, and speak in England.
Two letters may they then have in their A. B. C. That is to say y. and. the
which are called throne and zowx.

Of diverse Isles and manner of people, and of marvelous Beasts. Chap. xlvij.
AND sithen I have spoken before of the holy land and countries thereabout, and
many ways thither, and to mount Synay, and to Babylon, and diverse other places
which I have spoken of. Now will I tell and speak of Isles and of diverse
beasts, and diverse folk and countries that be parted by the floods that come
out of Paradise terrestre. For Mesopotamia and the kingdom of Calde and Araby,
are between two floods, Tigree and Euphrates, and the kingdom of Media and
Persia are between two floods, Tigree and Nylus, and the kingdom of Surry,
Palestine and Femines are between Euphrates and the sea of Mediterani: it is
of length from Marroch on the sea of Spain, unto the great Sea, and so lasts
it beyond Constantinople three hundred and twenty mile of Lumbardy and to the
Ocean sea. In Inde is the kingdom of Sichem, that is all closed among hills,
and beside Sichem is the land of Amazony, wherein dwell none but women.

depiction of a male figure holding a spear, next to a wild animal or dog
biting into the back of a large spotted cat

And thereby is the kingdom of Albany which is a great land, and it is called
so, because that men are more white there them in other places, and in this
country are great hounds and strong, so that they overcome Lions and slay them.
And ye shall understand that in those countries are many Isles and lands of the
which it were too long to tell, but of some I will speak more plainly
afterward.

Of the haven of Gene, for to go by sea into diverse Countries. Chap. xlviij.
NOw he that will go to Tartarie, Persie, Chalde, or Inde, he takes ship at
Gene or at Venice, or at any other haven, and so he passes by the sea and
ariueth at Topasond, that is a good city, that sometime men called the haven
of bridge, and there is the haven of Persia, of Medes and of other marches. In
this city lies Saint Athanasius, that was bishop of Alexandria, that made
the Psalm Quicunque vult.

This man was a great Doctor of Divinity, and of the Godhead, he was accused
unto the Pope of Room, that he was an Heritike, and the Pope sent for him and
put him in prison, and while he was in that prison, he made this Psalm and
sent it unto the Pope, and said it that he were an Heritike, then was that
Herisie, for that was his faith and his belief: and when the Pope saw that he
had said therein was all our faith, then anon he did deliver him out of
prison, and he commanded that Psalm to be said every day at the beginning of
of service, and so he held Athanasius for a good Christian, but he would
never after go to his Bishoprike, because they accused him of Heresy. To
pasond was sometime holden of the Emperor of Constantinople, but a great man
that he sent to help the country against the Turks, did hold it to himself
and called him self Emperor of Topasond.

And from thence men go through little Armony, and in that country in an old
Castle that is on a rock that men call the Castle of Sypris, and there men
find an Hawk sitting upon a perch right well made, and a fair Lady of Fairy
that keeps it, and he that will watch this same Hawk seven days and
seven nights, and some say that it is but three days and three nights alone
without any company and without sleep: this fair Lady shall come unto him at
the seven or at three days end, and shall grant unto him the first thing
that he shall ask of worldly things, and that has often been proved.

depiction of a female figure looking out from a castle window with a bird or
hawk in another window; outside stands a male figure with hand outstretched

And so upon a time it besel that a man who at that time was king of Armony,
that was a right doughtie man, watched upon a time, and at the seven days
end, the Lady came to him and bad him ask what he would, for he had well
done his duty, and the king answered and said, that he was a great Lord, and
in good peace, and he was rich, so that he would ask nothing but only all
the body of the fair Lady, or to have his will of her. Then this fair Lady
answered, and said unto him, that he was a fool, for he wist not what he
asked, for he might not have her, for he should have asked of her only
worldly things, and she was not worldly. And the king said he would naught
else, and she said, since he would ask naught else, she would grant him and
all that came after him, three things, and said unto him: Sir king, ye shall
have war without peace, unto the ninth degree, and ye shall be in subjection
unto your enemies, and ye shall have great need of good cattle, and since
that time all the Kings of Armonie have been in war and needful, and under
tribute of the Sarasins. Also a poor man's son as he watched on a time, and
asked the Lady if that he might be rich and happy in merchandise, and the
Lady granted him, but she said to him that he had asked his undoing, for
great pride that he should have thereof. And this man became so great a
merchant both by sea and land, that he was so rich that he knew not the
thousand part of his goods. Also a knight of the templers watched likewise, and
when the had done, he desired to have a purse full of gold, and whatsoever he
took thereof, it should ever be full again: and the Lady granted it him,
but she told him that he had desired his destruction, by the great mispending
that he should have of the same purse, and so it befell. But he that shall
wake has great need to keep him from sleep, for if he sleep, he is lost,
so that he shall never be seen after: but that is not the right way, but for
the marvel. And from Tapasond men go to great Armony to a City that is
called Artyron that was wont to be a good City, but that Turks have
destroyed it, for there neither grows wine nor yet fruit. From this Artyron
men go to an hill that is called Sabissocoll, and there near is an other hill
called Arath, but the Jews call it Thano, where the Ark of Noah rested after
the Deluge, and yet it is on that hill, a man may see it from far in clear
weather, and the hills be xij. mile of height, and some say they have been
there, and put their fingers in the holes where the fiend went out when Noe
said in this manner, Benedicite. But I understand that for snow that is always
upon the hill, both Winter and Summer, no man may go up since Noe was there:
but only a Monk through the grace of God, who brought a plank that yet is in
the Abbey at the hills foot, for he had great desire to go upon that hill,
and when he was at the third part upward, he was so weary that he might go
no further, and he rested him and slept, and when he was awake, he was down
at the hills foot, and then prayed he to God devoutly that he would suffer
him to go to the upper part of the hill, and the Angel said, that he should
have his desire, and so be did, and since that time no man did ever come
there. And therefore a man ought not to believe all things that are spoken of
it.

And from thence men go to a city that is called Tanzyro, and that is a fair
city and good. Beside that city is an hill of salt, and thereof every man
takes what he will: and there depiction of a male figure standing beside a
mountain with an axe or scythe raised behind his head dwelled many christians
under tribute of the Sarasins. From thence men go through many Cities,
Towns, and Castles, toward Inde, and then come to a City that is called
Cassage, that is a fair city, and in that city is abundance of corn,
wines and all manner of goods, and there met the three kings together that
went to make their offerings to our Lord depiction of a heavily-laden
grape-vine and a tall field of corn behind a fence in Bethlehem. From that
City men go to an other called Cardabago, and Panims say that Christians may
not dwell there but they dye soon, but they know not the cause. From thence
men go through many Countries, cities and towns, so that it were too long to
tell all, and to the City of Carnaa, that was sometime so great, that the wall
was twenty and five mile about, which yet may be seen, but it is not now
inhabited, and at that place ends the land of the Emperor of Persia.

Of the Country of Job, and of the Kingdom of Calde. Chap. xlix.
ON the other side of the City of Carnaa men enter into the land of Job, that
is a good Land and great plenty of all fruits, and that Land is called Swear.
In this Land is the City of Thomar. Job was a Panim, and also he was Cofraas
son, and he held that Land as the prince thereof, and he was so rich, that
he knew not the hundred part of his goods, and after his poverty God made him
richer then ever he was before, so that he was king of Idumea after the death
of king Esau, and when he was king he was called Ioab, and in that kingdom
he lived a C. and lxx. year, so that he was of age when he dyed CC. and
xlviij. year, And in this land of Job is no want of any thing that is needful
to man's body. There are hills where men find manna, and manna is called Angels
bread, that is a white thing right sweet, and much sweeter then sugar or honny,
and that comes of the dew of heaven that falls on the herbs, and there is
congealed and waxen white, and men put it in medicines for rich men.

This land marches to the land of Calde which is a great land and there is
full fair men, and well apparelled, and they go richly arrayed with cloth of
Gold, and with Pearls and other precious stones. But the women are right soul
and evil clad, and go bare foot, and bear an ill cote, large, wide, and
short, unto their knees, and have long sleeves down to the foot, and
depiction of a female figure with very long hair and bare feet, and a male
figure they have great black hair long hanging about their shoulders, and they
are right foul for to look upon, but I will not tell it all, because that I
am not worthy for to have any reward for my praising of them. In this land of
Calde aforesaid is a city that men call Hur, and in that city was Abraham
the Patriarch borne.

Of the kingdom of Amasony whereas dwell none but women. Chap. L.
Near the Land of Calde is the Land of Amasony, wherein do dwell no men but
all women, as men say, for they will suffer no man to live among them nor to
have rule over them. For sometime there was a king and men dwelling in that Land,
as they do in other Countries and had wives, and it befell that the king had
great war with them of Sychy, this king was called Colopius and he was
slain in battle and all the noble men of his land. And this Queen when she
and other Ladies of the land heard that the king and the Lords were slain,
they gathered them together and killed all the men that were left in depiction
of two female figures or Amazons, one holding a bow and an arrow, the other
holding a pike and a shield their land among them. And when they will have any
man to lie by them, they send for them into a Country that is near their land,
and the men come and stay there eight days, or as the woman likes, and then
go they again, and if they have men children, they send them to their fathers
when they can eat and go, if they have maid children they keep them, and if
they be of noble blood they burn the left pap away for bearing of a shield,
and if they be of baser degree they burn the right pap away for shooting. For
those women of that country are good warriors, and are often in pay with other
Lords, and the Queen of that land governs well the land, this land is
environed with water. Beside Amazony is the land of Termagute, that is a good
land and profitable, and for the goodness of that land king Alexander did make a
city there, and called it Alexandria.

Of the land of Ethiope. Chap. li.
ON the other side of Chalde toward the South side is Ethiope a great land. In
this land on the South are the folk right black. In that side is a well that
on the day the water is so cold that no man may drink thereof, and on the
night it is so hot that no man may abide to put his hand in it. In this land
the rivers and all the waters are troubled and some deal salt for the great
heat, depiction of a naked male figure and a naked female figure, standing in
the sun in the desert and men of that land are lightly dronken, and have little
appetite to meat, and they have commonly the flix of body, and they live not
long.

depiction of a mythical creature, a monopod, sciapod, or male figure lying on
his back with a single enormous leg

In Ethiope are such men that have but one foot, and they go so fast that it
is a great marvel, and that is a large foot that the shadow thereof covers
the body from Sun or rain when they lie upon their backs, and when their
children are first borne they look like russet, and when they wax old then
they be all black. In Ethiope is the land of Saba, of the which one of the
three kings that sought our Lord at Bethlehem was King.

Of Inde the more and the less, and of Diamonds, and small people, and other
things. Chap. lij.
FRom Ethiope men go into Inde through many and diverse countries, first
through Inde the more, and it is parted into three parts, that is to say, Inde
the more, which is a hot Land, and Inde the less, which is a temperate land,
and the third part is toward the North, and there it is right cold, so that
with great cold, frost, and Ise, the water becomes Crystal, and upon that
grows the good Diamonds that are of a troubled color, that diamond is so
hard that no man may break it. Other Diamonds men find in Araby that are not
so good, for they are more soft, and there be some in Cipres: and in Macedony
men find Diamonds also, but the best are in Inde, and some many times are
found in Amasse in the mine where gold is gotten, when men break the mass in
pieces: sometime men find some of greatness of a Pease, and some less, and
those are as hard as those of Inde: sometime there are good Diamonds found in
Inde upon the Rock of Crystal: and also upon the Rock of Adamand in the sea,
and on other hills are found Diamonds that are as great as Hasell nuts, which
are all square and pointed of their own kind, and they grow two together male
and female, and are nourished with the dew of heaven, and they engender
commonly and bring forth other small ones, which increase and grow all the
year. I have many times tried, that if a man keep them with a little of the
rock, and wet them with many dewes sometime, they will grow every year, and
the small will wax great, and if a man do bear that Diamond in his left side,
then it is of more virtue, for the strength of their growiag is toward the
North, that is on the left side as men of those countries say. To him that
bears the Diomond upon him it gives hardiness, it keeps the lims of his
body, also it gives a man victory of his enemies if his cause be right, and
it keeps him that bears it in good will from strife, from riot, ill
dreams, sorceries and enchantments. Moreover no wild beast shall grieve him
nor assail him. This Diamond should be given freely without covetousness or
buying, for then it is of most virtue, it heals him that is lunatike and he
that is possessed with a Devil, and as soon as any venim or poison be
brought near to the Diamond, it moistneth and begins to sweat, and men may
easily polish them, though some think that they may not be polished. But men
may assay them well in this manner: first, cut them on precious stones, as
Sapphires or upon Crystal, and then take a stone that is called Adamand, and
lay a needle before that Adamand, and if the Diamond be good and virtuous,
the Adamand draws not the needle to it, whiles the Diamond is there. And this
is the proof that they make beyond the sea. But it chancheth sometime that the
good Diamond loses it virtue through him that bears it, and therefore it is
needful for to make it to recover his virtue again, or else it is little of
value.

depiction of two mythical creatures, naked androgynous figures or
hermaphrodites

Of diverse kingdoms and Isles in the land of Inde. Chap. liij.
THere are in Inde many countries and diverse kingdoms, and it takes the name
of a river that runs through it, which is called Inde also, and there are
many precious stones in the said River, and diverse other strange things, as
Eeles of thirty foot long, and men that dwell near that river are of evil
color, yelow and green. In the land of Jude are more then five thousand Isles
that are inhabited (beside diverse that are uninhabited) and in each one of
those is great plenty of Cities, and much people: for men of Inde are of that
condition that commonly they pass not out of their land, for they dwell under
the Planet Saturn, and that Planet makes his course by the xij. Signs in
thirty year, and the Moon passes through the xij. Signs in a Month, and
for that Saturn is of so little stirring, therefore men that dwell under it,
and in that Climate have no good will to stir much abroad. But in our country
it is contrary, for we are in a Climate that is of the Moon, and of light
stirring, and that is the Planets of way, and therefore it gives us will to
much moving and stirring, and to go into diverse Countries of the world, for
it goes about the world more lightly then any other Planet does. Also men
pass through Inde to many countries by sea. And then they come to the I Will of
Hermes, where Marchaunts of Venice and of Gene and of other diverse parts of
Christendom come to buy their merchandise, but it is so warm there in that
I Will that men's members hang down to their shanks for the great dissoluing of
the body. And men of that country that know that manner do bind them full
strait and anoint them with ointments made therefore for to hold them up, or
else they might not live.

In this land men and women lie all naked in the Rivers and Waters, from under
the heat of the day till it he past noone, and they lie all in the water but
the face, for the great depiction of a naked male figure and female figure
standing in the sun heat that is there, and the women be not ashamed for the
men. In this I Will are the ships without nails or bands of iron, for rocks of
Adamond that are in the sea would draw ships to them. From this I Will men go by
the sea to the I Will of Lana where is great plenty of corn, and the king of
this I Will was somteime so mighty that he held war against king Alexander with
great strength: men of this I Will have many manners of beliefes and faith, and
have also diverse laws, and some do worship to the Sun, some the fire, some
the trees, and some the Serpents, or any other thing that they first meet in
the morning, and some do worship simulacres and Idols, but between simulacres
and Idols is no difference, for they are but the Images made to what likeness
of thing that man may invent, for some Image has an head like an Ox, and some
have three or four heads, one of a man, or an horse, or Ox or any other beast
that no man has seen.

And ye shall understand that they that worship symulacres they worship them
for worthy men that were sometime as Hercules, and other that did many
meruailes in their times. For they say they know well that they are not the God
the which made all things, but that they are well with God for the meruailes
that they did, and therefore they worship them. And depiction of a male figure
kneeling before a simulacre or idol with the body of a human and the head of an
ox so say they of the Sun, for it changes often times, and gives sometime
great heat for to nourish all things on earth, and because it is of so great
profit, they know well that it is not God, but it is well with God, and that
God loves it more then any other thing, and for this cause they worship it.

And also they have their reasons for other planets, and for fire also, for it
is profitable and needful. And of Idols they say, that the Ox is the holiest
that they may find here on earth, and more profitable then any other, for he
does much good, and none ill, and they know well that it may not be without
the special grace of God, and therefore they make their God of an Ox the one
half, and the other half a man, for man is the fairest and the best creature
in the World. And they do worship to Serpents and other beasts that they first
meet with in the morning, and namely those beasts that have good meeting after
whom they speed well all the day after, the which they have proved of long
time, and therefore they say that this meeting comes of Gods grace, and
therefore they do make Images like unto these things that they may worship
them before they meet any thing else.

depiction of two dogs or dog-sized rats

And there are some Christians that say some Beasts are better for to meet
then other, for Hares, Swine, and other beasts are ill to meet first as they
say. In this I Will of Cana is many wild beasts, and rats in that country are as
great as hounds here, and they take them with mastises, for cats may not take
them. From thence men come to a City that is called Sarchis, and it is a
fair and good city, and there dwell many Christians of Gods faith, and there
be men of Religion. Fom thence men come to the Land of Lombe, and in that land
grows pepper in a forest that is called Tomber and it grows in none other
place more in all the world then in that forest, and that forest is fifty
days journey, and there by the land of Lombe is the city of Polomes, and
under that city is a hill that men call Polombe, and thereof takes the
city his name.

And so at the foot of the same hill is a right fair and a clear well, that
has a full good and sweet savor, and it smells of all manner sorts of
spices. And also at each hour of the day it changes his savor diversely, and
who so drinks thrice in the day of that well, he is made whole of all manner
sickness that he has, I have sometime drunk of that well, and me thinks
yet that I fare the better, some call it the Well of youth, for they that
drink thereof seem to be young always, and live without much sickness, and
they say this well commmeth from Paradise terrestre, for it is so virtuous, and
in this land grows ginger, and thither come many rich merchants for spices.
In this country men worship an Ox for his great simpleness and meekness,
and the profit that is in him, for they make the Ox to travail vi. or vij.
year, and then men do eat him. And the king of that land has evermore one
Ox with him, and he that keeps him every day takes his fees for the
keeping. And also every day he gathers his urine, and his doung in a vessel
of gold, and bears it to the prelate that they call Archt porta papaton, and
the prelate bears it to the king, and makes thereupon a great blessing, and
then the king puts his hand therein, and they call it gaul, and he
annointeth his front, and his breast therewith, and they do it great worship,
and say he shall be fulfilled with the virtue of the Ox before said, and
that he is hallowed through virtue of those holy things as they say. And when
the king has thus done, than other Lords do it, and after them other men
after their degree if they may have any of the remnant.

In this country their Idols are half man and half Ox, as the figure in the
second leaf before is showed, and out of these Idols the wicked Ghost speaks
unto them, and gives them answer of what thing that they ask him, and before
these Idols they many times slay their children, and sprinkle the blood on the
Idols, and so make sacrifice. And if any man dye in that country, they burn
them in token of penance, that he should suffer no penance if he were laid in
the earth by eating of worms. And if his wife have not children, then they
burn her with him, and they say that it is good reason that she keep him
company in the other world as she did in this, and if she have children she
may live with them, if she will, and if the wife die before, she shall be
burnt and her husband also if he will. In this country grows good wine, and
women drinck wine and men none, and women shave their heads and not men.

Of the kingdom of Mabaron. Chap. liiij.
FRom this land men go many days journey to a country called Mabaron, and
this is a great kingdom, therein is many fair Cities and Towns. In this
land lies Saint Thomas in a fair tomb in the city of Calamy, and the arm
and the hand that he put in our Lords side after his Resurrection, when
depiction of a hand emerging from a tomb Christ said unto him, Noli esse
incredulus, sed fidelis: that is to say, be not of vain hope but believe,
that same hand lies yet without the tomb bare, and with this hand they give
their domes in that country, to wit who says right, and who does not, for if
any strife be between two parties, they write their names, and put them into
the hand, and then incontinently the hand casts away the bill of him that
does wrong, and holds the other still that does right, and therefore men come
from far countries to have judgment of causes that are in doubt.

In this Church of Saint Thomas is a great Image that is a simulacre and it is
richly beset with precious stones and pearls, to that Image men come in
pilgrimage from far countries with great devotion, and there come some
pilgrims that bear sharp knives in their hands, and as they go by the way,
they sheare their shanks and thighs that the blood may come out for the love
of that Idol, and they say that he is holy that will dye for that Idols sake.
And there is some that from the time that they go out of their houses at each
third pace they kneel till that they come to this Idol, and when they come
there, they have insence or such other thing to offer to the Idol. And there
before that Minster or Church of this Idol is a river full of water, and in
that river pilgrims cast Gold, Silver, pearls and other precious stones
without number, instead of offerings, and therefore when as the minster has
any need of mending, then the master of the Minster goes unto that river, and
takes out thereof as much as is needful for the mending of the Minster. And ye
shall understand depiction of a male figure with a sword or scimitar kneeling
beside his hat in front of a cart containing a simulacre or idol of a male head
that when any great feasts of that Idol come, as the dedication of the Church,
or of the throning of the Idol, all the country thereabout assemble there
together, and then men set this Idol with great reverence and worship in a
chair well dressed with cloth of gold and other tapistrie, and so they carry
him with great reverence and worship round about the City, and before the
chair goes first in Procession all the maidens of the country, two and two
together, and so after them go the pilgrims that are come from far countries
of the which pilgrims some fall down before the Chair, and lets all go
over them, and so are they slain, and some have their arms and legs broken
and they do it for love of the Idol, and they believe the more pain that
they suffer here for their Idol, the more joy shall they have in the other
world: but a man shall find few Christians that will suffer so much penance
for our Lords sake, as they do for their Idol. And nigh before the chair go
all the minstrels of the Country, which are without number with many diverse
melodies.

depiction of male figure slicing himself with a knife in front of a simulacre
or idol with a demonic head sitting on a tower pointing downward; nearby
another male figure

And when they are come again to the Church they set up the Idol again in
his Throne, and for worship of the Idol two or three are willingly slain with
sharp knives, and the men in that country think they have great worship, if
that holy man which is slain be of their kindred: likewise they say that all
those that are there slain are holy men and Saints and they are written in
their lettany, and when they are thus dead their friends burn their bodies and
they take the ashes, and those are kept as relics, and they say it is an holy
thing, and that they have doubt of no peril when they have of those ashes.

Of a great country called Lamory, where the people go all naked, and other
things. Chap. lv.
depiction of a naked male figure and a naked female figure, standing in the
sun in the desert

FRom this country two and fifty days journey is a country that is called
Lamory, and in that land is great heat, and it is the custom there that men
and women go all naked, and they scorn all them that are clad, for they say
that God made Adam and Eve all naked, and that men should have no shame of that
God made, and they believe in the same God that made Adam and Eve, and all the
world, and there is no woman married, but women are all common there, and they
refuse no man. And they say that God commanded to Adam and Eve and all that
come of him saying: Crescite et multiplicamini et repleti terram. Increase and
multiply and fill the earth, no man there may say this is my wife, nor no woman
may say this is my husband, and when they have children they give them to whom
they will of them that have meddled with them.

Also the Land is all common, for every man takes what he will, for that one
man has now this year, an other man has the next year. And all the goods,
as Corn, Beasts, and all manner of things in that country is all common. For
there is nothing under lock, and as rich is one man as another: but they have
an evil custom in eating of flesh, for they eat more gladly man's flesh then
other. Nevertheless, in that land is abundance of corn, of flesh, of fish, of
gold of silver, and of all manner of goods. And thither do Marchaunts bring
children depiction of a male figure, naked apart from a helmet and sword,
defending a shield, decorated with two keys crossed over a column, from another
male figure with a sword for to sell, and those that are fat they eat, but
those that be lean they keep till they be fat, and then are they eaten. And
beside this I Will of Lamory is another called Somober, the which is a good I Will,
and there both men and women that are of the nobility are marked in the visage
with an hot iron, that they may be known from other, for they think
themselves the worthyest of the world, and they have evermore war with those
men that are naked of whom I spoke before. And there are many other Isles and
people, of the which it were overmuch for to speak here.

Of the country and I Will named Iana, which is a mighty Land. Chap. lvi.
ANd there is also a great I Will that is called Iana, and the king of the country
has under him seven kings, for he is a full mighty Prince. In this I Will
grows all manner of spices more plenteously then in any other places, as
Ginger, Cloves, Nutmegs and other, and ye shall understand that the Nutmeg
bears the Mace: also in that I Will is great plenty of depiction of a fruit
tree all things save wine. The king of this Land has a rich Palace, and the
best that is in the world, for all the stares of his hall and chambers are made
one of gold, and another of silver, and all the walls are plated with fine
gold and silver, and in those plates are written stories of knights, and
battles, and the flowers of the hall and chambers are of gold and silver, so
that no man would believe the great riches that are there except he had seen
it, and the king of this I Will is so mighty that he has many times overcome the
great Caane of Cathay, which is the mightiest Emperor that is in all the world,
there is often war between them, for the great Caane would make him hold his
land of him.

Of the kingdom of Pathen or Salmasse, which is a goodly land. Chap. lvij.
ANd for to go forth by the Sea, there is an I Will that is called Pathen, and
some call it Salmasse, for it is a great with many fair cities. In this land
grows trees that bear meal, of which men make fair bread and while, and of
good savor, and it seems like as it were wheat. And there be other trees
which bear venim, against the which is no medicine depiction of two fruit
trees, one with leaves but only to take of the leaves of the same trees and
stamp them, and temper them with water, and drinck it, or else he shall dye
suddenly, for nothing else may help him. And if ye will know how these trees
bear meal, I shall tell you, men hew with an hatchet about the root of the
tree by the earth, and they pearce it in many places, and then comes out a
licour the which they take in a vessel and set it in the Sun, and dry it,
and when it is dry they carry it unto the mill to grind, and so it is fair
meal and white. Also honey, wine and venim are drawn out of other trees in the
same manner, and they put it in vessels, to keep. In that I Will is a dead sea,
which is a water that has no bottom, and if any thing fall therein, it shall
never be found: beside that sea grows great Canes, and under their roots
men find a precious stone of great virtue, for he that bears one of those
stones about him, there may no Iron grieve him nor draw blood on him, and
therefore they that have those stones fight full hardly, for there may no
weapon that is of Iron grieve him, therefore they that know the manner, make
their weapons without iron, and so they slay them.

Of the kingdom of Talonach, the king whereof has many wives, Chap lviij.
THen is there another I Will that men call Talonach the same is a great land, and
therein is great plenty of fish and other goods, as you shall hereafter hear.

And they king of that land has as many wives as he will, a thousand and more,
and he never lies but once by any one of them, also in that land is a great
marvel, for all manner of fishes of the sea comes thither once depiction of
a male figure with a sword or scimitar kneeling beside his hat in front of a
cart containing a simulacre or idol of a male head a year one after another,
and lies near the land, sometime on the land, and so lie three days and men
of that land come thither and take of them what they will, and then go those
fishes away and an other sort comes, and lies also three days, and men take
of them, and thus do all manner of fishes till all have been there, and men
have taken what they will. But no man can tell the cause why it is so But they
of that country say, that those fishes come so thither to do worship to their
king, for they say he is the worthiest king of the world, for he has
depiction of male figure taking a fish from the sea with his bare hands so many
wives and gets so many children of them. And that same king has xiiij. M.
Elephants or more which be tame, and they be kept for his pleasure by the men
of the country, so that he may have them ready at his hand when he has any
war against any King or Prince, and then he does put upon their backs
castles and men of war as the use of the land is, and likewise do other kings
and princes thereabout.

depiction of an elephant with a castle on its back and a wild boar

Of the Island called Raso, where men be hanged as soon as they are sick.
Chap. lix.
depiction of a naked male figure bound to a tree surrounded by four birds

AND from this I Will men go to another I Will called Raso, and the men of this I Will
when their friends are sick, and that they believe surely that they shall dye,
they take them and hang them up quick on a tree, and say it is better that
birds that are Angels of God eat them, then worms of the earth. From thence
men go to an I Will where the men are of an il kind, for they nourish hounds for
to strangle men And when their friends are sick that they hope they shall dye,
then do those hounds strangle them, for they will not that they die a kindly
death, for then should they suffer too great pain, as they say, and when they
are thus dead they eat their flesh for venison.

Of the Island of Melke wherein dwells evil people. Chap. lx.
FRom thence men go by sea through many Isles unto an I Will called Melke, and
there be full ill people, for they have none other delight but for to fight
and slay men, for they drink gladly man's blood which depiction of two armoured
male figures with swords, one holding a cup blood they call good, and they that
may slay most, is of most fame among them. And if there be two men at strife,
and after be made at one, then must they drink either others blood, or else
the accord is of no value. From this I Will men go to an other I Will that is called
Traconit where all men are as beasts, depiction of a male figure biting the
head off a snake, with two snakes on the ground nearby for they are
unreasonable, and they dwell in caves for they have not wit to make houses,
these men eat Adders and speak not, but make such a noise as Adders do one
to another, and they make no force of riches, but of a stone that is of forty
colors, and it is called Traconit after that I Will, they know not the virtue
thereof, but they covet it for the great fairness.

Of the Island named Macumeran, whereas the people have heads like hounds. Chap.
lxi.
depiction of a mythical creature, a cynocephalus or male figure with a dog's
head holding a spear and a shield standing before a simulacre or idol of an ox

FRom that I Will men go to an other that is called Macumeran, which is a great
I Will and a fair, and the men and women of that country have heads like hounds,
they are reasonable, and worship an Ox for their God, they go all naked but a
little cloth before their privy members, they are good men to fight, and they
bear a great Target with which they cover all the body, and a spear in their
hand, and if they take any man in battle, they send him to their king, which
is a great Lord and devout in his faith, for he has about his neck on a Cord
three hundred Pearls great and orient, and as we say our Pater noster and
other prayers, right so their king says every day three hundred prayers to his
God before he either eat or drinck, and he bears also about his neck a
Ruby, orient, fine and good, that is near a foot and five fingers long. For
when they choose their king they give to him that Ruby to bear in his hand,
and then they lead him riding about the city, and then ever after are they
subject to him, and therefore he bears that Ruby always about his neck, for
if he bear not the Ruby, they would no longer hold him for King. The great
Caane of Cathay has much coueted this Ruby: but he might never have it,
neither for war nor for other goods, and this king is a full true and
depiction of a giant lizard righteous man, for men may go safely and surely
through his land, and bear all that he will, for there is no man so hardy to
let them. And from thence men go to an I Will that is called Silo, this I Will is
more then an hundred mile about, and therein be many Serpents which are great,
with yealow-stripes, and they have four feet, with short legs, and great
claws, some be five fadom of length, and some of eight, and some of ten, and
some more, some less, and be called Cocodrils, and there are also many wild
beasts and Elephants.

Also in this I Will and in many Isles thereabout are many wild geese with two
heads, and there be also in that country white Lions, and many other diverse
marvelous beasts, and if I should tell all, it would be to long.

depiction of a mythical creature, a bird or goose with two heads

Of a great Island called Dodyn, where are many men of evil conditions. Chap.
lxij.
depiction of a female figure strangling a young male figure with a rope while
a male figure holds an axe raised behind his head; in the background another
male figure

THen is there another I Will called Dodyn, and it is a great I Will. In the same I Will
are many and diverse sorts of men who have evil manners, for the father eats
the son, and the son the father, the husband his wife, and the wife her
husband. And if it so be that the father be sick, or the mother, or any
friend, the Son goes soon to the priest of the law, and prays him that he
will ask of the Idol if his father shall die of that sickness or not. And
then the priest and the son kneel down before the Idol devoutly and ask
him, and he answers to them, and if he say that he shall live, then they
keep him well, and if he say that he shall dye, then comes the Priest with
the son or with the wife, or any that is a friend unto him that is sick, and
they lay their hands over his mouth to stop his breath, and so they slay him,
and then they smite all the body into pieces, and prays all his friends for
to come and eat of him that is dead, and they make a great feast thereof, and
have many minstrels there, and eat him with great melody.

And so when they have eaten all the flesh, then they take the bones and bury
them all singing with great worship, and all those of his friends that were not
there at the eating of him have great shame and reproof, so that they shall
never more be taken as friends.

depiction of a mythical creature, a cyclops or naked male figure with one eye
next to a fishpond

And the king of this I Will is a great Lord and mighty, and he has in every
I Will other kings under him, and in one of these Isles are men that have but one
eye, and that is in the midst depiction of a mythical creature, a Blemmye or
human figure with no head and a face in its chest of their front, and they eat
not but flesh and fish all raw. And in another I Will dwell men that have no
heads, and their eyes are in their shoulders, and their mouth is on their
breast. In another I Will are men that have no head ne eyes, and their mouth is in
their shoulders. And in another I Will are men that have flat faces without nose,
and without eyes, but they have two depiction of a mythical creature, a human
figure with no nose small round holes in stead of eyes, and they have a flat
mouth without lips. And in that I Will are men also that have their faces all flat
without eyes, without mouth, and without nose, but they have their eyes and
their mouth behind on their shoulders.

depiction of a mythical creature, a human figure with no nose

And in another I Will are foul men that have their lips about their mouth so
great, that when they sleep in the Sun, they cover all their face with their
lips. And in another I Will are little men as dwarfes, and have no mouth but a
little round hole, and through that hole they eat their meat with a pipe, and
they have no tongue, neither do they speak, but they blow and whistle, and so
make signs one to another. And in another I Will are men with ears hanging unto
their shoulders. And in another I Will are wild men with hanging ears, and have
feet like an horse, and they run fast, and they take wild beasts and eat
them. And in another I Will are men that go on their hands and feet like beasts,
and are all rough, and will leap upon a tree like cats or Apes. And in another
I Will are men that go ever upon their knees meruailously, and have on every foot
viij toes. And in another I Will are folk that are both men and women, and have
members of both for to engender with, and when they will they use one at one
time, and an other another time, depiction of a naked male figure and female
figure standing in the sun and they get children when they use the members of a
man, and they bear children when they use the members of a woman, many other
manner of folk be in the same Isles thereabout of whom it were too long to
tell all.

Of the kingdom of Mancy, which is a large kingdom of the world. Chap. lxiij.
TO go from this I Will toward the East, after many days a man shall come to a
kingdom called Mancy, and this is in great Inde, and it is the most delectable
and plentiful land in all the world. In this land dwell Christians and
Sarasins, for it is a great land, and therein are two thousand great Cities,
and many other towns. In this land no man goes a begging, for there is no
poor man, and there men have beards as it were Cats. In this I Will are fair
women, and therefore some men call that land Albany, for the white folk, and
there is a city that is called Latorim, and it is bigger then Paris, and in
that land are Birds twice greater then they be here, and there is all manner
of vittailes good cheap. In this country are white hens, and they bear no
feathers but wool, as sheep do in our depiction of two mythical creatures,
birds or hens covered in wool Land, and women of that Country that are wedded
bear crowns upon their heads, that they may be known by. In this country
they take a beast that is called a Loyre, and they keep it to go into waters
or rivers, and straight way he brings out of the water great fishes, and thus
they take fish as much as them needs.

From this city men go many days journey to another City called Cassay,
which is the fairest City of the world, and that city is fifty mile about,
and there is in that City above xij. principal gates without. From thence
within three mile is another great City, and within this City are more then
twelve thousand bridges, and upon each bridge is a strong tower, where the
keepers dwell to keep it against the great Caane, for it boundeth on his land,
and on each side of the city runs a great river, and there dwell
Christians and other, for it is a good and plenteous country, and there grows
right good wine, in this noble city the king of Mancy was wont to dwell and
there dwell religious men, as friars. And men go upon the river till they come
to an Abbey of Monks a little from the city, and in that Abbey is a great
garden, and therein is many manner of trees of diverse fruits, in that garden
are diverse kinds of beasts, as Baboynes, Apes, Marmozets, and other, and when
the covent have eaten, a Monk takes the relief and bears it into the
Garden, and smites once with a bell of silver, which he holds in his hand,
and anon come out these beasts that I spoke of, and many more, near two or
three thousand, and he gives them meat in fair vessels of silver, and when
they have eaten, he smites the bell again, and they go away, and the Monk
says that those beasts are souls of men that are dead, and those beasts that
are fair, are souls of Lords and other rich men, and those that are foul
beasts are souls of other commons, and I asked them if it had not been better
to give that relief to poor men, and they said there is no poor men in that
country, but if there were, yet were it more alms to give it to those souls
that suffer there their penance, and may go no farther to get their meat, then
to men that have wit, and may travail for their meat. Then men come to a
City that is called Chibens, and there was the first siege of the king of
Mancy. In this city are three score bridges of stone as fair as may be made.

Of the Land of Pigme, the people whereof are but three spans long. Chap.
lxiiij.
WHen men pass from that City of Chibens, they pass over a great river of
fresh water, and it is near four mile broad, and then men enter into the land
of the great Caane. This river goes through the land of Pigme, and there men
are of little stature, for they are but three spans long, and they are right
fair both men and women, though they be little, and they are married when they
are half a year old, and they live but eight year, for he that lives eight
year is holden right old, and these small men are the best workmen of silk
and of cotton, and all manner of things that are in the world: and these men
travail not nor till land but they have among them great men as we are, to
travail for them, and have great scorn of those great men, as we would have
of Giants, or of them if they were among us.

Of the City of Menke where a great Navy is. Chap. lxv.
FRom this Land men go through many countries, cities, and towns, till they
come to a city that men call Menke. In that city is a great Navy of ships
and they are as white as snow of the kind of the wood that they are made of,
and they are made as it were great houses with walls and chambers, and other
easements.

Of the land named Cathay and of the great riches thereof. Chap. lxvj.
ANd from thence men go upon a river that men call Ceremolan, and this river
goes through Cathay and does many times harm when it waxes great: Cathay is
a fair country and rich, full of goods and merchandise: thither come merchants
every year for to fetch spices and other marchandises more commonly then they
do to other countries. And ye shall understand that Marchaunts that come from
Venice, or from Gene, or from other places of Lomberdy, or of Italy, they go
by sea and land xi. months and more or they come to Cathay.

Of a great city named Cadon, therein is the great Caanes palace and siege.
Chap. lxvij.
IN the province of Cathay toward the East, is an old City, and beside that
City the Tartarians have made another city that men call Cadon that has
xij. gates and between each two gates is a great mile, so those two cities the
old and the new is round about xx. mile. In this city is the palace and siege
of the great Caane, it is a full fair place and great, of which the walls about
be two mile, and within that are many fair places and in the garden of that
palace is a right great hill on the which is another palace, and it is the
fairest that may be found in any place, and all about the hill are many trees
bearing diverse fruits, and about this hill is a great ditch, and there near
are many rivers on each side, and in those are many wild Fowls that he may
take and go not out of the palace. Within the hall of that palace are
xxiiij. pillars of gold, and all the walls are covered with rich skins of
beasts that men call Panthera.

Those are fair beasts and well smelling, and of the smell of those skins,
none evil smell may come to the Palace: those skins are as red as blood,
and they shine so against the Sun, that a man can scarcely beehold them, and
those skins are esteemed there as much as Gold. In the midst of the palace
is a place made that they call the Mountour for the great Caane, that is well
made with precious stones and great, hanging about, and at the four corners of
the Mountour are four nedders of gold, and under that Mountour and about are
Conduits of Beuerage that they drink in the Emperors Court. And the hall of
that Palace is richly dight and well: and first at the upper end of the hall
is the Throne of the Emperor right high, where he sits at meat, at a Table
that is well bordred with gold, and that border is full of precious stones and
great Parles, and the greeces on which he goes up are of diverse precious
stones bordred with gold.

At the left side of his Throne is the seat of his wife, a degree lower then
he sits, and that is of Jasper, bordred with gold, and the seat of his
second wife is a degree lower then the first, and that is also of good Jasper,
bordred with gold, and the seat of the third wife is a degree lower then the
second, for always he has three wives with him wheresoever he is: besides
these wives, on the same side sits other Ladies of his kin, each one lower
then other, as they are of degree, and all those that are married, have a
counterfayte of a man's foot upon their heads a cubite long, and all made with
Precious stones, and about they are made with shining feathers of Pecocks or
such other, in tokening that they are in subjection of man, and under men's
feet, and they that are not wedded have none such. And on the right side of the
Emperor sits first his Son the which shall be Emperor after him, and
he sits also a degree lower then the Emperor, in such manner of seats as
the Emperor sits, and by him sits other Lords of his kin, each one
lower then other as they are of degree. And the Emperor has his table by
himself alone, that is made of gold and precious stones, or of white Crystal
or yellow, bordred with gold, and each one of his wives has a table by her
self.

And under the Emperors Table sits four Clarks at his feet, that writes
all that the Emperor says, be it good or ill. And at great feasts about the
Emperors Table, and all other Tables in the hall is a Vine made of gold, that
goes all about the hall, and it has many branches of Grapes, like to grapes
of the Vine, some are white, some are yelow, some red, some green, and some
black: all the red are of Rubies, of creames, or Allabonce, the white are of
Crystal or Byrall, the yelow are of Topaces, the green are of Emeraudes, and
Crisolites, and the black are of Quickes and Gerandes, and this Vine is made
thus of precious stones so properly, that it seems that it were a Vine
growing. And before the Board of the Emperor stands great Lords, and no man
is so hardy to speak unto him, except it be Musitions for to solace the
Emperor. And all the vessel that is served in his hall or chambers are of
precious stones, and specially at the tables where great Lords eat, that is to
say, of Jasper, Crystal, Amatist, or fine gold, and the cups are of
Emeraudes, Saphires, Topaces, and other, of many manner of stones and silver
have they no vessel, for they esteem but little of silver to make vessel
off, but they make of silver, greeces, pillars and pauements of hals and
chambers. And ye shall understand that my fellow and I were in wages with him
xvi. months against the king of Mancy, upon whom he made war, and the cause
was, we had so great desire to see the nobility of his Court, if it were such
as we heard speak off, and forsooth we found it more richer, and of greater
royalltie then ever we heard speak off, and we should never have believed
it, had we not seen it, but ye shall understand the use of our eating and
drincking is more civil among us then in those countries, for all the commons
eat upon skins of beasts on their knees, and eat but flesh of all manner of
beasts, and when they have all eat, they wipe their hands in their skirts, and
they eat but once on the day, and eat but little bread, but the manner of the
Lords is full noble.

Wherefore the Emperor of Cathay is called the great Caane. Chap. lxviij.
ANd ye shall understand why he is called the great Caane, ye know that all
the world was destroyed with Noes flood, but Noe his wife and children: Noe had
three sons, Sem, Cham and Iapheth, Cham when he saw his fathers priuities
naked when he slept, he scorned it, and therefore he was cursed, and Iapheth
covered it again. These three brethren had all the land. Cham took the best
part Eastward, that is called Asia Sem took Afryke, and Iapheth took Europe.
Cham was the mightiest and richest of his brethren, and of him are come the
Panim folk, and diverse manner of men of the Isles, some headless, and other
men disfigured, for this Cham the Emperor there called him Cham and Lord of
all. But ye shall understand that the Emperor of Cathay is called Caane, and
not Cham, and for this cause it is not long ago that all Tartary was in
subjection and thrall to other nations about, and they were made heardmen, to
keep beasts, and among them was vii. linages or kinds, the first was called
Tartary that is the best, the second lineage is called Tamahot, the third
Furace, the fourth Valaire, the fifth Semoth, the sixth Menchy, and the seventh
Sobeth. These are all holding of the great Caane of Cathay. Now it befell that
the first lineage was an old man, and he was not rich, and men called him
Chanius. This man lay and slept on a night in his bed, and there came to him a
knight all white sitting upon a white horse, and said to him, Caane sleep
thou, God that is almighty sent me to thee, and it is his will that thou say
to the vii. linages that thou shall be their Emperor, for ye shall conquer
all the land about you, and they shall be in your subjection as you have been
in theirs, and when morrow came he rose up and said to the seven linages, and
they scorned him and said he was a fool, and the next night the same knight
came to the vii. linages, and bad them in Gods behalf to make Chanius their
Emperor, and they should be out of all subjection. And on the morrow they
chose Chanius to be Emperor, and did him all worship that they might do, and
called him Caane as the white knight called him, and they said they would do
as he bad them. Then he made many statutes and laws, the which they called
Isakan. The first statute was that they should be obedient to God almighty and
believe that he should deliver them out of thraldom, and that they should
call on him in all their works. Another statute was, that al men that might
bear arms should be numbered, and to each ten should be a master, and to a
hundred a master, and to a thousand a master. Then he commanded to all the
greatest and principallest of the vii. linages, that they should forsake all
that they had in heritage or lordship, and that they should hold them paid of
that he would give them of his grace, and they did so. And also he bad them
that each man should bring his eldest son before him, and slay his own Son
with his own hands, and smite off their heads, and as soon they did his
bidding. And when he saw they made no letting of that he bad them, then bad
he them follow his banner, and then he put in subjection all the lands about
him.

How the great Caane was hid under a tree, and so escaped his enemies, because
of a Bird. Chap. lxix.
AND it befell on a day that the Caane rode with a few men to see the land that
he had won, and he met with a great multitude of his enemies, and there he
was cast down off his horse and his horse slain, and when his men saw him at
the earth, they thought he had been dead, and fled, and the enemies followed
after, and when he saw his enemies were far, he hid him in a bush, for the
wood was thick there, and when they were come again from the chase, they went
to seek him among the wood if any were hid there, and they found many, and as
they came to the place where he was, they saw a bird sit on a tree, the which
bird men call an Owl, and then said they, that there was no man for the bird
sat there, and so went they away, and thus was the Caane saved from death, and
so he went away on a night to his own men which were glad of his coming: and
from that time unto this day men of that Country have that Bird in great
reverence, and for that cause they worship that bird above all other birds of
the world.

And incontinent he assembled all his men, and rode upon his enemies and
destroyed them, and when he had won all the lands that were about him, he
held them in subjection: And when the Caane had won all the Lords to mount
Belyan, the white knight came to him in a vision again and said unto him,
Caane the will of God is that thou pass the mount Belyan, and thou shall win
many lands, and because thou shall find no passage, go thou to the mount
Belyan, that is upon the sea side, and kneel nine times thereon against the
East in worship of God, and he shall show thee a way how thou shall pass, and
the Caane did so, and anon the sea that touched the hill withdrew it self and
showed him a fair way of nine foot broad between the hill and the sea, and
so he passed right well with all his men, and then he wan the land of Cathay
that is the best land and the greatest of all the world, and for those ix.
kneelings and the nine foot of way, the Caane and the men of Tartary have the
number of nine in great worship.

Of the great Caanes letters and the writing about his Seal. Chap. lxx.
AND when he had won the land of Cathay he dyed, and then raygned after
Cythoco the eldest Son of Caane and his other brothers went to win them lands
in other countries, and they wan the land of Pruisse, and of Rusie, and they
did call themselves Caanes, but he of Cathay is the greatest Lord of all the
world, and so he called him in his letters and says thus. Caane filius Dei
excelsi vniuersam terram colentium sumus imperator and Dominus Dominantium.
That is to say: Caane Gods son, Emperor of all those that till all the land,
and Lord of Lords. And the writing about his great seal is. Deus in coelo, and
Caane super terram eius fortitudo omniu^ hominum Imperatoris sigillum: That is
to say, God in heaven, Caane upon earth, his strength the seal of the Emperor
of all men. And the writing about his privy seal is. Dei fortitudo omnium
hominum imperatoris sigillum: That is, The strength of God, the seal of the
Emperor of all men. And though it be so that they be not christians, yet the
Emperor and the Tartarians believe God almighty.

Of the governance of the country of the great Caane. Chap. lxxj.
NOw have I told you why he is called the great Caane: Now shall I tell you of
the governing of his Court when they make great feasts, and he keeps four
principal feasts in the year, the first is of his birth, the second when he
was borne to the Temple to be circumcised, the third is of his Idols when they
begin to speak, and the fourth when the Idol beeginneth first to do miracles,
and at those times he has men well arrayed by thousands and by hundreds, and
each one wot well what he shall do. For there is first ordained four
thousand rich barons and mighty, for to ordain the feast and to serve the
Emperor, and all these barons have crowns of Gold, well dight with precious
stones and pearls, and they are clad in cloths of gold and camathas as richly
as they may be made, and they may well have such clothes, for they are there of
less price then woollen cloth is here. And those four thousand Barons are
parted into four parts, and each company is clad in diverse colors right
richly, and when the first thousand is passed and has showed themselves, then
come the second thousand, and then the third thousand, and then the fourth, and
none of them speaks a word. And on the one side of the Emperors table sits
many Philosophers of many sciences, some of Astronomy, Nigromancie, Geometry,
Pyromacy, and many other sciences, and some have before them Astolabes of Gold
or precious stones full of sand, or of coals burning, some have horologes well
dight and richly, and other many instruments after their Sciences, and at a
certain hour when they see time they say to men that stand before them make
peace, and then say those men with a loud voice to all the hall now be still a
while, and then says one of the Philosophers each man make reverence and
incline to the Emperor that is Gods Son and Lord of the world, for now is time
and hour, and then all men incline to him and kneel on the earth, and then
the Philosopher bids them rise up again, and at another hour another
Philosopher bids them put their finger in their ears and they do so, and
at another hour another Philosopher bids that all men shall lay their hand
on their heads, and they do so, and then he bids them take them away, and
they do so, and thus from hour to hour they bid diverse things, and I asked
privily what it should mean, and one of the masters said that the enclining
and the kneeling on the earth at that time has this token, that all those men
that kneeled so, shall evermore be true to the Emperor, that for no gift nor
threatening they shall never be traitors nor false to him, and the putting of
the finger in the ear has this token, that none of those shall hear any ill
spoken of the Emperor, or his counsel. And ye shall understand that men dight
nothing, as clothes, bread, drink, nor no such things to the Emperor but at
certain hours that the Philosophers tell, and if any man raise war against
the Emperor in what country soever it be, these Philosophers know it soon,
and tell the Emperor or his counsel, and he sends men thither, for he has
many men. Also he has many men that keeps birds, as gerfaukons, Sparhauks,
Faukons, Gentiles, Laners, Sacres, Popyniayes that can speak, and many other:
he has ten thousand Eliphants, Baboynes, Marmozets and other, and he has ever
about him many Physicians more then two hundred that are christian men, and
Sarasins, but yet he trusts more in christian men then in Sarasins. And
there is in that country many Sarasins and other servants that are christians
and converted to the faith, through preaching of good christian men that dwell
there, but there are many that will not that men know that they are christians.

Of the great riches of the Emperor, and of his dispending. Chap. lxxij.
THis Emperor is a great Lord, for he may dispend what he will without
number, because he spends neither silver nor gold, and makes no money but
of Lether or skins, and this same money goes through all his land, and of
the silver and gold builded he his Palace. And he has in his chamber a
pillar of gold in the which is a Ruby and a Carbuncle of a foot long, the
which lights all his chamber by night, and he has many other precious
stones and Rubies, but this is the richest.

This Emperor dwells in the fommer toward the North, in a City that men
call Saydus, and there it is cold enough, and in the winter he dwells in a
City that men call Camalach, and there it is right hot, but for the most part
is he at Cadon, that is not far thence.

Of the ordinanance of the Lords of the Emperor when he rides from one
country to another to war. Chap. lxxiij.
AND when the great Caane shall ride from one Country to an other, they ordain
four hosts of people, of which the first goes before a days journey, for
that Host lies at even where the Emperor shall lie on the morrow, and there
is plenty of vittailes. And an other Host comes at the right side of him,
and an other at the left side, and in each Host is much Folk. And then comes
the fourth Host beehinde him a how draught, and there is more men in that, then
in any of the other. And ye shall understand that the Emperor rides on no
horse, but when he will go to any secret place with a privy meinie, where he
will not be known, then he rides in a Chariot with four wheels, and
thereupon is a chamber made of a tree that men call Lignum Aloes, that comes
out of Paradise terrestre, and that Chamber is covered with plates of fine
gold, and precious stones and Pearls, and four Eliphants and four Oxen all
white go therein, and five or six great Lords ride about him, so that none
other men shall come nigh him, except the Emperor call any, and in the same
manner with a Chariot and such hoasts rides the Empress by an other side,
and the Emperors eldest son in that same array, and they have so much people
that it is a great marvel for to see.

How the Empire of the great Caane is divided into twelve Provinces, and how
that they do cast insence in the fire where the great Caane passes though the
cities and towns, in worship of the Emperor. Chap. lxxiiij.
THE Land of the great Caane is divided into twelve Provinces, and every
province has more then two thousand Cities and towns. And when the Emperor
rides through the country, as he passes through cities and towns, each man
makes a fire before his house, and casts therein Insence and other things
that give good smell to the Emperor. And if any men of Religion that are
christian men dwell near where the Emperor comes they meet him with
Procession, with Cross and holy water, and they sing Veni creator spiritus,
with a loud voice, and when he sees them coming he commands the Lords
that they ride near to them to make way that the Religious men may come to
him, and when he sees the Cross he does off his hat that is made of
precious stones and great Pearls, and that hat is so rich that it is marvel
to tell, and then he enclineth to the Cross, and the prelate of the religious
men says Orisons before him and gives him the blessing with the cross, and
he enclineth to the blessing full devoutly, and then the prelate gives him
some fruit to the number of ix. pears or apples or other fruit, in a platter
of gold, and then the Emperor takes one thereof, and the other he gives to
his Lords, for the manner is such there, that no strange men shall come before
the Emperor, but he give him somewhat after the old Law that says. Non
accedit in conspectu meo inanis, that is to say. No man come into my sight
idle. And then the Emperor bids these religious men that they go forth, so
that men of his host defile them not, and those religious men that dwell where
the Empress or the Emperors son comes, they do in the same manner.

How the Caane is the mightiest Lord of all the world. Chap. lxxv.
THis great Caane is the mightiest Lord of the world, for Prester John is not
so great a Lord as he, nor the Soudan of Babylon, ne the Emperor of Persia.
In this land a man has an hundred wives, some xi. and some more, some less,
and they take of their kin to wives, all save their sisters, their mothers and
daughters, and they take also well their stepmother if their father be dead,
and men and women have all one manner of clothing, so that they may not be
known, but the women that are married bear a token in their heads, and they
dwell not with their husbands, but he may lie by any as he will. They have
plenty of all manner of beasts save swine, for they will keep none, and they
believe well in God that made all things, and yet have they Idols of gold and
silver, and to those Idols they offer their first milk of beasts.

Yet of other manners of this country. Chap. lxxvj.
THe Emperor the great Caane has three wives, and the principal wife was
Prester John's daughter And the people of this Country begin to do all their
things in the new Moon, and they worship much the Sun, and the Moon, those
men ride commonly without spurs, for they hold it a great sin to break one
bone with another, and to spill milk on the ground, or any other licour that
men may drinck, and the most sin that they may do, is to piss in their houses
where they dwell, and he that pisseth in his house shall be slain, and of
those sins they shriue them to their Priests, and for their penance they shall
give silver, and the place where they have pissed shall be hallowed, or else
may no man come there. And when they have done their penance they shall pass
through a fire or two to make them clean of their sins. When they have eaten
they wipe their hands upon their skirtes, for they have no Table clothes except
it be right great Lords, and when they have all eaten, they put their dishes
or platters not washed in the pot or caudron with the flesh that is left when
they have eaten, until they will eat another time, and rich men drinks milk
of Mares, Asses, or other beasts, and other beuerage, that is made of milk and
water together, for they have neither beer nor wine. And when they go to war
they war full wisely, and each man of them bears two or three bows, and many
arrows and a great hatchet, gentlemen have short swords, and he that flies
in battle they slay him, and they are ever in purpose to bring all the land
in subjection to them, for they say, it is prophesied, that they shall be
overcome by shot of archers, and that they shall turn them to their law, but
they wot not what men they shall be, and it is great peril to pursue the
Tartarians when they fly, for they will shoot beehind and slay men as well as
before, and they have small eyes as little byrds, and they are commonly false,
for they hold not their promise. And when a man shall dye among them, they
stick a spear in the earth beside him, and when he draws to the death, they
go out of the house till he be dead, then they put him in the earth in the
field.

How the Emperor is brought unto his grave when he is dead. Chap. lxxvij.
ANd when the Emperor is dead, they set him into a cart in the midst of the
tent, and then set before him a Table covered with a Cloth, and thereupon they
set flesh and other meat, and a cup full of milk of a Mare, and they set a
Mare with a colt by him, and a horse sadled and brideled, and they lay upon the
horse gold and silver, and all about him they make a great grave, and with all
the things they put him therein, as the tent, horse, gold and silver, and all
that is about him, and they say, when he comes into another world he shall
not be without an house, nor horse, ne silver, nor gold, and the Mare shall
give him milk, and bring forth more horses till he be well stored in an
other world, and one of his chamberlaines or servants is put with him in the
earth for to do him service in the other world, for they believe that when he
is dead he shall go to another world, and be a greater Lord there then here,
and when he is laid in the earth, no man shall be so hardy for to speak of
him before his friends.

When the Emperor is dead, how they choose and make another. Chap. lxxviij.
ANd then when the Emperor is dead the seven Linages gather them together,
and they touch his son, or the next of his blood, and they say thus, we will,
and we ordain, and we pray thee that thou will be our Lord and Emperor,
and he enquireth of them and says, if ye will that I reign over you, then
must ye do all that I bid you do. And if he bid that any shall be slain,
he shall be slain, and they answer all with one voice, all that ye bid
shall be done. Then said the Emperor, from hence forth my word shall cut as
my sword, and then they set him in a chair and crown him, and then all the
good towns thereabout send to him presents so much that he shall have more
then C. Cammels laden with gold and silver beeside other jewels that he shall
have or Lords, as precious stones and gold without number and horse, and rich
clothes of Camacas and Tarius, and such other.

What Countries and Kingdoms lie next to the land of Cathay, and the fronts
thereof. Chap. lxxix.
THis land of Cathay is in Asia the deep, and this same Land reaches toward
the West upon the Kingdom of Sercy, the which pertained sometime to one of the
three kings that went to seek our Lord in Bethlem, and all those that come of
his kin are christian men. These men of Tartary drink no wine. In the land of
Corosaym, that is at the North side of Cathay is right great plenty of goods,
but no wine, the which has at the East side a great wilderness that lasts
more then an hundred days journey, and the best city of that land is called
Corosaym, and alter the name of that city is the land called, and men of this
land are good warriors and hardy, and thereby is the kingdom of Comayne, this
is the most and the greatest kingdom of the World, but it is not all
inhabited: for in one place of the Land is so great cold, that no man may dwell
there for cold, and in another place is so great heat, that no man may dwell
there, and there are so many faithes that a man cannot tell on what side he
may turn him, and in this land are few trees bearing fruit. In this land men
lie in tents, and they burn doung of Beasts for lack of wood. This Land
descends toward Pruse and Russy, and through this land runs the River
Echel, that is one of the greatest rivers of the world, and it is frozen so
hard every year that men fight thereupon in great battles on horse and
footmen more then C.M. at once. And a little from the River is the great of
Occian, that they call Maure, and between this Maure and Aspy is a full
straight passage to go toward Inde, and therefore king Alexander did make there
a city that men call Alexander, for to keep that passage, so that no man may
pass unless he have leave, and now is that city called Port de Fear, and
the principal city of Comaine is called Sarachis, that is one of the three
ways to go to Inde, but through this way may not many men go but if it be in
winter, and this passage is called Berbent. And another way is to go from the
land of Turkescon through Persia, in this way are many days iourneys in
wilderness. And the third way is that comes from Cosmane and goes through
the great city and through the kingdom of Abachare. And ye shall understand
that all these kingdoms and Lords unto Persia are holden of the great Caane,
and many other, and therefore he is a great Lord of men and of land.

Of other ways coming from Cathay toward the Greek Sea, and also of the
Emperor of Persia. Chap. lxxx.
NOW that I have showed you the lands toward the North, to come from the lands
of Cathay to the lands of Pruse and Russy, where Christian men dwell. Now shall
I show unto you of other lands and kingdoms, in coming down from Cathay to
the Greeks Sea, where Christian men dwell, and forasmuch as next the great
Caane of Cathay, the Emperor of Persia is the greatest Lord, therefore I shall
speak of him, and ye shall understand that he has two kingdoms, the one
begins Eastward, and it is the kingdom of Turkescon, and it lasts
Westward to the sea of Caspy, and Southward to the land of Inde. This land is
great and plain and well manned with good cities, but two most principal,
the which are called Bacirida, and Sormagaunt. The other is the kingdom of
Persia, and lasts from the River of Phison unto great Armony, and Northward
unto the sea of Caspy, and Southward to the land of Inde, and this is a full
plenteous country and a good: In this land are three principal cities,
Nassabor, Saphen, and Sermesse.

Of the land of Armony which is a good land, and of the land of Myddy. Chap.
lxxxj.
THen is the land of Armony, in the which was sometime three kingdoms, that is
a good land and plenteous, and it begins at Persia, and lasts westward to
Turkey of lenght, and in breadth lasts from the City of Alexander (that now
is called Port de Fear) unto the land of Middy. In this Armony are many fair
cities, but Canrissy is most of name. Then is the land of Middy, and it is
full long and not broad, and beeginneth Eastward at the land of Persia and Inde
the less, and lasts Westward to the kingdom of Chalde, and Northward to
little Armony, in this Myddy are many great Hills and little Plains, and there
dwell Sarasins and other manner of men, that men call Cordines and Kermen.

Of the kingdom of George and Abcan, and many meruailes. Chap. lxxxij.
THen next is the kingdom of George that begins Eastward at a great hill
that men call Abior, this land lasts from Turkey to the great Sea, and to the
land of Middy, and great Armony, and in this Land are two Kingdoms, one to
Abcan, and an other of George, but he of George is in subjection of the great
Caane, but he of Abcan has a strong Country, and defends him well against
his enemies, and of this land in Abcan is a great marvel, for there is a
country in this land that is near three days journey in length, and is called
Hamfon, and that country is all covered with darkness, so that it has no
light, that no man may see there, and no man dare go into that country for
darkness. And nevertheless men of that country thereby say that they may
sometime hear therein the voice of men and horse crying, and cocks crow, and
they know well that men dwell there, but they know not what manner of men, and
they say this darkness came through the miracle of God, that he did for
Christian men there. For there was a wicked Emperor that was of Poy, and was
called Saures, and he pursued sometime all christian men to destroy them, and
did make them do sacrifice to their false gods, and in that country dwelled
many christian men the which left all their goods and cattle, and riches, and
would go to Greece, and when they were all in a great plain that is called
Mecon, the Emperor and his men came to slay the christian men, and then the
christian men kneeled down and prayed to God, and anon came a thick cloud and
covered the Emperor and all his hoasts, so that he might not go away, and so
dwelled they in darkness, and they never came out after: and the christian men
went forward as they would, and therefore they say thus. A domino factum est
istud, and est mirabile in oculis nostris, That is to say, of our Lord is this
done, and it is marvelous in our eyes. Out of this land comes a river
whereby men may see by good tokens that men dwell therein.

Of the land of Turkey, and diverse other countries, and of the Land of
Mesopotamia. Chap. lxxxiij.
THen next is the land of Turkey, that reaches to great Armony, and therein
are many countries, as Caperdoce, Saure, Bryke, Ouecion, Patan and Geneth, in
each one of these countries are many good cities, and it is a plain land with
few hills and Rivers, and then is the kingdom of Mesopotamia, that beeginneth
Westward at the flome of Tygre at a City that men call Mosell, and it lasts
Westward to the flome of Euphrate, to a City that men call Rochaim, and
Westward from high Armony, unto the wilderness of Inde the less, and it is a
good land and plain, but there is few rivers, and there is but two hills in
that land, the one is called Simar, and the other Hison, and it reaches unto
the land of Calde, and ye shall understand that the land of Ethiope reaches
Eastward to the great wilderness, Westward to the land of Nuby, Southward to
the land of Maratan, and Northward to the red Sea, and then is the Maritan that
lasts from the hills of Ethiope unto Liby the high, and the low, that lasts
to the great sea of Spain.

Of diverse countries, kingdoms, and Isles, and meruailes beyond the land of
Cathay. Chap. lxxxiij.
NOw have I said and spoken of many things on this side of the great kingdom
of Cathay, of whom many are obeisant to the great Caane. Now shall I tell of
some lands, countries and Isles that are beyond the land of Cathay. Who so goes
from Cathay to Inde the high and the low, he shall go through a kingdom that
men call Cadissen, and it is a great land, there grows a manner of fruit as
it were gourdes, and when it is ripe, men cut it a sunder, and they find
therein a beast as it were of flesh, and bone, and blood, as it were a little
lamb without wool, and men eat the beast and fruit also, and sure it seems
very strange. Nevertheless I said to them that I held that for no marvel,
for I said that in my country are trees that bear fruit that become birds
flying and they are good to eat, and that that falls on the water lives, and
that that falls on the earth dies, and they meruailed much thereat. In this
land and many other therabout, are trees that bear cloves, and nutmegs, and
channel, and many other spices, and there be vines that bear so great grapes
that a strong man shall have enough to bear a cluster of grapes. In that same
land are the hills of Caspy that men call Vber, and enclosed within those hills
are the Jews of the x. kinds that men call Gog and Magog, and they may come
out on no side. There were enclosed xxij. kings, with their folk that dwelled
depiction of a heavily-laden grape-vine and a tall field of corn behind a fence
between the hills of Syche: and king Alexander chased them thither among those
hills, for he trusting to have enclosed them there through the working of men,
but he might not, and when he saw he might not, he prayed to God that he
would fulfill that which he had beegun, God heard his prayer and enclosed the
hills all about them but at the one side, and there is the sea of Caspy. Here
some men might ask, if there be a sea on one side, why go they not out there,
for thereto answer I that although it be called a sea, it is not a sea, but a
poole standing among hills, and it is the greatest Poole of all the world, and
though they go over that poole, yet they wot not where to ariue, for they can
no speech but their own. And ye shall understand that these Jews which dwell
among the hills have no law among them, and yet they pay tribute for their land
to the Queen of Armony: and sometime it is so that some of these Jews go
over the hills, but many may not pass there together for the hills are so great
and high. Nevertheless, men say in that country thereby that in the time of
Antichrist they shall do much harm to christian men, and therefore all the
Jews that dwell in diverse parts of the world learn for to speak Ebrew, for
they hope that these Jews that dwell among the hills aforesaid shall come out of
the hills and speak all Ebrew and naught else, and then shall these Jews
speak Ebrew to them and lead them into Christendom for to destroy Christian
men. For these Jews say they know by their Prophesies that those Jews that
are among those hills of Caspy shall come out, and christian men shall be in
their subjection as they be under Christian men now. And if ye will know how
they shall find the passage out, as I have understood I shall tell you. In the
time of Antichrist a Fox shall make his den in the same place where King
Alexander did make the Gates, and he shall dig in the earth so long till he
pierce it through and come among the Jews, and when they see the Fox, they
shall have great marvel of him, for they never saw such a beast, but other
Beasts have they among them many, and they shall chase this fox and pursue
him until that he be fled again into his hole that he came from, and then
shall they dig after him until they come to the gates that Alexander did make
of great stones well dight with mortar, then shall they break these gates and
they shall find the way forth.

Of the land of Bactrie and of many Griffons and other beasts. Chap. lxxxv.
FRom this land men shall go unto the land of Bactrie, where are many wicked
men and fell, in that land are trees that bear woll, as it were sheep, of
which they make cloth. In this land are Ypotains that dwell sometime on land,
sometime on water, and are half a man and half a horse, and they feed on men
when they may get them. In this land are many Griffons more then in other
places, and some say they have the body before as an Eagle, and behind as a
Lion, and it is truth, for they be made so, but the Griffon has a body greater
then eight Lions and stronger then an hundred Eagles, for certainly he will
bear to his nest flying a horse and a man upon his back, or two Oxen yoked
together as they go at plough, for he has long nails on his feet as great as
it were horns of Oxen, and of those they make cups there to drinck with, and of
his ribs they make bows to shoot with.

Of the way for to go to Prester John's land which is Emperor of Inde. Chap.
lxxxvj.
FRom this land of Bactrie men go many days journey, to the Land of Prester
John, that is a great Emperor of Inde, and men call his land the isle of
Pantrore. This Emperor Prester John holds a great land, and many good cities
and good towns. In his kingdom are many great Isles and large, for this land
of Inde is parted into Isles because of great floods that come out of Paradise:
and also in the sea are many great Isles. The best city that is in the I Will of
Pantrore is called Nile that is a noble city and a rich. Prester John has
under him many kings and diverse people, and his land is good and rich, but not
so rich as the land of the great Caane, for merchants come not so much thither
as they do into the land of the great Caane, for it is too long a journey. And
also they find in the I Will of Cathay all things that they have need of, as
spicery, clothes of gold and other riches, and although they might have better
cheap in the land of Prester John, then in the land of Cathay, and more fine,
nevertheless they will not go thither by reason of the length of the journey,
and great perils on the sea, for there are many places in the sea where are
many rocks of a stone that is called Adamand, the which of his own kind
draws to him all manner of iron, and therefore there may no ships that have
iron nails pass, but it draws them to it, and therefore they dare not go
into that country with ships for dread of the Adamand, I went once into that
sea and saw as it had been a great I Will of trees, stocks and branches growing,
and the shipmen told me that those were great ships that abode there through
the virtue of the Adamands, and of things that were in the ships, whereof those
trees sprung and waxed, and such rocks are there many in diverse places of that
sea, and therefore dare there no shipmen pass that way. And another thing also
is, that they dread the long way, and therefore they go most to Cathay, and
that is near unto them. And yet it is not so near, but that from Venice or
Gene by Sea to Cathay is xi. or xij. months journey. The land of Prester John
is long, and Merchants pass thither through the land of Persia, and come unto
a City that men call Hermes, for a Philosopher that was called Hermes founded
it, and then pass an arm of the Sea, and come to another City that men call
Saboth, and there find they all marchandises, and popiniayes as great plenty
as larks in our country. In this Country is little wheat or barley, and
therefore they eat rice, milk, and cheese, and other fruits. This Emperor
Prester John weddeth commonly the daughter of the great Caane, and the great
Caane his Daughter. In the land of Prester John is many diverse things and many
precious stones so great and so large that they make of them vessels, platters
and cups, and many other things of which it were too long to tell, but somewhat
of his law and of his faith I shall tell you.

Of the faith and belief of Prester John, but he has not all the full belief
as we have. Chap. lxxxvij.
THis Emperor Prester John is christened and a great part of his land also,
but they have not all the articles of our Faith, but they believe well in the
Father, the son, and the holy Ghost, and they are full devout and true one
to another, and they make no force of cattle. And he has under him lxxii.
Provinces and countries, and in each one is a king, and those kings have other
kings under them. And in this land are many meruailes, for in this land in the
gauely sea that is of sand and grauaile and no drop of water, and it ebbeth and
flows with right great waves as an other sea does, and it is never standing
still, and never in rest, and no man may pass that land beyond it. And
although there be no water in the sea, yet men may find therein right good
fish, and of other fashion and shape then are in any other seas, and also they
are of a full good savor and sweet and good to eat. And three days journey
from that sea are many great hills, through which runs a great flood that
comes from Paradise, and it is full of precious stones and no drop of water,
and it runs with great waves into the gravely Sea. And this flood runs
three days in the week so fast, and stirs great stones of the rocks with
him that make much noise, and as soon as they come into the gravely sea, they
are no more seen, and in those three days when it runs thus no man dare
come in it, but the other days men go therein when they will. And so beeyond
that flood toward that wilderness is a great plain among hills all sandy and
gravely, and in that plain grow trees that at the rising of the Sun each day
begin to grow, and so grow they till midday, and bear fruit, but no man dare
eat of that fruit, for it is a manner of iron, and after midday it turns
again to the earth, so that when the Sun goes down it is nothing seen, and
so does it every day: and there is in that wilderness many wild men with
horns on their heads right hedious, and they speak not but rout as swine, and
in that country are many popiniayes, that they call in their language Pistak,
and they speak through their own kind partly as a man, and those that speak
well have long tongues and large, and on every foot five toes, but there are
some that have but three toes, but those speak naught or very ill.

Of another Island where also dwells good people therein, and is called
Sinople. Chap. lxxxviij.
THen is there an other I Will that is called Synople, wherein also are good
people and true, and full of good faith, and they are much like in their living
to the man before said, and they go all naked. Into that Island came king
Alexander and when he saw their good faith and troth and their good belief
he said that he would do them no harm, and bad them ask of him riches or
ought else, and they stould have it. And they answered that they had riches
enough, when they had meat and drinck to sustain their bodies, and they said
also that riches of this world is naught worth, but if it were so that he
might grant them that they should never dye that would they pray him. And
Alexander said that might he not do, for he was mortal and should die as
they should. Then said they, why art thou so proud and would win all the
world, and have it in thy subjection as it were a God and have no term of thy
life, and thou will have all riches of the world, the which shall forsake thee
or thou forsake it, and thou shall bear nothing with thee, but it shall
remain to other, but as thou were borne naked, so shall thou be done in earth.
And Alexander was greatly astonished at this speech, and though it be so that
they have not the Articles of our faith, nevertheless I believe that God
likes their service as he did of Job that was a Panim, the which he held for
his true servant and many other. I believe well that God loves all those that
love him and serve him meekely and truly, and that despise the vain glory of
the wolrd as these men do, and as Job did, and therefore said our Lord through
the mouth of the holy Prophet Esaias, Ponam eis multiplices leges meas, that is
to say, I shall put laws to them in many manners, and the gospel says thus.
Alias oues habeo quae non sunt ex hoc ouili, that is, I have other sheep that
are not of this fold: and thereto accords the vision that S. Peter saw at
Ioppa, how the Angel came from heaven and brought with him of all manner of
beasts, as serpents and diverse fowls, saying to Saint Peter. Take and eat,
and Saint Peter answered, I never eat of any unclean beast. And the Angel
said to him, Non dicas immunda quae Deus mundauit. That is to say, Call thou
not those things unclean that God has cleansed. This was done in token that
men should not have any man in disdain for their diverse laws, for we wot not
whom God loves, and whom God hates.

Of two other Isles, the one is called Pitan, wherein be little men that can
eat no meat, and in the other Isles are the men all rough of feathers. Chap.
lxxxix.
THere is another I Will that men call Pitan, the men of this land till no ground,
for they eat nothing, and they are small, but not so small as Pigmens. These
men live with smell of wild apples, and when they go far out of the country
they bear Apples with them, for anon as they loose that savor of apples they
dye, they are not reasonable, but as wild beasts. And there is another I Will
where the people are all feathers, but their face and the palms of their
hands, these men go as well about the sea as on the land, and they eat flesh
and fish all raw, in this I Will is a River that is two mile and an half broad
that men call Renemar.

Of a rich man in Prester John's land, named Catolonapes, and of his garden.
Chap. xc.
IN an I Will of Prester John's land, that men call Miscorach, there was a man that
was called Catolonapes, he was rich and had a fair castle on a hill and
strong, and he made a wall about the hill right strong and fair, within he
had a fair garden wherein were many trees bearing all manner of fruits that he
might find, and he had planted therein all manner of herbs of good smell and
that bear flowers, and there were many fair wels and by them was made many
hals and chambers well dight with gold and azure, and he had made there diverse
stories of beasts and birds that sung, and turned by engine or orbage as they
had been quick, and he had in his garden all things that might be to man's
solace and comfort, he had also in that garden maidens within the age of xv.
year the fairest that he might find, and men children of the same age, and
they were clothed with clothes of gold, and he said that they were Angels, and
he caused to be made certain hills, and enclosed them about with precious
stones of Iaspy and crystal and set in gold and pearls and other manner of
stones, and he made a conduite under the earth, so that when he would, the
Wels ran sometime with milk, sometime with wine, sometime honey, and this
place he called Paradise, and when any young bacheler of the country knight or
squire comes to him for solace or disport he leads him into his paradise,
and shows them these things, as the songs of birds, and his damsels, and
wels, and he did strike diverse instruments of music in a high tower that
might be heard, and said they were Angels of God and that place was paradise,
that God had granted to those that believed, when he says thus. Dabo vobis
terram fluentem lac and mel, That is to say, I shall give you land flowing
milk and honey. And then this rich man did make these men drink a manner of
drink of which they were dronken, and he said to them if they would dye for
his sake, when they were dead they should come to his Paradise, and they should
be of the age of those maidens, and should dwell always with them, and he
would put them in a fairer Paradise, where they should see God in his joy and
in his majesty, and when they granted to do that he would, and he bad them
go and slay such a Lord, or a man of the Country that he was wroth with, and
that they should have no dread of any man, and if they were slain themselves
for his sake, he should put them in his Paradise when they were dead. And so
went those Batchelers to slay great Lords of the country, and were slain
themselves in hope to have that Paradise, and thus he was avenged of his
enemies through his deceit, and when rich men of the country perceived his
cautell and malice and the will of this Catolonapes, they gathered themselves
together and assailed the castle and slew him and destroyed all his goods and
his fair places and riches that were in his Paradise, and the place of the
walls are there yet, and some other things, but the riches are not, and it is
not long ago since it was destroyed.

Of a perilous valley that is beside the River of Pison. Chap. xcj.
AND a little from that place on the left side, beside the river of Pison is a
great marvel. There is a valley between two hills and that is four mile
long, and some men call it the valley enchaunted, some the valley of Devils,
some the valley perilous, and in that valley are many tempests, and a great
noise very hydeous both day and night, and sound as it were a noyce of Tabers
and Trumpets as it were at a great feast. This valley is full of Devils and
has been always, and men say there is an entry to hell. In this valley is
much gold and silver, wherefore many christian men and other go thither for
couetise of that gold and silver, but few of them come out again, for they are
anon strangled with Devils, and in the midst of that Valley on a Rock is a
Visage, and the head of a flend bodily, right hidious and dreadful to see, and
there is nothing seen but the head to the shoulders, but there is no Christian
men nor other in the world so hardy, but that he would be greatly afraid to
beehold it, for he beholds each man so sharply and felly, and his eyes are
so staring, and sparkling as fire, and he changes so often his countenance
that no man dare come near for all the world, and out of his nose comes
great plenty of fire of diverse colors, and sometime is the fire so stinking,
that no man may suffer it, but always a good Christian man, and one that is
steadfast in the faith may go therein without harm if they call to God only
for forgiveness of their sins, then shall the Devils have no power over
them. And ye shall understand that when my fellows and I were in that valley
we had full great doubt if we should put our bodies in a venture to go
through it, and some of my fellows agreed thereto and some would not, and
there were in our company two Friars minours of Lombardie who said if any of us
would go in they would also, as they had said so upon trust of them we said
that we would go, and we did make our prayers to God for our safeguard, and
so we went in xiiij. men, and when we came out we were but x. and we wist
not whether our fellows were lost there, or that they turned again, but we
saw no more of them, other of my fellows that would not go in with us, went
about another way for to be before us and so they were, and we went through
the valey and saw there many marvelous things, gold, silver, precious stones
and Jewels great plenty as we thought, whether it were so or no I know not,
for devils are so subtle and false, that they make many times a thing to seem
that it is not, for to deceive men, and therefore I would touch nothing for
dread of enemies that I saw there in many liknesses, what of dead bodies that I
saw lie in the valey, but I dare not say that they were all bodies, but they
were bodily shapes through making of devils, and we were often cast down to
the earth by wind, thunder and tempest, but God helped always, and so passed we
through that valey without peril or harm thanks be to God.

Of an Island wherein dwell people as great as Giants, of xxviij. or xxx. foot
of lenght, and other things. Chap. xcij.
ANd beyond that valey is a great I Will, where be people as great as Giants of
xxviii. foot long and they have no clothing but beasts skins that hang on
them, and they eat no bread but flesh raw, and they drink milk, and they have
no houses, and they eat gladlier flesh of men then other, and men say to us
that beyond that I Will is an I Will where are greater Giants, as xlv. or l. foot
long, and some said l. cubits long, but I saw not them, and among those
Giants are great sheep, as it were young Oxen, and they bear great woll,
these sheep have I seen many times. An other I Will is there Northward where are
many evil and fell women, and they have precious stones in their eyes, and
they have such force that if they behold any man with wrath, they slay them
with beeholding as the Basalyke does. An other I Will is there of fayrer folk and
good, where the custom is such, the first night that they are wedded, they
take a certain man that is ordained therefore, and let him lie by their wives
to have their maidenhead, and they give him great reward for his travail, and
those men are called Gadlybrien, for men of that country hold it a great thing
to make a woman no maiden, and if it be so that the husband find her a maiden
the next night after (for peradventure he that lay by her was dronken, or for
any other cause) the husband shall complain of him to the Lawyers that he
has not done his devour, and he shall grievously be punished and chastised,
but after the first night they keep their wives well, that they speak not
with those men, and I asked what was the cause why they had that custom, and
they said, heretofore men lay with their wives first and no other, and their
wives had serpents in their bodies, and stong their husbands in the yard or on
their bodies, and so was many men slain, and therefore had they that custom
to let other men have their maidenhead, for dread of death, and thus they
suffer them to assay the passage, or they adventure.

Of women which make great sorrow as their children are borne, and great joy
when they are dead. Chap. xciij.
AN other I Will there is where women make great sorrow when their children be
borne, and when they are dead they make great joy and cast them in a great fire
and burn them, and they that love well their husbands when then are dead they
cast them in a fire to burn them, for they say that fire shall make them clean
of all filth and vices, and they shall be clean in an other world, and the
cause why they weep when their children are borne, and that they joy at their
death, they say a child when he is borne comes into this world to have
travail, sorrow and heaviness, and when they are dead they go to Paradise
where Rivers are of Milk and Honey, and there is life and joy and plenty of
goods without travail or sorrow. In this I Will they elect their kings by voices,
and they choose him not for his riches, and nobleness, but him that is of good
conditions, and most righteous and true, that judges every man truly, little
and much after their trespass, and the king may judge no man to death, without
counsel of his Barons and that they all assent. And if it so be that their
King do a great trespass, as stay a man, or such like, he shall dye also,
but he shall not be slain, but they shall charge and forbid that no man be
so hardy to bear him company, nor to speak to him, ne give him meat nor
drink, and thus he shall die, for they spare no man that has done a
trespass, for love, lordship, riches nor nobleness, but they do him right
after that he has deserved.

Of an Island where men wed their own daughters and kinswomen. Chap. xciiij.
THere is an other I Will where is great plenty of people, and they never eat
flesh of Hares nor of Hens, nor Geese, yet is there many of them, but they eat
of all other beasts, and they drink milk in this country they wed their own
daughters and other of their kin, as them likes, and if there be ten or
eleven men in one house, each one of their wives shall be common to other, and
at night one have one of the wives, and an other night an other, and if she
have any child she may give it to whom she will so that no man know it to be
his. In this land and many other places of Inde are many Crocodrilles, that is
a manner of long Serpent, and on nights they dwell on water, and on days they
dwell on land and rocks, and they eat not in winter. These serpents slay men
and eat them weeping, and they have no tongue.

In this country and many other, men cast seed of cotton, and sow in each
year, and it grows as it were small trees, and they bear cotton. In Araby
is a kind of beast that some men call Garsants, that is a fair beast, and he
is higher then a great courser or steed but his neck is near xx. cubits long,
and his tail like a Heart, and he may look over a high house, depiction of a
camel and there are many Camelions that is a little beast, and he never eats
or drinks, and he changes his color often, for sometime he is of one
color and sometime of another, and he may change him into all colors that
he will, save black and red. There are many wild swine of many colors, and
as great as Oxen, and they are spotted as it were small fawnes, and there are
Lions all white, and there be other Beasts, as great as steedes that men call
Lanhorans, and some men call them Tonts, and their head is black, and three
long horns in his front, as cutting as sharp swords, and he chaseth and will
slay Eliphants. And there is many other manner of Beasts, of whom it were too
long to write all.

Of an Island wherein dwell full good people and true. Chap. xcv.
THere is another Island good and great, and plentious, where are good men and
true and of godly life after their faith, and though they he not christians,
nevertheless of kind they are full of good virtues, and they fly all vices, and
all sin and malice for they are not envious, proud, covetous, lecherous, nor
gluttenous, and they do not unto another man but that they would he did to
them, and they fulfill the x. commandments and they make no force of riches
nor of having, and they swear not, but they say yea and nay, for they say he
that swears will deceive his nighbour, and some men call this I Will the I Will of
Bragamen, and some call it the land of faith, and through it runs a great
river that men call Thebe, and generally all men in those Isles, and other
thereby are truer and right wiser then in other countries, in this Isles are no
thieves, murderers nor beggars. And forasmuch as they are so true and so good,
there is no tempest nor thunder, war, hunger, nor tribulation, and thus it
seems well that God loves them well, and he is well pleased with their
deeds, and they believe in God that made all things, and him they worship and
they live so ordinately in meat and drink that they live right long, and many
of them dye without sickness, that kind fails them for age.

How king Alexander sent his men thither for to win that land. Chap. xcvj.
AND king Alexander sometime sent his men to win that land. And they sent him
letters that said thus. What beehooueth a man to have all the world that is not
content therewithal, thou shall find nothing at all in us why should thou
make war upon us, for we have no riches or treasure, and all the cattle of
our country are common, our meats that we eat are our riches, and in stead
of gold and silver, we make our treasure peace and concord of love, and we
have naught but a cloth upon our bodies, our wives are not arrayed richly to
pleasing, for we hold it a great folly for a man to trim up his body with
costly apparel to make it seem fayrer then God made it We have been
evermore in peace till now that thou will dishcrite us. We have a king among
us, not for need of the law, nor to judge any man, for there are no
trespassours among us, but all only to learn us to be obedient to him, and so
may thou take from us but our good peace. And when king Alexander saw this
letter he thought he should do too much harm if he troubled them, and sent
to them, that they should keep well their good manners, and have no dread of
him.

How the Emperor Prester John when he goes to battle, has three crosses
of fine gold borne before him. Chap. xcvij.
THis Emperor Prester John when he goes to battle, has no banner borne
before him, but he has borne before him three crosses of fine gold and those
are large and great, and well set with precious stones, and for to keep each
cross he ordained a thousand men of arms, in manner as men keep a standard
in other countries, and he has men without number, when he goes in any
battle against any other Prince. And when he has no battle, but rides
with privy company, then has he borne before him but a cross of tree not
painted, and without gold or precious stones, and all plain, in token that our
Lord Jesus Christ suffered death on a cross of tree. And also he has borne
before him a vessel full of Jewels and gold and precious stones, in token of
his present nobleness and of his might, he has borne before him likewise a
platter of gold full of earth, in token that all lordship and nobleness shall
turn to naught, and his flesh shall turn to earth.

Of the most dwelling place of Prester John in a City called Suse. Chap.
xcviij.
ANd he dwells commonly at the city of Suse, and there is his principal
palace that is so rich that it is strange to tell, and about the principal
tower of the palace are two pomels of gold all round, and each one of those
has two carbuncles great and large, that shine right clear in the night, and
the principal gates of this palace are of precious stones that men call
Saraine, and the borders of the bars are of Iuory, and windows of the hall
and chambers are of crystal, and Tables that they eat off, some Emerandes,
some of Mayk, some of gold and precious stones, and the pillars that bear the
tables are of such stones also, and the steares on the which the Emperor goes
up to his table where he sits at meat, one is of Mastike, another of
crystal, and another of green Iaphy, another of Diasper, another of Serdin,
another of Cornelin, another of Senton, and that he sets his foot upon is
of Chrisolits, and all these steares are bordred with fine gold, and well set
with great pearls and other precious stones, and the side of his table are
Emerauds brodred with gold and with precious stones, the pillars in his chamber
are of fine gold with many Carbuncles and other such stones that give great
light in the night, and though the Carbuncles give great light, nevertheless
there burns xij. great vessels of crystal full of balm, to give good smell
and to drive away evil air. The frame of his bed is all of Sapphire well bound
with gold to make him sleep well, and for to destroy Lechery, for he will not
lie by his wives but thrice a year after the seasons, and that only for
getting of children. And he has also a fair palace in the city of Nise,
where he dwells when he will, but the air there is not so well tempered as
it is in the City of Suse. And he has every day in his court more then xxx.
thousand men, beside comers and goers, but xxx. thousand there, or in the
court of the great Caane, spends not so much as xij. thousand in our
country. He has evermore vii. kings in his court to serve him, and each one
of them serves a month, and with these kings serve always lxxii. Dukes, and
CCC. Earls, and every day eat in his court xii. Archbishops, and xx. Bishops.
The Patriarch of Saint Thomas is as it were a Pope, and Archbishops, Bishops
and Abbots, all are kings in that country, and some of the Lords is Master of
the hall, some of the chamber, some steward, some Marshall and other Officers,
and therefore he is full richly served. And his Land lasts in breadth four
months journey, and it is of length without measure.

Of the wilderness wherein grows the trees of the Sun and the Moon. Chap.
xcix
AND beeyond this place is a great wilderness as men that have been there
say. In this wilderness as men say are the trees of the Sun, and of the
Moon that spoke to king Alexander and told him of his death, and men say that
folk that keep these trees and eat of the fruits of them, live four or five
hundred year through virtue of the fruit, and we would gladly have gone
thither, but I believe that an hundred thousand men of arms should not pass
that wilderness for great plenty of wild beasts, as Dragons, and serpents
that slay men when they pass that way. In this land are many Elephants, all
white and blew without number, and Unicorns and Lions of many colors. Many
other Isles are in the land of Prester John, that were too long to tell, and
much riches and of precious stones is great plenty. I have heard say why this
Emperor is called Prester John, and for those that know it not I will declare.
Therefore sometime an Emperor that was a noble Prince, and doughtie, and he
had many Christian Knights with him, and the Emperor thought he would see the
service in christian Churches, and then was Churches of Christendom in Turkey,
Surry, and Tartary, Jerusalem, Palistine, Araby and Alapy, and all the Lords
of Egypt. And this Emperor came with a Christian Knight into a Church of
Egypt, and it was on a Satterday after Whitsunday when the Bishop gave Orders,
and he beheld the Service and asked of the knight what folk those should be
that stood before the Bishop, and the Knight said they should be Priests, and
he said he would no more be called king ne Emperor, but Priest, and he
would have the name of him that came first out of the Priests, and he was
called John, and so have all the Emperors since been called Prester John. In
this land are many Christian men of good faith and good law, and they have
priests to sing service, and they receive the sacrament as men of Greece do,
and they say not otherwise, but as the Apostles said, as Saint Peter, and Saint
Thomas, and other Apostles, when they sung and said Pater noster, and the words
with the which the Communion is sacred: we have many additions of Popes that
have been ordained, of which men of those countries know not.

Of a great Island and Kingdom called Taprobane. Chap. c.
TOward the East side of Prester John's Land is an I Will that men call Taprobane,
and it is right good and fruitful, and there is a great King and a rich, and
he is obedient unto Prester John, and the King is always made by election. In
this I Will are two winters, and two Summers, and they reap corn twice in the
year, and gardens flowrish at all times in the year. There dwells good
people and reasonable, and many christian men among them are full rich, and the
water between the side of Prester John, and this I Will is not very deep, for
men may see the ground in many places.

Of two other Isles, one is called Oriell, and the other Argete where are many
gold mines. Chap cj.
THere are more Eastward two other Isles, the one is called Oriell, and the
other Argete, of which all the land is full of mines of gold and silver. In
those Isles many men see no Stars clear shining, but one Star that is called
Canapos, and there many men see not the Moon but in the last quarter. In that
I Will is a great hill of gold that Pismires keep, and they do the fine gold from
other that is not fine gold, and the Pismires are as great as hounds, so that
no man dare come there for dread of pismires that should assay them, so that
men may not work in that gold nor get thereof, but by subtlety, and therefore
when it is right hot the pismires hide themselves in the earth from morn to
noone of the day, and then men of the country take Cammels and Dromedaries and
other beasts and go thither and charge them with gold, and go away fast or
the pismires come out of the earth. And other times when it is not so hot, that
the pismires hide them not, they take Mares that have soles, and they lay upon
these mares two long vessels as it were two small barrels and the mouth
upwards, and drive them thither and hold their foles at home, and when the
pismires see these vessels they spring therein, for by kind they leave no hole
nor pit open, and anon they fill these vessels with gold, and when men think
that the vessels be full, they take the foles and bring them as near as they
dare, and then they whine, and the mares hear them, and anon they come to
their foles, and so they take the gold, for these pismires will suffer beasts
to come among them, but no men.

Of the dark country and hills and rocks of stone nigh to Paradise. Chap. cij.
BEyond the Isles of the land of Prester John and his Lordship of wilderness to
go right East, men shall find nothing but hills, great rocks and other dark
land, where no man may see a day or night as men of the Country say, and this
wilderness and dark land lasts to Paradise terrestre, where Adam and Eve
were set, but they were but a little while there, and that is toward the East
at the beginning of the Earth, but that is not our East that we call, where the
Sun rises for when the Sun rises there, then it is midnight in our country
by reason of the roundnesse of the Earth, for our Lord made the earth all round
in the midst of the firmament. Of Paradise can I not speak properly, for I
have not been there, but that I have heard I shall tell you. Men say that
Paradise terrestre is the highest land of all the world, and it is so high that
it touches near to the circle of the Moon, for it is so high that Noes flood
might not come thereto, which covered all the Earth about.

A little of Paradise terrestre. Chap. ciij.
THis Paradise terrestre is enclosed all about with a wall, and that wall is
all covered with moss as it seems, that men may see no stone nor nothing
else whereof it is, and in the highest place of Paradise in the midst of it
is a Well that casts out the four floods that run through diverse Lands.
The first flood is called Pison or Ganges, and that runs through Inde: in
that River are many precious stones and much Lignum Aloes, and gravel of gold.
An other is called Nilus or Giron, and that runs through Ethiope and Egypt.
The third is called Tigree, and that runs through Asiria and Armony the
great. And the fourth is called Euphrates that runs through Armony the
less, and Persia, and men say that the sweet and fresh waters of the world
take their springing of them. The first River is called Pison, that is to say,
gathering of many Rivers together and falling into one, and some call it
Ganges, of a king that was in Inde that men call Gangeras, for it runs
through his land, and this river is in some places clean, in some places
troubled, in some place hot, in some place cold. The second river is called
Nilus or Giron, for it is ever troubled, for Giron is to say, trouble. The
third river is called Tigree, that is to say fast running, for it runs
faster then any of the other, named so of a beast that men call Tigris, for he
runs fast. The fourth river is called Euphrates, that is to say, well
bearing, for there grows many good things upon that river. And ye shall
understand that no man living may go unto that Paradise, for by land he may
not go for wild beasts which are in the wilderness, and for hills and rocks
where no man may pass. Neither by those Rivers may any man pass, for they
come with so great course and so great waves that no ship may sail against
them. Many great Lords have assayed many times to go by those Rivers to
Paradise, but they might not speed on their way, for some dyed for weariness
of rowing, some waxt blind and some deaf for noise of the waters, so no man
may pass there but through special grace of God, I can tell you no more of
that place, which I may speak of upon mine own sight.

How Prester John's land lies foot against foot to England. Chap. ciiij.
THese Isles of the land of Prester John, they are under the earth to us, and
other Isles are there who so would pursue them for to compass the earth, having
the grace of God to hold the way, he might come right to the same Countries
that he were come of and come from, and go about the earth, but for that it
asks so long time, and also there are so many perils to pass, that few men
assay to go so, and yet it might be done, for men come from those Isles to
other Isles costing of the Lordship of Prester John, which men call Cassoy, and
that country is near lx. days journey long, and more then fifty of breadth,
and this Cassoy is the best land that is in those countries, save Cathay, and
if merchants come thither as commonly as they do to Cathay, it would be better
then Cathay, for it is so thick of cities and towns that when a man goes out
of a city he sees an other at each side: there is great plenty of spices
and other goods, the king of this I Will is rich and mighty, and he holds his
land of the great Caane, for that is one of the xii. Princes that the great
Caane has under him beside his own Land.

Of the Kingdom of Ryboth. Chap. cv.
FRom this I Will men go to an other Kingdom that is called Ryboth, and that is
also under the great Caane, that is a good country and plenteous of corn,
wine, and other things: men of this land have no houses, but they dwell in
tents made of trees. And the principal city of the country is all black made
of black stones and white, and all the streets are paued with such stones, and
in the City is no man so hardy to spill blood of man ne beast, for worship of
a mawmet that is worshipped there. In that city dwells the Pope of their
Law, that they call Lopasse and he gives all dignities and benefices that
fall to the mawmet. And men of religion and men that have Churches in that
country are obedient to him as men here to the King. In this I Will they have a
custom through all the Country that when a man's father is dead they will do
him great worship, they send after all his friends, religious Priests, and many
other, and they bear the body to an hill with great joy and mirth, and when it
is there the greatest Prelate smites off his head, and lays it upon a great
plate of gold or silver, and gives it to his Son, and the Son takes it, and
gives it to other of his friends singing and saying many orisons, and then
the priests and the religious men cut the flesh off the body in pieces and say
orisons, and the birds of the country come thither, for they know well the
custom, and they fly about them, as the Eagles and other birds that eat
flesh, and the priests cast the pieces unto them, and they bear it away a
little from thence and then they eat it, and as the Priests in our Country
sing for souls, Subuenite sancti Dei, and forsooth so those priests there sing
with high voice in their language in this manner wise. See and behold how good
and gracious a man this was that the Angels of God come for to fetch him and
bear him into Paradise. And then thinks the son of the same man that he
is greatly worshipped when birds have eaten his father, and when there are
most plenty of birds, there is most worship. And then comes the Son home
with all his friends, and makes them a great feast, then makes he clean his
fathers scalpe and gives them drink therein, and the flesh of his fathers
head he cutteth off, and gives it to his most special friends, some a
little, and some a little for dainty. And in remembrance of this holy man that
the Birds have eaten, the son keeps his scalpe for a cup, and therein
drinks he all his life, in remembrance of his father.

Of a rich man that is neither King, Prince, Duke, nor Earl. Chap. cvj.
AND from this place men go ten days journey through the land of the great
Caane, which is a full good I Will and a great kingdom, and the king is full
mighty. And in this I Will is a rich man which is neither king, Prince, Duke nor
Earl, but he has each year four thousand horses charged with rice and
corn, and he lives nobly and richly after the manner of the country, for he
has fifty damsels that serve him every day at his meat and bed, and do what
he will. And when he sits at the table they bring him meat, and at each
time five messes together, and they sing in the bringing a song, and they cut
his meat and put it in his mouth, and he has right long nails on his hands,
that is great nobility in that country, and therefore they let their nails
grow as long as they may, and some let them grow so long that they come about
their hands, and that is great honor, and gentry, and the gentry of a woman is
to have small feet, and therefore as soon as they are borne, they bind their
feet so straight that they cannot wax half as they should. And he has a
full fair Palace and rich, where he dwells, of which the wall is two mile
about, and there is many fair gardens, and all the pauements of the hal and
chambers is of gold and silver, and in the midst of one of his gardens is a
little hill, whereon is a place made with towers and pinacles all of gold, and
there he will sit often to take the air and disport, for it is made for
nothing else. From this land men may go through the land of the great Caane.

How all the Lands, Isles and kingdoms, before rehearsed, have some Articles of
our Faith. Chap. cvij.
AND ye shall understand that all these men and folk that have reason, that I
have spoken of, have some articles of our faith, and though they be of diverse
laws and beliefes, yet they have some good points of our faith, and they
believe in God as the Prophecy says. Et metuent cum omnes fines terrae. That
is to say. And all the ends of the earth shall dread him. And in another place.
Omnes gentes seruient ei. That is to say. All Nations shall serve him, but they
cannot speak perfectly but as their natural wit teaches them, neither of the
Son nor of the holy Ghost, but they can well speak of the Bible, and
specially of Genesis, and of the books of Moses. And they say that those
creatures which they worship are no Gods, but they worship them for the great
virtue that is in them, which may not be without the special grace of God:
and of simulacres and Idols they say that al men have simulacres, whereby they
mean the Papists, who have Images of our Lady and other, but they think that
they worship the Images of stone and of wood, and not the Saints whom they do
represent, for as the letter teaches Clarks how they shall believe, so Images
and Picture teaches lay men, they say also that the Angel of God speaks to
them in their Idols and do miracles, and they say truth, but it is the evil
Angel that does miracles to maintain them in their Idolatry.

How Sir John Maundeuile leaves many meruailes unwritten, and the cause
wherefore. Chap. cviij.
THere are many other Countries where I have not yet been nor seen, and
therefore I cannot speak properly of them. Also in countries where I have
been are many meruailes that I speak not of, for it were too long a tale, and
therefore hold you apaid at this time with that I have said, for I will say no
more of meruailes that are there, so that other men that go thither may find
enough for to say, that I have not told.

What time Sir John Maundeuile departed out of England. Chap. cix.
ANd I John Maundeuile went out of my country and passed the Sea, the year of
our Lord 1332. and have passed through many Lands Isles and countries, and now
am come to rest, I have compiled this book and writ it the year of our Lord.
1366. thirty two year after my departing from my Country. The rather for the
pleasure of all such as delight to read of the strange and wonderful meruailes
of other foreign countries, as also for a direction to all such as shall
desire to see either all, or some of these countries heretofore specified, and
because some things herein spoken of may seem strange and scarcely credible,
therefore I have thought good to make known unto all that will see more proof
hereof, in the book called Mapa Mundy, there they shall find the most part of
the same ratified and confirmed. And I pray all that shall read this book, and
look for no further proof to judge favorably thereof, since they shall in
conceit see as much at home without much pains, as I did after many weary and
dangerous steps passed, and I pray to God of whom all grace comes, that he
will fulfill with his grace the readers and hearers hereof, and save them body
and soul, and bring them to his Joy that ever shall last. Amen.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
He that will go toward Jerusalem on horse, on foot or by sea. chap. 1 Of
the Islands of Greece. chap. 2 To come again to Constantinople to go to the
holy land. chap. 3 Of a terrible Dragon. chap. 4 Of a young man and his lemman.
chap. 5 Of the manner of hunting in Cypres. chap. 6 Of the haven named Iaffe.
chap. 7 Of the haven of Tire. chap. 8 Of the hill Carme. chap. 9 How Sampson
slew the king and his enemies. chap. 10 The way to Babylon whereas the Souldan
dwells. chap. 11 Yet here follows of the Souldan and the kingdoms that he
has conquered, which he holds strongly with force. chap. 12 For to return
from Sinay to Jerusalem. chap. 13 As men are passed this wilderness again
coming to Hirusalem. chap. 14 Here follows a little of Adam and Eve and
other things. chap. 15 Of the dry tree. chap. 16 From Ebron to Bethlehem. cha.
17 Of a fair maiden that should be put to death wrongfully. chap. 18 Of the
city Jerusalem. chap. 19 Yet of the holy city of Jerusalem. chap. 20 Of
the Church, and of the holy sepulcher. chap. 21 Of the Temple of God. chap. 22
Yet of the Temple of God. chap. 23 Of king Herod. chap. 24 Of saint Saluatours
church. cha. 25 The field of Acheldemack which was bought with the xxx. pence.
chap. 26 Of the mount Joy. chap. 27 Of the castle of Bethania. chap. 28 Of
Jericho and other things. cha. 29 Of the holy place between Bethania and the
river Iordane, with other things. chap. 30 Of Abraham and his generation. chap.
31 Of the river Iordane. chap. 32 Of many other meruailes. chap. 33 Of the
Samaritones. chap. 34 Of Galile. chap. 35 Of the way of Nezareth to the mount
or hill of Tabor. chap. 36 Of the sea of Galile. chap. 37 Of the Table whereon
Christ eat after his resurrection. chap. 38 Of strange manners and diverse.
chap. 39 For to turn again on this side of Galile. chap. 40 How a man may go
furthest and longest in those Countries that are here rehearsed. chap. 41 Of
other ways for to go by land unto Jerusalem. chap. 42 Yet of another way by
land toward the land of Promise. chap. 43 Of the faith of the Sarasins, and of
the book of their Law named Alkaron. chap. 44 Yet it treats more of Mahomet.
chap. 45 Of the birth of Mahomet. chap. 46 Of the Isles, and diverse manners of
people, and of marvelous beasts. chap. 47 Of the haven of Gene, for to go by
the sea into diverse countries. chap. 48 Of the Country of Job, and of the
kingdom of Calde. chap. 49 Of the kingdom of Amazony where as dwells none
but women. chap. 50 Of the land of Ethiope. chap. 51 Of Inde the more and the
less, and of Diamonds, and of small people, and other things. chap. 52 Of
diverse Kingdoms and Isles which are in the Land of Inde. chap. 53 Of the
kingdom of Mabaron. chap. 54 Of a great Country called Lamory where the people
go all naked chap. 55 Of the country and I Will named Iana, which is a mighty
land. chapter 56 Of ye kingdom of Pathen or Salmas which is a goodly land. chapter 57
Of the kingdom of Talonach, the king whereof has many wives. chap. 58 Of the
Island called Raso, where men are hanged as soon as they are sick. chap. 59 Of
the Island of Melke wherein dwells evil people. chap. 60 Of an Island named
Mecumeran, whereas the people have heads like hounds. chap. 61 Of a great
Island called Dodin where are many men of evil conditions. chap. 62 Of the
kingdom named Mancy, the which is one of the best kingdoms of the world.
chap. 63 Of the land of Pigmen, the people whereof are but three spans long.
chap. 64 Of the city of Menke where a great Navy is kept. chap. 65 Of the land
named Cathay, and of the great riches thereof. chap. 66 Of a great City named
Cadon, wherein is the great Caanes palace and siege. chap. 67 Wherefore that
the Emperor of Cathay is called the great Caane. chap. 68 How the great Caane
was hid under a tree, and so escaped his enemies because of a bird. chap. 69 Of
the great Caanes letters, and the writing about his seal. chap. 70 Of the
governance of the country of the great Caane. chap. 71 Of the great riches of
the emperor and of his descending. chap. 72 Of the ordinance of the Lords of
the Emperor when he rides from one country to another to war. chap. 73 How
the empire of the great Caanc is parted into xij. provinces, and how that they
do cast insence in the fire where the great Caane passes through the Cities
and towns in worship of the Emperor. chap. 74 How the great Caane is the
mightiest Lord of all the world. cha. 75 Yet of other manners of his country.
chap. 76 How the emperor is brought unto his grave when he is dead. chapter 77
When the Emperor is dead, how they choose and make another. chapter 78 What
countries and kingdoms lie next to the Land of Cathay, and the frontes
thereof. chap. 79 Of other ways to come from Cathay toward the Greek sea, and
also of the Emperor of Persia. chap. 80 Of the land of Armony which is a good
Land, and of the Land of Middy. chap. 81 Of the kingdom of George and Abcan,
and many meruailes. chap. 82 Of the land of Turkey, and diverse other countries,
and of the land of Mesopotamia. chap. 83 Of diverse Countries, kingdoms and
Isles, and meruailes beyond the land of Cathay. chap. 84 Of the land of Bactry,
and of many Griffins and other Beasts. chap. 85 Of the way for to go to
Prester John's land, which is the Emperor of Inde. chap. 86 Of the faith and
belief of Prester John, but he has not all the full belief as we have.
chap. 87 Of another Island, which is called Sinople, wherein dwells good
people. chap 88 Of two other Isles, the one is called Pitan, wherein be little
men that eat no meat, and in another I Will are the men all rough with feathers.
chap. 89 Of a rich man in Prester John's land named Catolonapes, and of his
garden. chap. 90 Of a marvelous valey that is beeside the river Phison. chap.
91 Of an Island wherein dwell people as great as Giants of xxix. or of xxx.
foot of length, and other things. chap. 92 Of women which make great sorrow
when as their children be borne, and great Joy when they dye. chap. 93 Of an
Island where men wed their own Daughters and kinsewomen. chap. 94 Of another
Island wherein dwell full good people and true. chap. 65 How king Alexander sent
his men thither for to win the land. chapter 96 How the Emperor Prester John when
he goes to battle, has three crosses of gold borne before him. chap. 97 Of
the most dwelling place of Prester John in a city called Suse. chap. 98 Of
the wilderness wherein grows the trees of the Sun, and the Moon. chap. 99
Of a great Island and kingdom called Taprobane. chap. 100 Of two other Isles the
one called Oriell, and the other Argete, where are many gold mines. chap. 101
Of the dark country, and hills and rocks of stone nigh to Paradise. chap. 102 A
little of Paradise terrestre. chapter 103 How Prester John's land lies foot
against foot to England. cha. 104 Of the kingdom of Riboth. chapter 105 Of a rich
man that is neither king, Prince, Duke nor Earl. cha. 106 How all the lands,
Isles and kingdoms before rehearsed have some of the articles of our faith. chapter
107 How sir John Maundeuile leaves many meruailes unwritten, and the cause
wherefore. chap. 108 What time John Maundeuile departed out of England, chap.
109
FINIS.

