FOr as much as the Land over the sea / that is to say the holy land that
men call the land of hetynge / among all other lands it is most worthy
land and sovereign of other lands / and it is blessed and hallowed and sacred
of the precious blood of our lord jesus christ. In the which land it lyked
him to take flesh and blood of the virgyn mary / and to enuiron that land
with his own fete. And there he Would do many miracles / and preche and teache
the feythe / and the law of us christian men as unto his children. And there fore
he would suffer many reproues and scorns for us. And he that was king of
heaven / and of earth / of air / of see / and of all things that are contained
in them would all oonly be called king of that land when he said. Rex sum
iudeorum. I am king of Jews. For that time was that land of Jews / and that
land had he chosen before all other lands as for the best and the most
virtuous and for the most worthy of the world / and as the Phylosofer says
thus. Virtus rerum in medio consistit. That is to say the virtue of things is
in the myd. and in that land he Would led his life and suffer passion and
death of the Jews for us and for to deliver and bye us fro the pains of hell /
and fro death wythouten end. the Which was ordained to us for the sin of
our fader Adam. and for our own sins also. For as him self he had none
evil deserved: for he thought never evil. ne did never evil. And he that was
king of glory and joy might best in that place suffer death for he that woll
do any thing that he woll be known openly. He woll do cry it openly in the
myddyll place of a town / or of a cite so that it may be known to all parties
of the Cite. So he that Was king of all the world would suffer death for us at
Jerusalem that is in myddis of the world so yt it might be known to men of
all parties of the world how dear he bought man that he had made to his own
likeness for the great love that he had to us: for more worthy catell ne
might he have set for us than his own blessed body and his own precious blood
/ the which he suffered for us. A dear god what love he had to his subget us.
When he that had done no trespass would for trespass sours suffer death Right
ought men to love and worship and d^ede and serve such a lord and worship and
pray se such a holy land yt brought forth such fruit thorough the which every
man is saved but if it be his own de^a^te. This is the land hight to us in
heritage / and in that land he would dye as sesed to leave it to his children.
For the Which every good christian man that may and has Whereof should
strength him for to conquer our right heritage and chase out the ylke
trowand for We are called christian men of crist our fader. and if we be right
children of crist we owe for to challenge the heritage that our fader left us
and do it out of strange men's handis. But now pride couetise and envy has so
enflamed the hertis of lords of the World that they are more besy for to
disherite t^eir neighbors than for to challenge or conquer there right heritage
before said. And the common people that Would put their bodies and catell for
to conquer our heritage they may not do without lords for assemble of the
people Without a cheef lord is as a flock of sheep that has no shepeherde
the which depart asonder / and wot never wheder that they should go. But
would go^ that the worldly lords were at good accord / and With other of
their common people would take this holy vyage over the sea. I trow well that
Within a little time our right heritage before said should be reconsyled and
put in the hands of the right eyres of Jesus christ: and for as much it is
long time that there was no general passage over the sea. And many men desire
to here speak of the holy land. and have thereof great solare / and
comforthe. John Maundeuyle knight. Though it so be that I be not worthy that
was borne in england in the town of saint Albone and passed the sea in the
year of the Incarnacion of our lord jesus crist M.CCCxxxii on the day of saint
Myghell and hyde^ w^rde has be long time over the se and have seen and gone
through many lands and many prouynces and kingdoms and Isles and have passed
thorough Turkey thorough Ermony the little and the great thorough Tartary
Thoroughe Per^y thorough Syry thoroughe / araby / thorough Egypt the high and
the low. thorough lyby thoroughe Caldee / and a great party of Ethyope through
Amo^ome. thoroughe Inde the less and themore. a great party. and thorough
many other Isles which are a boute Inde Where many diverse manners of folk dwell
of diverse laws and shappes ^ of which lands and Isles I shall speak more
plainly / and I shall deuyse a party of things what they are when time shall
be after it may come to mind ^ and specially for them that woll and are in
purpos for to vysite the holy cite of I^rusa^lem and the holy places yt at
theraboute and I shall tell ^he Wey that they shall hold thither for I have
many times passyd and ryden it with good company / and of many lords.

IN the name of god almighty. He that woll pass over the se: he may go many
weyes both on land and see after the countrees that he comethe fro ^ and many
of them come all to one end: but trow est not that I woll tell all the towns
and cytes and castle lys that men shall go by. for than should I make to long
tale but all only so^me countres and most pryncypall steddi^ that men shall
goo thoroughe to go the right wey. First if a man come from the west side of
the World as England Irlande wales Scotlonde Norwey he may go if he woll
thorough almayne and through the kingdom of hungery that marchys too the land
of poyalme and to the land of pannony and of Allesey. And the king of hungery
is a right great lord and a mighty and holds great and much land. for he
holds the land of hungery and of allesy. Sauoy Coma me a great party of
Bulgary: that men call the land of Bugers and a great party of the kingdom
of rosse and y^ lasts to the land of Nyflond and marchis unto Pruysse. and
men go this thorough the land of Hungry thorough a cite that men call Chyppron
^ and thoroughe the castle of Newburgh and by the ille town that is to ward
the end of hungry and men by the river of Daunby this is a full great river
and gothe into almaygne. under the hyllys of lumbardy and it takes into him
xl. other ryuer^ and it ^enneth thorough hungry and through Gresses* and
thoroughe Tracy and gothe into the sea so stal worthly and with so great
strength that the water is fresshe xx. mile within the sea. and afterward go
men to Belgraue and enter into the land of Bugers and there pass men a Bredge
of stone that is over the river Marroke / and men pas thorugh the land of
Pynteras and com to Greece to the cite of Stemy and to the cite of affynpayn and
sythyn to the cite of Constantynople that was sometime called Bessamorn and
there dwells commonly the emperor of greece there is the best church of the
world and the fairest and it is of saint Sophy / and before this church is an
Image of Ius^in^an the emperor gilt and it is upon an horse and crowned / and
it was wont to hold a round appyll in his hand and men say there that it is
a token that the emperor has lost a great party of his land for the appyll
is fall out of the images hand and also that he has lost a great party of
his lordship ^ For he was wont to be emperor of romayn of greece and all assy
the less of Surry and of the land of I^de / in the which is Jerusalem / and
of the land / of Egypt ^ of Pe^^y and Araby ^ but he has lost all but greece
/ and that land that he holdethe all only and men would many times put the
appyll in the images hand but it would not hold it This appyll betokenethe the
lordshyp that he had over all the World. And the other hand he holds lift
up again the west in token for to manasse mysdoers. This Image stands upon a
pyller of marble at Constantynoble. there is the spounge and the read of the
which the Jews gave our lord drink gall on the cross and there is one of
the nails that christ was nailed with to the cross.

So^me men wene that half of the cross of crist be in cypre in an abbey of
munkes that men call the hill of the holy cross but it is not so. for that
cross that is in cypre is the cr^sse on the which Dysmas the good thief was
hangyd but all men wot not that. and that is ill done but for getynge of the
offringes they say that it is the cross of our lord jesus criste. And ye shall
understand that the cross of our lord was made of four manner of trees as it
is contained in this verse. In cruce sit palma cedrus ^pr^ssus oliua. For the
piece that went right up from the (...) unto the head was of cypres and the piece
that went ou^rthwa^t to the which the hands were nailed was of palm: and the
stock that stood within the earth to the which they had made a morteys was
of cedre ^ and the table above his head that Was a foot and a half long on
the which the title was wreten in Ebrewe / in grew and in laten that was of
olyue. And the jews made the cross of these four manner of trees for they
trowed that our lord jesus crist should have hanged upon the cross as long as
the cross might last. and therefore made they the foot of cedre. for cedre may
not in earth ne in water rotte* and they would it should have last long and
for they trowed that the body of crist should have stonken* that year is made
of cypre for it is well smellyng: so that the smell of his body should not
grieve to men that come forby. and that overthwart was mad^ of palm ^ for in
the old testament it was ordained that when any had the vyctory he was crowned
with palm and for they trowed yt they had the victory of Jesus crist therefore
they made the piece yt Went overthwart of palm and the table of the title they
made of Olyue. for olyue betokenethe pees. as the story of Noe witnesses. when
the dove brought the branch of olyue that betokenyd pees made between god and
man Also the Jews trowed to have had pees when crist was dedde. for they said
that he made discord and strife among them. And ye shall understand that
our lord Was nailed to the cross lyinge. and therefore he suffered the more
pain. Also in Greece and the christian men yt dwell over the sea say that the
tree of the cross that we call Cypress was of that tree that adam ete the
appyll and so find they Wretyn. and they say as their scripture seyth that
adam was sick / and said to his son Seth that he should go to paradyse and
pray the angel that kepethe paradyse that he would send him of the oil of
the tree of mercy for to anoint with his members that he might have heel. And
Seth went but the angel would not late him come in at the door. but said
unto him that he might not have of the oil of mercy. but he took to him four
branches of the same tree that his fader^etee the apple / and bad him as soon as his fader was deed that he should put these graynes under his tongue / and
grave him ^ and he did so. and of these four branches sprange a tree as the
angel said that should bear a fruit thoroughe which fruit adam should be
saved.

And when Seth came again he fond his fader nere deed and he did with the
graynes as the angel badde him. of the which came four trees. of which a
cross was made that bare good fruit. That is to say our saueoure Jesus christ.
Thoroughe whom adam and all that came of him were saved and delivered from
death Withouten end / but if it be their own defaute. This holy cross the
jews hid under the earth under the roche of mount caluary. and it lay there
two hundred year and more unto the time that saint Elyne fond it: the which
saint Elyne was the mother of Constance the emperor of rome. and she was
daughter of king All that was king of england that than Was called the
great Bretaygne whom the emperor took to wife for her great fayrenesse when
he was in that country. And ye shall understand that the cross of our lord
was in length / viii. cubits. and that overthwart had in length.iii. cubytes
and a half. A party of the crown of our lord ihu^ wherwithe he was crowned
and of the nails and the spear head and many other relyques ar in france in
the chapel of the king of france and the crown lyethe in a vessel of
crystell well dight and richely. for a king of france bought theyse relyques
sometime of the Jews. to whom the emperor laid them to wedde for a great
some of silver. And all if it be so that men say that this crown be of
thorns. ye shall understand that it was and is of Ionkes of the sea that was
white that pryckethe as sharp as any thorns. for I have seen and behold many
times that of Paris and that of Constantynople. for they were both of one made
of Ionkes of the se but men have departed them in two pieces. the which one
party is at paris and the other party is at Constantynople. And I have one
point thereof that semethe a white thorn and that was given to me for great
frendshype. for there is many of them broken and fallen in the vessel to
show the crown to great men that com thedyr. And ye shall understand that
our lord in that night yt he was taken he was led into a gardeyne / and there
he was examyned sharply. and there the Jews scorned him and made him a crown
of branches of albespyne yt grew in the same gardeyne: and set it on his
head so fast that blood ran down by many places of his vysage: and his neck
and his shulders. and therefore has the albespyne many virtues / for he that
bears a branch of it upon him / no thunder / ne no manner tempeste may dear
him ne none house that it is in may none evil ghost come in no place there it
is. And in that same garden saint Peter denied our lord thryes.

Afterward was our lord led before the bysshope and the mynysters of the
Law in another gardeyne of anne there he was examyned also. and scorned and
after again with a white thorn that men call barbarens that grew in that
gardeyne and that has as many virtues. And afterward he Was led into a
gardeyne of Cayphas and there he was crowned of one Englent and afterward he
was led into a chaumber of Pyfates / and there he was examyned and crowned.
and the Jews set him in a chair and cladde him in a mantill and than made
they a crown of Ionkes of the sea / And they knelyd unto him saying. Aue rex
iudeorum. That is to say in English. Heyle king of Jews. And the crown of
the wyich one half is at paris / and the other at Constantynople the which
crist had upon his head when he Was done on cross and therefore men shall
Worshype that most and hold it more worthy than any of the other. And that
spear shafte has the emperor of almaygne. But the head is at paris and many
times says the emperor of Constantynople that he has the spear head. And I
have often seen it but it is gretter than that of paris. Also at constantynople
lies saint anne our ladis mother whom saint Elyne made bring from Jerusalem
And there lyethe also the body of saint John crysostom that was bishop of
constantynople. And there lies also saint luke Eua^gelyst for his bones were
brought fro Bethany. where he was graven and many other relyques are there. And
there is of the vessellis of stone as it were marble the which men call Id^yons
that evermore drop water. and fill them sylfe each year. And ye shall wete
that constantynople is a right fair cite and a good and a well walled and* it
is three cornered and there is an arm of the sea that men call hellespount and
so^me call it the bouche of constantynople. and so^me call it the brache of
saint george. and this water enclosethe two pertyes of the cite and vpwaide to
the sea upon the water Was wont to be the great cite of troyse in a full
fair plain but that cite was destroyed with them of greece And there ben many
Isles that men call Calastre calcas Certege Tesbytta Minona Fayton / Molo
Carpate and sempne. and in this isle is the mount Athos that passes the clouds
and there is many speches and many countries that are obeysaunt to the
emperor that is to say. Turcople / Pyncy Narde Comange and many other Trachy
and macydone of which Alysander was king. In this country was arystotyll
borne in a Cite that men call sirages. a little fro the cite of Trachy and at
sirage lyethe arystotyll and there is an altar upon his tomb and there make
they a great fest every year as he Were a saint and open his auter they hold
their great counseylis and assembles and they trow that thorough inspyracion
of god and him they shall have the better counsel. In this country ar right
high hills toward the end of Macidone is a great hill that men call
Olymphus that departs Macidone and Trachy / and it is high up to the clouds
and the other hill that men call Athos is so high that the shadow of him
rechethe unto Olymphus that is nere lxxvii mile between. And above that hill is
the air so clear that men may feel no wind there And therefore may no be
live there so is the air dry. And men say in these countres that Phylosofers
sometime went up on those hyllys / and held to their noses a spounge moist
with Water for to have air for the air Was so dry. And above in the powder
of the hill they Wrote letters With their fyngers. and at the years end they
came again and fond those letters the which they had wreten the year before
without any defaute. And therefore it seems well that those hills pass the
clouds to the pure air. And at Constantynople the Emperors paleys is right
fair and Well dighte / and therein is a fair paleys for iustynge / and it is
on stages and each man may Well se and none grieve other. and under these stages
ar stables vouted for themperours horse / and all the pillars ar of marble. and
within the church of saint Sophy / an emperor would have laid the body of
his fader When he was dedde / and as they made the grave they fond a body in
the earth / and upon that body lay a great plate of fine gold / and thereupon
was wreten in Ebrewe / in Grew and laten letters that said thus. Jesus
cristus nascetur de virgin maria. et ego credo in eum. That is to say Jesus
crist shall be borne of the virgyn mary and I trow in him. And the date was it
was laid in earth ii. M. year before our lord was born. And yet is that
plate in the tresory of the church. and men say that it was Ermogynes the wise
man. And all if it be so that men of Greece be christian / yet they vary from our
feythe. for they say that the holy ghost comes not out of the son but all only
of the fader. and they are not obeysaunt to the church of rome ne to the pope
/ and they say that their patriarchs have as much power over the se as the
pope has on this side the sea. And therefore pope John the xxii sent letters
to them how christian feithe should be all one and that they should be obeysaunt
to a pope that is crisus vyker in earth to whom god gave plain power for to
bind and to assoyle and therefore they should be obedyent to him. and they sent
him diverse answers and among other they said thus Potentiam tuam su^mam circa
subiectostuos ^irmiter credimus. Superbiam tuam su^mam collerare no^ possumus.
Auaricia^ tua^ su^ma^ saciare non intendimus. Dn^^ tecum sit. quia dn^s
nobiscu^ est. vale This is to sey. we trow well thy power is great upon thy
subgettis. we may not suffer thy pride. we are not in purpos to staunche thy
great couetyse. lord be with the for lord is with us. Fare well. and other
answer might we not have of them. And also they make their sacrament of the
auter of therf bread / for our lord made it of therf bread when he made his
mau^de and on sherthursday make they their bredde in tokenynge of the maunde /
were wont to hold that place / but in the tomb of saint Ion is no thing but
Manna. for his body was translatyd into paradyse. and Turks hold now that
cite and that church and all assy the less / and therefore is assy the less
called turkey and ye shall understand that saint John did make his grave there
in his life / and laid him self therein all quycke / and therefore some sayn
that he dyed not / but he restethe there to the day of dome / and therefore
sothely there is a great marueyle for men may se there apertly the earth of
the tomb many times stere and move as there were a quycke thing under. And
from Ephesym men go thorough many yles in the se* unto the cite of Pateran
where saint Nycholas was borne and so to marca where he was chosen to the
bishop / there growethe right good wynes and strong / that men ^alle wine
of marca. and fro thens se men Isles of Greece the which the emperor gave
sometime to Ionays. And than pass men thorough the Isles of Cophos and lango of
the which Isles Ipocras was lord / and some say that in that I Will of lango is
Ipocras daughter / in manner of a dragon that is a hundred foot long as men
sayn for I have not seen it. and they of the Isles call her the lady of the
country / and shelyeth in an old castle and shewethe her thryes in the year.
And she does no man no harm / and she is thus changed fro a damsel to a
dragon thorugh a goddess that men call Deane / and men say that she shall dwell
so unto the time that a knight come that is so hardy that dare go to her and
kiss her mouth and than shall she turn again to her own kind and be a woman
and after that she shall not live long.

And it is not long sythen a knight of Roodes that was hardy and doughty said
that he would kiss her and when the dragon began to lift up his head again
him and he saw it was so hydious he fled awey* and the dragon in his anger
bare the knight on a roche and of that roche she kest him into the sea and so
was he lost. Also a young man that wist not of that dragon* went out of a
ship and went thoroughe the isle till that he came to a castle / and came into
the cave and went so long till he fond a chamber / and than he saw a damsel
that kempt her head and looked in myrroure and she had much tresoure about her
and h^ trowed she had been a common woman that dwelled there to keep men. and he
obeyde unto the damsel. and the damsel saw the shadow of him in the
myrroure / and she turned toward him / and asked him what he would and he
said he would be paramoure or lemman. And she asked him if he were a knight.
and he said nay. And she said th^^ might he not be her lemman. But she badde
him go again to his felawes and make him knight and come again on the morrow.
and should come out of the cave: and badde him come and kiss her than on the
mouth / and she bad him have no dread for she should do him no harm if all
him thought she were hydious to se. she said it was done by enchauntement. for
she said that she was such as he saw her than and she said that if he kyst
her he should have all that treso^re and be her lord. And lord of those yles.
and he departed fro her and went to his felawes to ship and made him knight /
and came again upon the morrow for to kiss the damsel. And when he saw her
come out of the cave in form of a dragon he had so great dread that he
fled too the ship / and she followed him / and when she saw that he turned
not again she begane to cry as a thing that had much sorrow ^ and she
turned again and as sone the knight dyed. and sythen hitherto ward might no
knight se her but he dyed as sone. But when a knight comes yt is so hardy to
kiss her / he shall not die but he shall turn that damsel into her right
shappe / He shall be lord of the country before said. And fro thens men come
to the isle of rodes. the which the hospitelers hold and govern / and that
took they sometime fro the Emperor. and it Was wont to be called Colles /
and so colles the turks call it yet. And saint Paul in his Epystelis writes
to them of the isle of Colocenses. This isle is nere vin. hundred mile long
from Constantynople. and from this isle of rodes men go into Cypre where ar many
vynes that first ar read. and after a year they wexe all white / and those
vynes that are most white are most clear and best smelling and as men pas
by this wey by a place where was wont to be a great cite that men call
Sathalay / and all the country was lost thorough folly of a young man for he
had a fair damsel that he loved well / and she dyed suddenly and was done
in a grave of marbil / and for the great love yt he had to her. he went on a
night to her Tomb and opened it / and went and lay by her / and when he had
done / he went his wey. and when it came to the end of ix months a voice came
unto him and said in this manner of wise. Goo unto the tomb of that same woman
that thou haste line by / and opyn it and behold well yt that thou haste gotten
of her: and if ^hou let for to goo thou shall have a great harm ^ and he
went and opened the tomb and there flewe out a head right hydous to se the
which as swythe flewe above the cite and the country and sone the cite sanke
down and there is many perilous passages fro Rodes to Cypre is nere v.C. mile
and more / but men may go to Cypre and come not at Rodes Cypre is a good I Will
and great and there are many good cytees and there is an archebysshop at
Nycosy and iiii other bishops in that land. And at famagost is one of the
best haven on the sea that is in the world and that are christian men and
sarasyns and men of all nations. and in cypre is the hill of the holy cross /
and there is an abbey of monks / and there is the cross of the good thief
Dysmas as I have said before. And so^me wene that there is the half of the
cross of our lord but it is not so and they do wrong yt make men to believe
so. In Cypre lyethe saint Gononon of whom men of that country make great
solemnyte and in the castle of Amou^s lies the body of saint hyllaryon / and
men keep it full worshypfully. and beside famagost was saint Bernarde borne
men hunt with the pampeons that are like to leopardes and they take wild
bestis right we^ and they are somewhat more than lions / and they take more
sharply wild bes^ys than hounds. In cypre is a manner ye lords and other men
ete upon the earth* For they make dyches in the earth all about the hall deep
to the knee / and they do pain them and when they woll ete they go there in
and sytte there this their manner for to be more fresshe for that land is more
hot than it is here. And at great festis / and for strange men they set
forms and bordes as men do in this country / but them were leuet sit in the
earth. Fro Cypre men go by land to Jerusalem / and by the sea / and in a day
and in a night he that has good wind may come to the haven of Tire that now
is called Sure / and also it is at the enter of Surry. there was sometime a
fair cite of christian men. but sarasyns have destroyed it in great party / and
they keep ^ haven right (...) for dread that they have of crys^en men Men might
go right to that haven and come not in Cy / pre but they go gladly to cypre to
rest them on the land. or ellis to bye things that they have need of ^o
their living. Upon the sea side men may find many rubies and there is the
well of the which holy writ spekethe. Fons ortorum et puteus aquarum
viuenciu^. That is to say The well of gardeyns and dyches of waters living in
the cite of Tire said the woman to our lord Beatus venture qui te portauit et
vbera que suxisu That is to say Blessed be the body that bare the / and the
pap^pes that thou souke and there our lord forgave too the woman of Canane
her sins and before was wont to be the stone on the which our lord sat
on / and preched. And on that stone was found the church of saint Saueoure.
Upon that see is the cite of Saphen or Sarept or Sodom. there was wont to
dwell Elyas the prophet ^ and there was raised Jonas the prophet the wydowes
son. And five mile fro Saphen is the Cite of Sydon of the which Cite dydo that
was Eneas wife after the destructyon of Troy / and that foundyd the cite of
Car^age ^n Affryke and now is it called Didonsart Dydon is Beruth / and fro
beruth to Sardena is iii. iou^^e^ and from Sardena is five mile to Damas

WHo so Woll go longer upon the sea and come nere to Jerusalem he shall go fro
Cypre by see to port Iaffe. For that is the next haven to Jerusalem. for fro
that haven is not but a days journey and an half to Jerusalem. And that haven
is called Iaffe and the town affe. After one of Noe sons that men called
Iapheth that found it. And now is it called Iops and ye shall understand
that is the eldeste town of the World for that was made before Noes flode /
and there be bones of a geaunt ^yde that been.xl. foot long. And who so
arryuethe at the first haven of Ty^e or of Surrey before said may go by land
if he woll to Jerusalem. and he gothe to the cite of Acon in a day that was
called Tholomayda. and it was a cite of christian men sometime. but it is now all
destroyed. and it is on the se And from Venys it is to Acon by se two thousand
and four score miles of lambardy and from calabre / or fro Cycyle it is to
Acon. M.ccc. miles of lumbardy: and the I Will of Greece is right in the mydwey.
and beside this cite of Acon to ward the sea at vi. score forlonges on the
right side toward the North. there is the hill Carme where Elyas the prophet
dwelled. and there Was the order of carmes first found. This hill is not right
great ne high. And at the foot of this hill Was sometime a good cite of
christian men that was called Cayphas. For Cayphas foundyd it but it is now all
wastyd.

And at the lift side of the hill is a town that men call Saffre. and that is
set upon another hill. There was saint James and saint Ion borne. and in the
worship of them is there a fayrechurche. And for Tholomayda that men call now
Acon. to a great hill that men call Ekale de Tyrreyes is a hundred forlonges.
and beside the cite of acon renneth a little river that men call Belyon / and
there nere is the fosse of Mymon all round yt is an hundred cubytes or
shaftmontis long / and it is all full of gravel shynynge of such men make
good verres and clear.. And men come from far in a ship / and by land with
carts to take of that gravel. and if there be never so much taken thereof on
a day / on the morrow it is as full again as ever it was. and that is great
merueyle. and there is evermore wind in that fosse that sty / rethe alwey the
gravel and makethe it trouble.

And if a man put or do therein any metal as soon as it is in as sone it waxethe
glass. and the glass that is made of this gravel if it be done again into
the gravel / it tornethe again to gravel as it was before. and some say that
it is a swolowe of the sea gravel.

Also from acon before said go men three iournes too the cite of Phylistyen
that now is called gaza that is to ^ay cite rich / and it is right fair and
full of folk and i^ is a little upon the sea

And from that cite brought Samson the strong gates upon an high land when he
was taken in that cite and there he slew the king in his paleys and many a
thowsande more with him. For he made a house to fall on them. and fro thens
shall men go to the cite of Cesare and so to the castle of pylleryns and so to
Askalon / and than to Iapheth. and so unto Jerusalem.

ANd who so woll go thorough the land of Babylone where the Soudan dwells to
have leave to go more sykerly to go thoroughe the churches and countrees / and
for to go to mount Synay before he came to Jerusalem / and than turn again by
Jerusalem he shall go fro Gasa to the castle Dayr. And after a man comes out
of Surry and goth in wilderness where the wey is full sondy. and that wilderness
lasts viii. iourneys where men find all that them nedethe of vytayles. and
men call that wyldernes Archellek / and when a man comes out of this deserte
he entrethe into Egypt / and they call Egypt Canopat / and in a another langage
men call it Mersyne. and the first good town that men find is called Beleth
/ and it is at the end of the kingdom of Alape. And fro thens men come to
Babylony and to kayre and in Babylony is a fair church of our lady. where
she dwelled vii. year when she was in the land of Jews for dreede of king
herod. And there lyethe the body of saint Barbara vngyn. and there dwelled
Joseph when he was selde of his brether. and there made Nabugodonozor put their
children in fire. For they were of right truth the which children men called
Anania Azaria Mysael as the psalm of benedicite says. But Nabugodonozor
called them thus. Sydrac / Mysael Abdenago. that is to sey God glorious god
victorious / god over all kyngedoms. and that was for miracle that he made
godde son / as he said goo with those children thorough the fie / re. There
dwells the Soudon / for there is a fair see in a castle strong / and well
set upon a Roche. In ye Castle is dwelling alwey to keep the Castle / and
to serve the soudan more than viii thousand persons of folk that take all
their necessaries of the court of the sowdan. I should well know for I dwelled
with him soudeour in his wars a great while again the Bedoyns and he would
have weddyd me to a great pryncys daughter right rychely and I would have
forsaken my truth. And ye shall understand that the Soudon is lord of v.
kyngdoms the which he has conquered / and gotten to him by strength. And this
arre they of Canopate that is Egypt the kingdom of Jerusalem whereof David and
Salon were kings: the kingdom of Surrey. of the which the cite of Damas was
the chef kingdom of anaple in the land of Dameth / and the kingdom of arab was
to one of the three kings that made offering to our lord when he was borne.
and many other lands he holdethe in his hand / and also he holdethe Calaphes
that is a great thing to the Soudan / that is to say among them Roys I Will
and this vale is full cold. and than men goo up on the mount of saint
Katheryn / and that is much higher than the mount Moses. And there as saint
katheryn was graven is no church ne chapel ne other dwelling place but there
is an hill of stones gedryd togeder about the place there she was graven of
aungellis. the^ was wont to be a chapel. but it is all casten down. and yet
lie a great part of the stones there.

And all it be so that the Collet of saint katheryn say y^ it is all one place
where our lord gave the law to Moses. And there saint katheryn was graven.
ye shall understand that it is all in a country or else in a stedde that
bears all a name. For they are called both mount Synay. but it is a great wey
between them / and a great vale.

Now sythen a man has vysited this holy place of saint katheryn. and he woll
turn to Jerusalem ^ he shall first take leave at the monks and reco^mau^de him
specially to their prayers. and those same monks give with good will to
pylgryms vetayles to pas with thorough wyldernes to Surry and that lastethe
well xiii: iournes. And in that wilderness dwell many arabyns that men call
Bedoynes and ascopdes. these ar folk that are full of all manner of ill
condicyons and they have no houses but tentys which they make of beestys
skynnes as of camellys and other bestis / the which they ete and thervnder lie
they. and they dwell in places where they may find water as on the red see.
For in that wilderness is great defaute of water and it falls often where a
man fyndeth water one time he fyndeth it not another time / and therefore make
they no howses in those countrees. These men that I speak of they till not the
land for they ete no bread. but if it be any that dwell nere a good town /
and they roast all their fysshes and flesh upon hot stones again the son.
and they are strong men and well fighting and they do no thing but chase
wild bestis for their sustenaunce / and they set not by their lives. and
therefore they dread not the Soudan nor none other prince of all the world

And they have often werre with the Soudan. and that same time that I was
dwelling with him they bare not but a sheelde / and spear for to defend them
with. And they hold none other armours. but they wind their hedes and their
necks in a great lynen clothe / and they are men of full ill kind. and when
men are passed this wilderness toward Jerusalem they come to Bersabe. that was
sometime a fair and a liking town of christian men and yet is there so^me of
their churches and in yt town dwelled sometime abraham the Patryarke. This
town of be^^abe foundyd vrrey wife of whom Dauyd engendered Salon the wife that
was king of Jerusalem and of xii. kinds of Israel and he reigned xl* year.
and from thens go men to the vale of Ebron that is frothens nere xii. mile. And
so^me call it the vale of Ma^bre: and also it is called the vale of Teres / for
as much as adam great in that vale a hundred year the detthe of his son abel
that caym slough And Ebron that was sometime the pryncipall cite of Phylistiens
/ and there dwelled Geauntes and there it was so fre that men took all fleers
of all other places that had done ill In Ebron Iosue Calofe and their
felaweshyp came first to aspye how they might win the land of promyssyon.
In Ebron dauyd reigned first vii year and half and in Jerusalem he reigned
xxxiii year and half. And there are the graves of Patryarkes adam / abraham /
Jacob and their wives / Eve / Sara / Rebecca / and they are in the hyngynge of
the hylle / and under them is a right fair church kyrnelde after the facyon
and manner as it were a castle. The which church the sarasyns keep right
well and they have that place in great worship. For the holy patryarkes that
lyethe there / and they suffer no christian men ne Jews come in there. but they
have special grace of the ^oudan. for they hold christian men and Jews but as
hounds that should come in no holy place. And they call the place spelunke /
or double cave / or double grave for one lyethe on another. and the sarasyns
call it on their langage. Caryatharba that is to say the place of patryarkes.
and Jews call it arboth. And in that same place was abraham's house ^ and that
was the same the which sat in his door and saw three persons and worshypped
one. as holy writ Wetnesseth saying. Tres vidit et vnum adoraunt. That is to
say he saw iii. and worshypped one and him took abraham to his house. And
right nere to the place is a cave in a Roche where adam and eve dwelled when
they Were driven out of paradyse and there gate they their children. And in
that same place was adam made as some men say / for men called sometime that
place the field of Damasse. For it was in the lordshyp of Damasse and fro thens
he was translatyd into paradyse as they say. And afterward he was driven out
of paradyse and put there a geyne / for the same day that he Was put into
pararise the same day he was driven out. for as sone he sinned.

There begins the vale of Ebron yt lasts nere to Jerusalem ^ and the
au^gel bad Adam yt he should dwell with his wife. and there they engendered Seth
of the which kyn Jesus christ was borne.

And in that Vale is a feelde where men draw out of the earth a thing the
which thing men in yt country call chambyll and they ete that thing in
stedde of spyce and they bear it to sell and men may not make it so deep ne so
wide but yt it is at the years end full again up to the sides thorough the
grace of god. And two mile from Ebron is the grave of loath that was abraham's
brother. and a litell from ebron is the mount Marbre of the which the vale
took his name. and there is a tree of oak that sarasyns call Dyrpe that is of
Abrams time / that men call dry tree. and they say that it has been from the
beginning of the world and was sometime green / and bare leaves unto that time
that our lord dyed and so did all the trees in the world / or ellis they
failed in their hertes / or else they faded / and yet is many of thoose in the
world. And so^me prophesies say that a lord prince of the west side of the
world shall win the land of permyssion that is the holy land with the
help of christian men. and he shall do sing a mess under the dry tree. and
than the tree shall wax grene and bear fruit and leaves and thorough that
miracle many sarasyns and jews shall be turned to christian feyth / and therefore
they do great worship thereto and keep it right besyly. And all if it be dry
it bears a great virtue. for certeynly he that berethe a little thereof on him
it heleth of the falling evil and many other virtues. and therefore it is
holden right precious. Fro Ebron men go to bethleem on half a day for it is
but five mile and it is a pylous wey and thorugh wodes full lykand. But
bethleem is a little cite long / and narowe and well wallyd and enclosyd with
a dyke and it was wont to be called Effrata. as holy wryttte says. Ecce
audiuimus eum in effrata. That is to say. Lo we herd him in effrata toward
the end of the cite toward the est is a right fair church. and a gracious /
and it has many toures and pynnacles and kyrnellys full straungely made and
within that church is.xliiii. of marble pylers great and fair. and between
this chuche and the cite is the field Floudons / and it is called the feld
florysshed. For as much as a fair maiden that was blamed with wrong that she
had done fornycacion. for the which cause she was demyd to the death and to be
buried in that place to the which she was led / And as the Wode began to
brenne about her she made her prayer to our lord as she was not gyltye of
that thing. that he would help her that it might be known to all men. And
when she had thus said she entered the fire and as soon was the fire out. and
thoose branches that were brennynge bycam red roses and those branches that
were not kyndled becam white rosers full of white roses and thoose were the
first roses and rosers that any man saw and thus was the maiden saved
thoroughe the grace of god. And therefore is the field called the feld of god
florysshed for it was full of rooses. Also beside the queere of that church at
the right side as men come downward.xii. grees is the place. where our lord
was borne that is now full well dight of marble and full rychely depeyntyd of
gold silver and asure / and other colors. and a little thens by three pacys is
the Crybbe of the ox and the ass. And beside that is the place where the
sterre fell that led the three kings Jasper Melchior and Balthazar. But men
of greece call the kings thus. Galgalath Saraphy Galgalagh. Theyse iii. kings
offered to our lord. Encense gold and myrre and they came togeder thorough
miracle of god for they met togeder i^ a cite that men call Chasak. that is
lui. iournes fro Betheleem / and there they were at betheleem the fourth day
after they had seen the sterre. And under the cloister of this church xviii
grees at the right side of the Charnel of the Innocentis where their bones lie
/ and before that place where crist was born is the tomb of saint Ierom that
Was a pressed and a cardynall that translatyd the bible and the sauter fro Ebron
to latin. and beside yt church is a church of saint Nycholas where our lady
restyd her when she was delivered of child. And for as much as she had so
much milk in her pappes that greuyd her she mylked it out upon the red
stones or marble. so that yet may the traces be seen white upon the stoones.
and ye shall understand that all that dwell in betheleem a^ christian men and
there are fair wynes all about the cite and great plente of wine for their
books that macho mete betoke them. the which they call Alkaron. And so^me
call it alkaron. and so^me call it Massap. and some call it harm forbedeth
them to drink wynes: for i^ that book machomete cursethe all those that
drink of yt wine and all that sell it for so^me men said ones that he slow a
good heremyte which he loved much in his dronkenes And therefore he cursed the
wine / and them that drink Wine. but his malison is turned to him self as
holy writ says.

Et in verticem ipsius iniquitas eius descendet. That is to say in english:
His wyckednes shall descend in his own head. And also the Sarasyns bryngethe
forth no gryse ne they ete no swynes flesh / for they say it is brocher too
man and that it was forboden in the old law. Also in the land of Palestyne /
ne in the land of egypt they ete but little veale and beef / but it be so
old that it may no more travail ne work not for it^s forbode but for they keep
them for (...) of their land. Of this cite of bethleem was dauyd the king
borne and he had syxty wives and three hundred lemmas: Fro bethleem. to
Jerusalem is two mile / and in the wey to Jerusalem. half a mile from bethleem
is a church where the angel said to the shepeherde of the berynge of
christ. and in that way is the tomb of ^^chell that was Joseph's mother the
patriarch and she dyed as soon as she had borne bemamyn and there she was
graven / and Io^ob her husbonde set xii. great stones upon her in tokenynge
that she had borne xii: children. (...) this wey to Jerusalem ar many
churches christian by the which men goo to Jerusalem.

FOr to speak of jerusalem ye shall understand that it stands fair among
hills and there is nouther river ne well but water comethe by condyte fro
Ebron. and ye shall wete that men called it first Iebus and sythen Was it
called Salomee unto the time of king dauyd: and he set these two names Samen
and called it Iebusalem. and than came Salon / and called it Jerusalem and so
is it called yet. And about Jerusalem is the kingdom of Surrey / and thereby is
the land of Palestyne and Ascalon but Jerusalem is in the land of Inde and it
is called Indee.

worlds has wrought heel in the myddys of the earth. And also upon the
Roche where the cross was fyxed is written within the roche. Gros guist basis
thou pestes thoy thesmoysy That is to say in laten. Quod vides est fundamentum
tocius mundi et huius fidei. and it is too say. that thou see is ground of
all the world and of this ^eythe. And ye shall understand that our lord when
he dyed was xxxii. year old. and three months / and the prophesy of david
says that he should have.xl. year when he says thus. Quadraginta annis
proximus fui generacioni huic That is to say. Forty year Was I neighbor to
this kind. and thus should it seem that prophesy we^ not sothe / but it is.
For in old time men called years of x. months: of the which march was the
first. and december the last. But Gayus Caesar that was emperor of rome did
set to these two months January and February and ordained the year of xii.
months. yt is to say ccc. days without lepe year. the propyr course of the
son. And they fpre after the accomptynge of ten months to the year he dyed
in forty year: and after our years of xii. months is xxxii. year and three
months Also within mount caluary at the right side is an auter where the
Pyller lyethe that our lord was bound too when he was scourged / and there
beside at four foot at four stones that alwey drop water. and so^me say
that those stones weep for our lords death. and nere this auter in a place
xlii degrees deep was found the very cross by assent of saint Elyn under a roche
where Jews had hid it and it was assayed for they fond three crosses. one of
our lord and two of the two thieves

And saint Elyne assayed them on a deed body that to / se as soon as the very
cross was laid on. And thereby in the vale is the place where the four nails
of our lord was hid* for he had two nails in his hands and two in his
fete. And of one of these nails the emperor of Constantynople did make a
brydell for his horse to bear him in battle. for thorough virtue thereof he
ouercam his ennemys. And when all lands of assy turkey / dama^yne more and the
less surrey and Jerusalem araby / persy and Messopotany the kingdom of alap^^
egypt the high and the low ^ and other kyngdoms many unto w^lle low in
Ethyope and alsoo unto Inde the less^ that than was christian. and there was in
that time ma / ny good men. and holy heremytes of whom the books of the ^ader
lyfes speaks / and they are now in paynemes and (...) hands but when god Woll
right as these lands are lost thorough sin of christian men so shall they be
won again by christian men thorough help of god. And in the myddis of this
church is a compass in the why the Joseph of a^amathy laid the body of our lord
when he had taken him of the cross. And that compass men say it is in myddys
of the World. and that church of the sepulcre on the north side is the place
where our lord was done in prison in many places and there is a party of the
^heyne with the which he was bound. And there he apperyd first to mary
magdalen when he was risen and she trowed that he had been a gardyner / in
the church of the sepulcre was wonyd to be chanons of the order of saint kenet
and they had a pryoure but the patryarke was their sovereign. and withouten
the doors of the church at the right side as men goo up.xviii. degrees said
our lord to his mother. Mulier ecce f^ ius tuus. That is to say woman behold
thy son. Divide dicit discipulo. Ecce matter tua. That is to say. Than said he
to his discyple. Behold thy mother. And this word he said upon the cross /
and upon these degrees went our lord when he bare the cross upon his
shulder and under these degrees is achapell where prestis sing / but not after
our law. and alwey they make there sacrament of the auter of bred saying
Patern^. and other things / as with the which thing they say the words of
whom the sacrament is made. for they know not of addicyone y^ many popes have
made / but they sing in good devotion. and there nere is the place where our
lord restydde him when he was weary for berynge of the cross. And ye shall
understand that before the church of the sepul^re is the cite most wake ^
For the great plain that is between that cite and the church on the est side
without the wallys of the cite is the Vale of Iosaphat that comes to the
wallys. In that vale of Iosaphat without the cite is the church of ^aynt
stephyn where he was stoned to death. and thereby is the gate gyfted that may
natte be opened. Thoroughe that gate our lord entered on palm sunday upon an
ass and the gate opened ageyn him when he would go to the temple and yet are
the steppi^ of the ass seen in three places the which are full of hard
stones. Before the church of the sepulcre two hu^dryd pacys is a great
hospytall of saint John of the which hospytalers half their foundement / and
to go toward the est fro the hosp^tall is a right fair church y^ men call
Nostre Dame de vatynz and there was mary Cleofe / and mary magdaleyne and drew
their here when our lord was done to death. And fro the church of the
sepul^^^ Toward the est at xviii. pacys is temple d^^ that is a fair house
and it is all round and right high. and coueryd with leede. and it is well
panyd with white marble. but the sarasyns woll suffer no christian men ne Jews
come therein. for they say that so foul men should not come into that holy
place / but I came in there and in other places where I would. for I had letters
of the Soudan with his great S^ale and commonly other men have but of his
signet: and men bear his letter with his seal before them hanging on a spear
^ and men do great worship thereto and knele again / ^t as we do again goddis
body / for those men that it is sent to / befoore they take it. they enclyne
them first thereto. and sythen they ^ake it / and said it upon their hedys and
afterward they kiss it / and than read all enclynynge with great worship /
and than they profer them to do all that the brynger woll and in this temple
dn^i. were wont to be chanons regulers / and they had an abbotte to whom they
were obedyent / and in this temple was Charlemayne when the angel brought him
the p^puys of our lord when he was circumcised. And after king charles did
bear it too paris. And ye shall understand that is not the temple that salamon
made for that temple lasted but a thousand / an hundred and two year. For
Tytus Vaspasiane son that was emperor of rome that ^ayde syege about
Jerusalem for to discomf^te the Jews for they had do christ to death
without love of the emperor / and when he had take the cite he did bren the
temple and kept it down / and took all the Jews and did of them to death.xi.
C.M. and the other he did in prison / and sold of them thretty for a penny /
for they said that they bought jesus christ for xxx pens. And sythen gave Iu^yan
apostata leave to the Jews to make the temple of Jerusalem for he hated christian
men and yet he was christian. but he forsook his law and when the Jews had
made the temple came an earth quaue as god would that kest down all that they
had made. Sythen Adryan emperor that was of them of Troys made Jerusalem
again and the Temple in the same manner that Salamon made it and would that no
Jew should dwell there but all christian men for if all it were so that he was
not crystened ^e loved christian men more than any other men. save men of his
own sey^he. And this emperor did enclose and wall the church of the holy
sepulcre within the cite that before was fer with out the cite / and he would
have changed the name of Jerusalem and called it Helyam / but that name lasted
not long. And ye shall wete that the sarasyns do great worship to that temple
/ and they say that place is right holy / And when they go theder in / they go
barefote and knele many times down.

And when my fellows and I came theder in we did of our harueyse / and came
barefote into the temple and thought that we should do as much: or more than
they that were mystrowynge. and this Temple is three score and three cubytes of
wydnesse and as much of length and of heyght vi. and twenty and five cubytes /
and it is within all about of pyller^ of marble.

And in mids of the temple is a stage of xxiii. degrees of height. and good
pyllers all about / This place the Jews called it. Sancta sanctorum. That is
to say. Holy of holyes / and in that place comes none but only their prelate
that makes their sacryfice. and the folk standethe all about in diverse
stages after they are of dignyte and of worship / and there is four entres to
that temple and the doors are of cypres well dight / and within the est door
Our lord said here is Jerusalem. And on the North side within the door is a
staunke. but it rennethe not: of the which holy writ speaks and says thus.
Vidi aquam egredientem de templo. That is to say. I saw water coming out fro
the temple. And upon the other side is a roche that men called sometime Mo^^ach
but after was it called Belet or the hutche of god with the rylikes of Jews.
This arc or hutche ga^t Tytus loode with the relykes to great rome when he
had dyscomfyted all the Jews. In that same arc was the ten co^maundementis
and of arons wonde / and of Moses wonde with which he departed with the red
see when the folk of Israel passed thorough on foot dry / and with that wonde
he did many wonders and there was a vessel of gold full of Manna and
clothing and ornaments. and the tabernacle of Aron: and a table square of
gold With xii precious stones / and a bost of Jasper grene With four ^ygures
/ and viii. names of our lord within and vii candylstickes of gold and four
censers of gold / and an altar also of gold and four lions of gold Upon the
which they had Cherubyn of gold. twelve span long and a tabernacle of
gold / and also twelve trompettis of silver / and a table of silver and seven
barley loves. and all other relykes that were before the Natiuyte of Ihesu. Also
upon this Roche slepte Jacob when he saw aungellys goo up and down by a stey.
and said vere locusiste sanctus est / et ego ignorabam. That is to say
Forsothe this place is holy and I wist not. And Jacob held the angel still
that changed his name and called him Israel. and in that place saw David the
angel that share the folk With a sword and put it all bloody in the shethe.
And in this Roche was saint Symeon / when he resceyued our lord in to the
temple. and on this Roche he set him when the Jews would have stoned him / and
the roche ryued in two ^ in that ryft he hyd him. and a sterre came down and
gave him light. And on this roche sat our lady and levied her sauter. and
there forgave our lord the sins to the woman that was found and taaken in
aduoutrye. and there was our lord Jesus christ circumcysed / and there the
angel denounsed the Natiuite of saint John baptyst. and there offered first
Melchysedech bredde and wine and water to our lord in tokenynge of the
sacrament that was for to come. / And there fell david praynge to our lord /
and the angel that he would have mercy of him and of the folk / and our
lord anon herd his prayer and therefore would he make the temple in that place
/ But our lord Jesus christ forbadde him by an angel For he had done
treason / when he did sle Vry a go / de knight for to have his wife.

And therefore all that he had ordained for too make the Temple he betoke it
unto Salamon his son. And he made it and he prayed our lord that all those yt
pray / ed in that place devoutly and with good heart that he would here that
prayer and grant that they asked righwysly and our Lord grauntyd it. And
therefore Salamons son cal^yd it temple of counseyle and help of god without
the doors of that temple is an autere where / Jews were wont to offer downs
and tyrtilles and in that temple was zachary slain. and on the pynnacle the
Jews set saint Iame on the earth that first was bishop of Jerusalem. a
little fro this temple on the right side is a church coueryd with led that is
called the scole of sala / mon: And toward the southe is the temple Salon that
i^ full fair and a great place. and in this place dwell knights that are
called templers and that was the fou^ / dement of. and of their order. and in
that Temple Dm^ / dwell chanons. Fro this temple toward the est at xxvi pace
in a corner of the cite is the bathe of our lord and this bath was wont to
go to paradyse. and beside is our ladies bid. and nere there is the tembe of
saint Symeon and without the cloister of the temple toward the north is
right a fair church of saint An our lady mother. There was our lady
conceived. and before that church is a great tree that began to grow that
same night. And as men go down fro that church. xxii. grees lies Ioachym
our ladies fader in a tomb of stoone. and there nere was laid sometime saint
an / but saint Elyn did translate her into Constantynople.

In this church is a well in manner of a Cysterne that is called Proba^^ca
pisana. That had five entringes / And in that Cy^^erne was wont an angel
to descend and stere the water and what man that bathed him first therein after
the mouynge was made hole that was syke What sykenesse so ever he had And
there was the man in the palsy made hole. that was syke xxxviii. year And our
lord said unto him in this manner of wise.

Toll grabatum tuum et ambula. That is to say in english Take thy bed and
goo. And there beside was the house of pylate. and a litell thens was the house
of heraude the king that did slay the Innocentis. Thy^ Heraude was a full
wicked man and a fell. For he did first and formest sle his wise which he
loved full well And for the great love that he had to her when she was deed
he beheld her and went out of his wit and so was he long time. and
afterward he came again to him self. And sythen he did sle his own children
that he had gotten of that wife. and after he made sle the other of his wives.
and a son that he had gotten of that same wife and he did all the ill that he
might.

And when he saw that he should dye he sent for his suster and all the great
lords of that country. and When they were there he put all the lords ^n^o
toure and say / de to his suster He wyste well that the men of the country
should make no sorrow for him when he were deed. And therefore he made her for
to swear unto him that she should do smite of the hedes of his lords
euerychone after his death. and than should men of all the country make sorrow
for his death. and else they would not sorrow And thus he made his testament.
But his suster fulfyllyd it not. as that thing that parteyned unto the lordys
for as soon as he was deed she delivered the lord out of the toures and sent
euerychone home to their houses and told them what her brother would she
had done with them. And ye shall understand / that in that time was three
herodes of great name. This of whom I speak men called him Herod ascolonyte /
he that did smite of saint John's Baptyst head was Herod antipa. and herod
agryppa did sle saint James. Also ferthermore in the cite is the church of the
saueoure / and there is the arm of saint John Crysostom. and there is the more
party of saint stephens head. And on the other side toward the Southe as men
go to mount syon is a fair church of saint James where his head was smyten of
/ and there ^^ mount Syon and there is a fair church of god and of our Lady
where she was dwelling / and dyed and there was sometime an abbey of chanons
reguler^. and fro that place she was borne of the apostles unto the Dale of
Iosaphat. And there is the stone that the aungel bare to our lady fro mount
Synay. and it is of y^ color y^ the ro^he of saint katheryn is of ^ and there
beside is the gate where our lady when she was with child went to Betheleem.
Also at the enter of mount Syon is a chapel and in that chapel is that stone
great and large with which the sepulcre Was covered when christ was lay / de
therein. the which stone three Jews saw turned upward when they came to the
sepulcre and there they fon / de an angel that said to them ye christ was
risen fro death to life. And there is a little piece of the pyller / to the
which our lord was scourged. and theere was Anne house that was bishop of
the Jews in that time / and in that same place forsook saint Peter our lord
thrye^ before the kocke crewe. and there is a party of the table on the which
god made his maunde with his discyples / and yet is there the vessel with
water / and thereby is the place where saint stephen was graven and theere is
the auter where our lady herd the aungellis sing mess. and there apperid
christ first to his discyples after his resurrection when the gates were sperde
and said. Pax vobis. That is to say. Peace to you. And on that mou^te apperyd
christ to saint Thomas / and bad him assay his wound. and than trowed he first
and said. Dominus meus et deus meus. That is to say. My lord and my god / in
that same chapel behind the high altar Were all the appostlis on wytsonday.
when the holy ghost desce^dyd on them in likeness of fire / and there made
god Paske with his disciples. And there slepte saint John the Euangelyst on
our lords kne / and saw slepynge many preuy things of heaven. The mount syon
is within the cite and it i^ little higher than the other side of the cite and
that cite is stronger on that one side than on the other for at the foot of
mount synay is a fair castle and strong / on mount syon was dauyd king
Salon and other many graven / and there is the place where saint Peter wept
full tenderly when he had forsaken our lord and a stone cast from that is
another place where our lord was Iuged / for that time was there cayphas house
/ also between the temple Salamon and mount Syon is the place where er is it
raised the maiden fro death to life. Under mount syon toward the vale of
Iasaphat is a well that men call Natatoyr Sylo there was our lord wasshen
after he was baptized. and nere there is the tere / on the which Judas hangyd
him self for despair when he had sold christ and thereby the synagoke where
the bishop of Jews and sarasyns came. some to hold counseyle and there Judas
cast the xxx. pens before them and said peccaui / tradens sanguinem iustu^.
That is to say I have sinned deceyuynge rightwys blood. And on the other side
of mount Syon toward the southe a stone cast is the feld yt was bought with
those thretty pens for when christ was sold that men call Acheldemak that is to
say the field of blood in that field is many tombs of cris^en men. for there
be many pilgrims graven* and also in Jerusalem toward the west is a fair
church where the tree grew of the which the cross was made / and there nere
is a church and that a fair Where our lady met with ^lysa^ethe when they
were both with child and saint John sty^d in his moders womb and made
worship to our lord his maker. And under the altar of the church is a
place where saint John was borne / and thereby is the castle of Emany. And two
mile f^o Jerusalem is the mount joy that is a fair place and liking and there
lyethe Samuel the prophet in a fair tomb and it is called mount joy* for
there many pylgryms first see Jerusalem / and in the myddell of the vale of
Iosaphat is a little river that is called Torrens Cedron / and overthwart this
river say a tree of the which the cross was made that men yode over. Also in that
vale is a church of our lady and there is the sepulcre of our lady and our
lady was of age when she dyed lxxii. year. and there ne / re is the place where
our lord forgave saint Peter all his sins and mysdedis that he had done.

(...) fastyd forty days ^ and the ennemy of hell bare christ and said to
him thus. Dic vt lapides isti panes fiant. That is to say that these stones be
made loves. and ther^ is an ermytage where dwell a manner of christian men yt men
call Georgyns ^ for saint george converted them. And upon that hill dwelled
Abraham a great while. Also as men go to Ieryco. In the wey sat many sick
men cryinge Jesus fili david miserere nobis. That is too say. Ihesu david son
have mercy on us. Also two mile fro Ierico is flom Jordan. and ye shall wete
the dedde see departs the land of Indee / and of araby / and the water of
that see is full bitter / and this water castethe out a thing that men call
aspaltu^ as great pieces as an horse. and Jerusalem is ^c. forlonges from this
see / and so it is called the dedde See. for it renneth not. no man^ne be
that has life that is therein may live and that has been proved many times.
for they cast therein men. that are demyd to death / ne no man may dwell* ne
drink of that water / and men cast iron therein it comethe up again. And if a
man cast a fether therein it gothe too the ground / and that is against kind.
And there grows trees that bear fruit of fair color and seem ripe. but
when a man brekethe them or cut in them he fyndeth naught in them but
coals of ashes in tokenynge ye thoroughe vegeaunce of god. These cytees were
brent with fire of hell. and so^me men call that lake. the lake of the
alphitedde ^ and so^me call it the flome of the devil / and so^me the flome of
stynkande. for the water is stynkyng There sanke these five cytees thoroughe
wreche of god / That is to say / Sodom ^ Gomor ^ Aldema ^ Solo ^ me and ^egor.
For the sin of Sodom that reigned in them but Segor thorough the prayere of
Loath was sauyd a great while for it sat on a hill and yet appears much
thereof above the water / and men may see the walls in clear wedyr. And there
Loath dwelled a great while and was made dronken of his daughters and lay by
them. they trowed that god should have destroyed all the world as he did with
Noes flode. And therefore they lay by their fader. for men should be borne of
them into the world. And if he had not be dronken / he had not lain by them
And at the right side of this se dwelled loath is wife a stone of salt for that
she looked again when the cite sanke down. And ye shall understand that
Abraham had a son that he called Isaac / and he was circu^cysed when he was of
viii. days old. and therefore the Jews did circumcyse them at the age
of.viii. days and he had another son tha^ was called Ismael and he was of
xiiii year of age when he was circumcysed on a day. and therefore the sarasyns
did circumcyse them at xiiii. year old And into that deed see renneth the
Flom Jordan and makes end there. And this Flom Jordan is no great river but
there is much good fysshe them* and it comethe from mount Lybany. for two
wells that men call Ior and Daue. and of them it takethe the name. and upon
the one side of that river is mount Gelboe. and there is a fair pl^yne. And on
that other side men go by mo^^ Lybane to the Desert of Pharao / These hills
depa^^e the kingdom of Surry and the country of Phenys. On that hill grow
Cedres that berelonge apples Which ar as much as a mannys head

This flom Iordane departs Galyle: and the land of Idones and the land of
Botron ^ and it renneth into a plain that men call Meldane in Sermoys and in
that plain is the temple Job. In this flom Jordan our lord was baptized. and
there was the voice of the fader herd saying. Hic est silius meus dilectus in
quo mihi been complacu^ipsu^ audite. That is to say. here is my son that I love
in whom I am well paid here him and the holy ghost descendyd on him in
likeness of a down and so was there in his baptysynge all the Trynite. And
thorough the flom Jordan passed the children of Israel all dry and they set
stones in the mids of the Water in token of great myrecle* and also in that
flom Naaman of Surry bathed him that was a mesell and he was hole. and a little
thefro is the cite of hay. the Which Iosue assailed and took. Also in the flom
Jordan is the vale of Mambre. that is a fair vale and a plenteuous.

ANd ye shall understand that for to go fro the ded see afterward out of the
March of the land of promyssionis a strong castle that men call Carras ^ or
Sermoys. That is to say Reale mount in french. This castle did make a king
of france that men call / lyd Baudewyn that had conqueryd all that Land ^ and
put it into christian mennys hands to keep and under that castle is a fair
town that men call Sabbath. theraboute dwell many christian men under trybute.
And than go men to Nazareth of the which our lord had his name / And from
Jerusalem unto Na^arethe is three Iornes. Men go thoroughe the prouynce of
Galyle tho / rough Ramatha thorough Sophym and thoroughe the high hill of
Effraym where / Anna Samuel / Mother the prophet dwelled and there was the
prophet borne / and after his death he was graven at mount Joy as I have said
And after came men to Sybola where the Ark of god was kept under Hely the
prophet. There made the folk of Ebron their sacrafyce to our lord and there
spoke our lord first unto Samuel and there mynystred god the sacrament / and
there nere at the lift side is Gabaon and rama bemamin of the which holy write
spekethe. And than come men to Sychem / that some men called Sicar. This is in
prouynce of Samarytanes. And there was sometime a church but it was cast down
and it is a fair vale and plenteuous. and there is a good cite that men call
Neople. and from thens is a days journey ^o Jerusalem there is the well where
ou^re lord spoke to the woman Samaritane. Sychem is ten mile fro Jerusalem and
it is called. Neople that is to say the new town. and there nere is the
temple Joseph Jacob son that governed Egypt fro thens were his bones brought
and laid in that temple and theder came Jews often in pilgrimage with great
devotion and in that cite was Jacobs daughter rauysshed. For when h^^ brother
slew many men. And there nere is the Cite of Garryson where the samarytans
make that sacryfice. On this hill would Abraham have sacrifyed his son Isaac.
and there nere is the vale of Dotaym. and theere is the Cesterne where Joseph
was casten of his brethern before that they sold him. and it is two mile to
Sycar fro thens men come to Samary. that men call Sebast. and that is cheef
cite of that country. and of that cite were the xii. kyndnes of Israel. but it
is not so great as it was. There was saint John graven between two prophets
Helyseus and Abdon but he was heded in the castle of Makaryn beside the dedde
se. and he was trans / lated of his disciples and graven at Samary but there
did Julius apostata take his bones and bren them for he was that time emperor
^ but the finger with the which he showed our lord: saying. Ecce agnus d^i.
That is to said. behold the lamb of god. might not be burnt. and saint
Tecle the virgyn did saint John's hedde the baptyst be closed in a wall. but the
emperor Theosody did take it out. and he fond it lappyd in a clothe all
blody ^ and so he did bear it to Constantynoble and there is yet the one half
of the head ^ and the other is at Rome. in the church of saint Syluester.. and
the vessel in the which the head was laid when it was smytten of is at Geene
/ and men of geen do it great worshype. Some say that saint John's head is at
Ameas in pycardy / and so^me say it is saint John^ head the bishop. I Wot not
but god wot. From Sebast to Jerusalem is xii. mile. and between the hills of
countrees is a well that men call Fons Jacob that is to say Jacobs Well that
changed four times in the year his Color. for sometime it Was read and
sometime clear sometime thycke and men that dwell there are called Samaritans.
and they Were converted thorough the apostles / and their law varyeth from
christian law and sarasyns law also. and fro Jews. and paynymes that they
trow well in one god that all shall deem. and they trow the bible after the
letter and they lap their hedes en read lynnen clothe for difference of
other. for sarasyns lap their hedes in white clothe / and crys^en men that
dwell there in blewe cloth or blo. And Jews in yelowe And i^ this country
dwell many Jews paynge tribute as christian men done. and if they woll we^e the
letter of the Jews they are such / and the names of their letters as they call
them. Alpha. for a beth. for b. gimel. ^. he. d. van. ^. zay. f. ex. g. 10th.
i. karph k. lamp. l. men. m. sameth. o. ^y. p. phe. q. lad. r. ^oth. s. ^ir. t.
soun.v. than.x. lours. y. Now shall ye have the fygu^es* D li xh i^ SES lin h^
N / sc^hn^^^. And fro ths country that I have spoken of men go to the plain of
Galyle. and leave the hills at the one side and Galyle is of the prouynce of
the land of promyssion and in that prouynce is the land of Naym and Capharnaym
and Corosaym / and at* besayda was saint Petyr and saint Andrewe borne. of
Corosaym shall antecryst be borne and as some say he shall be born in babylony.
Therefore says the prophet. De babilonia colu^ba eyie^ que totu^ mundu^
deuorabit. That is to say. Of babylon shall a down come out that shall
devout all the World. And this antecryst shall be norysshed in Besayda and he
shall regne in Corosaym* and therefore says holy wryt thus. Ve tibi corosaym.
Ve tibi Besay / da. That is to say. woe be to the corosaym. Woo be to the
Bsayda. and the Chan of galyle also is there four mile from Nazareth. Of that
cite was the woman of chananee of whom the gospel speaks / and there our
lord did the first miracle at the wedding of Archetryclyne When he converted
water into wine. And fro thens men go unto Nazareth that was sometime a great
cite. but now is there but a little town / and it is not wallyd. and there
Was our lady borne: the name took our lord of this cite / but our lady was
gotten at Jerusalem. at Nazareth took Joseph our lady to wife. when she was of
xiiii. year of age^ and there the angel salued her sayng Aue maria gratia
plena dn^s tecum. That is to say ^eyle mary full of grace lord be with the.
and there was some time a great church. and now is there but a little closet
to resceyue the offerynges of pilgrims. and there is the well of gabryell
where our lord was wont to bathe him when he was little at Nazareth was our
lord norysshed. And Nazareth is to say. flower of gardeyne. and it may well be
called so. for there was norysshed the flower of life that Was our lord Jesus
christ. At half a mile from Nazareth is the blood of our lord. for the Jews
led him upon an high roche to cast him down and slay him / but Jesus christ
passed thorough them and lepe on a roche where his steps are yet seen. and
therefore say so^me when they dread them of thieves orellys of enemies. they
say thus. Jesus autem transiens per medium illorum ibat. And they say also
these verses of the saulter. three times. Irruat super eos formido and pauor in
magnitudine brach^ tui. Domine f^ant i^mobi^es quasi lapis donee ^transeat
populus tuus domine and populus iste quem redemisti.

And so when all this is said a man may goo without any lettynge. And also ye
shall understand and know that our blessed lady bare child when she was of
xv year of age. and shelyued with him xxxii. year. and three months. and after
his passion she lived xxii. year. And from Nazarethe to mount Thabor is three
mile. and there our lord transfured him before saint Pe / ter saint John and
saint Iame. and there they saw goostly our lord and moses and Hely the
prophetys. And therefore said saint Peter Bonum est hic esse saciamus tria
tabernacula etc. That is to say. It is good to be her. e make we three
tabernacles. and our lord jesus christ badde that they should say it to no man
unto the time y^ he was risen from death unto life. and upon the same hill
shall four aungellys sownetheyr trompettes. and reyse all men that are deed
unto life. and than shall co / me in body and soul unto the Judgment. but the
Judgment shall be in the vale of Iosaphat on pase day. at such time as our
lord rose from death to life. And also a mile from mount Thabor is the mount
Ermen. and there was the cite of Namy. before the gates of that cite our lord
raised the Wydowes son that hadd no more children. and from thens men go to a
cite that men call Tybo^^^ that sy^t^the on the sea. of Galyle. and all if it
be called the sea Galyle. it is no see ne arm of the Se^ for it is but a
staumble of fresshe Water. and it is more than a hundred forlonges long and
forty broad. and there in is many good ^ysshes. and on the same see but
changes the name after cytees that stand thereupon yode our lord dryefote
and there said he to petyr when he came on the water and was nere drownyd.
Modice fidei quare dubitasti. That is to say Thou of little trowthe. why
had thou dou^e. In this cite of Tyborne is the table that christ ete of
with his discyples after his resurrection / and they knew him in brekynge of
bread as ho / ly writ says. Et cognouerunt eum in fracto^ne pa^us. That is
to say they knew him by brekynge of bread. And ye shall understand that Flom
Iardon begynnethe under the hill of Lyban / and there begynnethe the land of
promyssion and it lasts unto Bersabe of length to go toward the North and
the southe. and in bread it holds ix. score mile. and of bread from Ierico
unto Iaffe it is forty mile: And ye shall understand that the land of
Promyssion is in the kingdom of Surrey. and it lastethe unto the wilderness of
Araby. And I do you to wete that among the Sarasyns in many places dwell
christian men under tribute and they are in diverse manners / and diverse manners of
monks / and they are all cr^stened and have diverse laws / But they all trow
Well in our lord god the fader and in the son / and in the holy g^ost. but
yet they fail in the articles of our feyth And they are called Iacobynes. For
saint James converted them to the feyth. and saint John baptized them And they
say that men shall only shryue them unto god and not unto man. for they say
that god badde not man shryue him unto another man. And therefore sithe Dain the
sauter in this manner of wise

Confitebor tibi domine in toto cord meo etc.

That is to say in english. Lord I shall shryue me unto the in all mine
heart. And in another place he says thus Delictum meum cognitum tibi feci.
That is for to say. My trespass I have made known unto the And in another
place. Deus meus es tu and confitebor tibi. That is to say thou art my god and
I shall be shryuen of the. and in another place. Quoniam cogitatio hominis
confitebitur tibi. That is to say. For thought of man shall be shryuen to the.
and they can well the bible. and the sauter. but they leg it not in laten.
but in their own langage. and says that David and other prophets say it. But
saint Austen and gregory say. Qui scestra sua cogitat et conuersus fuerit
veniam sibi credat. That is to say. Who so know his sin / and turned / he
may trow to have forgyuenesse. and saint gregory say the this Dominus poc^us
mentem quod verba considerat. That is to say. our lord takethe more keep to
thought than to word.. And Hyllary says. Longorum ^emporum crimina ^ctu
ocusi pe^ent si cord nata fuerit temptatro. That is to say. Sins that are
done of old time shall perysshe in twynkelynge of an iye if despysinge of them
be borne in a mannys heart. ^ thus say they. Men shall shryue them to god all
only by theyse auctorytees. And this was the shryft in the first time. But
saint Peter and the apostles and popes that came sythen have ordained / that
men shall shryue them to prestes: men as they are. and this is their skyll.
For they say that a man that has a sykenesse men may give him no good
medycyne. but they know the kind of the sykenesse. and so say they a man may
give no couenable penance. but if he know the and understand the sin. For
there is a manner of sin that is greuouser to a man than too a another. and And
therefore it is needful that a man know and understand the kind of sin.
And therefore is other men that men call Surryens. they held the law of Greece
/ and they have long beerdys* and there is other that men call Georgyens whom
saint George conuertedde. and they do more worship to halowes of heaven than
other do and they have their crowns shaven. The clerks have round crowns.
and lewd men have crowns square And they hold the law of Greeks / and other
is there yt men call christian men of gyrdinge / for as much as they were
gyrdeles underneath. Some outher hatte Nestorynes so^me aryens. so^me Nubyens.
some Gregours. some Indyns that are of the land of Preter John. and euerichone
of these have so^me articles of our truth. But each of them vary from
other. and of their variaunce were to much for to tell

Now sith I have told you of many manners of men that dwell in countrees
before said. Now woll I turn again to my way. For to turn upon this side
now he that Woll turn fro the land of Galyle yt I spoke of. to come on this
side he shall go thorough damas that is a fair cite and full of good
marchaundyses and it is three Iournes from the sea / and v. Iournes fro
Jerusalem. but they carry marchaundyses upon Camelles / Mules horse / and
Dromederies: and other manner of bestes. This cite founded Helyseus Damask. yt
was abraham's servant before that Iosyas was borne / and he wenyd to have be
abrams air and therefore he called that cite after his name damas. In that
place slow Caym his brother Abel. And beside damas is the mount of Syry. and
in that cite is many a physycien / and that holy man saint Poule was a
phesycyen to save me^nys bodies in hele. before that he was converted. and
sythen he was a phesicyen of souls. and men come by a place fro Damas that is
called Nostre dame de sardemarcke. that is five mile from damas. and it is on a
roche / and there is a fair church and there dwell monks and no^nes christian
in the church. behind the high auter. In the vale is a table of tree on the
which the Image of our lady was depeyntyd that many times was turned into
flesh but the image is now seen but a little. but ever more thorough grace
of god the table droppeth oil as it Were an Olyue. and there is a vessel of
marble under the table to receive the oil. thereof they give to pilgrims for
it heleth of many sykenesses / and he that kepethe it clenly a year. after the
year it turns into flesh and blood Between the cite of Dark and the cite
of Rapha^eis a river that men call Sabatory. for on the saturday it renneth
fast and all the weke else it stands still and renneth not orlytell: And
there is another river that on the night freseth fast. and upon the day no
frost is seen. And so goo men by a cite that men call Beruch and there men gone
into the sea that shall go into cypre. and they arryue at port of Sur or of
Thir^y ^ and than go men to cypre or ell^^ men go or may go from the port of
Thi^^y right and come not at cypre and arryue at some haven of Greece. and than
come men in these countrees by ways. that I have spoken of before

How a man may go ferthest and lengest in those countrees as herafter ben
rehearsed
Now have I told you of weyes / by the which men go ferthest and lengest as
by Babylony / and mount Synay ^ and other places many / thoroughe the which
lands men turn again to the land of promyssyon. Now wolle I tell you the
wey to Jerusalem. For so^me men woll not pass it. so^me for they have not to
spend. so^me for they have no company / and many other causes resonables. and
therefore I shall tell you shortly how a man may go with little costage and
short time. A man that comes from the lands of the weste he gothe thoroughe
france: burgoyne and lumbardy and to Denis or to Geene or some other haven of
those marches and take there a ship and go by see unto the I Will of Gryff / and
so arryueth he in Greece / or else at port myroche / or Valon / or Duras / or
some other haven of those ma^ches / and go to land for to rest him / and gothe
again to the sea and arryueth in Cypre and comethe not in the I Will of rodes and
arryueth at Famagost that is the chef haven of Cypre or ellis at lamaton / and
than enter ship again and passes beside the haven of Tire. and come not to
land / and so passes he by all the hau^ns of that cost unto he come to Iaffe
that is the next haven to Jerusalem. for it is xxviii. mile between. And ^roo
Iaffe men go to the cite of Ramos ^ and that is but litell thens and it is a
fair cite / and beside Ramos is a fair church of our lady where our lord
showed him unto her in this likeness that betokened the trynite. And there
nere is a church of saint George where his head was smyten of. And than to the
castle of Chinay / and than unto mount Joy: and fro thens pilgrimage to
Jerusalem. And than to mount Modyn and than to Jerusalem. At mount Modyn lies
the prophet Machabe / and over Ramatha is the town of Donke Whereof Amos the
prophet was.

FOr as much as many men may not suffer the sauoure of the sea. but is lever
to go by land if all it be more pain. A man shall goo to one of the havens of
lombardy as venys or another. and he shal-passe into greece to port myroche or
another and shall go to Constantynople. and shall pass the water that is
called the Bra^e of saint geo^ge that is a an arm of the sea And from thens he
shall come to puluerall / and sithen to the castle of Synople. And fro thens
shall he go unto Capadoce ^ that is a great country Where is many great
hills. and he shall go thorough Turkey. and to the cite of Nyke the which they
wan fro the emperor of constantynoble and it is a fair cite and well wallyd
/ and there is a river that men call the lay. and there goo men by the alps of
Mormant. and by vales of Mallebriuz and the vale of ^max. and so to antyoche
the better y^ sytteth on the rychay. and theraboute is many good hills and
fair and many fair wodes and wild bestis And he that woll go another way he
gothe by the playnes of Romayn costande the romayn see. On that cost is a
fair castle that men call floraghe. And when a man is out of the hills he
passethe thoroughe the cite of Moryache and Artoyse where is a great bridge
upon the River. of fer^e that men call fassar. and it is a great river beringe
ships ^ and beside that cite of Damas is a river that comes fro the mount of
Lybany that men call alban at passinge of this river saint Eustache lost his
two sons When he had lost his wyffe. and it goothe thoroughe the plain of
archades. and so to the red see. and so go men to the cite of Phenne and so
to the cite of Fern. And antyoche is a fair cite and well wallid for it is
two mile long. and at each pylour of the bridge is a good toure. This is the
best cite of the kingdom of sur^y. Fro antyoche men shall go to the cite of
Locuth / and than to Geeble. and than to Tortouse. And thereby is the land of
Cambre where is a strange castle yt men call Manbek. And fro Tourtouse men go
to trypelle on the sea. and upon the sea men go to Dacres. and there is two
weyes to Jerusalem. on the lift way men go first unto Damas by flom Jordan. on
the right side men go thoroughe the land of Flagme / and so to the Cite of
Cayphas / of which Cayphas was lord / and so^me call it castle pellerinz /
and from thens it is four days Iourne to Jerusalem. and they go thoroughe
Cesary Phylyp and Iaffe and Rames and Emaux. and so to Jerusalem

Now have* I told you so^me ways by land / and by water. how men may go to
Jerusalem. If all it be so that there be many other ways that men goo by after
countrees that they come fro. Nevertheless they turn* all to one end* yet is
there a wey all by land too Jerusalem and pass no see from france or
flaunders but yt wey is full long and a perylous and of great travail / and
therefore few go yt wey. he that shall go that wey he goth thoroughe almaigne
and Pruysse. and so unto Tartary This tartary is holden of the great Cane of
Whom I shall speak afterward / for theder lasts his lordshyppe And the
lords of this Tartary yield him Trybute. this is a full evil land and sondy
and little fruit berynge. for there grows little good of corn or wine ne
benes ne pesen. but bestes are there great plente / and therefore ete they but
flesh Without bread / and they soupe the bre and they drink milk of all
manner of beestes. They ete cattes and all manner wild bestes / Ratons and myce
/ and they have little wode / and therefore they dight their mete with horse
milk and other bestes When it is dry. Princes and other lords ete but ones
on the day / and right little and they be right foul folk and of evil kind
and in somer there is many tempestis and thundres yt sleth many folk and bestes
and right suddenly is it there great cold and as suddenly is it right hot.
The prince that governs yt land that they call Raco dwells at a cite that
men call O^da and forsooth there woll no good man dwell in that land for it is
good to sow in thorns and wedes and other good none as I herd say for I was
not that wey but I have been in other lands marchynge thereon (...) land of
Rossye and Nyflande and the kingdom of Grecon and ^ec^owe. and the kingdom of
Grasten and many other places but I went never that wey to Jerusalem. and
therefore I may not Well tell it. for I have understand that men may not well
goo that wey but in winter for Waters and marrays that are there that a man may
not pass but he have frost right hard and fast snowynge above. for were not
the snow there might no man go And ye shall understand that a man shall go
three iournes fro Pruysse to pass this Wey till he come to the land of
Sarrasyns that men dwell in. And all if it be that christian men every year posse
there they carry their vetayle With them. for they should find no thing
there. but a manner of thing that they call Soleys / and they carry / their
vytalles upon the ice on sledes and chariettes with out wheles. and as long
as their vetels last they may dwell there / but no longer. And when spies of
the country see christian men come they run to the towns and cry right loud.
kera kera kera. and as sone they keep them And ye shall understand that the
frost that there is and the ye is harder there than here. and every man has
a stewe in his house. and therein ete they and done all things that they may..
and that is at north side of the world Where it is commonly cold. for the
son comes ne shynethe but a little in that country / and that land is in
some place so cold that there may no man dwell. And on the southe side of the
world is in some place so hot that the^ may no man dwell for the son gives
so great h^te in those countrees

FOr as much as I have told you of the Sarasyns and of their laws. If ye
woll I shall tell you a party of their law and of their truth. after their
book that they call alkaron says so^me call yt book Mesap. some harm in
diverse langage of countrees the which book machomete gave them in the why /
che he wrote among other things as I have often read and seen that they that
are good shall go to paradyse. and the evil to hell / and that trow all
sarasynes and if a man ask of what paradyse they mean / they say it is a place
of delyces where a man shall find all manner of fruits in all times and waters
and ^yur^s rennynge with milk and honey Wine and fresshe water and they shall
have fair houses and good as they have deserved. And those howses ar made of
precious stones gold and silver and every man shall have x. wives and all
maidens. and he shall every day ones have to do with them and shall evermore
be maidens. Also they speak often and trow of the virgyn mary and say of the
Incarnacion that mary was served of aungellis and that Gabryell said to her
that she was chosen before all other fro the beginning of the world and that
witnesses well their book. And that Gabryell told her of the incarnacion of
Ihesu c^yst. and that she conceived and bare a child maiden. And they say that
christ spoke as soon as he was ^orne. and that he was a very and a holy prophet
in word and deed and meke and rightwys to all / and without any Wit. And they
say that when the angel said her of the Incarnacyon she had great dread
for she was right young. And there was one in that country that medlyd with
sorcery that men called Takyna that with enchau^t / mentes could make him like
an angel and he went often and lay with maidens and therefore was mary ferd for
the angel and wenyd in her mind that it had be Takyna that went with the
maidens: and she co^iured him that he should say unto her if he was that each
Ta^kyna. and the angel badde her have no dread for he was certain messenger
of Jesus christ.

Also their book says she had child under a Palm and than was she shamed /
and great / and said / that she Would be deed. and as sone the child spoke
and conforted her and said to mary. Ne timeas maria. That is to say.
Benatadred mary. and in many other steddes says their book alkaron. that Jesus
crist spoke as soon as he was borne. and the book says that Jesus crist was
sent fro god almighty to be ensample to all men ^ and yt god shall deem all
men / the good to heaven and the wicked to hell and that Jesus christ i^ the best
prophet of all other / and nerest to god and that he was very prophet that
gave the blind sight and helyd mesellis and raised dedde men and went all
quycke to heaven. and if they may find a book with gospellis and namely Missus
est angelus. they do it great worship / they fast a monethe in the year. and
they ete not but on the nyghtys / and than they keep them fro their wives but
they that are seek arnat constreyned to that. And that book speaks of Jews /
and says they are wicked folk for they woll not trow that Jesus crist is of
god. and they say that the Jews lie on our lady and her son Jesus christ saying
that they did him not on cross. and for sarrasyns trow so nere our feyth
they are lightly converted when men preche the law of Jesus christ / and they
say they wot well by their prophesies that their law of machomete shall fail
as does the law of Jews. and that christian men's law shall last unto the
worlds end.

And if a man ask them wherein they trow. and they say that they trow in god
almighty the which is maker of heaven and of earth and other things. And
without him is no thing done / and the day of dome when every man shall be
rewarded after his desert / and that all thing is soth that christ said
thorough mouths of his prophets. Also Machomete bad in his alkaron that ylke
man should have two wives or three or four. but now take they nine. and as
many lemans as them like. and if any of their wives do amys again their
husbondes. he may drive her out of his house and another but him be houeth
give her of his goods. Also Where men speak of the fader and son and holy
ghost. they say that they are. three persons and not one god. For their alkaron
spekethe not thereof / ne of the trynite. but they say that god spoke or else
was he domme. And god has a ghost or else were he not in live. and they say
yt gods word has a great strength. and so says their alkaron. and they
say that abraham and moses were well with god for they spoke with him and
Machomete was right messanger of god. and they have many good articles of our
feythe And those that understand the scriptures and prophesyes for they have
them. And the gospel and the bible is wreten in their langage and so wot
they well of holy writ bu^ they understand it not. but after the letter and so
do the Jews for they understand not the letter gos^ly. and therefore says
saint poule. Littera occidit spiritus autem v^^ficat. That is to say. Letter
sleeth and ghost makes quycke. And the sarrasyns say that the Jews ar wiked
for they keep not the law of Moses the which he took to them. And also
christian men ar ill. for they keep natt the co^maundementis of the gaspellys
that Jesus Christ sent unto them. And therefore I shall tell you that the that
the soudan told me upon a day in his chaumber he did void out all manner of
men / lords / knyghtys and other and for he would speak with me in counseyle.
and he asked me how christian men governed them in ou^e country. and I said to
him right well thanked be god and he said sykerly nay / for he said our
prestis made no force of goddis service. for they should give ensaumple to men
to do well and they give ill ensample. And therefore when the people should go
on the holy day unto the church to serve god. they go to tavern to be in
glote^ny all the day / and the night / and ete and drink as beestes yt wo^e
not when they have Enough. and also christian men he said aforsed them to fight
samen / and euerychon to begyle other / and also they are so proud that they
Wo^e not how they may cloth them / now long now short now streyte / now
wide / on all manner of wise. They should he said be simple / meke and
sothefast and do alms as jesus christ did in whom they trow. And they are he
said to covetous that for a little silver they sell their children their
susters and their wives / and one takethe another ma^nys wife and none holds
his feyth to other And therefore said he For their sins has god given these
lands to our hands / and not thorough our strength / but all for your
sins / For we wot well forsothe when ye serve well your god yt he woll
help you so yt no man shall win again the land when they serve their god
well. but while they live so foully as they do. we have no dread of them for
their god shall not help them. and than I asked him how he knew the state of
christian men so. and he said that he knew well both of lords and of commons by
his messangers which he sen^e thorough all countrees as it were marchauntis
with precious stones and other marchaundises to know the manner of every
country. And than he did call again all the lords into the chamber / and
than he showed me.iiii. that were great Lords in that country that devised me
my country and other as in cristendome all as they had be men of the same
country / and they spoke french right well and the soudan also. And than had I
great maruayle of this great s^launder of our feyth. and so they that should
be ^ourned by our good ensaumples to the feyth of Jesus christ / they are
drawn awey through our evil living. and therefore it is no wonder if they
call us evil for they say sothe / but the sarrasyns are true for they keep
truly the commandments of their alkaron that god sent them by his
messangere Machomete / too Whom they say saint gabryell the angel spoke often
and said him the will of god. And ye shall understand that Machomete was borne
in Araby and he was first a po^^ ^naue and kept horse and went after
marchaundyse. And so he came ones into Egypt with marchaundise and Egypt was
that time christian / and there was a chapelle beside araby and there was an
Eremyte / and when he come into the chapel that was but a little house / and a
low as soon the enter began to be as great as it were of a paleys gate and
that was the first miracle that the sarrasyns say that he did in his youth.
After began Machomete to be wise and rich. and he was a great Astronomer and
sythen was he keeper of the land of the prince Corodan and governed it full
well in the which manner that when the prince was deed. he weddyd the lady that
men called Quadryge. And Machomete fell often in the falling evil. wherefore the
lady was wroth. that she had taken him to her husbonde and he made her to
understand that every time that he fell so. he said that gabryell the angel
spoke to him / and for the great brightness of the angel he fell down. This
Machomete reigned in araby the year of our lord. syx hundred xx. and he was of
the kind of Dysmael that was abraham's son. that he gate of Agar and other ar
properly called Sarrasyns of Sarra / but so^me are called Moabites / and some
amo^^tes after two sons of Loath. And also Machomete loved well a good man an
heremyte that dwelled in wilderness a mile from mount Synay. in the wey as men
go fro araby to Caldee and ynde a days ^ourne fro the se where merchants of
Venys came. and ma / chomete went so often to this heremyte that all his men were
Wroth for he hard gladly the heremyte preche ^ and did his men wake all the
night. and his men thought they would this heremyte were dedde. So it befell on
a night that Machomete was full dronken of good wine and he fell in sleep / and
his men took Machometes sword out of his shethe whiles he lay and slepte. and
therwyth they slew the heremyte. and afterward they put the sword up again
all blody. And upon the morrow When they fond this heremyte thus dedde / he
was in his mind very angry and right wroth / and would have done his men unto
the death / but they all with one accord and with one will / said that he him
self had slain him when he was dronken. And they showed him his own swerd
All blody and than trowed he they said sothe / and than he cursed the wine and
all those that droken it. And therefore sarrasyns that are devout drink no wine
openly. they shall be reproved but they drink good beuerage and sweet and
norysshynge that is made of Calamels / thereof is sugour made. Also it befalls
sometime that christian men became sarrasyns / outher thorough pouerte or
symplenesse or wickedness. And therefore larchesleuyn when he receueth them
seyth thus. Laeles ella Macho mete to ^s ella. That is to say. There is no god
but one and machomete his messanger. And sythen I have told you a party of
their law and of their customs I shall say you of their letters. that they
have with their names First they have for A almo^ bethath for b^athi ^ ephoti
for d delphoy e fo^hy f garophin g hechun h iocchi i kathi. ^ loth^^ l malach m
nahalot n orthy o. choziri p zoth q. ^^holat r rou^hi s solathi t chatimus v
yrithom x mazot z zatepin and iohetus con these are the names. These four
letters they have yet more for diversity of their langage for as much as they
spoke so in their throtes as we have A in our langage and speak in england Two
letters may than they have in their abc. That is to say y and z the Which are
called thorn and zowx

ANd sythen I have devised before of the holy land and countrees theraboute
and many ways theder and to mount Synay to Babylon. and other places of the
which I have spoken.

Now I woll tell and speak of yles / and of diverse bestes and diverse folk /
for in those countres is many diverse folk. and countres that are departed by
the four flodes that came out of paradyse terrestre. For Mesopotany and the
kingdom of Caldee and araby ar between two flodes Tygre and Eu^rate. And the
kingdom of Mydy and Perse ar between two flodes Tigre and Nyke and the kingdom
of Surrey and Palastyne / and Funes ar between Eufrate and the sea mediteran^
and it is of length from Maroch on the se of Spain unto the great se and so
lasts it beyond Constantynople. three thousand and forty mile of lomba^dy.
And to the occean see in ynde is the kingdom of Sychy. that is all closed
among hills and ye shall vnde^stonde that i^ tho countres ar many yles and
lands of the which it were to much to tell all: but of some I shall speak
more pleynely afterward. Fer he that woll go to Ta^tary or persy or Caldee / or
ynde. he entrethe the sea at Geene or Ve^^ se or at another haven and so
passes by the sea and arryueth at Trapazonde that is a good cite. that
sometime. men called le port de pounce. There is the kingdom of psans and
Medoyns and other marches In this cite lies saint Athanas that was bishop of
Alysaunder that made the Psalm Quicu^que vult ^ This man was a great Doctoure
of diuinyte and of the godhede / he was ac / cused unto the pope of Rome that
he was an heretyke And the Pope sent for him and put him into prison and while
he was in that same prison he made this Psalm and sent it unto the pope / and
said if that he was heretyke than were that heresy / for that was his troth
and his believe And when the Pope saw yt he said. therein was all our feyth.
anon he did deliver him out of prison. And he commanded that psalm to be
said every day at pryme and so he held athanas for a good christian man: but
he Would never go unto his bysshopryche for they accused him of heresy.

Topazonde Was sometime holden of the Emperor of Constantynople / but a great
man that he sent to keep that country again the Turks / and held it too him
self and called him self Emperor of Topazonde.

And from thens men go thoroughe little armony In that country is an old
castle that is on a Roche that men call the castle of S^nere. and there men
find an hawke sitting upon a perke right well made ^ and a fair lady of fary
that keeps it.

And he that woll wake this same hawk seven days and seven nyghtis. and some
say that it is but three days and three nyghtes. alone withyouten any company /
and wythouten sleep. This fair lady shall come unto him at the seven days or
three days end. and shall grant unto him the first thing that he woll ask
of worldly t^ynges. and that has of^ be proved.

And so upon a time it befell that a man which that time was king of Ermony
that was a right doughty man waked upon a time. and at the seven days end /
the lady came unto him and bad him ask what he would for (...) had well done
his devour And the king answered and said that he was a great lord and in
god^ p^as ^ and he was rich so that he would ask no thing but all only the
body of the fair lady to have his will of her. Than this fayrelady answered
and said to him y^ he was a fool for he wist not what he asked for he might
not have her / for he should not ask but wordly thing and she was not worldly
and the king said he would naught else. and she said to him sith he would not
else ask she should grant him ^oure thing and to all that came after him /
and said unto him. Sir king ye shall have war without peace alwey unto the
ix. degree: and ye shall be in subjection of your enemies / and ye shall have
grea^e need of good and catell. and sythen that time all the kings of Ermony
have been in war / and needful and under tribute of sarrasyns. Also a pore
man's sons woke the a time / and asked the lady that he might be rich and happy
in marchaundyse / and the lady granted him. but she said him that he had
asked his undoing. for great pride that he should have thereof. But he that
shall wake has need to keep him from sleep. for if he sleep he is lost that
he shall never be seen. but that is not the right wey. but for the marvel.
And from Topa^onde men go to great armony to a cite that men call Artyron that
was wont to be a good cite. but turks have destroyed it* for there neither
grows no wine ne fruit. From this artyron men go to an hill that is called
Sabyssatoll. and there nere is a another hylle that men call ararach. but the
Jews call it Thano where Archa Noe rested / and yet is on that hill / a man
may se it fro far in clear weder / and the hill is twelve mile of heyght and
so^me say they have be there at. and put their fyngers in the holes where the
fend went out when Noe said in this manner of wise. Benedicyte.

But they note well for no man may go on that hill for Snow that is alwey upon
that hylle both Winter / and somer. that no man may go up and never yode sith
Noe was. A monk thoroughe grace of god brought a planke that is yet at the
abbey at the hill foot / and he had great desire to go upon that hill / and
aforsed him thereto / and when he was at the third part upward he was so weary
that he might no ferther and he rested him and slept and when he awoke than he
was down at the hill foot and than prayde he to god devoutly that he would
suffer him go upon the hill. and the angel said unto him that he should go
upon the hill and so he did. and sythen that time no man came there. And
therefore men shall not ^owe such words. And fro ^hens men go to a cite that
is called Tanziro and that is a fair cite and good. Beside that cite is an
hill of salt / and thereof each man take what he woll. there dwell many christian
men under trybute of Sarrasyns. fro thens men go by many towns and castellys
and many ^owarde ynde. and come to a cy^t^ that men call Cassage that is a
fair Cite. and there met the three kings togeder that went to make present to
our lord in Bethelem. ^^o that cite men goo to a cite yt men call Ca^dabago.
and Paynemes say that christian men may not dwell there but they dye sone and
they w^^e not the cause. And from thens men go thorugh many countrees cytes and
towns that were to long to tell / to the cite of Carnaa that was wont to be
so great that the wall about was of xxv. mile / the Wall shows yet. but it
is not now in habyte with men. and there ends the land of the emperor of
Percy:

On the other side of yt cite of Carnaa men enter into the land of Job. that
is a good land and great plente of all fruits / and men call that land the
land of Swear In this land is the cite of Thomar. Job was a paynym and also he
was Co^raas son / and he held the Land as prince thereof / and he was so rich
that he knew not the hundredth of his good. and after his pouert god made him
rycher than he was before. For after he was king of Idumea: and sithen king
of ysan. and when he was king he was called Iohab and in that kingdom he lived
Clxx year / and so he was of age when he dyed ccxl viii^ in the land of Job is
no defaute of no thing that is needful to a mannys body. There ben hills
where men find ma^na. and ma^na is called aungellys bredde that is a white
thing right sweet and much swetter than sugoure or honey. and that comes of
the dew of heaven / that falls on the herbs / and there is coagles and wex
white and men do it in medecynes. for rich men. This land marches to the
land of Caldee that is a great land. and there is full fair folk and well
apeyraled and women a^ right layth and evil cladde and they go bare foot / and
bear a ill cote large wide and short unto the kne: and long slones down to
the foot / and they have great here / and long hyngynge about their shulders.
After the land of Caldee is the land of Amosony that is a land where is no
man but all women as men say. for they woll suffer no man live among them ne
to have lordspyp of them. For sometime was a king in that land and men were
dwelling there as did in other countries. and had wives / and it befell yt the
king had a great war with them of Sychy and he was called Solopenco / and he
was slain in bat^yle and all the good blood of his land. And this queen when
she herd that / and other ladies of that land that the king and the lords
were slain they gadred them togeder and slowghe all the men that were left in
their land among them / and sithen that time dwelled no man among them. And
when they woll have an^ man to ly by them they send for them into a country
that is nere to their land / and the men come and ar there viii. days or as
the woman lykes and than goo they again. and if they have men children / they
send them to their ^aders when they can ete and goo. and if they have maid
children they keep them and if they be of gentle blood they brenne the left
pappe away for berynge of a shield. and if they be of little blood they bren
the right pappe away for shotynge. For those women of that country ar good
war^eours and ar often in sonde with other lords and the queen of that land
governs well that land. This land is all enuyrond with water. Beside
Amozonde is the land that turmagute that is a good land and profitable. And
for goodness of that land king Alysaunder did make a cite there that he
calledde alysaunder On the other side of Caldee toward the southe side is
Ethyops a great land In this land on the southe ar the folk right black.
In that side is a well yt on the day the water is so cold that no man may
drynk thereof. and on the night it is so hot that no man may suffer to put his
hand in it. In this land the ryuers and all the waters ar trobolous and
somdell salt for the great hete. And men of that land are lightly dronken and
have little appetyte to mete and they have commonly the flyx of body and they
live not long. In Ethiope are such men that has but one foot. and they go so
fast that it is a great marueyle / and that is a large foot that makes
shadow and covers the body fro the son and in ethyope is a cite of Saba of
the which one of the three kings that sought our lord was king.

FRo Ethyope men go into ynde thorough many diverse countrees and it is called
ynde the more. And it is departed in three parties that is to say. ynde the more
that is a full hot land / and ynde the less is a temperet land. and the
third party that is towardys the north. there is right cold. so that for
great cold / and frost and ice the water becomes crystal. and upon that
grows the good dyamande that is like a troble color and that dyamande is so
hard that no man may break it Other dyamandes men find in Araby that are not
so good that are more nesshe. and sum are in Cypre / and in Macydony men find
also dyamandes. but the best are in ynde. And so^me ar found many times in a
mas that comes out where men find gold fro the mine. when men break the
mass in pieces. and sometime men find so^me of gretnesse of a pese and so^me
less / and those are as hard as those of ynde

And all if it be that men find good dyamandes in ynd upon the roche of
crystal. also men find good dyama^des upon the roche of adamande in the sea.
and on hills as it Were hasyll nottes: and they are all square and poynted of
their own kind / and they grow both togeder male and femmall and ar
norysshed with the dew of haven / and they engender commonly and bring forth
small children that multyplye and grew all the years. I have many times assayed
that if a man keep them with a litell of the roche and Wete them with many
dewes often sythes they shall grow ylke a year. and the small shall wexe great
/ and a man shall bear the deamand in his lyf^syde / and than is it of more
virtue / and for the strength of their growing is toward the north that is
the left side as men of those countrees say. To him that berethe the deamande
upon him it gives him hardynes it keeps his ^ymmes of his body it gives
vyctory of ennemys if a mannys cause be right / and him that bears it in good
will it keeps him f^^ ^^ufe fro riot fro ill dremes / and sorceryes and
^nchauntementes. Also no wild best shall grieve hymn assail him. And also the
Deamande should be given ^^ely withouthouten couetyse / and byinge and than it
is of more virtue. it heleth him that is lunatyke. and that is t^a^ayled with a
devil. and if venym or poison be brought in presence of the deamand as sone it
moysteth and begins to w^x sweet. and men may well polyce them to make men
trow yt they may not be polisshed But men may assay them well in this manner.
first shere with them in diverse precious stones as gasyrs / or other upon
crystalle and than men take a stone that is called adamande. upon that adamande
and lies a nedyl before that adamand and if the dyamande be good and virtuous
the adamand draws not the nedyll to him whiles the dyamande is there. And
this is the prove that they beyond the se make. but it falls sometime that
the good dyamande loses his virtue thorough him that bears it and therefore it
is needful to make it cover his virtue ageyn or else it is little of value /
and there is many other precious stones. and it is called ynde / In that water
men find elys of xxx. foot lynge. and men that dwell nere that water ar of
evil color and yelowe and grene. In ynde is more than v thousand Isles yt
men dwell in good and great beside those that men dwell not in. And in echone
of those is great plente of cytes and much folk for men of ynde ar of that
condition that they pas not out of their land commonly for they dwell under a
planet that is called Saturn and that planet makethe his course by the xii.
signs in xx. year and the moon passes thorough the xii. signs in a month.
and for yt Saturn is of so late sterynge the^fore men that dwell un / der him
and in that Clymate have no good will to be much styrynge about. And in our
country is a contra / ry for we are in a clymate that is of the moon / and of
light styrynge and that is the planet of way. and therefore it gives us will to
much mouynge and styringe and go in to diverse countres of the world. for it
gothe about the world more lightly than another planet does. Also men pass
thoroughe ynde by many countrees unto the great see Occian. And than they
find the isle of Hermes when / der merchants of Venys and of Geene and other
parties of crystendome come to bye marchaundyse. but it is so warm there in ye
isle that men's ballokes hang dow / ne to there shankes for the great dyssoluynge
of the body / And men of the country that know the manner do bind them up
full streyte and anoynte them with oyntemen / it is made therefore for to hlde
them up or else they might not live. In this land and many other. men / and
women ley them all naked in ryuers and waters from vndren of the day to it be
passed none. And they lie all in water but the face. for the great hete that
is there. In this isle are the ships without nails of iron or bond for
roches of adamonde that are in the Sea woll draw ships to them. Fro this
I Will men go by see to the I Will of Cana where is great plente of corn and of
wine / and the king of this I Will was sometime so mighty yt he held war with
king alys^undre. Men of this isle have diverse laws. for some worship the son
some the fire / and some nedyrs some the trees some the f^^st thing they mete in
the morning. and some worship simulacres and ydollis but between simulacres and
ydols is no difference / For some sacres are images made to likeness of what
thing a man woll that is not kyndly for some image has th^e hedes one of a
man and an horse and an ox or any other best that no man has seen. And ye
shall understand that they that worship symulacres they worship them for
worthy men that were sometime / as hercules / and other that did many
marueyles in their times* For they say they wot well they are not good of
kind that made all thing but yt they are well with god. for the maruayles yt
they do and therefore they worship them. And so say they of the son for it
changes often the times sometime gyuethe great hete to norysshe all things on
earth And for it is so great profit they wot well it is not good. but it is
well with godde and that god loves it more than any other thing. and therefore
they say good skyll to worship it. And so they make skylles of other planettes
and of fire also for it is so profitable and needful

And of ydols they say that the Ox is the holiest best that they may find here
in earth and most profitable than any other. for he does many goods and none
ylle. And they wot well that it may not be without special grace of god and
therefore they make their god of an Ox. the one half. and the other half a
man for man is the fairest and the best creature of the world. And they make
worship to nedders and other bestes that they mete first at mo^owe and namely
those bestis that have good metynge after whom they speed well all day: the
which they have proved of long time. and therefore they say yt this good
metynge comes of gods grace / and therefore have they do make images like
unto those things that they may worship them before they mete any thing el /
lis. And yet a^e some christian men that say that some bestis are better for to
mete than some for hares and swyne and other bestes are ill to mete first as
they say. In this isle of Cana is many wild bestes / and Ratons of that country
are as great as hounds here. and they take the^ with mastyfes for Cattes may
not take them. From thens men come to a cite that men call Sarchis and it is
a fair and a good cite and there dwell many christian men of goddys feyth / and
there be men of religion. Fro thens men come to the land of Lombe ^ and there
is the cite of Polomes. and under that cite is an hill that me^ call Polombe.
and thereof takes the cite his name.

And so at the foot of the same hill is a right fair and a clear well that
has a full good and sweet sauoure. and it smells of all manner sorts of
spyces. And also at each hour of the day it changes his sauoure dyuersly and
who so drynketh thryes on the day of that well he is made hole of all sykenes
that he has. I have sometime dronken of that well. and methynketh yet yt I
fare the better. so^me call it the well of youth. for they that drynk thereof
seem to be young alwey and live without great sykenesse. and they say this
well comes froo Paradyse terres^re. for it is so virtuous. In that country
growethe gynger and theder come many good merchants for spices. In this
country men worship the Ox for his great symplenesse and meekness and the
profit that is in him they make the Ox to trauale vi. or vii. year and than
men ete them. And the king of that land has euermo^e one ox with him. and
he that keeps him every day takes his fees for the keeping. And also every
day he gadereth his v^yne and his donge in a vessel of gold / and bears it
to the prelete that they call Archiporta papaton. and the prelat^ bears it to
the king / and makes thereupon a great blessing and than the king puts
his hand therein and than they call it gaul ^ and he anoyntethe his ^ro^ and
his breast therewith and they do it great worship. and say he shall be ^ulfylled
with virtue of the ox before said and that he is hallowed thorough virtue of y^
holy thing as they say* and when the king has thus done than do other lords
and after them other men after they are of degree / when they may have any
remenaunte An this country their ydols ar half man and half ox. And in these
ydols the wicked ghost speaks to them and gives answers of what they ask
before these ydollis they s^e their child^e many times and sprenge the blood on
the ydols. and so make they sacryfyce. and if any man dye in that country they
brenne him in tokenynge of penance that he should suffer no penance if he
were lay / de in the earth of etynge of worms and if his wife have no children
they bren her with him / and they say it is good reoson that she make him
company in the other world as she did in this and if she have children she may
live with them and she woll and if the wife dye before men brenne her and her
houshelde as if he woll. In this land grows good wine. and women drink wine
and men none. and women shave t^eir be^des and men not. Fro this land men go
many iourneys to a country that men call Mabaron / and this is a great
kingdom. There in is many fair cytees and towns. In this land lies saint
Thomas in flesh in a fair tomb in the cite of Calamy and the a^me and the
hand that he put in our Lords side when he was risen. When christ said to
him. Noli esse m^redulus / sed sidelis. That is to say / Be not of wanhope but
believe. that same hand lies yet with out the tomb bare. and with this hand
they gave their domes in that country to wete who has right. and who not for
if any strife is between two parties they do write their right in two bylles
and those bylles ar put in the hand of saint Thomas / and as sone the hand
castethe away the byll that has wrong and holdethe the other still that has
right and therefore they come fro far to have iugementis of causes that are in
doubt. In the church of saint Thomas is a great image that is a symulacre and
it is welldight with rich precious stones and perles and unto that image men
come in pilgrimage fro far with great devotion as christian men go to saint
Iame. And there come some in pylg^ymage yt bear sharp knyues in their hands and
as they goo by the wey they shere there shankes and thighs that the blood may
come out for the love of that ydoll And they say that he is holy that woll dye
for that gods sake. And some is there yt fro the time that they go out of
their houses at each third pas they knele to that they come to this ydol. and
when they come there they have ensence ^ or such other thing ^ to ensence the
ydoll as we would do to gods body / and there is before that Mynster of this
ydoll a river full of Water. and in that vynere pilgrims cast gold / silver /
precious stones and perles. without noumbre in stedde of offrynges. and
therefore when the mynster has need of helping. as sone they go to that vyner
and take yt they have need to helping of the mynster. and ye shall understood
when great festes come of that ydoll as the dedycacion of the church or of
the thronynge of the ydoll all the country is assembled th^de^ / and men set
this ydoll with great worship in a chair well dight with rich cloothes and
good and other and led him with gr^ate worship abou^te the ^yte. and before
the chair goth first in p^ession all the maidens of the country two and two
togeder. And after them go the pilgrims that are come fro fe^re countries of
which pilgrims some fall down before the chair and lateth all go over them
and so are they some slain and some ar broken then arms and shankes and this do
they for love of the ydol and they trow the more pain that they suff^e here
for their ydoll. the more Joy shall they have in the other world. and a man
shall find few christian men that woll suffer so much penance for our lords
sake as they do for their Idol. And nygh before the chayer go all mynstrellis
of the country as it were without noumber with many diverse melodyes / And when
they are come again to the church. they set up the Idol again in his throne
and for worship of the Idol two men or three ar slain with sharp knyues with
there good will. And also a man thinks in our coutre that he has a great
worship. And he have an holy man in his kyn. so say they there that those that are thus slain ar holy men and saints. and they are wreten in their letany and
when they are thus deed their friends brenne their bodies and they take the
ashes and those ar kept as relikes and they say it is holy thing and that
they have doubt of no peril when they have those ashes. Fro this country l^^.
iournes is a country that men call Lamory i^ that land is great hete and it
is custom sith that men and women go all naked and they scorn them that are
clad. for they say that god made Adam and Eve al nakid and that men should have
no shame of that / that god made and they believe in god that made Adam / and
Eve / and all the world / and there is no woman weddyd but women ar all common
there / and they forsake no man. And they say that god commanded to Adam and
Eve and all that came of them saying.

Crescyte et multiplicamini et replete terram.

That is for to say in english wex and be multyply ^ ed and fill the earth
and no man may say there. This is my wife. Ne woman say. This is my husbond.
And when they have children they give to whom they woll. of men that have dealt
with them. Also the land is all comom for that one man has in one year
another man has it another year. Also all the goods / and corns of the
country ar in common for there is no thing under ^o^ and as rich is o^^ man as
another. but they have an ill cus^ume they ete gladlyer man's flesh than other
Theder bring merchants their children to sell and those that are fat they
ete them. and the other keep they till they be fat and than are they even.
Beside this I Will is an I Will that men call Somober that is a good isle. men of that
I Will do mark them in the visage with an hoote iron men and women for great
nobley and to be know from other. for they hold them self the worthyest of
the world. and they have war evermore with those men that are naked that I
spoke of before. And there a^ many other Isles and diverse manners. of men of
which it were oue^moche for to speak of all. But the^e ^s a great I Will that men
call ^ana. And the king of that country has under him vii. kings for he is
full mighty In that I Will grows all mone^ of spices more ple^teuously than in
other places as gynge^ ^lowes canell nutmygges and other and ye shall
understand that the nutmygge bears the ma^^s all thing them is plente but
wine. The king of this land ^ath a ^i^he paleys: and the best that is in the
worl^e for all the greces in to his hall and chambers ben all of gold another
of silver and all the walls ar covered and plated with gold and silver. and
in those pla^es ar wreten s^oryes of knights and batayles and ^^e pauement of
the hall and chaumbres is of gold and of silver. and there is no man yt would
trow the riches yt is there* but if he had seen it. and the king of this I Will
is so mighty that he has many times overcome the great Chane of chatay that
is the myghtyest Emperor yt is in all the world for there is often war among
them for the great Chane would make him hold his land to him and for to go
forth by see men find one I Will that is called Salamasse. and some call it paten.
that is a great kingdom with many fair cytees. In this land grow trees that
bear mele. of which men make fair bredde and white and of good sauoure and it
semethe as it were of whete. And there is other trees that bear venym again
which is no medecyne. but one. that is to take of the leaves of the same tree and
stamped them and temper with water and drink it or else he shall dye suddenly
for trya^le may not help. And if ye woll wete how the Trees bear mele I shall
say you. men hew* with an hachet about the (...) ^^etre by the earth so that
no berke be per / sed in many places and than comes out a lycoure thy^ which
they take in a vessel and put it to the son and dry it and when it is dry
they do it unto the mylle to grynde and so is it fair mele and white / and
honey / and wine: and venym ar draw out of other trees in the same manner and
do it in vessels to keep. In that I Will is a ded see / that is a water that has
no ground / and if any thing fall therein it shall never be found. beside
that see grows great cannes and under their rotes men find precious stones
of great virtue. for he that bears one of tho stones upon him there may no
iron dear him ne draw blood on him. and therefore they yt have these stones
fight full hardely for there may no quarrel / ne such thing dear them:
therefore they that know the manner of them they make their quarrels without
iron and so they sle them And than is another I Will that men call Calonach that
is a great land and a plen^euous of gods. And the king of yt land has as
many wives as he woll. for he has a thousand and mo and lyethe never by one
of them but ones. And that land has a maruayle that is in no other land.
For all manner of fysshes of the sea comethe a time of the year every manner
after other. and sayethe them nere the land and on the land sometime and
there they lie three days. and men of the land come theder and take of them
what they woll. and than go those fysshes awey ^ and comethe another manner and
lyethe other three days and men take of them. And thus does every manner of
fysshes till all have be there: and men have taken of euery^hone what they
woll. And me^ (...) not the cause why it is. But they sey there. th^^ (...)
^ysshes co / me so t^eder to do worship to their king. for as the most worthy
king of ^he world for he has so many wives. and geteth so many children of
them. And than is a another I Will that men call Gaffolo^. Men of this I Will when
there frendis ar seek that they trow yt they shall dye they take and hang him
up all quyk on a tre^ say it is better y^ birds yt ar au^gellis of god ete
them than worms of the earth Fro thens men go to an isle therethe men ar of ill
kind they noryssh hou^des for to worow men and when their friends are syke yt
they hope they shall dye / they do those hou^des strangle the^ for they wol not
yt they dykyndly death for than should they suffer to great pain as they sey and
when they are thus ded they ete their flessh for venyson A fro thens men go
thorough many Isles by see unto an I Will that men call Melke there is full ill
folk for they have none other delight but for to fight and sle men for they
drink gladly mannys blood which blood they call god. and he that may most
sle is of most name among them. And if two men be at strife / and they be
made at one. them behooves to drink either too other blood ^ or else the
accord is naught. Fro this I Will men go to an I Will that men call Tracota where
all men are as bestes and not reasonable and they dwell in caves for they have
no wit to make them howses. and they ete edders and they speak not. but they
make such a noise. had edders have one to another / and they make no force of
richesse / but of a stone that has forty colors / and it is called Tracony^
after that I Will. but they know na^ the virtue ^^^of but they covet it for the
great fayrenes Fro that (...) go to an I Will that men call Natumeran that is a
great I Will and a fair / and men / and women of that country have hounde hedes
and they are reasonable and worship an Ox for their god and they go all naked but
a little clothe before their preuy members they are good men to fight and they
be^e a great targe / with which they cover all the body and a spear in their
hand / and if they take any man in battle they send him to their king which
is a great lord and devout in his feyth. for he has a bou^e his nek on a cord
in ^. perles great and orient in manner of Paternr of lambre and as we say
Paternt and Aue maria. right so the king says each day in. c. prayers to his
god before he ete / and he bears also about his nek a Ruby orient fine and
good that is nere a foot and v. fyngers long For when they ^hese* ^ey^ king /
they give too him that Ruby to bear in his hand / and so they led him ridynge
about the cite / and therefore he bears that Ruby al wey about his neck. for
if he bare not the ruby / they would no longer hold him king. and the great
Chane of chatay has much coueted this Ruby. but he might never have it for
war ne for other catell. and this king is a full true and a rightwys man.
for men may go safly / and like^ly thorough his land and bear all that he
woll. for noman is so hardy to let him. And than is another I Will that men call
Dodym. that is a great I Will. In this I Will ar many diverse manner of men and have
evil manners for the ^adereteth the son and the son the fader / the husbonde
the wife the wife the husbonde. And if it so be yt the ^ad^^ be syke or the
mother or any friend the son gothe as son^ to the priest of the Law and pray
him that he woll ask of the ydoll if his fader shall dye of that syke^esse o^
not. And than the priest and the son knele down before the ydoll devoutly and
asks him and he answers to them ^ and if he say that he shall live. than
they keep him well* and if he say that he shall dye than come the pressed with
the son or with the wife or wha^ friend it be unto him that is seek and they
say their hand over his mouth to stop his breath / and so they sle him and
than they smite ^ll the body in pieces. and do pray all his friends for to come
and ete of him that is deed ^ and they make a great fest thereof and have many
mynstrels there. And so When they have all even the flesh. Than they bery
and grave the bones and all those that are of his friends that were not there
at the etynge of him has a great shame and velany so th^^ (...) shall never
more be holden as friends. And the (...) of this I Will is a great lord and
mighty. and he has under him (...) yles and each of them has a king. and in
one of these yles ar men that has but one ^ye and that is in the mids of
their front and they ete not but flesh and fysshe raw. and in another isle
dwell foul men that have no hedes: and their iyen are in their shulders and
their mouth is on their breast. And in another I Will ar men that have no head ne
iyen and their mouth is behind in their shulders And other men is there that
have a platte face without nose. and iyen but they have two small holes in
sted of iyen: and they have a plat mouth liples. In another I Will are foul men
that have the lyppe above the mouth so great / that when they sleep in the
son they cover all their ^ace with the lyppe. In another I Will is folk that is
both men and women and have members of both for to engender with and when they
woll they use both on a time and the other another time. and they get children
when they use the membre of man. and they bear children when the use the
membre of woman. Many other manner of folk is in yles theraboute of whom / it
Were to long time to tell all. And for to pass forth men come into an isle
that men ar right small in. and they have a little hole in stedde of the
mouth. and they may not ete / but all that they shall ete or drink they take
it thorough a pype of a fether or such a another thing.

FOr to go fro this I Will toward the sea that is called occean toward the est
many iournes / a man shall find a kingdom yt is called Mancy / and this in ynde
the most and the lest and most delictable / and of most plente of all gods
that is in power of man In this land dwell christian men and sarrasyns for it is
a great land. therein is two thousand cytee^ great and other many towns. In
this land no man goth on beggynge for there is no poor man / and the men have
berdes thynne of here as it were cattes. In this land ar fair women and
therefore some men call that land albany for the white folk. and there is a cite
that men call latorym and it is more than Paryse. In that Cite is a fair water
berynge ships and in that land ar birds twyes so great as in any other
place of the world and there is good chepe of vetayles and there is plente of
great nedd^es. of which they make great fest and ete them at great
solemnytees* For if a man make a great fest and had given them all the mete
that he might get and he give them no nedd^es he has no thank for all that
he does. In this count^e are hens white and they bear no feathers / but wolle
as sheep do in our land. and women of that count^e that are weddyd bear
crowns upon their hedes that they may be known by. In this country they take
a vest that is called Loyrys and they ^en it to go into waters or vyners: and
as sone he brings out of the water great fysshes and thus take they fyssh
as long as they woll to that them needs. Fro this cite men go by many
iournes ^a another great cite that is called Cassay / that is the most cite of
the world. and that cite is.l. mile about and there is in yt cite mo than
xii. thosaund gates and each gate is a good to^^e where the kepers dwell to
keep it again the great ^han for it marches on his land and on one side of
the cite re^neth a great river. and there dwell cry^^en me^ and other many. for
there is a good country (...) plenteuous / and there grows right good wine /
y^ men call bygon / this is a noble cite where the king of M^cy was wont to
dwell. and there dwell religyous men crys^en freres. and men go upon that river
till they come to an abbey of monks a little fro the cite and there in that
abbey is a great gardeyne and fair / and therein is many manner of trees of
diverse fruits. In that gardeyne dwell many manner of bestes as baboynes / apes
/ marmosettes and other and when the covent has eten a monk takes the relyf
and do bear it into the gardeyne and smyteth ones with a clyket of silver which
he hold in his hand. and sone after comethe out theyse bestes yt I spoke of
and other many nere iii. thousand or iiii thousand and he gives them to ete
of fair vessellys of silver / and when they have eten he smyteth the clyket
ageyn and they goo again there they came froo. And the monk says that those
bestis ar souls of men that are dedde and those bestes that are fair are souls
of lords / and other rich men / and those that are ^oule bestes ar souls of
other commons. and I asked them if it had not be better to give that relef to
pore men and they said there is no poor man in that country. And if there were
/ yet it were more alms to give it to those souls that suffer there their
penance and may go no forther to get their mete than to men that have wit
and may travail for their mete. Than come men to a cite that is callid Chibens
and ther^ was the first syege of the king of Mancy. Iy this cite is ly.
brydges of stone as fair as they may be.

When men pass fro the cite of Chybe^se they pa^ over a great river of fressh
water / and it is nere four mile broad. and than men enter into the land of
the great Chan. This river goth thoroughe the land of pegmaus / there men ar
of little stature for they are but three span long and they are right fair men
gyf all they be little and they are wedded when they are half a year old / and
they live but viii. year and he that live viii. year is hold right old. These
small men travail not but they have among them great men as we are to
travail for them. and have great scorn of those great men as we would have
of geauntes that were among us. Fro this land men go thorough many countres
and cytees and towns till they come to a cite that men call Men^. In that
cite is a great Navy of ships / and they are as white as snow of kind of
the wode yt they are made of and they are made as it were great houses with
hal^es and chaumbers and other esementys. From thens men go upon a river that
men call Ceromosan This river gothe thorough Chatay ^ and does many times harm
when it wexethe great. Chatay is a fair country good and rich full of gods
and marchaundises theder come marchauntis every year for to fetch spyces and
other marchaundises more commonly than they do in other countrees. And ye shall
understand that merchants that come fro Venys or fro Geene or other places
of lumbardy or romayne / they goo by see and land. xi. months and more or
they may come to Chatay. and toward the est is an old cite in the prouynce of
Chatay and beside that cite the Tartarynes have made another rite that men call
Cadom that has seven gates and ever between two gates is a great mile. so that
those two cytees the old and the new is about than xx. mile. In this cite is
the sege of the great chane in a full fair place and great of which the
walls about it is two mile. and within that are many fair places / and in the
gardeyne of that paleys is a right great hill / on the which is another paleys
and it is the fairest that may be found in any place. and all about that hill
are many trees berynge diverse fruits. and about that hill is a great dyche and
there are nere many ryuers and vyners on each side. And in those are many wild
fowls that he may take and go not out of the paleys. without the hall of yt
paleys is xxiiii. pillars of gold and all the walls ar covered with rich
skynnes of bestes that men call panters Those ar fair bestes and well
smelling / and of the smell of the skynnes none evil smell may come to the
paleis those skynnes ar as red as blood. and they shine so again the son
that uneaths may men behold them. and men preyse those skynnes as much as
it were fine gold. In mids of that paleys is a place made yt they call the
mountoure for the great chane that is made well with pricious stones and great
perles hanging about and at four corners of that mountour ar four nedders
of gold / and under that mountour and above ar condytes of beuerage that they
drink in the emperors court and the hall of that palys is richely dight /
and well. and first at the over end of the hall is the throne of the emperor
right hye where he sits at mete at a table that is well bordured with gold
and that bordure is full of p^cious stones and great perles and the greces on
the which he go / the up ar of diverse precious stones bordured with gold At
the lift side of his throne is the sege of his wife a degree lower than he
sits and that is of Jasper bordured with gold / and the sege of his
secounde wife is a degree lower than the first and that is also of good Jasper
bordured with gold. and the sege of the third wife is a degree lower than the
secounde. for alwey he has three wives With him where so he is beside these
wives on the some side sits other ladies on his kynne echone lower than
other as they are of deg^e. And all those that are wed did have a counterfe^e of
a ma^nys foot upon their hedes a shaf^^on long and all made with precious
stoones. and above ar they made with shynynge fedyrs of Pecok / or such other
in token yt they are in subieccion to man and under mannys foot and they that are
not wedded have none such. And the right side of the emperor sits first
his son that shall be emperor after him / and he sytteth also a degree lower
than themperoure in such manner of seges as the emperor sits / and by him
sytteth other lords of his kyn echone lower than other as they are of degree And
the emperor has his table by him one that is of gold and precious stones or
of white cristall or yelowe bordered with gold. and each one of his wives
has a table by her self and under the emperors table sits (...). clerks
at his fete that write all that the emperor says be it good or ill. And at
great festes above themperuors table and all other tables In the hall is a
vine made of fine gold yt goth all about the hall and it has many branches
of grapes like to grapes of the vine. some are white some ar yelowe some red /
and some black. all the red ar of rubyes of cremas or alabau^ce / the white ar
of cry / stall or byrall the yelowe ar of Topaces the grene ar of Emeraudes and
crysolitis ^ and the blake ar of quyches and gerandes. and this vine is made
thus of precious stones so propyrly that it semethe as it were a vine growing.
and before the board of the emperor stands great lords and no man is so
hardy to speak to him but if it be myn^^trellis for to solace the emperor.
and all the vessel that is served in his hall or chambers ar of precious
stones and ^^mely at tables where great Lords et^. that is to say / of Jasper
crystal ama^yst or fine gold / and the cups are of Emeraudes Sapphires
topaces pydos / and other many manner of stones / of silver have they no vessel
/ for they preyse silver but little to make vessel of / but they make of
silver greces pylleris and pauementes of halles / and of chaumbers. And ye
shall understand that my felawe and I was in favor with him xvi months
again the king of Mancy of whom he made war / and the cause was for we had
so great desire to se the nobley of his court if it were such as we herd speak
of and forsooth we fond it more rych and more solemn than ever we herd speak
of / and we should never have trowed it had we not seen it: but ye shall
understand yt mete and drink is more honest among us than in those countres /
for all the commons ete not but flessh of all manner bestes / and when they have
al ete they wype there hands on there skirtis and they ete but ones on the day /
and ye shall wete why he is called the great chan ye woe / te well yt all the world
was destroyed with noes flode but noe and his wif and his children Noe had in
sons sem came and iaphet saw his faders balockes naked when he slept and
scorned it. and therefore was he cursed and Iapheth covered it again. These
three brethren had all the land. Cham took the best party es^wa^d. that is
called as^y. Sem took affryke. and Iapheth took Europe. Cham was the myghtyest
and rychest of his brethern and of him ar comethe paen folk and diverse manner
of men of the yles some hedles and other men disfigured. and for this Cham the
emperor there calls him Cham and lord of all. but ye shall understand
that the emperor of Chatay is called Chane and not cham. and for this skyll
it is not yet viii. year gone that all Tartary was in subieccyon. and thrall to
other nations about and they were made herdmen to keep bestes and among them
was seven lynages or kinds. the first was called Tartary. that is the bes^.
The secounde lynage is called Tanghot. The third Eurace. the forth Valayre. the
fyft Seems. the vi. Menchi. the seventh Sobeth. These ar all holding of the
great chane of chatay. Now it befell so that in the first lynage was an old
man and he was not rich and men called him Changuys. This man lay and slept on
a night in a bed and there came to him a knight al white syttinge upon a white
horse and said to him Chan slepes^ thou god yt is almighty sent me to the /
and it is his will yt thou say to the vii. lynages yt thou shall be there
emperor for ye shall conquer all the lands that are about you and they
shall be in your subiecco^n as ye have be i^ theirs and when morrow came he rose
up and said to the vii. lynages and they scorned him and said he was a fool
and the night after the same knight came to same lynage / and bad them of
gods behalf to make Changuys their emperor / and they should be out of
all subjection / and on the morrow they chase changuys to emperor / and did
him all worship that they might do and called him Chane as the white knight
called him. and they said they would do as he bad them ^ and he made than
many statutes and laws the which he called Isakan. and the first statute was
yt they should be obedient to god all mighty / and trow that he should deliver
them out of thraldom and that they should call on him in all their myster.
Another statute was yt all men that might bear arms should be noumbred and to
each x. should be a master. and a C. a master and to a thousand a master /
and than he commanded to all the grettest and pryncypallis of the seven
lynages that they should forsake all that they had in heritage or lordshype and
that they should hold them paid of that he would give them of his grace and
they did so. And also he bad them that each man should bring his eldest son
before him and sle his own son with his own hands and smite of their hedes
and as sone they did his bidding And when he saw they made no lettynge of
that he bad they^ ^ do. than bad he them follow his baner. and than he put in
subieccion all the lands about him. And it befell on a day that the chane
rode wtyh a few men to see the land that he had won / and he met with a
great multitude of his enemies and there was he cast down of his horse and his
horse slain. and when his men saw him at the earth they trowed he had be ded
and fled. and the enemies followed after / and when he saw the enemies were
far he hyd him in a busshe. for the wode was thycke there and when they were
come again froo the chasse they went to seek among the wode if any were hyd
there ^ and they fond many and as they came to the place there he was. they
saw a bird sit upon a tree the which bird men call an oule and than said
they yt the / re was no man for that byrd sat there and so went they away. and
thus was the chane saved fro death / and so he went awey on a night to his own
men which were feign of him. And fro that time hyderwardes men of that country
have do great worship to that bird and therefore before all birds of the
World they worship that manner of bud. and than he assembled all his men and
rode upon his enemies and destroyed them. and when he had Won all the
lands that were about him he held them in subieccion. And when the chane had
Won all the lands to mount Belyan. the white knight came to him in a vision
again and said unto him. Chane the will of god is that thou pass the mount
Belyan / and thou shall win many lands and for that thou shall find no
passage. go thou to mount Belyan that is upon the sea side and knele^y times
thereon again the Est in the worship of god and he shall show the a wey how
thou shall pass. and the chane did so. and as sone the sea that ^owched to the
hill withd^owe him and showed a fair wey of nine foot broad between the hylle
/ and the Sea. and so passed the right well with all his men. and so he wanne
the land of chatay that is the most land and grettest of the world. and for
those ix. knelynges and the ix. foot of wey the chane and men of tartary have
the noumbre of ix. in great worship. and when he had won the land of Chatay he
dyed / and than reigned after Cythoco Chane his eldest son ^ and his other
brother went to win them lands in other contres. and they wan the land of
pruys and of russy. and they did call them self chane* but he of chatay is the
great chane the grettest lord of all the world and so he calls him in his
letters and says thus. Chan filius de^ excels^ vniuersam terram colenciu^
su^mus imperator et dominus dominanciu^. That is for to say Chane gods son
Emperor of all those that till all the land and lord of all lords. and the
writing above his great seal is Deus in celo. Chan super terram enis
fortitudo oim hoi^m imperatoris sigillu^. That is to say thus God in heaven.
chan upon earth his strength. The seal of the emperor of all men / and the
writing a boute his preuy seal is thus. Dei fortitudo oi^m hoi^m imperatoris
sigil / lu^. That is to say the strength of god seal of the emperor of all
men. And all if it be so that they be not christian: yet the emperor and the
tartaryns trow i^ god almighty

Now have I told you why he is called the great chane. Now shall I tell you
of the gouernynge of his court when they make great festes and the pryncipall
four times in the year. the first feste is of his berynge. the secou^d when he
is borne to the temple to be circumcised. the third is of his ydols when they
begin to speak. and the forth when the ydol begins first to do miracles and
at those times he has men well arrayed by thousa^dis and by hu^dres and echone
wot well what he shall do for there is first ordained iiii. thousand rich
barons / and mighty for to ordeyne the fest and to serve the Emperor / and
all these barons have crowns of gold well dight with precious stones and perles
and they are cladde in clothes of gold and camathas as richely as they may be
made ^ and they may well have such clothes for they are there of less price
than woollen cloth is here. And these iiii. thousand barons ar departed in
iiii. parties and each company is clad in diverse color right richely. and
when the first thousand is passed and has showed them / than come the
secounde thosand / and than the third / and than the forth and none of them
spekethe a word. And on o side of the ^mperours table sytteth many
philosophers of many sciences. some of astronomy nygromancy / geometry /
pyromacy / and other many scyences. and some have before them astrolabes of
gold or of precious stones full of sonde or of cooles brennynge. some have
orlages well dight and richely and other many instruments ^^ter their
scyences. and at a certain hour when they see time they sey to men that
stand before them make p^^s. and than say those me^ with a loud voys to all the hall ^owe be s^yll a while. and than says one of the philosophers ^^he man
make reverence and bow and lou^e to themperoure that is gods son and lord
of the world for now is time and hour. and than all men loute to him / and
knele on the earth. and than byddeth the philosopher them rise up again. and
at one other hour another philosopher bid them all put their syngers in their
erys and they do so. and at another hour byddeth another philosopher yt all
men shall lay their hand on there head and they do so and than he byddeth them
take away and they do so. and thus fro hour to hour they bid diverse things:
and I asked pryuely what this should mean. and one of the masters said that
the loutynge and the knelynge on the earth at that time has this token. that
all those men that knelyd so shall evermore be true to themperoure / that for
no gift / ne hetynge they shall never be tratours / ne falls to him. And the
putting of the finger in the ere has this token. that none of those shall
here none ill be spoken of them / peroure or his counsel. And ye shall
understand that men dight no thing / clothes / bred / drink / nor non such
things to the emperor but at certain hours that the Philosophers tell /
and if any man reyse war again that emperor in what country so it be /
theyse philosophers Woteit sone and tell the emperor or his counseyl and he
sends men theder for he has many men. And he has many men to keep birds
as garfaukons / sperhaukes / faucons gentyls / laners / sacres / popymayes yt
ar speaking / and other many.x. thousand Olyfantes baboyns: marmosettis and
other. and he has many fie / sycien^ ^f the which he has. CC. of them that
are christian men. and xx. sarrasyns but he trusts more in christian men than in
sarrasyns. and there is in the country many barons and other servants that are
christian and converted to the good feyth through prechynge of good christian men
that dwell there. but there are many that woll not that men wete that they are
christian. And he is a full great lord for he may despende what he woll. and he
has in his chaumber a pyller of gold in the which is a Ruby and a carbuncle
of a foot long the which lyghtethe all the chamber upon night / and he has
other many precious stones and rubeis: but this is the most. This Emperor
dwells in the somer towardys the North in a cite that men call Sarduz and
there is cold enough and in winter he dwells in a cite that men call
Camalach there is right hot land and there dwell he for the most party. And
when this great chane shall ride from one country to another they ordeyne
four ostes of folk. of which the first goth before a days journey. for that
ost lies at even where the Emperor shall lie on the morrow and there is
plente of vetayles. And another ost comes at the right side of him and another
at the lift side and in each ost is many folk. and than comes the forth ost
behind him a bow draught. and there is mo^ men than in any of the other. And
ye shall understand that the emperor rides on no horse but if he woll wend
to any place with pryue meyne but he ^ydeth in a charette with four wheles.
and thereupon is a chamber made of a tree that men call ligmi^ alo^s that comes
out of para / d^se terrestre and that chaumber is covered with plates of fine
gold and precious stones and p^rles and four Olyfauntes and fou^e s^^des gone
there in. And v. or vi great lords riden about him so that none other men
shall come nere him but if the emperor call any. and that same manner with
cha^iottes and such ostes ridethe the Empres by another side and the Emperors
eldest son on the same array. and they have so many folks yt it is a great
maruayle to see. And also the land of the great Chane is departed in twelve
prouynces. and each prouynce has more than two thousand kings. Also when
the emperor rides t^r^owe the country. and he passes thorough cytees and
towns. each man makes a fire before his house and casts therein ensence and
other things that give good smell to the emperor / and if m^^ of religion
that are christian dwell nere as the emperor comes they mete him with
procession with a cross and holy water. and they sing Veni creator spiritus
with a lou / de voice. And when he see them come he co^waundethe to the lords
that ride nere him to make wey yt the relygyous men may come to him. and when
he se the cross de does of his hatte that is made of precious stones and
great perles. and that hat is so rich that marueyle it is to tell. and than
he lowteth to the cross. And the prelate of the relygious men say orysons
before him / and give him the benyson with the cross. and he lowteth to the
benyson full devoutly. and than the same prelate gyuethe him some froyte of the
noumbre of ix. in a plate of gold for the manner is such there that no strange
man shall come before the emperor but he give him somewhat after the old law
that says. Nemo accedat in conspectu meo vanuis. That is to say. No man come
in my sight to me. And than the emperor byddeth these religyous men that they
shall go forth so that men of his ost defoule them not. and those religious
that dwell where themperesse or the emperors son comes do in the same manner.
for this great chane is the grettest lord of the world. for prester John is
not so great a lord as he. ne the soudan of Babylon ne the emperor of
persy. In his land a man has a C wives and some xl. some mo some les and they
take of there kyn to wives all but there moders sons and dough^s and me^ and
women have al o manner of clothing so yt tehy may not be know but ye women yt
ar wedded bear a token on there hedes and they dwell not with there husbondes but
he may lie by which that he woll. They have plente of all manner of bestes but
swyne. forthose Wol they non and they trow well in god that made all thing
and yet have they ydols of gold and silver / and to these ydollis they offer
the first milk of their bestes. And this empeperoure the great chane has
three wives. and the pryncypall wife was prestyr John's daughter / The folk of
this country begin to do all their things in the new moan / and they worship
much the son and the moon and those men ride commonly without spores and they
hold it great sin to break a bone with a another and to cast milk on the
earth or any other lycoure yt men may drink. And the most sin that they may
do is to pys i^ their houses there they dwell and he that pisseth in his house
shall be slain and of these sins they shryue them to their prestes and for
their penance they shall give silver and the place where men have pyssed
shall be hallowed o^ else may no man come there. and when they have do their
penance. they shall pass through a fair fire or ^wo to make them clean of
their sins. and when they have eten they wype their hands on there skyrt^s
for they have no bordclothes but it be right great lo^des and when they have
all eten they put their dysshes or doublers. not wasshen in the pot or
cawdron with the flessh that leue^he when they have even unto they woll ete
another time. and rich men drink milk of meres / or asses / or other bestes
and other beuerage that is made of milk / and water togeder for they have
another wine ne ale and when they go to war they werre full wisely and each
man of them berethe two bows or three. and many arowes and a great hachet /
and gentle men have short swerdys / and he that fights in battle they sle
him / and they are ever in purpos to bring all lands in subiecco^n to them
for they say prophesyes say that they shall be over come by shot of archers and
that they shall turn them to their law / but they wot never what men they
shall be and it is great peril to pursue the Tartaryns when they flee. for
they Woll shote behynd and sle men as well as before. and hold oil of Oil for
a good medycyne. and they have small iyen as little birds and they are commonly
false for they hold not that they hete. And when a man shall dye among them
they st^ke a spear in the earth beside him: and when he draws to the death /
they go out of the house till he be deed and than they put him in the earth in
the field. And when the Emperor is ded they set him in a chair in mids
of a tente. and they set before him a table with a cloth and flesh and other
mete / and a cup full of milk of a mere / and they set a mere with a fool by
him and an horse sadlyd and brydelyd / and they lay upon the horse gold and
silver: and all about him they make a great grave / and put him in. And tent
to all other things they put in the earth to geder / and they say when he
comes into another world he shall not be without an house ne horse ne silver
and the mere shall give him milk and bring forth more horse til he be well
stored in the other world / for they trow yt when they are ded they shall go
into another world and ete and drink and have solace with their wives as they
have here. And when that he is leyde in the earth no man shall be so hardy for
to speak of him before his friends. And than when the emperor is deed
the.vii. lynages geder them togeder: and they touch his son or the next of
his blood / and they say thus we woll and we ordeyne and we pray that thou bo
our lord and our emperor and he enquyreth if ye woll that I regne upon you
echo ne woll do that I bid him. And if he bydd that any be slain he shall be
slain. And they answer all with one voice / all that ye bid shall be done. Than
says the emperor fro now forth my word shall be sherynge as my sword. and
than they set him in a chair and crowned him. and than all the good towns
sent him presents so that he shall have more than a cart full of gold^ ^
silver and other many Iuellys that he shall have o^ lords of precious stones
and gold without noumbr^ ^^d horse / and rich clothes of camacas and
tartaryn^ (...) such o / there. This land of Chatay in assy the deep. and the
land of chatay marches towa^de the west upon the kingdom of Se^^y the which
was sometime to one of the three kings that went to seek our lord in Betheleem
These men of Ta^tary drink no wine. In the land of Cor^saym that is at the
north side of chatay is right great plente of good but no wy^e. the which
has at the est side a great wilderness that lasts more than a hundred
iourneis and the best cite of that land is called Corosaym. and thereafter is
the land so called Men of this land ar good warreour^ and ha^dy. And thereby
is the kingdom of Comayn. This is the most and the grettest king / dom of the
world / but it is not all inhabyte. for in one place of that land is so
great cold that no man may dwell therefore cold* and in another place is so
great hete that no man may dwell there. and there are so many fey / ghes that a
man wot not on what side he may turn hi^ In this land ar but few trees
berynge fruit. In this land men lie in tents and they brenne dunge of bestes
/ for defaute of wode. This land descendethe towardys Pruyse and rosy. and
thorough this land renneth the ryuere Echel that is one of the grettest ryuers
of the world and it is frosen so hard each year that men fight thereon i^
great batayles on horse. and footmen more than an hundred thousand at ones.
And a little fro that River is the great see of occian that they call Maure.
And between this Maure and the Caspy is a full streyte passage too go toward
ynde and therefore king alysaunder did make there a cite that men call
alysaundre to keep that pas / sage so that no man may pass but if he have
leave. And now is that cite called Port de fear. and the pryncipall cite of
Comayn is called Sarachys. this is one of three ways to go into ynde but
thorough this way may not many men go but if it be in winter. And this passage
is called Berbent. and another wey is for to go from the land of turkeston
thoro^^ ^sy / and in this wey ar ma / ny iournes in wilderness and the third
way is that comes fro Cosmane and that goth through the great cite and through
the kingdom of abachare. And ye shall understand that all these kyngdoms and
lands unto persy ar holden of the great chane of chatay and many other and
therefore he is full great lord of men and of lands.

Now have I devised you the lands toward the north to com fro the lo^des of
chatay to the lands of Pruys and Rosy where christian men dwell. Now shall I
deuyse to you other lands and kyngdoms in coming down fro Chatay to the
greeks see where christian men dwell. And for as much as next the great chane
of chatay the emperor of percy is the grettest lord. therefore I shall first
speak of him and ye shall understand that he has two kyngdoms the one
begins Estward and the kingdom of Turkescon and it lesteth westward to the sea of Caspy. and southward to the land of ynde and this land is good and
pleyne and well mannyd good cytees. but two most pryncipall of the cytees ar
called Bacirida and Sorinaguiit. The other kingdom of pcy lasts fro the river
of Physon unto the great Ermony and Northward unto the sea of Caspy and
southwarde to the land of ynde. and this is a full plenteuous coun / tree and
good. and in this cite is three pryncypall cytees. Nessabor Saphan and
Sarmasse. and than is the land of Ermony in which was sometime three kyngedoms /
This is a good land and plenteuous and it begins at pcy and lasts
westward to Turkey of length and in bread it lasts fro the cite of alysaundre
that now is called Port de fea^ unto the land of Myddy. In this Ermony are
many fair cytees but Canryssy is most of name. Than is the land of Myddy that
is full long but na^ broad. that begins Estwarde at the land of percy and
ynde the less and lasts westward to the kingdom of Caldee and Northwarde to
little Ermony. In this Myddy ar many great hills and little pleyne and there
dwell Sarrasyns and another manner of men that men call Cordynz and karmen. Than
is next the kyngedom of George that begins estward at a great hill that men
call Abior. this land lasts fro Turkey to the great see and the land of
myddy and the great Armony. and in this land ar two kings one of Abeaz / and
another of George / but he of george is in subieccion to the great chan but the
abeacaz has a strong country and defends him well again his enemies. And
in this land of abcaz is a great marueyle for there is a country in that land
yt is nere three days journey long and about / and it is called hamfon. and
that country is all covered with myrkenes so that it has no light that no man
may se there. and no man dare go into that country for the myrkenes. and
nevertheless men of the country thereby say that they may sometime here therein
the voice of men and horse whynynge and cocks crow and they wot well that men
dwell there but they wot not what manner of men. and they say this myrkenesse
comes thorough miracle of god that he did for christian men there. For there was
a wicked emperor that was of Poy. and he was called Saures and he pursued
sometime all christian men to destroy / and did them make sacrifice to his false
gods and in that country dwelled many christian men / the which left all there
gods and catellys and riches and would go into greece and when they were all in
a great plain yt men call Megon the emperor and his men came for to sle these
christian men / and than the christian men all set them on there knees / and prayed
to god. and as sone came a thycke cloud / and ouerlapped the emperor and all
his ost / so that he might not go away and so dwell they in myrkenes / and they
came out never sithe and the cristo^me^ went where they would and therefore they
might say thus. A dn^o factu^ est istud and est mirabile i^ oculis (...) That
is to say of our lord is this done and it is wonderful in our iyen. Also out
of this myrke land comes a river that men may se by good token ye men dwell
therein. Than next is this land of Turkey that marches to great armony. and
therein ar many countries as capadoce saure Bryke / quesicion / Pytan / and
geneth / In each one of these ar many good cytees / and it is a plain land /
and few hills / and few ryuers. and than is the king of Messopotayne that
begins estward at Flom of Tygre at a cite that men call Mosel. and it
lasts westward to the floin of Eufraten to a cite yt men call Rochayz and
westward fro high Ermony unto the wyldr^es of ynde the less and it is a good
land ^ a plain / but there is few ryuers and there is but two hills in that
land. the one is called Symar and the other lyson and it marches to the land
of Calde. And ye shall wete y^ the land Ethyope marches estward to the great
wilderness westward to the land of Nuby southward to the land of Maritane
and northward to the red se and than is marytane yt lasts fro the hills of
Ethiope unto lyby the high and the low that lasts to the great se of spain.

Now have I sa^de and spoken of many on this side of the great kingdom of
Chatay of Whom many ar obeysaunt to the great chane. Now shall I say of some
lands and countres and Isles that are beyond the land of chatay. who so goth
fro chatay to ynde the high and the low he shall go thorough a kingdom yt men
call caldishe that is a great land / there grows a manner of fruit as it were
goordes. and when it is ripe men shere asonder and they find therein a best as
it were of flesh of bone and blood as it were a little lamb without wolle
and men ete the best and the fruit also and that is a great marueyle.
Nevertheless I said them that I held that for no marueyle. For I said in my
country ar trees yt bear fruit that become birds fleing and they are good to
ete and yt that falls in waterlyueth and yt that fallethe on the earth dyethe
and they had great maruayle of this. In this land and many other about there are trees yt bear clowes and nutmygges and canel and many oter spyces and there are vynes that beer so great grapes that a strong man shall have enough to do
to bear a cluster of the grapes. In that same land ar the hills of Caspe that
men call vber. and among those hills that are there / the Jews of the x.
kinds enclosed that men call Gog and magog and they may not come out on no
side. There was enclosed xxii. kings with their folk that dwelled before
between the hills of Syche and the king alysaunder chased them theder among
those hills for he trowed to have enclosed them there thoroughe workynge of
men but he might not. but when he saw yt he might not / he prayed to god yt he
would fulfill yt he had begone / and god herd his prayer and enclosed the
hills togeder so yt the Jews dwell there as they were locked in / and there
is hills all about them. but at one side and there is see of gaspy. And some
men might ask. there is a see on one side / Why go they not out there. for
thereto answer I that all if it be called a see. It is no see / but a stange
standing among hills / and it is the gretteste stange of all the world. And
if they went over the sea they wot not where forto aryue. for they can no
speech but their own. and ye shall understand that the Jews have no law of
their own law in all the world. but they that dwell in these hills / and yet
they pay trybute for their land to the queen of armony. And sometime it is so
yt some of the jews go over the hills but many men may not pass there samen
for the hills ar so great and so high. Nevertheless men say in that country
there by that in the time of antecryst they shall do much harm to christian men.
And therefore all the Jews that dwell in diverse parties of the world lere for
to speak Ebrewe for they that the Jews that dwell among the hills
beforesayde shall come out of the hills and they speak all ebrewe and not
else. and than shall these Jews speak ebrewe to them and led them into
cristendom for to destroy christian men. For these Jews say they Wot by their
prophesies that those Jews that are among those hills of Caspy shall come
out and crys^^n men shall be in their subiec^ion as they be under christian men.
and if ye woll w^te how they shall find the passage out as I have
understand I shall tell you. In time of an (...) a fox s^all make his de^ in
the same place where king alysaundre did make the gates and he shall so in
there earth and perse it thorough unto that he come among the Jews. And when
they see this fox they shall have great maruayle of him for they saw never
such best. for other bes^es have they among them many. and they shall c^ase
this fox and pu^sue him unto that he be fled again into his hole that he came
fro. and than shall they grave after as he went unto they come to the gates
that Alysaundre did make of great stones well dight with symont. and they shall
break these gates and so shall they find the issue. From this land men shall
go unto the land of Bakary where ar many wicked men and fell. In that land ar
trees that bear woll as is it were sheep of which they make clothe. In this
land ar many Ipotaynes that dwell sometime on land / sometime on water and ar
half man and half horse and they ete not but me^ when they may get them. In
this land ar many gryffons more than in another place. and some say they have
the body before as an egle / and behind as a lion. And they say soth. for they are made so / but the gryffon has a body gretter than viii. lions and gretter
and stalworthyer than an hundred egles. For certeynly he woll bear to his nest
flyinge an horse and a man upon his back or two oxen yocked samen as they go
at ploughe for he ha / the long nails on his fete and great as it were
horns of oxen and of those they make cups there to drynk of and of his
rybbes they make bows to shote

FRo this land of Bakary men go through many iourneys to the land of Prester
John that is a great emperor of ynde and men call his lon / de the I Will of
Pantoxore. This emperor Prester John holds great lands and many and good
cytees / and good towns in his his kingdom many great Isles and large. For
this land of ynde is all departed in Isles because of great flodes that come
out of paradyse. and also in the sea ar many great Isles. The best cite that
is in the I Will of Pentoxore is called Nyse for that is a noble cite and rich.
Prester John has under him many kings. and many diverse folk / and his land
is good and rych but not so rich as the land of the great chane. for
merchants com not so much theder as they do into the land of the great chan
for it is so long wey. And also they find in the I Will of Chatey all that they
have myster of / as spicery clothes of gold and other richesse. And all if
they might have better chepe in the land of prester John nevertheless they
let for the long wey and great per / yllis in the sea. for there is many
places in the sea where ar great roches of a stone that is called adamonde.
the which of his own kind draws to him iron and for as much that there
should pass no ship that had nails of iron. for it should draw it to him.
therefore they dare not wend into that country with ships for dread of
adamandes. I went ones in that se and saw as long as it had been a great isle
of trees and stocks / and branches. growing / and the shypman said that
those was of great ships that were dwelling there thoroughe virtue of the
adamandes and of things that were in the ships were those trees sprongen and
waxen.

And such roches are in many places in that see. and therefore dare no shypmen
pass that wey. and another also they dread the long wey. and therefore they
wend too Chatay that is nere unto them. and yet is it not so nere that them
behooves fro Venys or fro Geene be in see toward Chatay xi. or xii. months.

The land of Prester John is long / and merchants pass theder thorough the
land of Persy and come unto a cite that men call Ermes. for a Philosopher that
men called Ermes foundyd it / and they pass an arm of the sea and comes to
another cite that men call Saboth and there find they all marchaundyses and
popyniayes as great plente as larkes in our country. In this country is
little whete or barley. and therefore they ete rise and milk and chese and other
fruits. This emperor prester John weddeth commonly the daughter of the great
chane. And the great chan his daughter. In the land of prester* John is many
diverse things / and many precious stoones so great and so large that they
make of them vessel pla / ters and cups / and many other things / of
which it were to long to tell: but somewhat of his law and of his feyth shall
I tell you. This emperor prester John is christian and great party of his
land. Also but they have not all the artycles of our feyth but they trow well
in the fader and the son and the holy ghost. and they are full devout and true
one to another. and they make no force of catell. and he has under him lxxii.
prouynces. and countrees and in each one is a king / and those kings have
other kings under them. and in this land are many marueyles. For in that
land is the grauelly see yt is of sonde and of gravel and no drop of Water.
and it ebbethe and flows with right great wawes / as another see does / and
it is never still ne never in rest and no man may pass that land beyond it.
And all if it so be that there be no water in that see. yet men may find
fysshe right good and of other fasyon and shappe / than is in any other sees.
and also they are of full good sauoure / and sweet and good to ete. And at
three iournes froo that see ar great hills through which comes a great
flode that comes fro paradyse and it is full of precious stones and no drop of
water and it renneth with great wawes into the grauelly see. And this flodethre
days re^neth so fast and stereth great stones of the roches with him that
make much noise. and as sone they come into the grauelly see they are no more
seen. and in those three days when ^^renneth thus noman dare come in it. but
the other daye^ men may go therein where they woll: and also beyond that flode
toward the wilderness is a great pleyne all sondy and grauelly among hills
/ and in that pleyne grow trees that at the rysinge of the son each day
begin to grow and so grow they to mydday. and bei^ f^utes but no man dar
ete of ye fruit for it is a manner of iron and after mydday i^ turns again
into the earth. so that when the son goth down it is no thing seen: And so
does it every day. and there is in that wyldernes many wild men with horns on
their hedes / and right hydous and they speak not but grunt as swyne. And in
that country ar many popymayes that they call in their langage pysta^ and they
speak thorough there own kind as aptly as a man. and those that speak well
have long tongues and large and on every foot five tose. there are some that
has but three tose. and tho same speak naught or very little

This emperor Prester John when he gothe to battle he has no baner borne
before him but he has borne before him in. crosses of fine gold and those are
great and large and well dight with precious stones and for to keep each a
cross is ordained a thousand men of arms and mo than an hundred thousand on
foot in manner as men keep a standard in bataile in other places and he has
men withouten ^oumbre when he goth to any battle again any other lord. And
when he has no battle but rydeth with preuy company* than does he bear
before him but a cross of tree not painted and without gold and precious stones
and all plain in token that our lord Jesus christ suffr^d death on a c^osse of
tree. And also he has borne before him a plate of gold full of earth in token
that ^is lordship and nobley shall turn to naught and his flesh shall turn
to earth. And there before him also another v^ssell full of iewellys and gold
and precious stones in token of nobley and his might. And he dwell commonly at
the cite of Suse / and there is his pryncipall palys that is so rich that
ma^ueyle is to tell. and above the princypal toure of the palys ar two pomelles
of gold all round. and each one of those has two Carbuncles great and large
that shine right clear on the night. And the pryncipal gates of this palys ar
of precious stones yt men call Sardyn. and the borders of the bars are of
euory. and the wyndowes of the hall and chambers ar of crystal. And tables yt
they ete of some ar of emeraudes some ar of mastyk / some of gold and precious
stones and the pyllers that bear the tables ar of such stones also and the
greses on the which the emperor goth to his see / where he sets at mete
one is of mas^y^ andother of cystall / another of Iasby grene. another of
dyasper. another of sardyn. another of Corinlyn. another of Sempton. And that
he sets upon his foot is of crysolites and all these gr^ses ar bordure^ with
fine gold and well dight with great perles and other precious stones / and the
sides of his sege ar emeraudes bordured with gold and with p^cious stones. the
pyllers in his chamber ar of fine gold with many carbuncles and other such
stones yt give great light on the night. and all if the charbuncles give great
light. Nevertheless there brenneth each night xii. great vessellis of crystal
full of bame to give good smell / and to drive awey wicked air. The form of
his bed is all of saphyre well bound with gold to make him to sleep well and
for to stroy lechery. for he woll not lie by his wives but thryes in the year
after the sesons and all only for getynge of children And he has also a fair
palys at the cite of Nyse where he dwells when he wol but the air there is
not so well tempered as it is at the cite of Suse. and he has each day i^ his
court mo than xxx. thousand men without comers ^ goers. but xxx. thousand
there. And in the country of the great chane spend not so much as xii.
thousand in our country. he has evermore vii. kings in his court to serve
him* and echone of they^^ serves a month. and with these kings serve alwey.
lxxii. dukes and ccc. earls / and each day they ete in his court xii.
archebysshoppes and xx. bishops The patryarke of saint Thomas is as he were a
pope. and archebysshops and bysshopes / and abbottes all are kings in that
country. And some of the lords is master of the hall. some of the chamber. some
stywarde. and so^me marshal: and some other officers and therefore he his full
richely served. and his land lastethe in bread four months journey and it
is of length without mesure In this I Will of of prester John is great plente of
gods and much riches and many precious stones In that land was a rich man
not long sith yt men called there Catolonabes / he was full rich and he had a
fair castle in an hill and strong and he had made a wall all about the hill
right strong and fair within that he had a fair gardeyne wherein were many
trees beringe all manner of fruits yt he might find / and he did plant therein
all manner of erbes of good smell and that bare flowers. and there was many
fair wells / and by them was made many fair halles and chambers dight with
gold and asure and he had made there diverse stories and bestes and birds that
song and turned by engyne and orbage as they had be al quyk / and he had in
his gardeyne that he might find to make a man solace / and comfort. and he had
also there in that gardeyne maidens within the age of xv. year the foyrest he
might find. and men children of the same age. and they were cladde with clo /
these of gold and he said that tho same were aungellis and he had do made three
hills fair and good all enclosed about with precious stones of Iaspy and
crystal and well bound with gold and perles / and other manner of stones. and
he had made a condyte under the earth so yt when he would the walls ran
sometime with mylk. sometime with wine sometime with honey. and this place is
called Paradyse. And when any young bachel^re of the country knight / or
Squire comes to him for solace and disport. he ledeth him into his Paradyse
and show unto him all these diverse things / and diverse songs of birds and
also of his damoselles / and his wells. and he did stryke diverse instruments
of musyke in an high ^oure that might be seen and said those were aungelles of
god and that place was paradise that god has granted to those that beloved
when he said. Dabo vobis teriam fluentemla^ et mel. That is to say I shall give
you land flowynge milk and honey. And tha^ne this rich man did these men
drink a manner of drink of which they were dronken and he said to them if
they would dye for his sake that when they were deed they should come into
his paradyse. and they should be of the age of those maidens and should dwell
alwey with the^ and he should put them in a fair paradyse where they should
see god in his joy and in his mageste / and thanne they granted to do all that
he would and ^han he badde them go and sle such a lord or a man of the
country yt he was wroth with. and that they should have no dread of no man. and
if they were slain them self for his sake he should put them in his
paradyse when they we / ^^ deed. and so went these bachelors to sle great
lords. of the count^e. and were slain them self in hope to have that
paradyse. and thus he venged of his enemies thorough his desert. and when
rich men of the country pseyued this malice and cautele and the wyle of this
Catolonabes they gadred them togeder and assailed the Castle and slow him
and destroyed all his gods and his fair places and ^^chesse that were in his
Paradyse the place of the walls is there yet and some other things. but
richesse is not there. and it is not long sith he was destroyed. A litell fro
that place on the lyf^e side beside the river of Physon is a great maruayle.
There is a vale between two hills that four mile is long. some call it the
valey Enchanted: some the valey of deuylles. some the valey perylous and in that
valey ar many tempests and great noise and hydous every day and night. and
sometime as it were a noise of Tabu^nes of nakers and of trompettes as it were
at a great fest. This valey is all full of deuyllis and has been alwey and men
say there that it is an enter to hell. In this valey is much gold and silver.
wherefore many christian men and other go theder for couetyse to have of that
gold / and silver. but few of them come out again for they are as sone
strangled of deuylles. and in myddell of that vale upon a Roche is a vysage and
the head of a fend bodily right hidous i^ dredefull to se. and there is no
thing seen but the head. to the shulders. but there is no man cr^sten in the
world ne other so hardy that he ne should have great dread for to behold it /
for he beholds each man so sharply and so felly. and his iyen ar so styrynge
and so sprenkelynge as fire and he changes so often his countenance that no
man dare come nere for all the world and out of his mouth and his nose comes
great plente of fire of diverse colors. and sometime is the fire so stynkynge
yt no man may suffer it. but alwey a good christian man and that is stable in the
feyth may go therein without harm if they shryue them well and bliss them
with the token of the cross than shall the deuyllis have no power of them.
And ye shall understand that when my fellows and I were in yt valey we had
full great thought if we should put our bodies in adventure to go thoroughe it
/ and some of my fellows accorded thereto. and some would not accord thereto. and
there was in our company two freres Mynours of lumbardy and they said if any
of us would go in they would go also. and when they had said so / upon trust
on them we said that we would goo. and we ^yd sing a mess and we were
shryuen and houseled and we went in xiiii. and when we came out we were but x.
and we wise not Wheder our fellows were lost there or they ^urned again but
we saw no more of them other of our felawes that w^ld not go with us in went
about by another wey for to be before us and so they were and we went thorough
the Valey and saw there many marvelous things / gold* silver / and precious
stones and Iewellys great plente on many sides as us thought (...) it was as
it seemed I wot not for I touched the^ n^^. for the deuylles ar so subtell and
queynt that make many ^ymes a thing to seem that it is not for to descey^^
men. and therefore ^ would touch no thing for dread of (...) that I saw in
many lykenesses what of ded (...) that I saw lie in the valey / but I dare not
say ^ they were not all bodies but they seemed bodies through making of
deuyllys. and we were often casten down to the earth thorough wend and thonder
and tempests / but god helped us alwey and so passed we through that valey
without peril and harm thanked be god almighty that us kept well. And
beyond that valey is a great I Will Where folk are as great as g^auntes of
xxviii. foot or xxx. foot long. and they have no clothing but beestys skynnes
that hang on them and they ete no bread but flesh raw and drink milk and
they have no houses and they ete gladlyer flessh of men than of other. and me^
said us yt beyond yt isle is one isle where ar gretter geauntes as of xlv. or l.
foot long. and some say of l. cubytes long but I saw not them. and among
those geau^tes ar great sheep as it were young oxen and they bear great Woll
these sheep have I seen many times. Another isle is there occian in the sea
where ar many ill and fell women and they have precious stones in theiriyen.
and they have such kind yt if they behold any man With wreth they sle them
of the beholdynge as the baselyk does. another I Will is there of fair folk and
good where the custume is such yt the first night yt they are wedded they take
a certain man y^ is ordained therefore. and do him ly by their wives to have
their maydenhede / and they give him great reward for his travail / and those
men ar called gadlibirie^. for men of that country hold it a great thing to
make a woman no maydon and if it be so yt the husbonde find her a maydon the
night after. for perauenture he yt lay by her was dronken or for any other
skyll the husbonde shall pleyne of (...) to the law yt he has not do his
devour ^ and he shall grievously be punysshed and chastysed / but after the
first night they keep there wives well yt they speak not with those me^ and I
asked what was the cause why they had tha^ custom and they said sometime men
lay with their wives first and none other. and their wives had edders in their
bodies and stonged their husbonde on their yerde and their bodies ^ so was many
man slain.

And therefore had they that custom to let other men have their m^ydenhede
for dread of the d^the And thus they suffer them to assay the passage or they
put the^m unto adventure.

Another is there where women make much sorrow when their children ar borne.
and when they are deed they make great joy and cast them in a great fire and
bre^ne them. and they that love well their husbondes when they are deed they
cast them in a fire to brenne also. for they say that fire shall make them
clean of all fylthe and vices and they shall be cleene in another world. and the
cause why they w^pe and make sorrow when their children are bo^ne. and that
they make joy at their death. they say a child when he is borne he comes into
this world for to traueyle and sorrow and heaviness. and when they are deed
they go to paradyse where ryuers ar of milk and honey. and there is life and
Joy and plente of gods without travail and sorrow. In this I Will they make
they^ kings by chesynge. and they chese him not for hi^ ^ych^sse (...) his
no^ley but him that is of good condycyons and most rightwys and true that
Iugethe each man truly little and much after their trespass. And the king may
judge no man to death without counseyle of his batons and that all they assent.
And if so be that the king do a great trespass as slay a man or such other
^e shall be deed* but he shall be slain. but they shall defend and forbede that
no man be so hardy to make him company ne to speak with him ne give him mete ne
drink and thus he shall dye. they spare no man that has done trespass for love
n^ for lordshyp ne ^ychesse nor nobley yt men do him right after that he has
done. And there is another I Will where is great plente of folk. and they ete
never flesh of hares ne of ^ennes: ne of goose / but yet there is many of
them but they ete gladly flesh of all other bestes and they drink milk. In
this country they wedde their daughters and other of their kyn as them lyketh.
and if there be ten or twelve men in an house echon of their wives shall be common
to other. And a night shall one have one of the wives and another night another
/ and if she have any child. she may give to which of the^ she woll. so that
no man wot if it be his or not. In this land and many other places of ynde ar
many Cokadrilles that is a manner of a long nedder and a nyghtis they dwell on
water / and on days they dwell on land and roches and they ete not in winter.
This nedder slay men and eteth them gretande and they have no tongue. In this
country and many other men cast sede of coton and sow it each year and it
grows as it were small trees that be / re coton. In araby is many birds /
and some men call Gyrsantis that is a full fair best that is higher than a
great courser or a stead / but his neck is nere xx. cubits long. and his
croupe and his tail is like to an heart / and he may look over an high house.
and there is many Camylions that is a little best and he etethe / and drynkethe
never and he changes often his color. for sometime he is of one color and
sometime of another. and he may change him into all colors that he woll but
black and reed. There are many wild swyne of many colors / and as great as
oxen. and they are spotted as it were small fawnes and there are lions all white.
and there be other ^estes as great as great stedes that men call Lonhorans and
some men call them Tontes and their head is blak / and three long horns in his
front as cuttynge as a sharp sword. and he chaseth and woll sle the
Olyfaunte. and there is many other manner of bestes of whom it were ^o long to
write. and there is another I Will good and great and plenteuous where ar good men
and true and of good life after their feythe. and if all they be not christian.
nevertheless of kind they are full of good virtues / and they sle all vices
and all sin and malice for they are not enuyous ne proud ne covetous ne
lecherous ne glotenous / and they do not unto another man but that they would
he did do them / and they fulfill the x. co^maun / dementes / and they make no
force of richesse / ne of having. and they swe^e not but say nay / and ye. for
they say he that swereth he woll disceyue his neygboure. and some men call this
the I Will of Bragamen and some call it the land of feyth and thorough it renneth
a great river that men call Thebe. and generally all men in those I / l^s and
other thereby ar trewer and rightwyser than are in other countrees. In this I Will
are no thieves ne murderers ne common women ne beggars. and for as much they are
so true and so good that there is no tempest ne thunder ne war ne hunger ne
other tribulacions. and thus seems well that god loves them well and is well
paid of their troth and their deeds and they trow in god that made all
thing and him worship they and they ly / ne so ordynatly in mete and drink
that they live right long and many of them dye without sykenesse ye kind
fails them for age. And king alysaunder sometime sent his men to win that
land. and they sent him letters that said thus. What behouethe a man to have
all the world may not suffyse thou shall find no thing in us why thou
should warrey us for we have no riches. ne tresoure. and all the gods and
catell of our country ar common. our metes that we ete ar our richesse. And
in sted of tresoure of gold and silver we make our tresoure peace and accord
of love. and naught have we but a clothe upon our bodies. our wives are not
arrayed rychely to plesynge. for we hold it a great folly a man to dyght his
body to make it seem fayrer than god made it. we have be evermore in peace till
now that thou will disherite us. We have a king among us not for to law ne
deem no man. for there is no trespassoure among us but all only to lere us to
be obedyent to him and so may thou naught take fro us but our good peace. And
when alysaunder saw this Letter. him thought thus that he should do to much
harm if he troubled them. and sent to them that they should keep well their
good manners / and have no dread of him. Another I Will is there that is called
Synople where also ar good folk and true / and full of good feythe / and they are much like in lyuygge to men before said and they go all naked. and into
that I Will came king alysaunder. and when he saw their good feythe and truth
he said he should do them no harm and badde them ask of him richesse and
naught else and they should have.

And they answered that they had riches enough when they had mete and drink
to sustain their bodies and they said richesse of this world is naught worth
but if it were so that he might grant them that they should never dye that
would they pray him. and alysau^der said yt might he not do for he was dedly
and should die as they should Than said they why art thou so proud and would
win all the world and have in thy subiecco^n as it were a god and thou have
no term of thy life / and thou will have all richesse of the world the
which shall forsake the ^ or thou forsake it and thou shall bear no thing
with the. but it shall dwell to other but as thou was borne naked: so shall
thou be done in earth. And alysaunder was greatly astonyed of this answer. and
if it be so that they have not the artycles of our feyth. Nevertheless I trow
that god loves them well and their good entencion and that he takes their
service to gre as he did of Job that was a pain the which he held for his
true servant / and many other. I trow well that god loves Well all those yt
love him and serve him mek^ly and trewly and that despise the vain glory of
the world as these men do and as Job did. and the^fore said our lord
thoroughe the mouth of Isay the prophet thus. Ponam eis multiplices leges
meas. That is to say I shall put to them my laws in many manners. ^ the
gospel says thus. Alias o^e^ ha^^^o que non sunt ex hoc outli. That is to
say. I have other sheep that are not of this fold and thereto accords the
anysion that saint Peter saw at Iaffe how the angel ^am fro heaven and
brought with him of all manner of bestes and nedders and fowls in all manner.
and said to saint peter Take and ete ^ and saint Peter answe^ed. I ete never
of bestes unclean / and the au^gel said to him. No^ dicas i^mu^da que deus
mu^dauit. That is to say Call thou not those things unclean y^ god has
^lensed. this was done i^ token y^ men should not have many me^ in despite for
there diverse laws* for we wot never whom god loves. and whom god hates. And
there is a another I Will that men call Pytan. Men of this land till no land for
they ete naught. and they are small men but not so small as pegmanes. These men
live with smell of wild apples. And when they go far out of the country
they bear apples with them. for as sone they lose the sauoure of apples they
dye / they are not full reasonable / but as it were bestes. And than is there
another I Will where the folk ar all feders* but the face and the pames of their
hands. These men go as well above the sea as on the land and they ete flesh
and fysshe all ^awe. In this I Will is a great river that is two mile broad and
half that men call Renemar. and beyond that river is great wilderness as men
that have be there say. In such wilderness as men say, ar the trees of the son
and the moon yt spoke to king alysander and told him of his death and men say
that folk that keep these trees and ete of the fru^^ of them. they life CCCC.
or five hundred year tho^^ugh virtue of the fruit. and we would gladly have go
heder. but I trow that an hundred thousand men of irmes should not pass the
wilderness for great plente of wyld bes^es as dragons and edders that sle men
wha^ they have any. In this land is many Olyfauntes all white and blewe
without noumbre and vnycornes and lions of many manners. Many other yles ar in
the land of Prester John that were to long to tell and much ry / chesse and
nobley of precious stones in great plente. I trow that we have herd say whys
thy Emperor is called Prester John. but for those that wot not I shall say.
There was sometime an Emperor that was a noble prince and doughty ^ and he
had many christian knights with him. and the emperor thought he would se the
manner of service in christian churches / and than was churches of cristendom in
turkey surry and tartary Jerusalem Palestyn araby harap and all the lands of
egypt And this emperor came with a christian knight into a church of egypt and
it was on a Satu^day after wytsonday when the bishop made orders and he
beheld to the service and he asked of the knight what folk those should be
that stood before the bishop and the knight said they should be prestes. and
he said he would no more be called king ne emperor but pressed and he would
have the name of him that came first out of the prestes ^ and he was called
John and so have all themperours sythen be call / led prest^e John. In that
land ar many christian men of good feyth and good law ^ and they have prestes
to sing mess and they make the sacrament as men of greece do but they say not
so many things as our prestes do so they sey not but that the apostles said
as saint Peter ^ saint Thomas and other apostles when they sange m^sse and
said Pater noster. And the words with the which goddis body is sacred. we
have many addyco^ns of popes that have been ordained of which men of thos^
^^untrees know not.

Toward the Est side of the land of prester John is ^n I Will that men call
Tabrobane that is right good and f^^^^ouse. and there is a great king and a
rich and he is obedyent unto prester John ^ and that king is alwey made by
chesynge. In this I Will ar two wynters and two summers: and they shere corn ^wyes
in the year. And all times in the year ar gardeyns florysshed. There dwell good
folk and reasonable and many christian folk among them that are full rich. and
the water between the land of prestre John and this I Will is not full deep for
men may see the ground in many places. and there are more Estwarde two other
Isles. the one is called Or^ell and the other Argete of whom all the land is
mine of gold and silver. In those Isles may men see no sterres clear shinynge.
but one sterre that is called Canapos And there may not men se the moon but in
the last quar / ter. In that I Will is a great hill of gold that pyssmyres keep
and they do the ^yne gold from the other that is not fine gold and the
pyssmyres ar as great as hounds so that no man dare come there for dread of
pyssmyres that should assail them so that men may not work in that gold ne
get thereof but queyntyse / and therefore when it i^ right hot the pyssmy^es
hyde them in the earth from ^nderne to none of the day. And than men of the
country ^ake camellys and dromaderyes and other bestes / and goo theder and
charge them With gold and go awey fast or the pyssmyres come out of the
earth. And other times when it is not so hot that the pissmyres hyde them not
they take meres that have foles. and they lay upon these Meres ^wo vessels as
it were two small barelis tome and the mouth vpwardes and drive them theder /
and holden their foles at home.

And when the pyssmyres seen theyse vessels. for they have of kind to leave
no thing to me. They fylle these vessels of gold. and when men trow yt the
vessels ar full they take the foles and bring them as nere as they dare and
they whyne and the meres here them and as sone they come to there foles. and so
men take the gold so than for these pyssemyres woll suffer bestes to goo among
them but no men. Beyond the Isles of the land of Prester John and his lordship
of wilderness to goo right est men shall not find but hills great roches and
other myrke land where no man may see on day ne on night as men of the country
say. and this wyldernes and myrke land lasts to paradyse terresire where
Adam and eve were se^te / but they were there but a little while and yt is
toward the est at beginning of the earth / but that is not our est that we
call where the son rysethe in those countrees toward paradyse. than it is
mydnight in ou^e country. for the roundnesse of the earth for our lord made
the earth all round in mids of firmament. Of pa^adyse can I not speak
propuly. for I have not be there. and that angoreth me. but that I have herd I
shall say you. Men say that paradyse terrestre is the highest land of the
world and it is so high that it touches nere to the se^^le of the moon / for
it is so high yt Noes flode might not come thereto. the which covered all the
earth about. And this Paradyse terrestre is enclosed all about with a wall.
and that wall is all covered with moss as it semethe that men mayse no s^one
ne no thing ellis whereof it is. ^ the highest place of paradyse in the mydes
of it is one wall that casts out the four flodes that run through diverse
lands. The first flode is called physon or ga^ges: and that renneth thorough
ynde in yt river are many precious stones and much lignu^ aloes / and gravel
of gold. Another is called Nylus or Gyron and yt ren / nethe thorough Ethiope
and egypt. The third is called Tygre and that renneth thorough Assary and
Ermony the great. And the forth is called Eufrates that rennethe thorough
Ermony and Persy / and men say yt all the sweet and fresshe water of the world
take their springynge of them. The first river is called Physon that is to say
a gaderynge of many ryuers to geder and fall into that river. and some call it
Langes for a king that was in ynde yt men called Tangeras for it renneth
thorough his land And this ryuere is in some place clear in some place troble in
some place hot in some place cold. The secon^de ryuere is called Nylus or Gyron
for it is ever troble. for gyron is to say troble. The third river is called
Tygris. That is to say fast rennynge. for it renneth faster than any of the
other. and so is a best that men call tygrys for he ren / neth fast. The forth
river is called Eufrates / that is to say well brennynge / for there grows
many good things upon the river / and ye shall understand that no man living
may go unto that Paradyse. For by land he may not go for wild bestes which are
in the wyldernes and for hills and roches where no man may pass. Ne by those
ryuers may no man pass for they come with so great course and so great wawes
that no ship may go / ne sail again them. Many great lords have asayed
many times to go by those ryuers to Paradyse but they might not speed in their
wey / for some dyed for weary of rowing some wex blind / and some deefe for noise
of the waters. so no man may pass there but thorough special grace of god. And
for I can tell you no more of that place I shall say you of that I have seen in
these Isles of the land of prester John and they are under the earth / to us.
and other Isles ar there who so would pursue the^ for to enuiron the earth who
so had grace of god to hold the wey he might come right too the same countrees
that he were come of and come fro and so go about the earth and for it were to
long time and also many perils too pas few men assay to go so / and yet
might be done and therefore men came fro these Isles to other Isles coostynge of
the lordshyp of Prester John. And men come in the coming to one I Will that men
call Cassoy. and yt country is nere sexty iournes long / and more than.l. of
bread yt is the best land that is in those countrees save chatay. and if
merchants come theder as commonly as they do unto chatay. it should be better
than chatay for it is so thyk of cytees and towns that when a man gothe out
of a cite he seth as sone another on each side there is great plente of spyces
and other gods.

The king of this isle is full rich and mighty / and he holds his land of
the great chane / for that is one of the xii. prouynces that the great cha^^e
has under him with out his own land Fro this I Will men goo to another kingdom
that men call Ryboth. and that is also under the great chane this is a good
country and plenteuous of corn / Wine and other things. men of this land
have none houses. but they dwell in tents made of tree. And the pryncipall cite
is all black made of blake stones and white. And all the streets are paued
with such stones / and in that cite is no man so hardy to spyll blood of man
ne be. for worship of a mawmet that is worshypped there. In that cite dwell
the pope of their law that they call lobassy and he gives all dignytee and
benefyses that fall to the mawmet. And men of relygyon and men that have
churches in that country ar obedyente to him as men ar here to the pope. In
this I Will they have a custume thoroughe all the country that when a ma^s fader
is deed they woll do him great worship. they send after all his friends
religious prestes and other many. and they bear the body to an hill with great
joy and mirth and when it is there the grettest prelate smyteth of his he / de
and says it upon a great plate of gold or silver / and he gives it to his
son / and the son takethe it too his other friends singing and saying many
orysons. and than the prestys and the rel^gyous cut the flesh of the body
in pieces and say orysons. and the birds of the country come theder. For they
know Well the custom. and they fly above them as they were Egles and other
birds: that ete flesh. And the preestys cast the pieces unto them And they
bear it awey a little from thens and than they ete it and as prestes in our
country sing for souls. Subuenite sancti dei and so forth. So those prestes
there sing with high voice in their langage in this manner of wise. Se and
behold how good / and gracyous a man this was that the aungellys of god come
for to fett him and bear him into paradyse.

And than thinks the son of the same man yt he is greatly worshypped when
birds have eten his fader and where ar most plente of birds there is most
worship / and tha^ne comes the son home with all his friends ^ and makethe
them a great feast and the son makes clean his faders head and gives at
drink thereof and the flesh of the head he shereth and gives to his most
special friends. some a little and some a little for a deynte / and in
reme^berau^ce of this holy man that the birds have eten. and of the scalpe of
the head the son does make a cup and thereof drynketh he all his life in
rememberau^ce of his fader. And from thens to go x. iournes thoroughe the land
of the great chane is a full good I Will and a great kingdom / and the king is
full mighty for he has each year CCC. horse charged with rys and other tents
and he has a noble and a rych life after the manner of the country / for he
has l. damsellis y^ serve him each day at his mete and bed and do what he
woll. and when he sits at the table they bring him mete ^ and at each time
v. meases togeder and they sing in the bringing a song and they cut his mete
and put it in his mouth ^ and they have right long nails on their hands / yt
is a great nobley in ye cou^t^e and therefore they late their nails grow as
long as they may ^ and some late grow so long yt they come about their
hands and that is a great nobley: and gentry / and the gentry of women is to
have small fete and therefore as soon as they are borne: they bind their fete so
streyte yt they may not wex half as they should. And he has a full fair
paleys and rich where he dwells of the which the wall is ii. mile about and
therein is many fair gardeyns. and all the pament of the hall and chambers is
of gold and silver. And in the mids of one of theyse gardeynes is a little
hill whereon is a place made with toures and pynnacles all of gold / and there
woll he sit often to take the air and disport for it is made for no thing
else. Fro this land men may go thorough the land of the great chane and ye
shall understand that all these men and folk that have reason that I have
spoken of have some artycles of our feyth if all they be of diverse laws and
diverse trowynges they have some good points of our troth and they trow in
god of kind as their prophesye says. Et metuent eu^ oes fines terre That is
to say / and all ends of earth shall dread him. And in another place. Omnes
gentes sermente^. That is to say. Al folk shall serve him / but they can not
speak perfihgtly but as there kyndly wit techeth them nouther of the son nor
of the holy ghost can they speak ^ but they can speak well of the bible and
special of Genesys and of the books of Moses. And they say that those
creatures that they worship ar no gods / but they worship them for great
virtue that is in them which may not be without special grace of god. and
of symulacres and ydols / they sey that all men have symulacres and that sey
they for us. christian men have Images of our lady / and other. but they wot
not yt we worship not the images of stone ne of tree / but the saints of whom
they are made for as the letter techethe clerks. how they shall trow so
images and paynture techeth leude men / they say also that the aungel of god
speaks to them in their ydols and do miracles. they sey sothe but it is an
ill angel that does miracles to mayntene them in their ydolatry. There are
many other countries where I have not ben nor seen. and therefore I can natte
speak propyrly of them. Also in countrees where I have been ar many marueyles
that I spoke not of for it were to long tale. and therefore hold you paid at
this time that I have said. for I woll say no more of marueylie that are there.
so that other men that go theder may find enough to say that I have not
told. And I John Maunduyle that went out of my country and passed the sethe
year of our lord a M ccc.xxxii. and I have passed through many lands and
Isles and countrees / and now am come to rest I have compyled this book and do
write it the year of our lord M.ccc.lxvi. at xxxiii. year after my departing
fro my country. and for as much as many men trow not but that they se with
theyriyen or yt they may conceive in their kyndly wit therefore I made my way
to rome in my coming homwarde to show my book to the holy fader the pope and
tell him of the marueylis that I had seen in diverse countrees so that he with
his wise counsel would examyne it with diverse folk ye ar at rome for there
dwell men of al nations of the world. and a little time after when he / and
his counseyle had examyned it all through he said to me for certain that all
was sothe. for he said he had a book of laten yt contained all that and much
more of the which the Mapamundi is made the which book I saw. and therefore the
holy fader the pope has ratyfyed and confermed my book in all points. And I
pray to all those that read this book that they woll pray for me / and I shall
pray for them and all those that say for me a Pater noster and an Aue maria
that god forgive me my sins. I make them perceuers and grant them part of
all my good pylgrymages and other good deeds which I ever did or shall do to my
lives end and I pray to god of whom all grace comethe that he woll all the
reders and herers that are criste^ men fulfill of his grace / and save them body
and soul and bring them to his joy that ever shall last he that is in the
trynyte fader / son / and holy ghost that lyuethe and regneth god without end
amen

Here ends the book of John Maunduyle. knight of ways to Jerusalem and of
marueylys of ynde and of other countrees.
Emprented by Rychard Pynson.

Richard pynson



