COUNT. MANSFIELDS DIRECTIONS of WAR.

GIVEN TO ALL HIS Officers and Soldiers in General.

warrior figure with dog



LONDON, Printed by Edw: Allde for Richard Whittaker, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Kings head. 1642.

TO The High, Mighty, and invincible CHARLES Prince of Wales: the Right
Honorable GEORGE Duke of Buckingham: and JAMES Marquess Hambleton; with the
rest of his Majesty's Honorable and faithful Council for War.
THe Sun is all one both to the Poor and Rich: even so (says Socrates) ought
a Prince not to have respect to the person, but to the matter: Whereupon my
self being not worthy, in respect of Prudence and Experience, to rank with
the least or meanest member of your Heroic Counsel, yet daring to compare
with the Greatest in my loyal meaning, fidelity and best wishes; respectively
to his Majesty, your Highness, with restless prayers for the prosperous
proceeding of your true Noble designs; prostrate at your Highness feet, do
present these Directions for War, not to direct your Heauen-directed
Counsels, but only as a pious pledge of my hearty devotion, to acquaint you
(for your better satisfaction) with the order of such Martial Discipline, as
the Foreign Friends of Great Britain in these tumultuous times do exercise:
their Motions, Standing, Marching, Fighting, Tyring and Retyring. In a word,
the whole Art of Arms, taught and delivered by this illustrious and renowned
Figure of Fortitude (who first reuised and approved the same written) is here
exemplified; which I submissiuely commend principally to the Patronage of your
Princely Highness, the most remarkable object of Honor: beseeching his Divine
Majesty, that like a most politic and magnanimous General, you may
transcend not only this Right-valorous Director, but even Alexander Magnus in
Military Actions and Directions, and be Carolus surnamed Maximus: but much
more Fortunate in Diuturnall fruition of your Conquests and Inheritance: And
that as you are the Glory of your Royal Fathers age, (according to Zeno's
testimony) being right Virtuous and Religious; so you may long survive and
continue the chief Column and Comfort of his Kingdoms; and no less Defend
the true Catholic Faith: wherein the greatest Guider of all Hearts direct
mine, firmly to persevere, and make me ever ready and most willing (as at this
present) to hazard my self and all that is mine in its Cause, as one that
rests:

Most humbly Devoted, To your Highness: Your Graces: And the rest Respectively
Jn any Honorable Service W. G.

The Table.
The Office of a Regiment and their Duties.
THe Office of a Collonell. Page 1. The Office of a Lieutenant Collonell. page
3. The Office of a Sergeant Mayor. page Idem. The Quarter Masters Office. page
4. The Office of a Provost of a Regiment. page 5. The Office of a Captain of
Foot page 7. The Office of a Lieutenant of a Company. page 10. The Office of
an Ensign. page Idem. The Office of a Sergeant of a Company. page 11. The
Office of a Corporal of a Company. page 13. The Office of a Lanspreado. page
17. The Office of a Drum. page Idem.
The Office of a Troop of Horse.
Captain of Horse. page 19. The Lieutenant of Horse. page 20. The Cornet. page
24. The Quarter Master his Office. page 26. The Trumpet. page 27. Corporal of
Horse. page 27.
The Dignity of Soldiers in their Fyles.
Of the Ordering of a Foot Company, and of the Dignity of each Soldier in
their Fyle: with the manner of Exercising now used. page 30. The Dignity of
Leaders. page 33. Of Distances. page 37. The General Motions which the
Company or Troops are to observe. page 39. Countermarch. page 45. These
following Motions are to be performed, both Standing and Marching. page 50.
Motions Standing and Marching. page 53.
THE OFFICE OF A REGIMENT AND THEIR Duties.
The Office of a Collonell.
EVery Colonel is to Command over all his Officers, Captains and others, and
all Soldiers or men of War of what degree soever, that does put themselves,
or are by superior Authority put and ranged under his Regiment: and all such,
as are to obey his commandment, and obey him as fully as they would do the
chiefest Commanders.

Also, he shall see all Orders, Commandments, and Directions, which are
delivered him by the public Officers of the Army, for Guards, Marches,
Lodging, or any thing else; for matter of Justice or for ordering the Troops,
and furtherance of the service duly executed or performed, within his own
Troops.

Further if he himself do find any Mutiny, or discontented humors tending
to mutiny, extreme outrage, or disorder; or shall by any of his Captains,
Officers, or Soldiers, be informed of any such, he shall forthwith advertise
the General thereof; And if he find any other fault, negligence or swaruing,
either from the Directions given, or the policy of the Army set down, he
shall straight way acquaint them, by whom such directions did or was to come
unto him or some other superior Officer, if he can conveniently acquaint him
with it, and shall produce the party so offending, with the witnesses and
proofs, that order may be given forthwith and Justice done: and if he fail to
give in this information of any thing he knows or hears of, he shall be
thought deeply faulty; or if any such thing pass without his knowledge, he
shall be thought of worse government then were fit for a man of his place and
charge.

Also in Lodging, every Colonel is to lodge as near as can be in the midst
of the Quarter assigned for his Regiment, because so he may give direction for
the whole.

In March, the Colonel shall be at the end of his Troops that is nearest the
Enemies (that is to say) in the head of his Regiment, going toward an Enemy,
and in the Reere going from them; and he is not to stir from thence unless
it be for the ordering of his Troops or some extraordinary occasion.

Also once every week the Colonel shall call together all his Captains, and
shall enquire of all offenses in his Regiment, and examine the nature and
quality of them to prepare the Causes, for a more short and easy hearing in a
Marshall Court.

All Colonels shall repair to a Martial Court as often as they shall be
warned, and shall be assistant to the Lord Marshall in all causes that shall be
there in question, or belong to the Justice of the Army.

The Office of a Lieutenant Colonel.
THe Lieutenant Colonel, when his Colonel is present, is to assist and obey
him, in seeing all directions performed that are delivered by any public
Officer, or such as shall be within the authority of a Colonel himself to
command; and in the absence of his Colonel, he shall have the same authority
the Colonel has.

He is to lodge ever on the right hand of his Colonels lodging, as near the
end of the Quarter as conueuiently may be.

In Marching and Imbattelling, whenever his Colonel is in the head of his
Regiment, he shall be in the reere of all that Regiment, and when his Colonel
shall be in the reere he shall be in the head.

The Office of the Sergeant Mayor.
IN the presence of his Colonel or Lieutenant Colonel, he shall be an
assistant to them or either of them, in seeing all Orders and Directions
executed and performed, and in the absence of them both to have the same
authority, that the Colonel himself shall have.

He shall lodge on the left hand of his Colonel, as near the end of his
quarter as conveniently may be.

In Marching and Imbattelling, he shall keep as near the midst of his
Regiment as he can, but in the Flank, and so as he may best ouer-looke the
order of his march or imbattelling.

He is to come to the Sergeant Major of the Army to receive the Word from him,
if there be no extraordinary cause to hinder him: and when he has received
the word from him, he is to deliver it over to the Sergeants of the Regiment,
and to all those to whom it does appertain and to see them executed.

Every Night he is to visit all the Guards of that Regiment, and to keep
account of the turns of the Watches, Marches, and sending Troops upon
service, to the end both the labor and the honor may be equally divided.

The Quarter Masters Office.
IN all changes of lodging he is to attend the Quarter Master general, and to
take the place by him assigned for the quartering of the Regiment, in such
form as the Quarter Master general shall direct him; and then he shall
appoint lodging to the Colonels, and to the Officers, according to the places
they are to take in the Regiment, and he shall not only give the height, the
breadth, and the length of the Quarter to the furrier of every Company, but also
the distances from the Trench, if it be not an out Quarter, and the distance of
one Company from another, and when the Companies shall lie in Towns and
Villages, he is likewise to keep proportion and follow the directions of the
Quarter Master general: he shall lodge the Sutlers of that Regiment, in the
hindmost part of the Quarter, such a distance as the Quarter Master general
shall appoint.

His place is to lodge on the backside of the quarter, behind the lodging of
the Lieutenant Colonel.

The Office of a Provost of a Regiment.
HE shall see all Proclamations, Orders, or decrees, that shall be published by
the Provost Marshall of the Army, likewise published in the Regiment whereof he
is Provost.

Also, he shall safely keep all Prisoners committed to him, and once a week
to give a note to the Provost Marshall of the Army, of all the Prisoners which
is in his charge, and of the causes of their Commitments.

Further, he shall ouer-see all the Victualers of the Regiment, that they sell
not their Victuals either at vnteasonable prices or unlawful hours, and shall
on the other side be watchful, that no wrong be done unto them; and if any
be, that forthwith the party doing wrong be brought before some Officer that
has authority to yield redress, and to that end he shall go about the
Quarter once every fore-noone, and every afternoon once, and once in the dead
of the night, if it may be conveniently performed.

Also, he shall have an Account given him every night by the Victualers, what
victuals are in the Quarters, and he shall carry or send those notes to the
Provost Marshall of the Army.

When prizes or booties are brought in, after the Provost Marshall has divided
the said prey or booty to every Regiment, the Provost of each Regiment shall
divide them to the Companies.

It is his duty to see all the Quarter kept sweet and clean, all garbidge and
filth buried, and to suffer nothing that may annoy the Quarter, within such a
distance as shall be appointed him by the Provost Marshall of the Army.

He is to lodge in the midst of the Victualers of the Regiment.

He shall come to the Carriage Master for direction where the baggage of that
Regiment shall March, where they shall assemble, and what ways they shall go,
which directions he shall see performed: After he bath given the first place
to the Colonels baggage, he shall marshall the rest by turns, as the
Companies shall march.

Also, he shall see the ways made for the Carriage, and the carriage
accompanied with men sufficient, and with Instruments to help or mend any
thing that is amiss in the ways, or carriages; or if any carriage shall be
unable to go, he shall provide that it be no stop or hinderance to the rest.

The Office of a Captain of foot.
HE has proportionably the same commandment over his Company, that a
Colonel has over his Regiment; and so all his Officers and Soldiers are to
obey him.

When he receaueth his Company and his Arms, he is to choose his men, and to
sort them to their Arms, as he shall think fit: provided, that he make his
ablest men, armed men, and Musketeers: if he be to arm them himself, he
shall make the one half Pikes, the other half Musketeers.

He shall choose his Officers, such as others have had in the like place
heretofore, and are of experience and good government, or such as have made
themselves known to be fit for the like.

He shall divide his Company into three Corporal-ships.

He shall take care, and labor to teach all his Soldiers the carriage and
use of their Arms, to keep their orders in marching or imbatelling, to
understand all manner of motions and sounds of the Drum; to this end he shall
have usual times of Exercising, which shall be once aday at the least, till
all his men be perfect.

In marching with his company alone, he shall be in the head of his company
going toward an Enemy, and in the reere-ward, coming from an Enemy.

In Marching with a Regiment, he is to receive his directions from the Sergeant
Mayor of the Regiment, and to martial his several sorts of weapons, as he
shall be by him directed: and shall appoint to every division of his Company,
such an Officer as the Sergeant Mayor of the Regiment shall direct. And for the
place, it shall be where the said Sergeant Mayor shall assign him.

In imbatailing, he is to order his Troops as the Sergeant Mayor of the
Regiment shall direct, to be himself where his Colonel or superior officer
shall command him.

In lodging, he shall take his quarter assigned according to his degree and
place in the Regiment, and shall see it built and ordered according to the
directions his superiors has received; and that there be deuisions, both of
the quarter into squadrons, and the squadrons into Comradoes or fellowships.

He shall have his quarter kept sweet for healthfulnesse, and quiet for order,
especially in the night.

If his whole company be appointed to march, he shall draw out his company,
and stand in Arms ready to march before his quarter, attending the directions
of the Sergeant Mayor of the Regiment. When he is brought to the place of his
guard, he is to take directions of the Sergeant Mayor of the Regiment, for
placing of his Corps-de Guard, setting his Sentinels, and sending forth his
Round, and to see the directions given him performed.

He is not to abandon his guard till he be relieved, and whatsoever is
discovered, or brought to that Corp-de guard where he is, shall by him be sent
to the Captain of the Watch, and he shall still make good his guard, if he
be not commanded by a superior Officer to retire.

If he hear of any muteny or discontented humor tending to muteny, outrage,
or any disorder committed by any of his company within his quarter, he shall
forthwith advertise his Colonel; or if he be not in the way, some public
Officer of the Army and that he arrest and bring forth the party offending,
with such witnesses and proofs as are to be produced, of which if he fail and
know it, he shall be held very faulty, and if such things escape him, he shall
be held unworthy of his place.

He shall see on the other side, to those of his Company that do better then
their fellows, advanced to place, and encouraged accordingly; and do right to
all of them, both in the pay and in all things else that are due unto them, and
shall as far as in him lies, take care of the sick and hurt men.

In matter of service, he shall do all that is commanded him (by any superior
officer that has authority) in the best sort he can, without either exceeding
his Commission, or doing less.

Lastly, when he is alone with his Company, he shall be very vigilant and
careful, both in marching and lodging, and if he be put to any extremity, yet
he must look to make account, and therefore he shall do the utmost, both by
judgment and valor to free his Troops.

The Office of the Leiftenant of a Company.
WHen the Company is present, he shall be an assistant to his Captain in
seeing all directions performed, that are commanded by a superior Officer, all
such as his Captain has authority to command, and in the absence of the
Captain, he shall have the same authority the Captain has.

In Marching, if there be no company but his own, he shall be at the one end
of his company, when the Captain is at the other end: and if the company march
with the Regiment, he shall take such place, as the superior Officers that
have authority shall assign him.

In lodging, he shall be placed on the right hand of his Captain, as near the
end of the quarter as conveniently may be, and shall in all services, and at
all times help to keep the Soldiers in Discipline and obedience, and shall
perform all things commanded him, which are necessary to be done by him, with
valor and judgment.

The Office of an Ensign.
WHen his Captain or Leiftenant are present, he shall be assistant to them, or
either of them, and in their absence have the same authority the Captain has.

In Marching, he is to catry his Ensign, and take such place as shall be
assigned him: and if his Company be alone, he shall either upon entering his
quarter, going out of his quarter, going upon his guard, or upon sight of the
Enemy, carry his Ensign advanced and flying: and if he march with a Regiment,
he and all the other Ensigns of the Regiment shall do as the Ensign
Colonel does.

In Fight, he shall ever carry his Ensign advanced and flying, without
offering to use it in any kind of offense, being the sign for the Company to
gather by, and therefore to be preserved: for which cause for his defense he is
to use his Sword.

If he march with other Ensigns, he shall take such place as shall be assigned
him.

The Ensign shall never turn his face out of his order, start from any
danger, nor forsake his Ensign upon pain of death.

Whenever the Drum shall beat for the gathering of the Company together,
he shall be in the place, and shall see the Ensign well guarded, and be ready
to march, or do any thing for the service.

The Office of the Sergiant of a Company.
IF all the three forenamed Officers be out of the way by any accident, then
the eldest Sergiant is to command the Company as next in place.

In assembling the Company, he shall set every man in his place, and if any be
missing, he shall seek them out, and have power to correct them: and if any
be defective and not to be found, he is to acquaint his Captain or Officer
with it.

When the Company is assembled and set in order, he shall march in the out
side, where he may best see the order of march observed: and to make the places
of Sergiants more certain, the eldest Sergiant shall march in the right
Flancke, and take care from the Ensign forward; and the youngest Sergiant on
the left Flancke, and take care from the Ensign backward.

Though he is to understand the use of all Arms usually carried, and all
things else that belongs to a Soldier, yet he is especially to make himself
able to direct and lead Shot, because if his Company be alone and have any
fight, he is by custom to conduct the Shot, in which case he is to follow the
directions given him by his Captain; or in his Captains absence, by any of
his superior Officers.

And for his more particular directions how to lead his Shot after that he
has brought them up to that ground, and in that number and order that his
Captain or superior Officer has directed him, he shall have every man come
up close to him, and see him take his level and discharge to a good purpose:
as also he shall fee the Shot keep their order, as well in going on as in
retyring; if he be found with other Troops, he shall follow the directions of
him that commands the Troop, and carefully look to the order of that part on
which he is assigned to attend.

The eldest Sergeant shall lodge in the skirt of the Quarter right behind the
Captain, and the other Sergeant in the same sort right beyond the Lieutenant,
and in the Quarter they are both to visit the Soldiers lodgings, and to see
them orderly and quiet.

He is also to setch the Word from the Sergeant Mayor of the Regiment, and
deliver it to his Captain, Lieutenant, and Ensign, and to the Corporal that
is of the Watch; if the whole company watch, he is to attend, and to see the
places where the Centenels are put out, and to visit them all: if they watch
by Squadrons, then he shall lead the squadrons to bring them to their Guard,
where he shall attend upon any extraordinary occasion by the appointment of the
Captain of the Watch; and whilst he is there, he is to advertise the Captain
of the watch, of any extrordinary discovery or accident of any importance.

He shall deliver such Munitions either of victuals or of war to the
Corporals of the Company, as he shall receive or fetch from the Sergeant Major
of the Regiment.

The Office of a Corporal of a Company.
THough it very seldom happen that he has charge of the Company, yet if such
an accident should fall out, that all the superior Officers were absent, then
the command does belong to him.

To his place belongs properly, the command of one Squadron of the Company,
which he is to divide into Comradoes or Fellowships, to see all that are
within that squadron well exercised in their Arms, to keep them and wear them
Souldier-like, to deliver munitions of Victuals or Arms, to govern the Watch,
work, or Service; and to take care in every respect, that they do the Duties
of good Soldiers.

When the Drum beats to the gathering of the Company, the Corporals are
immediately to be in readiness themselves, and to call together their
Squadrons, with the which they shall repair to their Colors, and if any of
their Squadrons be wanting without leave, they shall give notice thereof to
their Captain, and shall prosecute the said absence to the punishing of them.

He shall have at the least, a third part of the Company under his Squadron,
which being divided into Files, he himself shall be Leader of the chief
File, and with the same, always to take place on the right hand of his
Squadron, which shall be compounded of one of the two sorts of Arms now in
use: Pikes, and Muskets.

He shall not (in case of any default by absence) leave the place void and
vnsupplyed, unless the same fall out to be the Leader or bringer up, whose
place shall be ever supplied by the next.

In Marching and Fighting, the Corporal of the Company has no command, but of
the File which each of them leads; They are to see to the opening of their
Files and Ranckes, and to the doubling of the same, to follow the sound of the
Drum, and to observe every other Motion that shall be commanded by the chief
Officer; always provided, that he start not out of his place, nor use any
command of himself.

When the Squadron is to Watch, he shall at the sound of the Drum assemble them
and repair to his Ensign, and shall see them fully furnished of their Arms,
Powder, Match, Bullets, and all things else, that shall be necessary to the
Arms they carry, whereof they shall be supplied by the Sergeant of the Company.

He is to be lead by his Sergeant to the place of his Watch, and from him to
receive the Word and Directions, in what manner and where he shall place his
Centenels, as well by day as by night, which he is to see performed.

His Sentinels being placed, he is to let none pass his Guard without the
word, unless the Captain of the watch or the Sergeant Major, to whom after he
knows them, he is to deliver the Word, the first round only.

In taking the Word, he is never to go further forth then to the Centinell
next his Guard, and when the outermost Centinell gives him warning of the
approach of any, he is to make his Guard stand to their Arms, and to take
three or four out among them, and so attend their coming, having given
direction to his outermost Sentinels for that end, to let them pass; when they
are approached near him, he is not to advance out to them, but to call out one
of the company, if more then one come together to him, and so receive the Word
from him, within the defense of those three or four Soldiers he took with
him, who shall have their Pikes charged, and their Matches cokt, till such time
as the Corporal has received the Word, and gives them order to let them pass.

He shall so divide his Sentinels, that every man's task may be alike; he
shall see them changed at due times, and shall now and then visit them
unlooked for; he must warn his Sentinels not to give false Alarmes, but with
as silent noise as is possible, to advertise his said Corporal; who upon any
extraordinary occasion, shall make his Squadron stand to their Arms, and give
notice of the danger discovered to the next Guards, and to the Captain of the
Watch.

He shall make good the place of his Guard, till he be called from thence, and
not suffer any of his Squadron to leave the same till he be relieved; and he
shall fulfill on his Guard, all Commands that shall be published for the
entering or going forth of the Soldiers.

At the coming of the relief, he shall put his Squadron into Arms, and
stand ready to receive them, and when his Sentinels are relieved, march to his
Quarter.

If during the time of his Watch, any of his Squadron shall have offended, he
is to Commit them, and to acquaint his Captain and chief Officers therewith.

If by any occasion of the Companies remove, he be drawn from his Guard before
the 24. hours be expired, and that the Company lodge again within the said
time, then shall the said Corporal with his said Squadron, be in readiness
to watch out the residue of the time, in such place as he shall be appointed.

Lastly, as the Corporal is next in degree to the Sergeant, so in behauing
himself well, he may pretend to the place of a Sergeant, when by any accident
it shall be void.

The Office of a Lanspreado.
NExt to the Corporal is the Lanspreado, who in the absence of the Corporal,
is in every respect to do his Office; his own proper place is to lead the
left hand File of the Squadron, and to have of his own, and the Files
adjoining, the same care for the observing of their Orders, as is specified in
the Corporals Office.

The Office of a Drum.
THere ought to be two Drums in a Company, and both perfect in every necessary
sound thereof, who by turns are to do all the services belonging to the
place; and therefore in Field or in Garrison, one of them is ever to give
attendance in the Quarters, though the Company should at any time be freed of
their duty.

The Drum having warning to beat to the gathering of the company, shall go
sounding from one end of the Quarter to the other, twice, and shall repair to
his Ensigns lodging.

When the Company marches, one of them shall sound by turns: they shall one
relieve the other.

When the Company shall be joined with others, the Drums shall take place by
the appointment of the Drum Major, and shall sound the same point, and observe
the same time that the Drum does that is next to the Colonel or chief Officer.

It is the office of a Drum, when any of the Company are taken Prisoners, to
enquire after them, and to carry their Ransom, which he may boldly do, after
he has received a Pasport from the General, or chief Commander of Army or
Garrison, where the Company is. When he is come near to any place of the
Enemies, he is to sound thrice, and not to approach too near, till he be
setcht in by some of the Enemy; he is only to make his arrant known, and not
to discover any thing of the state of the place whence he is sent, that may be
prejudicial to it: and to take as much notice as he can of all such things
as concerns the Enemy, which at his coming back he shall discover to the
General or chief Officer.

It is his duty being in Garrison and have the maine Guard, not to go off
without leave of the Captain of the Watch, and to be there all Night to beat
an Alarm if need require, for which use he must be perfect to practice on his
sticks, because the Enemy shall take no notice thereof. He must beat the
Relief in the Morning after day break, and to set the Parado, and at Night to
beat Tapto before the Patrole go above.

The Office of a Troop of Horse.
Captain of Horse.
THe Captain of a Troop of Horse, must take pleasure to be neatly Armed and
well mounted, to give thereby an example to his Soldiers to do the like: he
must take care that his Soldiers be practuall in performing their Duties, and
observing Military Discipline, as he himself must be in observing Orders, and
executing the directions that are given or sent him from his Superiors; not
failing of the hour appointed him to be at the place assigned, with his
Company.

He shall take care to teach his Soldiers the use of their Arms, and see them
perfect therein, and also that they keep their orders in Marching or
Imbattelling; that they understand all motions which the Horse are commanded to
learn, as also the sound of the Trumpet, to which end, he shall have his
times of exercising his men whilst he is in Garrison.

In all occasions he is to be first on Horseback, to see his Company kept up
in their full number, and replenished with all able Soldiers, to be able to
distinguish from the rest, that are of most valor and courage, as also to be
ready to assist and advance them in all occasions: so also is he to cashere and
dismiss from the Company, such Soldiers as he finds fearful, lazy, and
unfit for Service.

Furthermore, he is to have (if it be possible) two or three Soldiers in his
Company, that are expert in the Country and ways thereof especially being in
a frontier place, that upon all occasions he may have Guides of his own at
hand, and ready to serve him; to which men, he ought to give something
extraordinary above the rest.

In Marching to his Guard or though any place, he is to be in the head of his
Company before the Cornet, as also going toward an Enemy.

In Lodging, he is to lodge in the head of the Troop.

In Imbattelling, with other Troops, he is to take such place, as his
superior Officer do assign him.

When the Lances are joined with Curasiers, or Harquebusiers, the Captain of
the Lances commands the other, and in his absence, the Captain of the
Curasiers; in both their absence, the Captain of the Harquebusiers.

The Lieutenant of Horse.
IT is necessary, that the Lieutenants of Horse, should be men of great
experience, ability and valor, such as have been nourished and brought up
amongst the Cauolery: ordinarily those that are advanced to these places, are
such Soldiers, that in occasion have given better proof of their own persons
and valor, then the rest; that have passed through the other inferior degrees
to that charge, having been Corporals or Cornets.

He is to be assistant to the Captain, in the execution of all directions and
orders; and in the absence of the Captain, to command the Troop, many times
having all the difficulties of affairs and occasions laid upon him, in regard
that the Horse troops, are often given to young Genetletlemen of Noble houses,
that of themselves have small experience.

The Lieftenant must be strict and severe to his Soldiers, making them do
their duties, and whatsoever else is necessary (precisely and punctually) and
also to take care, that they look diligently to their Horses, and to their
Arms.

He marches always in the Reere of the Troop, taking care that the Soldiers
follow the Captain in their order and due distances, and that they disband not
from the Troop.

In occasions of Fight, the Leiftenant is to keep himself firm in the Reere
of his Troop with his Sword in his hand, to encourage the Soldiers to do
their duties: and seeing any of them turning or shrinking, to fly from the
Troop, let him kill him, to give encouragement to the rest.

But if in the absence of his Captain there be presented any occasion of
fight, or that he be to march through suspected places, the Leiftenant must
advance up to the Front into the Captains place, leaving in his place behind
some Officer reformed, or some other person of valor in whom he has
confidence, which may discharge the duty of a Leiftenant.

The Troop marching ordinarily, or passing through any place, or going to the
place of Arms to the Parado, the Leiftenant must in no sort take the place of
the Captain, but remain always behind as aforesaid, because the Lances and
Carasiers have their Cornets, who always march in the head, and lead the
Troops.

But in Troops of Harquebusiers that have no Cornets; the Leiftenant in absence
of his Captain, is to take his Captains place in the head of the Troops, be
it in marching, fighting, or drawing to the place of Arms, as to al other
places, sending to the Reere two of his best Corporalls, to do the office of
the Leiftenant; himself now and then notwithstanding turning toward the
Reere, to see if the Soldiers march in order as they should.

He must read and write, that he may keep a List of the names and surnames of
the Soldiers of his Troop, so as any order being sent him by writing, or
receiving Letters from his superiors, he be not constrained to show them to
others: he must also know the ability and sufficiency of each Soldier, to the
end, that there being any occasion to send them out to any place, he may know
whom he may best use and employ.

The Troop marching to the guard, and being approached near unto the place,
the Leiftenant is to go before to view the court of Guard; and by the
Leiftenant, who is to be relieved; be informed of the place of Sentinels, both
of the day, and of the night, what the ways are he must beat: and of all
other things that by order he is to do it in that place.

The Leiftenant is bound to place the Sentinels himself, and to visit them
oftentimes, sparing no diligence, keeping himself in particular, continually
armed, and his Horse bridled.

The Troop being lodged in any village, the Leiftenant must take the Billets
of the Quartermaster of the Troop, and afterward distribute them himself to
the Soldiers, with as much order and contentment to them as he can before the
Cornets lodging, who is to make an halt or stand there with the Troop, and
attend the foresaid distribution of the Billets, to the end that upon any
occasion, or when any Alarm happens, the Soldiers may know whereto come
together, and join themselves to their Cornet: if they shall tarry longer then
one day in a place, the Leiftenant is to visit the Horses, to see how the
Soldiers govern themselves, and that they indamage not their Hosts; which if
he find, to remedy, making the Captain acquainted with every thing: and when
afterward they do dislodge, the Leiftenant must command their fires to be put
out, and see it performed.

Going to lodge in any Village or Fort, or to be in Garrison, that the
Leiftenant ought so to accommo date the extraordinary reformed Officers, and
others according to their merits: In all places where they lodge more then once
aday; the Leiftenant shall write the names of the Soldiers upon the Billets,
and shall keep a Register of those Billets, that when their Hosts shall come
to make any complaint, he may readily find their names, and chastise them as
he sees cause.

When the Troop is to march, and that the Trumpets sound to horse, the
Leiftenant must be first in order and on horseback, taking care that all the
Soldiers do the like with diligence: and if he find any of them negligent in
this point, be it either through an ill custom, or of purpose to loyter
behind and pillage the houses, he must punish them presently with all
severity, for an axample to others.

It is necessary for the Leiftenant to have knowledge of the country and of the
ways, there happening many occasions that he is to send out to discover, and
beat the coasts about; the commodity of Guides not being at all times found.

In case the Troop be charged by the Enemy, the Leiftenant with some few
Soldiers, being best mounted, must stay behind.

Cornet.
THe Cornet in the absence of the Captain and Leiftenant, commands the Troop.

In marching, he goes always in the head of the Troop (yet behind the
Captain) who must suffer no man to march beyond the Standard, or to be equal
with him.

In occasion of fight, the Cornet of a company of Lances shall take his place
on the left hand of the Captain, and equal in front with him, and going to
the Shocke together with him, must endeavor to break his Cornet or Standerd
upon the Enemy: which Standard falling so to the ground, he is not to take care
to take it up; and if any man shall take it up and restore it him again, he
must not put it again upon his Staff: nor no new in the place, without the
permission of the General.

In occasion of fight with foot, the Cornet of Lances must likewise break his
Standard upon the same foot, but neither upon Foot nor Horse that is turned
and running away.

The Cornet of Curasiers in marching goes before the troop with his Cornet, as
also when he presents himself in the place of Arms, and when he is to
salute, he is to do it in the same manner as the Cornet of Lances does.

In the time of fight, the Cornet of Curasiers, is to take his place in the
middle of the Troop, leaning behind him the two third parts of the Troop,
and the other part that is before, must be those that be best armed, and the
best men.

The Cornet ought to keep a List of the names of the Soldiers of the Troop.

In all occasions of Mutiny, discord, and disputes, he is presently to inform
his Captain and Leiftenant, and to be assistant to the Captain and
Leiftenant, or either of them, in seeing all directions performed, that are
commanded by a superior Officer; as also, all such as the Captain has
authority to command.

The Quarter Master his Office.
THe Quarter Master is to fetch the word every night, and the directions from
the Sergeant Mayor of the Horse: he is to distribute the Billets among the
Soldiers, and was wont to dedeliuer out their pay unto them, which now is
given out by the Leiftenant of the Troop, though in my opinion not so well;
for it were much better, that the Captain or Leiftenant should call the
Quarter Master apart, appointing him the manner how he should pay the
Soldiers, to leave the discharge of it to him; which without doubt would give
greater contentment, because the Soldier in this point of his account, may
speak more freely with the Quarter Master, then the other Officers; who by
this means also, are delivered from a great many harsh replies, which they
must ordinarily receive from the Soldiers, to the diminishing the respect they
ought to bear them.

He is to attend the Quarter Master General, and to take his orders from him
of lodging the Troop, carrying with him one or two Soldiers, appointed him by
the Leiftenant, that he may the better advertise the Troop where they shall
lodge.

In the absence of the Cornet, Leiftenant, and Captain, he is to command the
Company.

Trumpet.
THere ought to be two Trumpets in every Troop of Horse, who ought to be
diligent to sound precisely at the times appointed: one of them is to be ever
with the Cornet upon all occasions.

When the Troop does march, they go before the Captain in the head of the
Troop, and in fight in the flancke of the Troops.

In Lodging, the one lodges with the Captain, the other with the Cornet.

Going out of their lodging, either on foot or on Horseback, they are never
to leave off their Trumpets, but always to have it by them.

They are employed in Messages for Prisoners, and other occasions to the
Enemy, and therefore ought to be intelligent men and well governed, that they
may be able to discover, and at their return to give an account of any
advantage of disorder or important things, they are able to learn among the
Enemies; as also to keep themselves so as they discover nothing that may
offend their own party.

Briefly, many important services may be drawn from them, and good use made;
provided they be discreet.

Corporal of Horse.
THough there have been some, who are of opinion, that it is not necessary to
have a Corporal in a Troop of Lances and Curasiers, notwithstanding I find
this Officer necessary; for by the means of a Corporal, the duties are better
distributed; and they themselves go forth with the Leiftenant to assist him to
place his Sentinels, when it is the Soldiers turn of their Squadron to do
it: and in sudden occasion of sending out a number of Soldiers, the easiest
way is to command a whole Squadron to the service: their lodgings also are
made, and distributed with more facility: especially when the Troop is not
lodged altogether in one place, and when there are few houses to be
distributed; the houses being distributed, so many to a Squadron, the
Leiftenant gives the Billets thereof to each Squadron, whereby he is to lodge
his Soldiers.

In Troops of Harquebufiers, we use no Corporalls; and they are of better
esteem, because they have ever been there: and the Hargubusiers going many
times in small Troops; the Corporals have therefore ordinarily more employment
then the Lances or Curasiers.

The Troops of Harquebusiers do ordinarily battle (least rude) and serve for
the Vandguard, it belonging to them to send forth their Auant Curriers; which
charge is given to one of the Corporalls, which must be a man of good
experience; that he must be able to know how to acquit himself in a charge of
that importance.

If it be necessary to guard a Passage or place of importance, the custom is
to send a Corporal with his Squadron thither.

In occasions of fight, we are wont to send out Corporals with their whole
Squadrons to the skirmish, after the Lieutenant is first gone out for that
purpose: for he is always the first.

The Corporals ought to read and write, because they are to keep a list of
the Soldiers of their Squadrons, to the end he may distribute unto them
equally their Duties.

The Captains are conformable to allow unto the Corporals, an half part of
the forage; and give them the tenth part in a hundred.

The Dignity of Soldiers in their Fyles.
Of the Ordering of a Foot Company, and of the Dignity of each Soldier in
their Fyle: With the manner of Exercising now used.
FIrst, it is meet for diverse good respects, that your men be divided into
Companies, and the Soldiers of these Companies, into their Fyles.

Now a Fyle consists of ten Soldiers armed alike, whereof every one knows
his place, all of them standing in a direct line downward, and behind one
another, and comprehended between the Leader and the bringer up.

It is likewise necessary, for the giving of due strength and reciprocal
proportion, that the men of each sort of Arms be so indifferently divided,
both for the number and quality of the men, that in every of the said Fyles
there may be an equal distribution, both of the better and worser sort.

This may be done, (the number of men being first known, and how many of each
sort of Arms you have) by choosing first out of every of the said sorts, so
many of the best men as the whole number will make Fyles through, so many
second, and so onwards, still choosing of the better sort, till the tenth man
be chosen.

The men thus chosen shall be divided in manner as follows:

The first choice, because they are men of best worth, shall stand in the
Front, and command the rest of the Fyle, and these men are to be known by the
name of Leaders.

Those of the second choice, because they are next in account, are to stand in
the Reere or last place of the ten, and are to be known by the name of
Bringers up.

Those of the third and fourth choice, are to take the fifth and sixth places
in the Fyle, and are to be known by the names of Middlemen; to wit, the
fifth, the Leaders middle-man, the sixth, the Bringers up middle-man.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh choice, to be ranged in the second, third, and
fourth places.

The eighth, ninth, and tenth choice, to be in the seventh, eight, and ninth
places: by which description it falls out, that the tenth and last place of men
(reckoning from the first downward) takes the ninth place of the Fyle.

These men thus divided into Fyles, it will be necessary for the effecting of
these things, that be required by this Discipline; That as the Soldiers have
their places in the Fyles according to the worth of each man, so the Fyles
themselves should have their particular degrees and places; to which end, the
Companies shall likewise consist of ten Fyles, which shall take their places
one by the other in Front and Rank, as the Soldiers in every Fyle did before
in Depth.

Following which course, the first Fyle shall stand on the right hand of the
rest; the second Fyle in Dignity, shall stand on the left hand, outermost of
the tenth.

To be considered, whether it were not better to reckon your degrees at the 8.
th, 9. th, and tenth Fyle.
The third, and fourth in Dignity, shall take the fifth, and sixth places,
being in the middle places of the ten.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh, shall stand in the second, third, and fourth
places, reckoning from the right hand toward the middle Fyle.

The eight, ninth, and tenth Fyle, in the seaunth, eighth, and ninth places,
from the left hand Fyle to the middle Fyle; So that in every Fyle, the tenth
and last man in Dignity stands in the ninth place, reckoning from the
Leaders downward: and the second in value, the tenth and last place. So among
the Fyles, the tenth, which is the Fyle of least account, takes the ninth
place, reckoning from the right hand Fyle, which is the first in Dignity and
account; and the second in Dignity holds the tenth place, being the outermost
on the left hand, as the first is on the right.

These ten Fyles, I would have known still by their degrees of Value: as
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth,
and not by the places they stand in when they are ranged, which notwithstanding
may serve guide the men to their places, because they never change their
standings.

The Dignity of Leaders.
ANd as the Soldiers in every Fyle shall take no place till their Leaders set
forward, at which time they are all to follow successively, as they are to
stand in the fyle that the last man may fall hindermost; so none of the fyles
shall take place till the first fyle has taken his, and then the rest as they
are to stand the one by another to take their places, so that still the
outermost fyle to the left hand, is to take his place last: which manner being
observed and duly executed, 2. 6. 10. 8. 4. 3. 7. 9. 5. 1. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0. Front Leaders.
men are ranged in an instant, without any confusion or help of Officers.

Now as in Fyles the duty of the Middle-man is to keep those before him in a
right line, 1 0.
5 0.
9 0.
7 0.
3 0.
4 0.
8 0.
10 0.
0 6.
2 0.
The Dignity of men in their Fyle.
and for the Bringer up to do the like, to the middle-men and those before
them; As also, if diverse fyles be joined in one body together to keep in even
rank with the others; so are the Leaders of the Fyles also, in the Front to
keep even with themselves, and with the other Troops when any march in or
Front with them, and to observe like distances in their fyles, and to take care
either Marching or going to Charge, to keep such Distances in the body they
make; as may be best for ease, and for the safety of the men, wherein the two
outmost fyles are to use the greatest observance.

The Fyles being ranged, the four chief Leaders (to wit) the right, lest, and
the two middle Leaders, are to take care that the Front be kept even, and that
the Distances in all motions, together with the Motions themselves, be duly
observed; which is easily performed when these sour keep even: for the right
Leader and his middle Leader, may see that the three Leaders betwixt them do
their duties, and the left hand Leader with his middle Leader, the other three
betwixt them.

Now rests to teach, what be the other particular Duties of the Leaders,
Bringers up, and Middle-men of the Fyles; as also what the Duties of those
Leaders, who in the Body of the ten Fyles are to do their Office to the
Body, as the others are to every fyle apart. The Leaders of the fyle ought to
be as follows: As he is the Chief of the ten, so is he to be respected and
obeyed by them in these things: they are to show themselves in their Arms
when be requires it; as well because it is his Office to see them kept clean,
as to teach them the true use of their Arms: to acquaint them how every one is
to take his place in the fyle, to make them perfect in all manner of Duties, as
March, Motions, Fight, Works, Distances, and Measures: as also to instruct
them in the understanding of all Commandments, by Drum or by voice, or by any
other Signal appointed: as also how to behave themselves in making their
Quarter, and making their Cabbins, wherein he himself when he is joined with
other fyles, is by his own due observance of the Directions given, to show
them the way, and make himself their example.

The Bringer up, as he is the second in worth, so ought he to be the second
in estimation, and to be held as the Lieutenant of the Fyle (not only to
assist the Leader in every thing of his Duty, and in his sickness or absence
to execute his Office) but to take care also, his fyle being ranged with a Body
of Fyles, that his fyle keep his order duly, especially, that half that is
next him: for the Bringers up are of special use in March, Motion, and Fight,
as also the Middle-men; in part because they stand aptly for the governing of
the Fyle, having every disorder in their eye: And if by the turning the Front
to the Reere, there be occasion to resist in the Reere, or by Dividing the one
half (as it falls out many times) both in Front and Reere, then is he in all
things to demean himself, as is before mentioned in the Duty of Leaders.

As for the Middle-men, they are not only for Distinction sake, (though it be
the chief end) but are upon the Dividing of the body, sometimes to do the
duty of Leaders, more often of Bringers up, because they close the Reere of
each Division, and are to see those of their fyles before them do their
Duties; But if the Body be to bend all his force forwards, then is the
Middle-man of the fist place to Discharge himself, as is before mentioned, and
to see that the three Soldiers before him do their Duties by keeping their
Orders, filling and supplying the places of the slain Soldiers before them,
and the Enemy being broken, it is their Duties to stir them up to follow the
chase sharply.

The Middle-man of the sixth place, is upon the time of a Charge, to leave a
little space betwixt the other Middle man and himself, unless it be thought
necessary to support the first Shocke of the Enemy, by standing closely joined.

In Fight, both Leaders, Bringers up, Middlemen, and all the rest in general,
are to keep their Distances in Fyle and Rank, diligently to be silent; and
attentive to the voice of the Commander, to observe the measures of March and
Skirmish duly, not to bend their Weapons or offer Fight before they may well do
it, as also not to forbear it or perform it lazily when time serves, not to
leave his place through Cowardice or sense of slight hurts, to succeed
willingly and readily in the empty place before him, the Soldier that
possessed it being slain, or grieuosly hurt, and no longer able to resist: not
to leave their places for the carrying away of their fellows that are hurt;
not to step untimely, or press over hastily to the Fight, either exceeding the
measure of the March, or before the Soldier before him, by giving back, show
that he cannot make his place good any longer.

This shall satisfy at this time for the Duties of the Leaders, Bringers up,
and Middle-men, with the rest of the Fyles in a Company; we will now go
forwards to the Distances and Motions, with which they are to be acquainted.

Of Distances.
The distances are all to be reckned from the Sentinels of the soldiers: that
is, from the midst of the space between the one man's feet, to the midst
between the other man's feet, that orders with him.
FOr avoiding of confusion, it shall be good to set down before we go any
further, what Distances you are to observe between the Ranks and the Fyles;
which I would have only three (to wit) open order; order, and close order: your
first Distance is your open order, when your men both in Rank and Fyle, stand
removed six foot in square from one another; which Distance you are always to
range your Troop, when you will exercise your Motions.

Your second distances is your order, which is, when the Soldiers in their
ranks and Fyles, stand three foot removed asunder, which is used when you will
imbattaile your Troops, and lead them against the Enemy, or when you come to
stand, or mean to wheel the Body: For when you march, you are to observe
three foot between the Fyles, and six between the Ranks, unless you march
with your Pikes advanced, in which case you may keep your meaner order of fix
foot in square.

Because the measure of this Distance cannot be taken so justly by the Eye, we
take the distance of six foot between Fyle and Fyle, by commanding the
Soldiers to stretch forth their arms, and stand so removed one from another,
that their hands may touch, and for the Ranks we make account, we take the
same Distance of six foot, when the butt end of the Pikes do almost reach the
heels of those that march before them.
Your third and last distance, is your close order, when the Fyles join
shoulder to shoulder; and the rancks come up to the Swords point, which is of
use in some kinds of motion; but chiefly when you will make the Troops seem
less, or in the passage of some straight, or when of neces forced to break
through an Enemy, or when you receive a charge of Horse, or of Foot, that
purposes to break through you.

We take the second order or distance of 3. foot from Fyle to Fyle, by bidding
the Soldiers to set their arms akenbowe, and join themselves so close, that
their Elbows meet together; and the Ranks when they come up almost to the
swords point.
When you mean to charge, you must advance your Pikes, and close your ranks,
to the distance of three foot; and when the signal or word to charge is given;
then the ranks must close to the Swords point; but this closing of the Swords
point, is to be understood, of the five first ranks, which makes up half the
depth of the body; for though the whole body doc advance their Pikes, and close
their ranks, to the distance three foot; yet upon the signal of charge, the
five last ranks shall neither couch, or charge their Pikes; nor cloase to
their close order, unless there be an express command for it, which command,
as I said before, is never to be delivered, but when a great Shocke is given or
sustained; and then it is of use, for the holding and sholdring forward of the
foremost five ranks: and as I take it, will be performed with ease and
strength, whilst their Pikes are advanced; for it were bootlesse for those to
bend, that are without reach of an Enemy, besides the advantage in the use of
these five ranks: if you should be charged in the Reere, or upon any other
occasion, and therefore in this sort would I have the last five ranks, with
their Pikes advanced, to attend the opportunity of fighting.

Both the heavy Armed, and the light Armed, are to be made acquainted with
these distances; there are also other Distances, which I would have the light
Armed accustomed to: and those likewise are of three sorts, as the former,
which I would have distinguished by the great, the mean, and the less: of
your open orders, the great thirty foot between Fyle and Fyle, the mean
twenty foot, and the less fifteen foot: but though the ranks always
observe three foot; only the men in the Fyles are to side, or stand stooping,
either to the right or left hand Diaginall to the distance: the Fyles are
ranged, in either 3. feet, 2. feet, or 1 feet to the hand required, or shall be
demonstrated in his place, where I purpose to declare the use of these
Distances, and my meaning herein: your Musketeers are never to be closer, then
your mean order of three foot in square, because they are to have a free use
of their Arms.

The General motions which the Company or Troops are to observe.
NOw that I have framed the Body, in manner as you have seen, and particularly
enlarged every part thereof, with the distances to be used and observed in all
occasions; I may boldly proceed to the orderly moving of the same, which I
would gladly so effect, that the whole Body or Troop should move as nimbly,
and with as small confusion, as the body of man: which by the due execution of
that which follows, may be in many performed. But before I proceed to deliver
the Motions themselves: I find it requisite to give these three rules, which
you are ever to observe.

1. All commands are to be delivered in the Front wheresoever it be.

2. Whenever the Flanck is made the Front; the shot that are now in the
Front, and the Reere, shall remove and fall upon the Flancks, the right to the
right, and the left to the left.

3. Whenever these words of direction (as you were) are propounded: it is
meant thereby, that you are to return by the contrary hand, to the place from
whence you came; as for example: if you did turn to the right hand, you are to
return as you were to the left hand, and so in all other motions.

The motions of Troops are twofold, of the whole, or of part; of the person
of a Soldier in his station, or of the limbs of the body, constituted into
Ranks or Fyles; and these either of keeping or leaving the place they stand
in: In that of keeping their places, the men only turn their bodies, the way
which is commanded them: in that of leaving their places, the whole body moves
into an other place or a part thereof: which motions for the better
understanding, we will distinguish the Ranks and Fyles.

By Ranks, the body changing his place, but so as the Leader of the corner Fyle
of that hand, to which the body wheeleth, turns his body only that way the
Manaple moves, unless in doubling of Ranks wherein it is changed but in
part, or by countermarching, which may be done, and the place kept: This is
moving by ranckes, which is to be used, when we desire to keep near to our
first station.

By Fyles, howsoever each man in his own place may alter, or the men in their
Fyles may change their places; the Body or maine, keeps the proportion still,
unless you make of the Flank the Front, wherein though the Maniple retayneth
his order and so much ground, yet not the same ground.

The motions of the person in his proper place are commanded by these terms of
direction: (to wit) to the right hand: to the left hand: and to the right or
left hand about, or to the Reere.

The motions of the lymbes, is properly so termed, when only some of them do
move, and the rest do stand: as in these words of command; Ranks to the
right or left hand double: Fyles to the right or left hand double, Ranks close
forward; Ranks open backwards, Fyles to the right or left hand close, or open
to the distance you will have them.

To the Right hand.
If you will make the right Flank the Front, then are you to say, To the right
hand: at the delivery of which words, the Soldiers are presently to turn
their faces that way; and so your command will be performed.

To the Left hand.
In like sort, if you will have your left Flank the Front, you must say: To the
left hand; and presently they will all turn their faces toward the left
flancke: When you will restore them back again to their first aspect, you
must say; As you were.

By the right or left hand to the Reere.
When you will make the Reere the Front, then are you to say; By the right hand
about: or, by the left hand about, or to the Reere: at which words every
Soldier is to turn his face to his backside.

Ranks close.
When you will close your Ranks, you must say, Ranks close, which is always to
be understood, that all the Ranks move at one instant close forwards, to the
first rank of Leaders, which is, to stand firm.

Ranks open.
When you will open your ranks, you must say, Ranks open; by which is always
understood, they are to open backward, unless an express commandment to the
contrary.

Fyles to the right or left hand close.
So likewise, if you will close the Fyles to any distance, you must say, Fyles
to the right or left hand close, to what order you please, and then all of them
turning their faces to that hand given, move jointly and wholly together,
saving the outmost Fyle to that hand you close, which is to stand firm till
the Troop have gotten his distance, and if you will restore them, then you are
to say; As you were.

When the commandment is given for the altering any of the Distances by Fyles,
Fyles close.
without any express mention, to which hand they should open or close, Then
the whole Troop is to edge indifferently, and at an instant to both hands,
toward or from the middle space between the two middlemost Leaders. The words
of commandment are Fyles close, Fyles open.
Fyles open.

There be two sorts of doubling: The one by Ranks, the other by Fyles, and both
these are performed diverse ways as shall be showed.

When an Enemy goes about to disclose you with the ouer-breadth of his body,
it will be necessary for you then to increase or double your Front, which may
be done either by Ranks, when every second rank comes between the
distances of the Rank before it, and that either to the right, or to the left
hand: Doubling of Ranks to the right or left hand.
The word of Directions are: Ranks to the right or left hand double.

Middle-men to double their Ranks, or Front to right or left hand.
Or by the Middle-man when the last five Ranks do march up through the spaces
between the Fyles, till the bringers up, middle-men be even in front with the
Leaders: The words of command are; Middle-men to the right or left hand: Double
your front.

Or by the bringers up by Induction, which is, when the bringers up do advance
through the distances between the Fyles; and next after them, the next last
Rank, and so the rest successively, till the bringers up be in the rank with
the Leaders, and their Middle-men with the Leaders middlemen, and so the
second, third, Bringers up to double their Ranks on the Fronts.
and fourth ranks from the front. The words of direction are; Bringers up to
the right or left hand, double the front.

Or by division, when the last five Ranks do turn their faces, the one half
in their fyles to the right hand, and the other half to the left hand, and so
march forth from both the flancks, till they have gotten such a proportion of
ground or distance, as is answerable to the order the first five Ranks do
stand in; and then presently without attending any further commandment, they
turn their faces again toward the front, and march upon both flanckes, till
they come even with the front; Middle-men by Division double the Front.
The words of command; Middle-men by division, double the front.

Middle-men double the body.
This also may be performed to either hand without dividing of the ranks, by the
marching forth only of the whole five ranks together: But in this case, the
Shot on both flanks, or on either, must edge outward, till they have given the
Pikes a full distance to come up between them and the foremost five ranks of
Pykes: The words are, Middlemen double the body.

Double the Front by the Hankes.
Or by rank to either flank, which is, when the second rank is drawn out
even with the rank before it: The words are; Double the front by the flanks.

Or by half ranks, when every second rank divides it self, and increases
the former upon each side.

Doubling of Fyles.
When you will have the Body of greater depth; then you must cause the one fyle
to mingle with the five other, either to the righ hand or to the left; which is
termed doubling of fyles; and is performed after this manner.

Doubling of Fyles to the right or left hand.
If to the right hand, then is the outermost fyle to the right hand to stand,
and the Leader of the second fyle, shall side behind the Leader of the first
fyle: and so of all the rest of the second fyle, behind those of the outmost
fyle successively: so as the bringer up of the second fyle, shall come to stand
behind the bringer up of the first fyle, and so likewise all the other fyles,
by every second fyle: So that the second, fourth, sixth, eigth, and tenth, shall
stand within, or go into the first, third, fifth, seventh and ninth: all
which in a known number of fyles may be done at once without confusion or
disorder.

But because this manner of Doubling, in the very orderliest and best
performance, cannot but break the Body, by reason of the disioyning of Fyles:
I would rather put the one half of the Fyles behind the other half, which
may be speedily performed, either by the advancing of falling back of the one
half part of the Fyles: the words of Direction are; Fyle upon fyle.

But if you desire to keep the same ground, then let the one half part of the
fyle in the Body which is to Double, close their Ranckes forwards toward the
Leaders, to half the Distance they were in before the Commandment was given:
And the other half part of the fyles in the Body, to shorten their Distances
toward the Reere, or Bringers up, to half that they held backwards: By which
means it will fall out, that the Leaders of the half which is to double, will
stand a little beyond the Bringers up of the other half: and by Edging of
their fyles behind the other half, may easily perform your Direction; The
words of Command are these, Fyles double the Body to the right or left hand.

Countermarch.
COunter-Marches are twofold, for either we Countermarch the Ranckes, or the
Fyles: and these either by changing your ground, or keeping still the same
ground. But though to show the diversity of them, the kinds are distinguished
by Ranks and Fyles; yet in the practice you are to nominate neither, but are
to say: To the right or to the left hand Countermarch.

Countermarch and loose ground.
Counter-marching of Ranckes and altering of Ground are thus affected: When the
Command is delivered, the Leaders turn, and pass through the Distances
between thc fyles; and when they are passed as far beyond, the next Rank
turns after them, and so successively the rest in due distance Marching out
after their Leaders, till they have taken another like place from the Bringers
up, equal to that they did possess, or otherwise pass on further at the
discretion of the Commander.

The use is, when the Enemy shows himself upon your Reere, and you desire to
confront him with your best men; the words of Direction are: To the right or
left hand Countermarch and pass: if you will keep the same Ground, then
thus: The Leaders upon the Word given must turn as before and March through
the Distances of the fyles, till they come between thc Distances where the
Bringers up stand; and so the rest successively. After them the Middle-men, the
ranckes of the second Middle-men standing firm, till the five first Ranckes
have possessed the place between the last five, and do by that means double
them. Then the Middle-men to the Bringers up without attending any further
Command, shall march till they have gotten the distance of the Rancks, which
done, they shall take their place right behind the Leaders Middle-men: so the
rest likewise successively, Marching out after one another to the same
distance, and shall turn and take their places till the Bringers up get the
places the Leaders marched from, and the Leaders the places where the Bringers
up stood: The words of direction; To the right or left hand Cou^termarch and
stand: The very same is done otherwise thus:

As Soon, as you have given the word Countermarch, and the Leaders begin to
turn; at the same time and instant all the Body shall move forward, and the
Ranckes advance successively one after another, still turning after their
Leaders as they come up to the place from whence they moved, and following
them till the Leaders have taken the place of the Bringers up, and the Bringers
up be come into the places of the Leaders; The words are: to the right or left
hand Countermarch.

Countermarch by Fyles.
The Counter-marching of Fyles, for the manner of it is nothing different from
the former of Ranks; Only, when you will Countermarch your Fyles, you must
first bid them, to the right hand or left hand, and when they are turned
toward that flancke from whence you meant to Countermarch, you must say; To
the right or left hand Countermarch.

The use is, when you will pass your Musketeers all to one flancke, or any
Maniple or Maniples to any other Quarter of the Army, either from the right
hand to the left, or to the middle Battle, or any contrary.

When you will Wheel the body or Maniple to the right hand, you must command
the right hand Fyle to stand firm: Wheeling the Body.
then Command them to the right hand; and all of them shall turn their faces
that way, so as the whole Body will front toward the right flancke. Then say,
Fyles to your order: and all of them shall close forward toward the right fyle,
at the distance of 3. foot, and this perforformed, bid them; Front as they
were: Then say, Ranks to your Order: and all the Ranks shall close forward to
3. foot. And this being effected, Command the right Leader to stand firm like
the fixed foot of a Compass; and all the rest plumpe together, to Wheel to
the right hand about him, as the Center, which will bring the Front from the
usual aspect to the right flank. Now as the body Wheels, so the right Leader
must observe to turn his body by Discretion in his place, keeping his aspect
even with the aspect of the rest of the Leaders as they wind themselves: and
thus your Directions will be accomplished. The same things to the contrary
must be likewise observed; when you will wheel to the best Flancke; If you
will bring the aspect of the Front toward the Reere, then you must give them
the half turn, by wheeling one quarter turn more then you did before.

If you will return the Body into his place again, you may wheel it round,
by giving it one half turn more, having once already had an half turn;
which will bring that Aspect back again that way from whence it was first
moved: But if the Body have made but a quarter turn to the right hand, then
before you wheel them back, you must say; To the right hand. And all of them
will turn their faces that way: then bid the Leader who was the right hand
Leader, and is now become the left, to stand firm; And the rest to wheel
back again about him the quarter turn: then let them Front as they were, and
so your first Rank of Leaders has gotten the place, from whence at first it
wheeled; Then say, Ranks open backward. And when the Ranks have taken their
first places and Distances, then say; Fyles to the left hand open: so all the
Fyles turning their Aspect toward the left flank, march from the right hand
Leader (who has his place already, and therefore is to stand firm) till they
have taken all the first places and Distances, and then they must Front again
as they were: And thus they are restored to their first Ground and Order.

When you intend to wheel a single Company, you must Double their Ranks
before they wheel, in regard the Body is but small; but in a Division or
greater Body, you close both Rank and Fyle to the Order of three foot,
omitting to Double.

The same Precepts are to be used to the contrary hand, if you be wheeled to
the left flank.

Now we will say somewhat of Exercising the Pyke, before we come to the
Musquetier: The punctual handling of the Pyke which every man is to be
practiced in, because it is common, we will omit, and proceed to the terms
of Direction; which are these: viz.

Advance your Pykes.
Order your Pykes.
Shoulder your Pykes, and slope them.
Charge your Pykes.
Order your Pykes.
Trayle your Pykes.
Cheek your Pykes.
These following Motions are to be performed, both Standing and Marching.
When you Charge and March, your Body must stand still a while till you see
your Pykes are all couched over their Leaders shoulders, then March forwards.
CHarge your Pykes.
Shoulder your Pykes.
To the right hand Charge.
Shoulder your Pykes.
To the left hand Charge.
Shoulder your Pykes.
To the Reere Charge.
Shoulder your Pykes. Stand.
Order your Pykes.
They must observe when they Charge standing, to fall back with the right leg,
and Marching, to set forward the left: When you Charge to the left hand stand
firm with the right leg, and only turn a little on your left heel.

Now for the Musketeers, because some Motions there are proper and belonging
to them only For the handling the Musket and the Postures: we will omit
them, and only tie you in the Exercise to these three terms of Directions,
which include all the other particularities.

Make ready, Present, Give Fire.
Your Musketeers must observe in all their Actions to turn to the Right hand;
and that they carry the mouths of their Muskets high, as well when they are
Shouldered as in Priming; as also when they hold their Pannes guarded, and come
up to give fire.

All Skirmishes and Fights, are performed one of these three ways: either by
Advancing, or Retiring, or by the Flank.

In Advancing toward an Enemy (if they Skirmish not disbanded) they give fire
by Rank, after this manner.

Two Ranks must always make ready together, and advance ten paces before
the Body; at which distance a Sergeant (or when the body is great) some better
quallified Officer is to stand, even with whom the Musketeers are to come up,
which they are to perform, one Rank still one after another; the second Rank
observing still to keep their Muskets upon their Rests, and to guard their
Pannes till the first have discharged and be fallen away; and then presently
after them, the second Rank is to give fire and fall away after the first
Rank, falling even behind the other Ranks in the Reere, and falling up after
them: whilst the first two Ranks come up and give Fire, the two next are to
make ready, and to advance forwards as far as the before mentioned Officer,
and no further, as soon as ever the two first are fallen away; and they are to
do all things in the same manner they did before them, and so all the other
Ranks by twoes, one after another.

When they have presented, no man must be suffered to Discharge his Musket,
till the word (Give Fire) be given, and then the whole Rank must be taught to
Discharge hansomely and altogether, no man being permitted to take his aim
higher then the Girdle or the Middle of a man.

When you will acquaint them to give Fire, retyring from an Enemy, you must do
it in this manner:

As the Troop marches, the last Rank makes ready; and being ready, turns
at an instant to the right hand, Presents and gives Fire; which being
performed, they March one after another, a good round pace toward the Front;
and there place themselves together before the Soldiers; as soon as the
aforesaid first Rank is turned to Discharge, the Rank next it makes ready;
and when the foremost is Marched away, the second comes up after the same manner
the former did, Presenting, giving Fire, falling away, and performing all
things in the same sort the former did, so successively the rest one after
another.

We give fire by Flanks, thus; The outmost Fyle next you must be Commanded to
make ready, Marching still along with the body till such time as they be ready;
and then they are to turn at the Signal given upon the Enemy, and give Fire
altogether at one time: when they have Discharged, they stir not but stand
firm, keeping their Ground, and Charging their Muskets again. Now as soon as
the foresaid Fyle turns to give Fire, the outmost next it must make ready,
always Marching along with the Body, till the Bringer up be past a little
beyond the Leader of the Fyle that gave fire last, and then the second outmost
Fyle, must turn altogether and give fire, doing as the first did; and so all
the rest of the Fyles successively one after another. A Sergeant, or if the
Troop be great, some better qualified Officer, shall stand at the head of the
first fyle, and as soon as the second fyle has given fire, he is to lead
forwards the first fyle, and so the rest one after another, till he has
gathered up the whole wing of Shot; and then he shall join them again in
equal front with the Pykes.

Another way of skirmishing is this; all the whole wing of Musketeers makes
ready altogether, and the first rank without advancing, gives fire in the
place it stands in, and speedily as it may; yet orderly falls away, all the
ranks doing the same, one after another successively.

Now last of all, we will repeat the terms of directions, which are these:

Motions standing and Marching.
Fyles right your Selves.
Ranks right your Selves.
Silence.
To the right hand:
As you were.
To the left hand,
As you were.
By the right hand to the Reere,
As you were.
By the left hand to the Reere,
As you were.
Ranks to the right hand Double,
As you were.
Ranks to the left hand Double,
As you were.
Middle-men to the right hand Double the Front.
As you were.
Middle-men to the Left hand, double the Front.
As you were.
Bringers up to the Right hand, Double your Front.
As you were.
Bringers up to the Left hand, Double your Front.
As you were.
Middle-men by Division, Double your Front to the right hand.
As you were.
Middle-men by Division, Double the Front to the
left hand.
As you were.
Middle-men to the Pyke or to the Sword, Double
the Body.
As you were.
Ranks by the Flanks, Double the Body to the right hand. to the left hand.
As you were.
Half Ranks by the Flanks, Double the Front.
As you were.
To the right or left hand, Countermarch.
As you were.
This is for the Ranks; but when you will Countermarch your Flanks or Fyles,
you must first bid them to the right or left hand; upon which directions, they
will turn their faces to the flank you desire to have them turned; and then
say as you did before in the Countermarching the Ranks.

To the right, or to the left hand Countermarch.
The same also is to be losed in the other Counter-marches, which are these;
viz.
To the right hand Countermarch and stand.
As you were.
Before you wheel the Body, you shall use these words;
Fyles, close to your mean order, or to 3. foot.
Ranks close to your mean order, or to 3. foot.
Advance your Pykes.
Slope your Muskets.
To the right hand, Whele.
To the left hand, Whele.
To the Reere Whele.
After you have wheeled to the right hand, to wheel back again, must be ever
to the contrary hand you wheeled first.

Front as you were.
Ranks open backward.
Fyles open.
If before the first wheeling, they closed co the right hand, then they must
open to the left hand: and so the contrary.

Front as you were.

FJNIS.

