A TREATISE of the Good and evil Tongue.

With the unstableness of the same, and also with the abuses thereof.

With a discourse of the punishment which the Lord has showed on al those
which through swearing and periuring themselves, have broken Gods
commandments: as by this Treatise most plainly appears.

Made by John of Marconuille Gentleman.

Proverb. 16. Man intends in his heart, but the aunsweare ^f the tongue is in
Gods hand.

Imprinted at London for John Perin dwelling in Paul's Church yard at the sign
of the Angel and are there to be sold.

T.S. to faithful Christian Reader greeting.
Being entreated by a friend of mine ( Gentle Reader) to peruse this pamflet,
and write somewhat in the behalf thereof: I was contented, after the reading
over of the same, to satisfy that his honest request, because in my poor
opinion, it is well worthy the publishing, and never more need full (it at
any time the like treatise was needeful) the^ now in this our so corrupt age,
after so long sincere preaching (the Lord be highly praised therefore) of the
most holy and glorious Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The matter
contained herein sets forth unto thee, how and in what manner thou should
use and rule they tongue, the good which comes by the modest and holy usage
thereof, and the evil and great danger which arises thereby in the abuse of
the same both to body and soul. It were superfluous for me to set down here
the infinite number of examples of mischief, which an evil tongue has
wrought, and what good otherwise being used in the fear of god it has brought
and will always bring, because thou shall find them in the reading hereof
sufficiently mentioned, both by the authority of the holy scripturs, and also of
other profane authors, although in very deed the first authority is most
sufficient.: and therefore since the heathen who never knew god aright, (because
they knew not his Christ, the savior and redeemer of al such as faithfullye
believe in him, and unfeignedly believe his holy gospel, and practice the same
in their lives and conversation all the days of their life) made such laws
and ordinances for the punishing of unruly and blasphemous tongues, some with
marking in the face with hot burning iro^s, some by the purse and some by
death, which is the just law of the most high. Let us christians, or at the
least which bear the name of Christ, and would gladly so be called, take heed
how we abuse our tongues, either with blasphemies, periuries, flatteries,
filthy and abominable speeches, cursings, raylings and backbitinges, least we
fall into the hands of the most severe and just judge, who judges both justly
and rightly, either to everlasting salvation, or else to perpetual destruction
both of body and soul for ever. Wherefore I exhort and beseech all the readers
hereof, of what estate or condition so ever he or she be, in the name of God
the father and of his son Jesus Christ, to bring with them circumcised ears
and hearts, and perfect and sound judgment, so that the things which they shall
read herin, may take deep root in their hearts and consciences, as seats
ready prepared for the bettering and amending of them selves in the reasonable
and holy use of their tongues, as may be to the glory of God, their everlasting
comfort in Christ Jesus, and the bettering of others with whom they shall be
conversant. For the Lord God created all things in the world for the use and
service of man, and man, to serve him alone, all the days of his life in
holiness and righteousness, which service of his rests in the heart and tongue,
for it is written, with the heart we believe unto righteousness, and with the
tongue we confess unto salvation. And again let your talk and communication
be such as may bring grace to the hearers: and again, if any man speak, let
him speak as the words of God, that is, let his communication be holy that it
may edify those which hear it, so that thereby your heavenly father may be
glorified: again be ye holy, because I your god am holy. But we for the most
part are thankeful unto his majesty neither in heart nor tongue, for his
benefits received, and especially when he feeds us, for even then when we
should be most tha^kfull for our meats and drinks, we pour out all the
repast whole: most filthy, abominable, beastly, and blasphemous talk, and he
is no good companion forsooth, that cannot and will not do so, and by that mean
in stead of glorifying his holy name we altogether blaspheme it with our
helhoundish tongues, and yet we think they do us great wrong, who will not
think and account us to be good Christians, But if this be, to be a good
christians, then all the devils in hell are such christians. And besides, if
any man shall admonish those that thus shall abuse their tongues, they ask what
have thou to do with my speeches, and as the prophet David complained of the
corruption of the people in his days, Psalm. 12. they say, our tongues are
ours, we ought to speak, what Lord shall us control? Furthermore, the tongue
is the messenger of the heart, and whatsoever the heart imagines the tongue vtte
reth, so that by the talk of a man, is known what an heart he bears, for it
is said, out of the abundance of the heart, the tongue speaks, wherefore
(Christian Reader) let us so use our tongues as that God may be honored and
served by them: And mark I beseech you, what commodity arises by the serving
of his majesty truly and duly. First this we know, that what soever pain
an earthly servant takes about the service of his master, that, that his
painful service, turns to the benefit of the master: But he that serves
God, the more duetifullie and painefully he serves him, the same his paineful
and diligent service turns wholly to his own benefit: yea even to the
enheritaunce of the kingdom of heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord: one
chief and special point of which service consists in the tongue. And thus
much according to my simple skill, and not like any great clarke, have I as
brief* l^e as I might, given thee to understand how thou ought to come
prepared to the reading of this treatise, not superficially and without some
fruit, but with judgment and understanding. Wherefore I beseech thee thank
God, for the author hereof who has offered this his travel for thy benefit,
that he finding by his pains taken, some good to have ensued thereby, it may
the rather encourage him and others which travel in the like cases, to go
forward in such measures as the Lord God shall bestow on them in their well
doing, to the glory of his most holy name, and benefit of his Church, And so
for this time I leave.

Thine in the Lord. T.S.

A TREATISE OF THE good and evil tongue, by John of Marconuile Gentleman.
Man intends in his heart, but the answer of the tongue is in Gods hand.
Prou. 16.
ONe of the principal points that makes a wise man to be known, is rightly
to govern his tongue, and aptly to conduct his speech: for it is commonly
seen that the stroke of the tongue is more dangerous then the dent of the
spear. Insomuch that this wound may easily be salued, but the hurt which the
wicked tongue leaves behind him is always incurable. Wherefore the sage
Sirach says; That he may be worthily counted happy which never offended by
his unruly tongue. And this is he which by the assertion of Saint James is
judged a perfect man.

It is a thing by custom incident to human things, that from whence we cull
any commodity: from thence, oftentimes we gather also many mishaps and
miseries, for as it is apparent that the stars and celestial bodies are most
necessary to the sustenaunce of this our life: whereof depends all the
properties and inclinations of these inferior bodies, yet out of them issues
extreme calamity which we may hardly avoid by any advise, as when it
happens us to be borne under a perverse climate or co^stellation, through the
benevolence of the air, we draw our breath, and enjoy our vital spirits,
but when it is infected, it fretteth every corner full of malady, wailings,
and mortalities, men cannot want the diverse vtillities which the sea and waters
daily conueieth unto them: yet when with might and maine they surmount their
appointed limits, they damnifie many thousands in one moment, whereof the
inhabitants neers the River of Loire may be very good witnesses by the
inspeakable loss which lately chanced to them thereby, in the year of our
Lord God. 1570. The life of man cannot be continued without the use of fire,
yet who can utter the soden frights and dreadful Tragedies which it has
brought forth of the earth, mother and nurse of all growing creatures, comes,
ruins, tremblings, and earthquakes, gapings, and pestiferous exhalations,
which sore annoieth mankind: even so is the tongue as it is co^ducted, for if
it be well guided there is nothing better, nothing more pleasant: but if it be
suffered to run at randon, nothing is more perilous. The tongue God wot is a
little member of slender substance, notwithstanding in it is conreined fire and
water, souerein salve and deadly poiso^, destruction and salvation: for in this
world cannot be found a greater mischief the^ a venomous tung, nor a more
better thing then friendly words and works agreeable to the same. For this
cause the renowned wise Byas, or as some others will have it Pytacus sent the
tongue of a certain beas^ allotted to be sacrificed to a King of Egypt called
Amasis, for the very worst and best member of the beast. Thereby to give us
notice, that in a man nothing is more excellent than the use of a well tempered
tongue, nor nothing more villainous then a vyperous tongue.

Socrates the most vigilant Historiographer, shows how on a day Pambus a
silly sot deuoid of knowledge, bethought him to go to a certain famous Doctor
to be instructed and better furnished in his defects: who after he had heard
the first verse of the 38. Psalm, etc. I will direct my ways that I may not
offend in my tongue, rose up upon the sodeine, took leave of his master and
departed, saying; That he desired to learn nothing more, so that he might
accomplish in his deeds the contents of this one verse. Signifying ^ereby,
that the chiefest perfection, the ^st property perteining to a man, is to
^orderate his tongue, for overmuch bab^e is ever subject to controlment, and he
^^at warely wears his tongue shows ^^mselfe to be wise, and he that gards
his ^outh and tongue, gards his own soul.

Plutarch compares these prating par^ts to empty vessels, which being
soun^ed, yeeldes a louder noise then those which are well fraught with good
liquor. Isocrates, in his book dedicated to De^onicus, says; That there are
two times ^t for talking, the one when necessity ^oth urge us, the other when
a man spea^eth of that whereof he is very well skiled. It was objected to
Cherillus for what ^ause Lycurgus had made so few ordi^ances. He replied,
that the multitude of ^wes and statutes was nothing needful ^o men that are
spare of speech. We are ^aught by the Philosopher Zenon, that nature has
given us two ears to hear ^ur fill, but one only tongue to speak seldom.
Whereunto accords S. Paul saying; Be you quick in hearing, b^slowe in
speaking. Sueton, also recorde^ that the principal cause whereof Oct^uian
above all other favored and fa^cied Mecaenas, was, for the great tenperance
he used in his talk. Cicero, r^citeth, Cato the Orator, would neu^^ leave
in writing, any his Orations: affi^ming that if it chanced him to repe^^
ought that he had said, he would n^^ be vpbraid with his writing, which he
could not deny. Cato the Censor beein^ snapt at for his too much sobriety i^
talk, insomuche that his taciturniti^ was of most men thought worthy
^reprehension, answered, that the ho^ding of his peace should not offend any
man, considering his life was innocent and altogether without blame, for then
he used to speak when he^ might, or long be silent. Into the same reproach
fell Heckades, anoble Orator of Greece, because he sat mute ^eeing invited to
a solemn banquet where others chatted and iangled out of ^easure, which
Archidamidas percei^ing, answered in the behalf of Hec^ades to him that
scoffed him for hol^ing his peace. Art thou ignorant said ^ee that those which
can wisely speak, ^an also warely hold their peace, when ^hey see the times
and tides not apt for ^^lke.

He therefore which will speak, must ^vel consider before he open his mouth,
whither the words he is about to vt^er may in time to come be prejudicial
unto him, having always in mind the ^ncient Proverb; Lingua quo vadis:
Tongue whither will thou.

Amongst many goodly examples of ^oo much talk, that which is written of ^he
Poet Ibyque seems very fit for our purpose, who being sharply assailed and
besette on all sides, with a route of careless and roysting robbers, in a
place far secluded from sucker where he could not be seen or heard of any man
the poor Poet, this distressed Ibyque, seeing himself ready to be
sacrificed, no knowing where to complain and appeal for justice, saw a
company of Cranes i^ the air, to whom he called aloud, O you Cranes be you
witnesses of the fraud and villainy that I here receive: after his death all
passed a long time before it could^ be known who was guilty thereof, till on
a dismoll day that men assembled themselves to a Faier, where also the
murderers of Ibyque made their appearaunce, it chanced that at the same time
certain Cranes came that way, one of the same murderers smiling said to his
companions, behold where flies the witnesses of the Poet Ibyque, which thing
being noted of one that stood by, suspected them of the fact committed: whereof
incontinent he advertised the Magistrates, the murderers were apprehended,
confessed the deed, and were executed, therefore, which happened only by their
chatting unadvisedly*

The very like history we read in Plutarch of certain sacriligious persons,
which by night had spoiled the temple of Pallas in Lacedemonia: the next
morning after this heinous offense heard of, was found an empty flagon in the
porch of the Temple, and as men made their recourse thither to behold this
piteous spectacle, they debated among themselves what this Flagon should
signify, then one of the malefactors which was in the thronge, yet unknown,
said, my friends give me leave and I will show you my censure upon this
matter, as I guess this thing is happened for that those which have taken upon
them to rob this Temple, fearing to be attached in doing the trespass, had
drunk of a certain confection called Cyge, which is a kind of mortal
poison, to the end they might be quickly dispatched out of the way, and not
to be brought to the place of judgment and infamy of the world, which
otherwise they should incur. But if it so chanced that they achieved their
enterprise without being discovered, they had brought also with them a
counterpoyson Cyge, which is wine without water. And for this cause I think
the Flagon is here left void, Certain of the assistance marking this device,
judged him to be a partner of the practice, committed him to ward, who upon
strait examination, was found culpable, and had the rigor of the law for his
enormious guilt, whereof he might thank his incontinent tongue.

At London in England, an accident not unlike to the former, happened of a
thief, which in the depth of the night had craftily conveyed himself into a
citizens house, minding to make speedy dispatch of the best wares that came
next to hand, but he could not so covertly handle the matter but the
neighbors there adjoining, heard him bursling about the door, which
immediately assembled themselves to take the thief that was yet in the house,
he seeing this tumult to be raised for his apprehension, cunningly got
himself in the midst of the prease, busily crying and calling for the
thief: Insomuche that the neighbors thinking him to be stopped, began to
retire homewarde, when this frantike fellow could no longer hold, but must
needs say, farewell thief, the devil go with thee, for I have lost my hat in
seeking of thee. Whereupon he was strait clapped fast, for one kept the hat which
he saw falling from the thief as he fled, which being laid to his
charge was so astonished, that he could not deny the fact, and was hanged
therefore at Tyborne, which he might have avoided easily if he had been
silent. King Seleucus surnamed Galymaca, for his noble and valiant prowess in
feats of arms, but as all human thing are full of fragilitie and mutations,
so on a time it happened, that Mars which erst was his gracious guide, so
vnlucke^ lie lowred and thundered his threate upon this unhappy Prince, that
he being discomfited in a great conflict, was driven to break his Diadem, the
only ensign of his Princely pomp, and to get him packing with three men,
only that he might not be known. After he had wandered a while in the
desolate deserts, he chanced upon a poor cottage, where he requested bread
and a little water, to the end he would not be revealed, his Host showed
him all the comfort and courtesy that in him lay, knowing full well that it
was the King, and did conduct him in the way that he did require: who surely
should have gained thereby a reward meritorious for his travail, had not his
talketiue tongue marred all his market, the King departing said, farwell host,
the peevish wretch answered, God keep you my Lord, whereat the King fretting,
not minding to be detected, made semblance ^o offer his hand to his hose as
though he would take his host coin, but it was a token to one of his men
that he should cut off his hosts head, such fruit we reap of our unbridled
speech.

The evil that ensues by an indiscreet tongue, has a huge heap of more
examples which of purpose I let pass, that I might set out to the view, the
hidden treasure and gallant company that secretly embraces, amongst whom
Papyrius has merited the pre-eminence. The Roman Senators had an ancient
custom, that one of their children should attend on them in the Senate house,
till the said children passed the age of seventeen years, to this end, that
they being inured to the holsom ordinances, of their ancestors, might after be
the more fit for the regiment of their country. Now it so fell out that the
Senate on a time confuted of a very weighty matter, and straigh^ charge was
given that it should be kep^ close, where amongst the other youthe^ this
little Papyrius was also present: o^ whom when he came home, his mothe^
demanded what great matters had cause^ the Senate that day to sit so long.
Where unto her son replied that he might no^ so do, for he had commission to
the contrary, and as women are ever curious to know, she allured her little
son with fair promises, but therein she lost her labor wherefore she used
thumps and threats o^ all sorts to get this hidden mystery, which Papyrius
perceiving, practiced a pretti^ policy, saying to his mother, that the thing
which so much encombred the Senate was, that every man should hereafter have
two wives, when the mother heard this, she stayed no longer, but incontinent
advertised the other Roman dames thereof, that so unjust an ordinance might not
go forward: the next morning at the gate of the Senate, were assembled great
^^oupes of matrons. Who instantly be^ought, that in Rome such inequality ^ight
not take place, for one man to mar^ye with two wives, affirming that it were
much more expedient that one woman should have two husbands, the Senators
abashed to see this inciuilitie in their wives, wondered from whence it should
proceed, but by any means they could not gather the cause hereof: the^ little
Papirius stepped forth and bad the^ to be quiet, deciphering from point to
point, what had happened between his mother and him, and how for dead of her he
was driven to use this deceit. The Senate highly commending the wisdom and
constancy of this youth, ordained that their children should no more approach
the Senates house, except only young Papyrius, because the secrets of the
Senate should not be revealed, and the^ Papirius was invested with a garment
called Pretext, which was the gretest honor that he could have in those young
years to wear the ha^ bite of a Senator. And this is reported o^ Aullius
Gellius and Macrobius in hi^ Saturnals.

Alexander the great, having red (...) letter of great importance in the
presence of his friend Ephestion, which he^ received from his mother, clapped
his finger upon his mouth, meaning thereby that he to whom any secret thing is
committed, ought always to have his mouth closed. K. Licimacus offered to the
Poet Philippide all that lay in his power to do, to who^ the Poet said; My Lord
the best benefit I can receive of you, is never to know your secrets: this
thing was not observed of Fuluius, who knowing a great secret of the Emperor
Octauius, did impart it to his wife, and she disclosed it to diverse others
which her husband often laid reprochfully to her charge: whereof she being
impatie^t, in a frantike fury slew her self, so did her husband Fuluius. An
example not far unlike to this, is recited by Pliny, of the Philosopher
Anazerxes, who be reft himself of his tunge, and teeth also, that he would not
reueal a certain secret which the tyrant Nicocrion sought violently to wrest
from him. The like we read of Zenon a Philosopher, which chose rather to cut
of his tongue, then to disclose his friends council. The Athenians made an
Image of the dust of a Lioness, in the remembrance and honor of a certain
wanton woman called Lioness who having familiar company with Harmodius and
Aristogidon, tyrants and enemies to the Athenian estate, concealed from the^, a
certain covert conspiracy, for which cause she is pictured without any
tongue, to give notice of her secrecy. The servants of Plocius Plancus as
Valerius writes, endured sharp torments and strappadoes because they would
not utter where their master had hid him self to his enemies, who sought to
have slain him. Acgisilaus king of Sparta greatly marueiled when it was told
him to a condemned man which for any cruelty that was done unto him would
never speak a word. The servant of Cato the orator, having seen a certain
trespass committed by his master, to the death would never utter it. A
Roman Tribune demanded on a time of Metellus a valliant captain, what he
meant to do concerning a conflict which was at hand: He answered, if I knew
that my shirt had intelligence of that I pretend to do, I would straight ways
cast it in the fire. When Darius was overthrown and vanquished by Alexander,
conveyed him self into a close corner, they which saw this, and knew where he
was, would not bewray him, although they suffered the most bitter pains that
could be inverted. Horace amongst his conuiuall constitutions wills that
every man should keep close that which is said and done at bankets.

It was a custom among the Athenians, that when they were assembled at a
feast, the grauest man of them all did always keep the door: saying to them
that entered there, take heed sirs that not one word be blown abroad, of all
that is done here. The order of Pithagoras discipline was chiefly to inure his
disciples to secrecy, to the which end a long time they kept silence, and he
had never any Scholar but he sat mute two years at the least: that thereby
they being accustomed to secretnes, might learn never to speak, but when
necessity did compel them.

Aristotle being asked what was the most difficult thing for a man to rule,
(said) to hold his peace. Saint Ambrose amongst the principal grounds of
virtue has placed Taciturnitie. The ancient Egiptians reverence Harpocrate for
the god of secrecy. So did the Romans Angenora as goddess of the same
silence, whom they painted, closing her mouth with her finger, in token of
secrecy.

For to conclude this matter of silence, Quintus Curtius shows us that the
Percians had a custom which might not be broken, which was, to punish above
all offenders, him that had bewraied any secret committed unto him: Further,
such is the providence of nature in the situation of our members, that she has
assigned to each one his right room, as well for the dignity and decoration of
the body, as for the commodity and use of the members. The brain which is
the very feate of reason, the most worthy part of man* is placed all aloft in
the head, as in an imperial throne, there to prescribe and bear rule over the
inferior parts: the tongue which is the interpreter of the inward thoughts
of the heart, is settled in the midst of both, to the end it should be under
the brain, and not far from the heart, who^ also the same nature has enclosed
and hedged in with teeth and lips, as it were within a defe^sible bulwark,
that it might not be ranging unadvisedly: for this cause the Poet Hesiodus
compares the tongue to a hidden treasure, which should not be used, but when
necessity does constrain. The Prophet Esaias reioyseth above measure of the
good gift he had in his tongue: saying, God has given me a pleasant tongue, a
tongue rightly instructed, that it should declare his words in due and
convenient time, to the comfort of them that be in misery, but to the slothful
he has framed my speeches more pearcing then the two edged sword. By our
tongues says Saint James we praise God. To his purpose I remember a story of
a man condemned to death, by an inferior Judge, and before his death to be
bereft of his tongue, the poor fellow appealed to the parliament of Tolosa,
there uttering his humble petitions said: that the principal cause that moved
him to appeal, was for that he was condemned to have his tongue cut off before
his death, which God had given him to praise his name, and that it were great
wrong that he should be destitute of so good a member at the last instant of
his life. Now if men marvel at a little fish, called Remora, which is in length
scarce half a foot, nor in breadth five inches, who notwithstanding mauger
the rage of the surging seas, and blustering winds is able to stay a ship in
the midst of his course, as though it were tied fast with an ankar. Then with
more just reason we may wonder at the tongue, who being so little a member can
stir up so many millions of men, and incencing country, against country, and
City against City, for this cause the Poets have fained of old that Mercury
had a magical rod, called Caduse: which in deed was nothing else but an
eloquent tongue, whereby he persuaded, or diswaded men, at his pleasure.

And for this cause they said of old that Amphion forced great rocks to move
out of their place by the sweet sound of his Harp. So did Orpheus cause oaks
and elmes to leap for joy of his harmony, whereby it is signified that the swet
melody of their cloque^ce, could provoke and stir up the most lumpish dullards
of the world. In like manner the ancient french men feigned, that one Hercules
Selticus, who having a little chain through the top of his tongue, whereunto was
tied a great number of men's ears, he led them whether pleased him. Whereby he
meant, that by the dexterity of his talk he made men to incline to what part he
listed. Some men attributed to Socrates: some to Pericles, such a pleasant
tongue, that they could transform their hearers. And for this cause were called
flexanimi, because they turned the minds of men even as they desired. By the
benefit of the tongue king Cresus son, who from his infancy has always been
mute, saved his fathers life, when a soldiar drew his sword to have lain him,
not knowing that he was the ^ing. The boy cried out kill him not, for ^t is my
father. Methridates was a barbaous prince, and had notwithstanding under his
dominion and obedience xxii. diuer languages which all he understood an^ gave
answer to each one with an interpr^tor. The tongue of covetous Naball ha^
provoked king David to wrath, but the tongue of sage Abakell appeased him s^
well, that he said with a loud voice thank^ be to God that has sent thee this
day before me, blessed be thy counsel, and tho^ also which have kept me this
day from bloodshed. Naaman of Siria returne^ homeward in a rage, because the
Prophet had not healed him out of hand, but sen^ him to the river of Iordaine,
for said hee^ I have in my country as good waters a^ that of Iordaine, but his
servants by their wholesome declaratio^s unto him made him of an other mind
saying: if the prophet had commanded thee to do any great matter, without
doubt thou wouldes^ have done it willingly, but he said only wash thee and
thou shall be whole. Which Naaman putting in practice was cute^ incontinent.
And by this we see the great commodity which comes of a good tongue. Let us
therefore follow the counsel of S. Paul, who says: that no dishonest talk,
should proceed out of our mouths, that ribaldrie, wanton speech, or fond
devises, should not so much as be named amongst us, but we should rather
accustom our selves to thanks giving.

Amongst those signs which accompany them that rightly believe in our savior
Christ, this in the scripture is reckoned for the chiefest: they shall speak
with new tongues. Now S. Peter does teach us that new language: when he biddes
us to follow Jesus Christ: who being iniuried with words, did not reply with
the like: when he was slaundered and backbited, threatened not at al, but
referred him self wholly to him that is the just judge. Whereof S. Paul being
a right follower, writes, we are ill spoken of, and we bless: we are
persecuted, and we endure it patiently: we are maligned, and we pray for them
that taunt us: we are made the outcastes of the world, and the most caitifes of
al others, even till this hour. Let us consider diligently that the tongue is
given us to praise and magnify God. According to the example of Melchisedeth,
who thanked God, that had given victory to Abraham. Delbora exhorts the
people to praise God. So did saint Paul, saying: blessed be God which is the
father of our savior Christ, father of the desolate, and fountain of all
consolation: we ought not only to praise God, but also be godly and virtuous
men, as David which praised the people in the name of God, after the Arc was
brought up and the sacrifices completed. We have a great number of examples in
the scripture, showing that our tongue was given us to praise^ and magnify God.
David praised god, because the promise of the Messiah was fulfilled in him: who
after his manifold^ great tribulations, still exalted the name o^ god. So did
Solomon his son because h^ had builded the sumpteous temple of god The
Apostles blessed and praised god without intermissio^, attending for the
coming of the holy ghost. You see now to what end we have the use of our
toungs, which we ought to employ to the service of god according to the
examples of our forefathers. Abraham prayed for Israel, and was hard Moises
requested pardon of God for the people, confessing the manifold benefits that
God had bestowed upon them. David prayed that the blessing of God might be upon
his house. We are also commanded to pray, that the word of god and his truth
might be spread abroad and have his course throughout the whole world. Behold
they are the fruits of a good tongue, to praise God, to bles God, to pray
unto him, and to instruct those that are ignorant, for he that teaches others
the way to righteousness, shall him self shine like a bright lamp for ever.
Now if we will be true followers of our Master Christ, we must acquaint our
selves with that kind of language and speech which he always used: for he
preached and published the glory of god: he brought into the way those that
wandered and straied, he reproved offenders, he sturred up the slothful, he
comforted those which were in misery, he prayed for those that were out of the
way, he gave thanks to God for all. Finally he had a modest tongue, pleasant,
gracious, amiable, and full of all consolation. The Apostles after they had
received the grace and virtue of the holy ghost, said no more, but lord command
and we will make the fire to fall from the skies, they striued no more amongst
the^ selves for sovereignty, but spoke new things, they vttred to the world the
great wonders of god: but alas at this day we see the contrary put in practice,
for we endeavor to build again the ancient tower of Babylon, the tower of
deadly strife and debate: when one sort will needs be called evangelists, and
other reformed Catholics, others entire and perfect protestants as though our
savior Christ were deuisible and of diverse sorts, and as though the weete
name of our redemer, were a mat^er to scoff at. In which behalf we shall have
great need of a new Esdras, to reduce again this confusion of tongues in^o
one Gospel: Who as soon as certain strange women called Assotides, and
Moa^ites, had corrupted the hebrewe tongue, speaking half hebrew, and half
like moa^ites: the said Esdras brought it again to ^is ancient perfection. In
like manner so many sundry sects which are risen up in the Church of god
represented to us by their barbarous women: have ouerthrown and marred the
sincerity of the Gospel. Let us therefore be no more followers of old Adam,
which cast the fault of his offense upon his wife Eve, and she threw it upon
the ^rooked serpent: and let us take heed that we be not of the race of Caine,
who ha^ing slain his brother, dissembled the matter: but rather let us follow
the foote^teps of good king David, which with ^is humble speech appeased the
wrath of god: and according to the aduertiseme^ts of S. Paul, let our words be
sauored with salt, tending always to the edification of our neighbors, and
that no wicked talk proceed forth of our mouth. Let us therefore submit our
selves under the hand of God, to the end he may exalt us in convenient time:
for he has always a singular regard to his servants. Let us expel and banish
from us all slander, and backbiting, and close our mouth with our hand, like
to patient Job: that no indecent word issue from us at all, and when we talk,
to speak the words of God, which we ought to use with fear, for when the
words of god are spoken to the people unadvisedly, it brings them straight to
perdition. We are charged also to instruct our children, that they by thee may
be delivered, and numbered from the servitude of Satan, and the better to
accomplish the commandments of god. Lo this is the thing whereunto a good
tongue ought to be^ employed, that it may bring forth the worthy fruits of
justice. But now it is ^me to speak of the mischief that hap^ens of a wicked
tongue: it seems to be (...) thing not from our purpose, first to declare
what the tongue is, to the end the subject whereof we treat, may be the better
understood. The tongue is a member of man, which is made of flesh, and open,
full of veins, and sinews, because of his great stirring and moving, and
chiefelye for the sense of tasting, which is natural and peculiar to the
tongue, and nature has given it a humor which never wants, that is to say
spittle, which is nothing else but the excrement of fleame which flows from
the brain into the mouth, for a moisture to the tongue: Which otherwise would
soon wax dry, by reason of his continual moving.

Now the use of the tongue is to frame our words, and to help to chawe our
meat, in the formyng whereof we ought to consider the great providence of
God. For although the thought is the worthy part of the soul: yet what could
it profit or avail, if it had not the tongue for his interpretor? For this is
he which sets forth the knowledge of God. This is he which has caused men
to be assembled together from a brutish and sauege life, to human society:
this has erected villages, great cities, and countries: this has published
and made known wholesome statutes, and ordinances: and finally all other things
which are necessary for us. Wherefore we ought to know that the tongue was
given us, that by it we might know god, and to help one another by the
communication of speeches. Unto these two purposes we should direct our talk.
He then that will lead a prosperous life, and see happy days, let him keep his
tongue wisely, and his lips that out of them proceed no fraud nor mischief:
that he do good always, and seek after peace, and obtain it. A wholesome tongue
which is not given to backbite, and blame others, is the tree of life,
pleasant, and amiable to behold: but froward talk makes the soul sad. A
wise man is always sober in speech. The fool when he holds his peace, is
oftentimes thought to be wise: the tongue resembles a sharp pointed darte, if
it be not well ordered. Wherefore Saint James likeneth it to a fierce fire,
for says he; An immoderate tongue filles the world full of iniquities: And
this makes me to remember the Philosopher Anacarsis, who supping with Solon,
as he returned home was found sleeping half the way, having one hand to his
mouth, the other upon his privy parts, showing these were members which
would be carefully looked unto. For he that will be thought religious and
refraines not his tongue, his religion is not worth a dodkin. Amian, the
composer of many pretty Fables, tells one of a Satire, who being
greeuouslie annoied with extreme cold of rigorous winter, repaired by chance
to a husbandmans house, there to warm himself, and beholding his host to
blow his hands, asked him wherefore he did so, he said, it was to heat his
hands, not long after when dinner was ready, he saw also his host busily
blowing his pottage, and again he asked him the cause thereof, his host
answered, that he did it to cool his portage which was too hot, whereat the
Satire disdeining, said, What sir can you blow hot and cold both out of one
mouth. Farewell farewell, therefore, for I never meant to frequent such manner
of people, which have now one thing in their mouth, and by and by an other,
and so he took his leave of his host, disproouing altogether those which have
two tongues, now praising a thing, and strait way blaming and misliking the
same.

Whereunto accords the Prophet Isaias, saying; That they are accursed which
affirm the thing that is evil, to be good, and contrary, good to be evil,
converting light into darkness, and ^arkenesse to light, sweetness to sower,
and sower to sweet, such was the tongue ^f the wily Serpent, when he said to
our ^rst parents, ye shall be like unto the gods: ^uch was the tongue of
pernicious Ioah, who under the color of fair words, ^ue Amasa traitorously,
in saluting him, ^aining to give him a courteous good eue^. Such was the tongue
of rebellious Abso^on, when he so mischieuously slew his ^rother. And such was
the tongue of Ba^am, when he took his journey to speak evil of the people,
had not his Ass reproved him by the way. Such was the tongue of Dalyla, when
she betrayed Sampson to the Philistians his enemies. And such was the venomous
tongue of the caitife Judas, when he delivered the Savior of the world in
kissing of him, to his deadly foes. But none has better discribed the
mischief of a wicked tongue, then the kingly Prophet David, when he
co^plaining of the malice of backbiters, says; their mouth is full of bitterness
and cursings, full of falsehood and deceit, and under the tongue lurketh tedious
strife and debate they lie in ambush and oppress the innocent, out of close
and covert corner they make a play game to bring to vtte^ ruin those which are
desolate. They watch continually for to entrap the silli^ sort. They hold fast
in their gripes the poor caitiue, that thinks no hurt. They say in their
heart God has forgotten all, he has hidden his face and shall never see the
things that we do. The same David in an other place says; Good Lord
deliver me from lying lips and slanderous tongues, for they are like unto swift
and sharp arrows, which are fet from a strong and poysant bow. The
Ecclesiastical story does admonish us to hate the whisperer and tale teller,
and specially he that has a double tongue. For herehence has come the
destruction, not of a few which erst lived in peace and tranquillity. This is
it which has turned up and down many strong and defensible Cities, has
^efamed many worthy personages, has taken a sunder a number of princely
Pa^ces, and has incensed to civil sedition ^any goodly countries. Whosoever
^ndes a listening ear to these double ^^ngues, or rather to these two edged
words, shall never rest in quietness, shall ^euer be at peace with any of his
friends. ^he lash of the whip wounds the flesh, ^it the stroke of the tongue
breaks the ^one: the whip only persecuteth our car^on corpse, but the glike
of a pernicious ^ongue does eclipse our bright renown, and leaves a spot of
black defame to our ^osteritie, which is more dangerous then ^y hurt we can
receive in our body. Ma^y men have been slain by the edge of ^e sword, but
many more by the pear^ng blows of wicked tongues. The ^id Prophet concludes
that he is in per^ect bliss, which has not passed through his painful
Purgatory of biting tungs, and has quite escaped their fearful fu^ie. For
the death which comes by ill tongues is maruellously to be feared, a^^ better
it is to fall into any other kind (...) death and danger, then by that whi^^
comes hereby. For it is said, that tho^^ which forsake our Savior Christ and
h^^ holy name, shall be vexed heerewith, a^^ she shall consume and extinguish
the^ wit^ out restraint, and it shall be sent against the^ as a fierce Lioness,
and shall destroy the^^ a wild Panther. Therefore says he, hed^ in thy lips
with thorns, and plant bars a^^ bulwarks before thy mouth, that from thence
proceed no indecent words, f^^ God is the witness of our thoughts, t^^ true
beholder of our hearts, and the hear^ of all that which our tung bringes fort^

Now although the life of man be su^iect to sundry sorts of calamity, yet n^^
reckening those which comes by sickn^^ses, poisons, lightnings, tempests, and
sod^ mischances, notwithstanding that ca^n^ be found any thing from whence
there (...) stilleth more mischief and misery to h^^ mane kind, the^ from a
disloiall and deuil^ ^ongue. For there is no kind of inconueni^nce that brings
unto us a more mighty ^ea of mischiefs of al sorts, then wars. But were not
malicious tungs the cause thereof, we should surely have no war at al, for ^hey
are the trumps and drums that strikes ^he alarm to all sedition, It was these
that pricked forth Alexander to many bloody battles, promising him that he
should be conqueror of the whole world. K. Pirrus also had diverse stingers and
buzzes in his ear, which babled nothing else but brauls and murders, whom the
wise Cine as encountered and ouermatched. Who on a time seeing K. Pirrus pressed
to bid battle to his enemies, asked him what he meant to do, seeing already
he vanquished the Romans. I will assay my force said he with the Sicilians,
and when you have overcome Sicile said Cineas, what then will you do? Pirrus
answered, I will set upon Lybia, Carthage, and Maceaonia, which yet remains
unconquered: and this achieved said Cyneas, what will you then more: we will
said Pyrrus repose our selves in joy and solace, then Cyneas replied, and I
pray you sir what have you to do with all this war, that after them you may
live in rest, whereas you may be in present quietness and tranquillity. And
by this sound advice the King was quite diswaded to make war upon neighbors. If
France during these stur^ die stirs, had had but one good Cyneas, that
flourishing realm should not have been so tossed and turmoyled as we see
now, in such sort, that it is almost in every place sparkled with humane
blood, so fiercely were they set on fire one against the other. But from whence
I pray you came all this, but from seditious tongues: for a man might see
dissentious books Printed and sown abroad very rife. Wherein was nothing
less treated of then peace, nor nothing more labored then war and iangling,
so that had not GOD resisted their malice, you should have seen long or this
the total destruction of this goodly country. And if it happen that any more
of these bloody Butchers and setters forth of al mischief do again show
their monstrous heads, I wish them no more harm, but that they may become
as dumb as ever was Iparkion, or that they might be bereft of their tongues as
Zenon Elates: and to them that would reitterate again this civil sedition,
might also be void of hands to execute their wicked intent, as was the hands
of Jeroboam, and might be as blind to go forward therein, as was Tyripe or
Hipse, and that they might not be able to go no more, then was Myphiboseth:
that their Horses might resemble the fatal steed of Gnaius Zoianus, and that
the Captains might have no more valor and force then ever had Eracinade, that
the booty and pray might be like to the gold taken from Tolosa. In brief I
vow unto them, all the execrable curses of Oedipus, and all those balefull
blisses contained in the Psalm; Lord do not conceive my praise, for surely
they are not of GOD which hates peace, desiring nothing else but bloody war.

He that will live in continual rest and quietness says David, let him take
heed that his tongue speak no hurt of others, and let him keep his lips from
lying and deceit. But to return to our purpose of the mischief that comes of
evil tongues, Solomon says; He that warns wisely his mouth, gardes his
soul, but he that pratleth unadvisedly ^s oppressed with many miseries. Job
calls such kind of people forgers of Fables, who according to the saying of
Jeremy have instructed their tongues to lie leudly, and have employed all their
travel to do mischief, yet some pleasant companions there be which
accountes lying to be no sin, though David say, that all liers shall go to
utter perdition. From an evil disposed tongue, proceeds not only lying but
swearing, blasphemyng, reproaches, scoffings and slanders.

Read over the ancient Chronicles, and among them all you shall not find so
many kind of strange others as are now daily used amongst the Christians,
look well about and you shall find every corner full of periuries. It was an
infamous thing amongst the Heathens, if any happened to swear by their false
Gods, yet amongst us Christians we make it a play game to take the name of the
eternal God in vain.

Plutarch recites, that in times past it was not lawful for little children
being within doors to swear by Hercules or Dinis, but that they must go out
of the house, that by this kind of temperature, they might learn not to
swear at all, or at the least to be moderate in their oaths. The ancient
Bishops of Rome which our ancestors long ago called Famines or Diales, for
fear durst not swear at all, whatsoever dread or danger was offered them.

On a time in Athens, acerteine Sorceresse accustomed to the Paynime
sacrifices, was instantly desired and requested of all the people to curse and
call vengeance upon Alsibiades, which then was very evil thought of in Athe^s.
Whereunto she answered, that she had received her Priestly dignity thereby,
to consecrate and bliss the people, and not wish hurt or vengeance to any, and
so she could never be induced to speak ill of Alsibiades, if we lay aside
examples of infidelles, and consequently to come to those of the Christians.

Saint Jews did so abhor perjury and blasphemy, that he constituted a law,
that whom soever was found to be a blasphemer of Gods holy name, should
have the Flower deluse glowing hot imprinted in his forehead, to the end he
might be known of all men to his extreme and great ignomie and reproach,
wheresoever he came. It so chauneed that a certain noble man of his Court
being overcome with collar, had sworn unadvisedly, and as the officers would
have executed the rigor of the law upon him, many of the peers of the
rea^me withstood it, beseeching pardon and grace of the King in his behalf,
but the King was no less severe in observation of this his Edict. Then was
that good King Seleucus in his Penal Statute made against adulterers, who
would have punished his son, for that he had transgressed his ordinance:
Even so the said King Jews answered, that he would himself abide the pain
contained in his Edict, and that the said mark should be fixed in his own
forehead, that all blasphemies thereby should be banished his realm. So the
most Christian King desirous to put in practice the laudable constitutions
invented by his predecessors, for the punishment of blasphemy has ordained
that no manner of person should blaspheme the name of GOD, or use any other
execrable oaths, under pain and forfeiture to have his tung pierced with a
hot iron.

Phillip an other of the French Kings, made a law, that if any whatsoever
gentle or simple, yea, although he were in birth right noble, in what place
soever he were thought it were in, a common Tavern where many wise men
forget themselves, if he blasphemed Gods holy name, he should presently be
drowned.

Maximilian the Emperor made a law, that whosoever were apprehended as a
vain swearer, should leese and pay thirteen shillings four pence, but if
after he would not be sorry for his offense, and willingly pay the said
money, he should lose his head. At Tubinggen in Germany, a desperate boy
devised new oaths, such as were not in common use, but the Lord sent a
Canker or some worse diseases, and consumed the instrument wherewith he
blasphemed God.

But to go beyond men the Lord himself has made a law, he that
blasphemeth and takes the name of the Lord GOD in vain, shall dye the death.
Leuit. 24.

That faithful and good instrument in Gods Church Master John Fox, from
whom I collected this notable and worthy history, gives a most gentle and
fatherlike admonition and warnyng unto all young Gentlemen to leave and
utterly to forsake their most extreme outrageous and horrible swearyng, by
the great and fearful example of these Gentlemen following.

In the time and reign of the most famous King Edward the sixth, there was in
Cornewayle a lusty young Gentleman, who did ride together with other more
Gentlemen, and their servants in number about twenty horsemen, amongst whom
this lusty yonker entering into talk, began to swear most horribly, among
whom one of the company not able to abide such blasphemous abomination, in
gentle words said to him, that he should give an account for every idle
word, the Gentleman taking snuff thereat, why quoth he take thou thought
for me, take thought for thy winding sheet, well quoth the other, take heed,
for death gives no warning, for as foone comes a Lambs skin to the market
as an old Sheep: Gods wounds (quoth he) care not thou for me, raging still
after his swearing manner worse and worse in words, till at length passing
onwarde their journey, they came ryding over a great Bridge which stands
over a piece of the arm of the ^^a, upon which bridge this gentleman ^wearing,
spurred his horse on such sort, that he sprang clean over the bridge with the
man on his back, who as he was going, cried horse and man and all ^o the
devil. That private example which ^appened to some especial, every man
per^iculerly may consider with him self ^ow common and great swerers are
afflicted. I could never yet either by expe^ience or reading find, but that
they which ^ake delight in swearing, and used vainly ^o swear, were
grievously punished one way or another. For my part though I am of small years
and but young, yet I have noted in some, that God will not suffer this vice to
go unpunished. When I was in a certain place for learnings sake, I knew a
company of youths which were very familiar, and would seldom be a sunder,
they were so wickedly bent, that when they were met, one would have supposed
that a company of young (...) two old lecherous dotars, whom Go^ miraculously
delivered, for her innocency, by the help of young Danyell, who no less
straight judged and condemn^ the said old wilye merchants, who lay^ in ambush
to oppress the said holy m^ trone. What should I speak of just N^bothe,
against whose innoce^^^ the fal^ and perjured Iesabell, suborned two fal^
witnesses, they not only to bereave hi^ of his vineyard, but of all his lands
a^^ life also.

O Lord increase the number of thy se^uantes, root out vain swearing and
pe^iurie, convert blasphemers to the obed^^nce of thy will, and advance thy
ho^^ name: who art to be glorified now and ever more, together with thy Son our
Savior, and the holy Ghost.

Amen.

