THE lives of holy Saints, Prophets, Patriarchs, and others, contained in
holy Scripture, so far forth as express mention of them is delivered unto
us in Gods word, with the interpretacion of their names: Collected and
gathered into an Alphabeticall order, to the great commodity of the Chrystian
Reader.

By John Marbecke.

Psalm. 97. verse. 10. O ye that love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing
which is evil: the Lord preserves the souls of his Saints, he shall
deliver them from the hand of the ungodly. printer's device of two lions
rampant and a sheaf of corn COR VNVM and VIA VNA

Seen and allowed, according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Anno. 1574.

To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, the Lord Burleigh, Lord high
Treasurer of England, one of the Knights of the most Honorable order of the
Carter, and one of the Lords of the Queens Majesty's privy Counsel: John
Marbecke wishes long life, with increase of all Honor, and perpetual
felicity.
ALbeit (right Honorable) it were good Reason, and most convenient, that
nothing should come before your Honorable presence, but that which were most
perfect and excellent: yet bearing my self bold upon that incomparable
goodness, which all men know to reast within your Noble nature, I have here
presumed to offer a taste unto your good Lordship, of such simple fruit as my
poor Orcharde could yield. Most humbly beseeching your Honor as well to
pardon my rude boldness herein, as also to accept my simple Present. My
meaning hereby, is not (my good Lord) to seem to crave any thanks or praise
where none is deserved, but only to seek some such means as my poor
ability will serve, to leave a Testimonial of the dutiful good will and
single heart, which I bear unto your Honor, for whose good and prosperous
estate, as all men, (who are any thing touched, either with zeal of
godliness, or love of their Country) have good occasion earnestlye to pray:
so I especially, for the favorable inclination I have always perceived in
your good Lordship to remain toward so simple a worm as I am, have most just
cause continually to crave the same at gods hand during my life, which
unfeignedly I will. And being not able otherwise to make declaration of my
duty herein, in most humble manner I beseech your Honor in favorable wise to
accept this my good meaning, who being desirous to labor in the Lords
harvest, and yet not able to hold tacke with strong and lusty laborers
therein, neither worthy to be accounted in the number of good workmen: am
contented to come after, as it were a gleaning: and as mine old age, and other
mine imperfections will give me leave, fair and softly to creep after the
Carte, picking up such scattered corn, as is fallen out by the way in the
Lords field: and yet to good to be lost, or trodden under foot, but rather,
now being gathered together, worthy in my simple judgment to be sorted into
sheaues: humbly desiring your good Lordshippe to suffer them to be placed in
your Barn, if your Honor shall think them worth the threshing. Or if
otherwise, yet, that then by your Lordshippes license and favorable
protection, they may be permitted to be bestowed amongst the mainye, and
simple sort of the reast of the Christian flock. The Lord of all Lords
preserve your good Lordshippe in most prosperous and blessed estate.

Your Lordshippes most humble and daily Orator. I. M.

To the Christian Reader.
THE best learned, and wysest Philosophers, having received no taste or light
of the Gospel of Christ, but only being led and directed by Nature and Reason,
held this for a Principle among themselves, that MAN was not borne to himself
only, but was framed of Nature such an excellent Creature as he is, to that
end, that he might employ those singular gifts wherewith he is beautifyed, as
Wisdom, Reason, Memory, Discretion, and Judgment, not only to his own
private commodity, but also to the profit of his Country, and others. This
good opinion ingraffed in their minds by Nature, delivered from one to another
by Instruction, and so from time to time continued among themselves by consent:
caused the best able men among them, such as God and Nature had plentifully
endued with knowledge and understanding, to leave such worthy Monuments as they
did to Posterity: as Plato, and Tullie, good Rules of life and government.
Aristotle, the hidden secrets of Philosophye: Ptolomie, the hie my steries of
Astronomy: Euclyde, the infallible Principles of Geometry. Varro, the
necessary observations of Husbandrye. etc. Out of the which, so great
commodities in all ages have been reaped, and (as occasion and good wits have
served) have also from time to time been increased. If this Principle of theirs
be sound and true (as in deed I take it to be) then of consequence, one other
depending upon the same, must needs be as true, and that is this: That those
men do nearest approach to the Rule of vncorrupt Nature, and do best deserve of
a commonwealth, whose labors and traueyles are bestowed on those things which
tend to the best end. For by the consideration of the end whereunto each
thing leads: the goodness and excellencye of the thing it self is to be
known and esteemed. As for example: If health either maintained, or recovered
be good: then Physic, whose chief end is to maintain and recover health,
must needs be good also. If good government publikelye, and peaceable
enjoying of our own privately, be a good thing, and to be commended: then the
Law, for that it respects Justice in all actions, and quietness, as his
chief end, must needs likewise be good, and deserve the like commendation.
And as be many things, which for this self same Reason that I have now
alleged, are to be accounted good, and praise worthy in their kind: So, I
think there is no man so far from Reason, but that he sees, by the self
same Argument it must needs be enforced, that though many Arts and sciences
be good, for that their ends be good: yet some one there is, that is to be
accounted as best, for that his end is best. The chief end of Man in this
world, what it is, I think no Christian man so slenderlye instructed, that
he makes any doubt thereof. For the very Philosophers themselves, of whom I
spoke before, were fully resolved, that it was to live well and virtuously, and
affirmed, that (whereas other Creatures are made grooueling, and still beholding
the ground as they go) Man was therefore framed straight and upright, that he
might always behold Heaven and heavenly things, and so by the very shape of
his body and countenance, be put in mind continually, that albeit he were
here for a season, as a wandering Pylgrime upon earth, yet his end was, to be a
free Citizen, and an inheritor of heaven above: And as they by Reason and
Conjecture were led so to think: so we by faith, and express commandment,
are moved, so steadfastly to believe. If then the knowledge of God and heavenly
things, be the chiefest end and mark whereat man ought to shoot, it must needs
be concluded, that those men's studyes and labors deserve the greatest praise,
which are employed to the attayning and directing of others thereunto. Wherein,
as God in all ages has always stirred up some, who have taken great pains
therein, to the public commodity of others: So, in my simple judgment,
neither this present work, neither the Author thereof deserves the least
commendation. And albeit I wot full well, that so the work it self be good,
it is not greatly material what the workman be: yet, like as good Wine is
then best, when it is drunk out of a clean vessel, and good meat then best
delights, when the dresser thereof is cleanly: So this Book, which of it
self, I doubt not, to be such, that it will be liked of all those who delight
in God and godliness, I trust, even for the Authors sake, it shall never awhit
the worse be welcome. Of whose sincere life, and great praises, although
there is good cause why I should speak, for that he has been of long time
thoroughly known to me, and I am assured his virtues and integrity to be
such, that if I should say, there are fevve his like to be found, I trust,
for saying the truth, no good man would be offended: Yet partly for that I am
not ignorant, that no man delights less to hear his own praise than he
does: partly for that there be many causes why I should rather honor him, than
for lack of sufficient skill and ability, meanelye praise him: I will leave
him to thy particular judgment (gentle Reader) and to the testimonial of the
whole world, who I doubt not, will say no less, but that he is a man
without fraud or guile, and such one as fears God.

As touching the Book it self, good reason it is, each man should use his
own judgment and opinion. But if my simple Testimonial may prevail, I
dare vvarrant it to be such, that what study soever thou shall bestow in
reading the same, it shall well requite thy pains. And though the Author be
such, that he rather delights in good and virtuous life, than makes boste of
any great learning: Yet such has his pains been herein, that very good
Clerks need take no scorn, to receive some light from this his Candell. In
sum: the Book is of God, and his holy Saints, and therefore to be
reverenced: collected out of Scripture, and therefore no vain fable: written
briefly, and therefore not tedious: set forth in plain and simple wise, and
therefore the better for thy capacity* truly reporting the life and death of
such, as either for sin, (and those to be avoided) either for virtue, (and
those to be imitated) have mention made in Gods holy Book. All that is
written therein, is written for thy help and instruction. Use it then to
that end that the Author means, that is: Not only to increase thy
knowledge, and so to be made more learned: but also to increase thy virtuous
life, and so to become the better Man.

R. M.

The lives of holy Saints, Prophets, Patriarchs, etc.
Exed. 6. c. d.
AAron, was the son of Amram and brother to Moses, and of the Tribe of Leui.
His mothers name was Iochebed, sister to Caath, the father of Amram. He was
appointed of God to be Moses interpreter, and also his Prophet, what time as
God sent Moses to Pharao, to pour out his plagues upon him. He took Elisaba
the daughter of Aminadab of the Tribe of Judah, to wife. He was the first Bishop
of the Jews. And left (with Hur) to govern the 24. d.
people in the absence of Moses, while he was in the Mount with God. And in the
mean time the people (being yet 32. cap.
infected with the ydolatrie of Egypt) cried out against Aaron to make them
gods to go before them. Then Aaron (perceiving the people inclyned to
ydolatrie, and also thinking they would rather forgo the same, than to
forsake their precious Jewels) said unto them: Pluck of the golden earerings
in the ears of your Wives, your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them
to me. The people did so, and Aaron made thereof a Calfe. Which when the
people saw and beheld, they were exceeding glad. And began now to worship
and honor the Calfe as a godde, hopping and daunceyng for joy. But the Lord
above, beholding their wickedness, told it to Moses, and sent him down post
haste to refourme their wicked attemptes. Who then coming down from the Mount
with the Tables of God in his hand, and drawyng near to the host, he saw
the Calfe, and the people daunceyng before it. Which sight, so kindeled the
wrath of Moses, and grieved his heart so sore, that he threw the Tables out
of his hands, took the Calfe and burnt it in the fire, and stampte it all
into powder and ashes, which he threw into the water, and forced the people to
drink it. Then he demanded of Aaron, what the people did to him, that he had
brought so great a sin upon them. Aaron said: let not the wrath of my Lord
ware fierce, thou know the people that they are set on mischief. For they
said unto me, make us gods to go before us, for we wot not what is become
of Moses, the man that brought us out of Egypt. Then I required to have their
gold and Jewels, which they brought unto me, and I did cast them into the
fire, and thereof came out this Calfe. Moses then understanding Idolatry
punished.
the matter, commanded the children of Leui to fall upon the ydolaters, and
slew of them about three thousand Nu. 12. cap.
persons. After this, it came to pass that Aaron and Miriam his sister, did
grudge against their brother Moses because he had taken an Ethiopian to wife,
saying on this wise: has the Lord in deed spoken only through Moses? and
has he not spoken also by us? The Lord not Disobedience punished.
content with this their contemning of Moses authority, was sore displeased,
and stroke Miriam with a foul leprosy. Which so much discomforted Aaron, to
see his sister so fowlye arrayed and disfigured, that he humbled himself to
Moses, and said: Alas my Lord, I beseech thee put not the sin upon us,
which we have foolishlye committed and sinned. Oh, let her not be as one dead,
of whom the flesh is half consumed, when he comes out of his mothers womb.
And so through Aarons entreaty, Moses prayed unto God, and Miriam was healed.
Finally, 20. d. 33. c.
when Aaron had lived one hundred xxiij. years, he dyed in mount Hor, as the
Lord had foretold. And his son Eleazar succeeded in his rowme. Aaron, a
Teacher.


Dani. 14. f. g.
Abacuck, the Prophet, was of the Tribe of Simeon. He prophesied of the taking
of Jerusalem by Nabuchodonosor. This Prophet (on a time) had prepared potage
and other vittayles for the harvest folks. And going to the fields, to bring
the same to the reapers, an Angel of God spoke unto him, and said: Go, and
carry the meat that thou have prepared into Babylon, and give it to Daniel,
which is in the Lions den. O Lord (quoth he) I never saw Babylon, and as for
the den, I know it not. With that, the Angel caught up the Prophet by the
top of his head, and bare him to Babylon, and set him upon the den. Then
Abacuck cried to Daniel, and said: O Daniel, thou servant of the Lord, take
here the breakefast that God has sent thee. Daniel hearing the voice of
Abacuck, rejoiced greatly, and said: O Lord, have thou Abacuck died six
hundred years before the incarnation of Christ. Eliote.
thought upon me? Well, thou never faylest them that love thee. And so he rose
up and did eat of such things as the Prophet had brought him. And
immediatelye, after that Daniel had eaten, the Angel set Abacuck in his place
again. Abacuck, a Wrastler.


Abdy. 1. cap.
Abdy, the Prophet, prophesied destruction to the Idumeans, which came of Esau,
and were utter enemies to the Israelites, which came of Jacob: as at the siege
of Jerusalem it did most plainly appear, where as they joined with
Nabuchodonosor against their brethren, whom they ought rather to have helped
and defended against the heathen. Abdy, a Servant of the Lord.


Ieremi. 38. b.
Abedmelech, was a Morian borne, and Chamberlane with Zedekia King of Judah.
This man had so great a confidence in God and love to his Prophets, that when
he saw Jeremy so evil entreated, he went to the king and besought his grace,
that Jeremy ye Prophet might be taken out of ye filthy dungeon wherinto he was
cast, least he there should perish and dye for hunger. And so obtaining the
Kings good will, he took his men and went to the prison where Jeremy lay,
and threw down unto him old rags and clowtes which he had provided,
bidding him to put them under his arm holes, to keep the cords from hurting
and fretting his arms in pulling up. Now, for this his 39. d.
kindness showed on Jeremy, and trust that he had in the ^indnesse
recompensed.
Lord, he was delivered from captivity, and saved from the hands of
Nabuchodonosor, at the destruction of Jerusalem, when other perished.

Genesis 4. a. b.
Abel, was the son of Adam, borne of his Mother Eve, next after Cain. He was
a keeper of Sheep and wholly dedicated to virtue and godliness. In all his
oblations, Abel and Delbora his sister, were born both at one birth fiftene
years after Cain. Cooper.
he ever gave of the best things he had. Which, of the Lord was greatly
accepted. And therefore Cain (perceiving his brothers offerings to be regarded
and his rejected) e^^yed him to death. And at the last (by a subtyle train)
slew him. Abel, Vanity.


3. Reg. 15. a.
Abia, the son of Roboam began his reign over Judah in the xviij. year of
Jeroboam King of Israel. His mothers name was Maacha the daughter of Abisalom.
He walked not in the steps of David, but followed the ways of his father
before him. Yet (notwythstanding) for David's sake, God gave him a light, that
is to say, a son to reign over Judah. He overcame Jeroboam in 2. Par. 13.
ca.
battle with an Army of four hundred thousand, notwithstanding, the other
had twice so many chosen and picked men. Of the which, Abia five five hundred
thousand, and weakened the power of Jeroboam so sore, that he was never able
to recover his strength again, so long as Abia reigned. This King had.xiiij.
Wives, by whom he had xxij. Sons, and xvj. Daughters. He reigned but three
years, and was buried in the City of David.

3. Reg. 14. ca.
Abia, the son of Jeroboam being sick on a time, his father called the Queen
his wife unto him, and bade her disguise her self ye in no wise she might be
known what woman she was. And so go thy way (quoth he) to Sylo, and there
shall thou find ye Prophet of God, called Ahia, which told me (long before
Solomon dyed) that I should be King of Israel. Make speed and take a present
with thee, and learn of him what shall become of the Child. The Queen did
then as she was commanded, but all was in vain. For God had revealed the
matter unto the Prophet before the woman came. In so much, that as soon as the
blind old man heard the noise of her coming and entering in at the door, he
said: Come in thou wife of Jeroboam, why have thou disguised and feigned thy
self to be another woman. Thou art come to receive some comfort for thy son
which lies sick, but I am commanded to tell thee heavy and sorrowful
things. It repents the Lord that he has exalted Jeroboam, and rented the
kingdom from the house of David, and given it to him, for so much as he has
forsaken the Lord, and not followed him in his heart as David did, but has
made him gods of his own: therefore the Lord has determined to bring such
a plague upon the house and posterity of Jeroboam, that he will not leave one
alive to make water against the wall: Wherefore now get thee home, and as
soon as thy foot shall enter into the City, the child shall dye, and all
Israel shall lament him and bring him to his Sepulcher. And so shall none of
the house of Jeroboam thy husband enjoy the honor of his buryall, but only
this child, because the Lord saw in him some goodness toward. And so when
the Prophet had all said, the wife of Jeroboam rose up and returned home to
her house, and found her son dead, as the Prophet had foretold. Abia,
Father of the Sea.


4. Reg. 18. a.
Abia, the Daughter of Zacharia, was wife to Ahaz King of Judah, and Mother to
Hezekia. Which name signifies thus. Abia, The will of the Lord.


1. Reg. 22*
Abiathar, the son of Achimelech priest of Nob, seeing the great cruelty of
Saul, in putting his Father to death for refreshing of David: escaped his
hands and fled to the forest of Hareth where David (at that time) lay,
declaring to him the great murder that Saul had done to Achimelech his father,
and to all the Priests of the Lord for his sake. Then, being comforted of
David, he abode with him, and was his Priest and Counsayler, so long as he
reigned. But in the end of David's reign, he consented with Adoniah (who had
exalted himself) to stablishe him in the kingdom, after the death of David.
3. Reg. 2.
But Solomon (being proclaimed, and the other deposed) as soon as he was
possessed, depryued Abiathar and placed Sadock in his rowme: And so was the
word of the Lord fulfilled, which he had spoken before, concerning the house
of Eli, for Abiathar was the last of that line. Abiathar, Father of the
Remnant: or excellent Father.


1. Reg. 25. ca.
Abigail, the wife of Naball y^ Carmelite, was a woman not only bewtifull, but
of a singular wisdom with all. For when her husbands denial to David's men
for sustenaunce in their masters necessity was told her: she then
(considering the great displeasure that might arise of the occasion offered)
hasted to lode her Asses with sundry kind of victuals, sending them forth
before her, and following after with speed: And as she was going, the
providence of God was so, that she met David by the way, upon the side of an
hill coming to Carmell, determined utterly to have destroyed her husband, and
all that he had by the dawning of the day following. Then she (perceiving the
fury of David) lighted down of her Ass, falling flat on the ground before
him, and so began her peticion, which was so pithilye framed and done, that in
the end, she pacifyed his wrath, and stayed his hands from shedding of blood
that day, for the which she was highly commended and praised of David, who
gently receiving her present, did clearly remyt the churlishe behavior of
Naball her husband for her sake. Which being granted, she took her leave and
returned again. But when she came home, and found Naball her husband so
far over charged with wine that his wits were gone, she thought it
convenient to follow the wise man's counsel: not to rebuke Eccle. 31. d.
him in his wine, but to let the matter rest, till the drink were all out of
his brain, and his memory fresh. And so on the next morrow, she declared to
Naball, the great and perilous danger he was in, for his unkindness showed
to David, which when he heard, did smite him so sore to the heart, that he
never enjoyed, but dyed within ten days after. And then (in process,) this
woman (Abigail) became David's wife, and bare him a 2. Reg. 3. a.
son called Chileab, which in the first book of Chronicles (chapter.iij.) is
called Daniel. Abigail, The Fathers Joy.


1. Par* 2. b.
There was another woman called Abigail, which was Sister to David, and wife to
Iether an Ismaelite, unto whom she bare a son called Amasa.

Genesis 20. cap.
Abimelech, King of the Philistines, was a man which had the fear of God
before his eyes, as it may appear in the story of Abraham, by his godly
entertaynement of his wife, whom he took to be his very sister and not his
wife, as they had both confessed unto him. And having a mind to the woman, he
took her from Abraham, intending to have coupled with her in marriage, and not
for no sinful desire. But when (by the voice of God) he knew she was Abraham's
wife in deed, and he a Prophet, and his house sore plagued for her sake, he
was right sorye for that he had done, and also displeased with Abraham for so
dissemblyng with him in so weyghtie a cause, considering the dishonestie that
might have happened unto his wife by some of his men, and the peril of Gods
indignation on him and on his kingdom for the same: yet notwithstanding, when
he knew the cause of Abraham's dissembling, he possessed him with cattle,
servants, and money, and delivered Sara his wife unto him again, gyuing him
also free liberty, to dwell and inhabit where he would, within the precinct
of his dominion. Then Abraham prayed unto God for Abimelech, at whose peticion
the Lord removed his plague from the house of Abimelech, so that the women
conceived and brought forth children, as before they had done. The like story
is of Isaac. Chapter.xxvj. Abimelech, The Kings Father, or a Father of
Counsel, or the Chief King.


Judith. 9. cap.
Abimelech, the son of Ierobaal, (otherwise Gedeon) was a wicked Tyrant, and
a proud ambicious covetous man. For when his father was dead, he (to be king
of Israel) consulted with all his mothers kyndred to persuade the people that
it was better to have one man to reign over them, than all y^ sons of
Ierobaal (which were.lxx.persons in number.) And also to consider that he was
of their flesh and blood, as well as the other were, which matter being
moved to the people, they all consented to cleave to Abimelech, and to make
him their king and governor. And that he should be the better assured of
their good wylles and obedient hearts, they gave unto him a great sum of
money, with the which, he hired a sort of light brayned fellows. And first of
all, went to his fathers house, and slew all his brethren, save Iothan the
youngest, who escaped his bloody hands and fled. But or he had reigned a two
or three years, the fire of hatred began so to kindle between him and the
Sichemites, with the house of Mello (who had preferde him before to the
kingdom) that at length it burst out into so great a flame, that it could not
be quenched, till chance of war made an end of the Tyrant: for in the end
(after diverse victories) he forced the Sichemites to take the strong tower of
Thebes for their refuge, and coveting nigh to the same, to have set it on fire,
a certain woman threw down a piece of a Mylstone upon his head, and brake
his Skull to the brain: Who then (feeling himself sore wounded) called his
servant, and bade him draw out his sword and ryd him out of his life, that it
should not hereafter be reported, that a woman had killed him, and so his
servant slew him.

2. Reg. 6. a.
Abinadab, was a man of Gibea, out of whose house, David took the Ark of God,
and had it from thence to the house of Obed. Isai (the Father of David) had
also a 1. Reg. 16. b.
son called Abinadab, and King Saul another of the 31. a.
same name, which was slain with him in battle. Abinadab, A Father of a Vow,
or of a free mind, or Prince.


3. Reg. 1. a.
Abisag, was a goodly fair young Damsel, brought up in the City of Sunem.
And (for her beauty and manners) chosen to keep and norishe King David in his
extreme age: After whose death (being still a pure Maid) She 2. d.
might not be suffered to marry with Adomah the Kings brother. Abisag, The
Fathers Ignorance.


1. Par. 2. b.
Abisai, was David's sisters son, and Brother to Ioab. His mothers name was
Zarniah. He consented not with Absalon, but stacke to David his Uncle in all
his 2. Re. 16. b. ^
troubles. He was so grieved with the spytefull rebukes and raylings of Semei,
which he made against his Uncle David in his adversity, that (if David had not
stayed him) he would have made Semei shorter by the head than he was. By his
great strength and hardiness, he rescued 21. d.
David out of the hands of a monstrous Giant (the iron 23* ^*
of whose spear weyed three hundred Sicles) and slew the Giant, with three
hundred Philistines mo, for the which, he is counted as chief among the three
Worthyes belonging to David. Abisai, The Fathers Reward.


1. Reg. 14. g.
Abner, the son of Ner, was Captain General over the host of King Saul, by
whose wisdom, manhood, and fidelity, the house of Saul was chiefly held up
and strengthened, not only in the time of Saul's reign, but so long also as he
served Isboseth his son, whom he set 2. Reg. 2. b. c. etc.
up and made king in his fathers stead, and governed his host, as he had done
his fathers before: But in the first battle he made against Ioab (David's
Captain) (...) went so much against him, that he was put to the worse and
feign to fly: In the which flight, Asael (brother to Ioab) followed Abner and
ouertooke him, with whom Abner was loath to meddle, for fear of Ioabs
displeasure, and therefore entreated him gently to go his way, and not to force
him against his will: But when he saw his words would nothing prevail, he
fell upon Asael, and smote him through the short rybbes with his Spear, and so
departed, leaving him dead on the ground. Not long after this, 2. Reg. 3. cap.
it fortuned the King to fall out with Abner, and to taunt and check him for
that he was so familiar with Rizpa his fathers Concubine, which check and
taunt of the king, so grieved Abner, that he forsook him and went to David,
with whom he made a secret bond, to stablishe him in the kingdom. And so
departing secretly from David again, he came to y^ people which served
Isboseth, and spoke so much unto them in the praise and commendatio^ of David,
that he wan^e their hearts and turned them quyte from Isboseth to David. And
when he had thus framed the people somewhat according to his mind, he came
eftsoons to David, to counsel farther with him, how the people might now be
brought togithers and be sworn unto him: which matter being determined, Abner
returned from David, thinking to have been as faithful to him, as ever he was
to Saul. But Ioab (who bare grudge and malice to Abner for the death of his
brother Asael) hearing how Abner had been with David and let go again, and
nothing done unto him, sent privily for Abner to come and speak with the king,
who being come, Ioab was ready to receive him, and under pretense of
friendship, had him a little aside (as though he would have talked with an
angel prevents Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac. A sheep is caught in a hedge. A
city skyline is visible in the distance. CREDIDIT ABRAHAM DEO, ET REPVTA: TVM
EST ILLI AD IVSTITIAM.

ROMANS IIII. Non extendas manum tuam super puerum, neque facias illi quicquam:
nune cognovi quod timeas Dominum, and non pepercisti vnigenito filio tuo
propter me.

Gene^^^ ^ Joan. Strada. inuen.
Phls Gall. excud.


him about the secret affairs of the king) and sodeinly^ smote him with his
dagger and slew him. Abner, The Fathers Candell.


^^^. 11. d.
Abraham, was the son of Terah, borne in Vr, a Town in Chaldey. A man so
endued with faith and virtue, (...), ^^^ the son of ^e^ah be^o^ ten of his
second ^y^e, ^ because of his (...) is counted be sore (...) ^ ^^a^, born^ of
the (...) wife.
that when he saw the true religion and honoring of God to cease in the land
of Chalda, he departed from thence with Terah his father, Sara his wife, and
Let his brothers son, to go into the land of Canaan. And 1^. c^p.
being come to Haran (which is a town in Mesopotamia) he remained there,
until the death of his father Terah. Then God commanded Abraham, saying: Get
thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house unto
the land which I will show thee, and I will make of thee a great nation, and
will bless thee and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing, and I
will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in th^^
shall all the families of the earth be blessed. (...) now (having this promise
made him of God) departed out of Haran, he and Sara his wife, with Let his
^ephewe, and with all their substance that they had, to go and to soiourne in
the land of Canaan. And being there, the Lord made a promise to Abraham, that
his seed should possess that land. Whereupon soon after, and in the same
place, where God spoke thus unto him, he made an altar, and offered sacrifices
ther^^ to the Lord. And so remaining in the land, there fell (at the last) so
great a famine, that he was constrained to ^^^^ into Egypt, where he (fearing
the Egyptians to be ungodly and vicious men) ^^igned Abraham ^^ught the
Egiptians (...) and (...)
Sara to be his sister, thinking and if ^^^ were known to be his wife, they
would (for her b^wt^^) take her from him, and put him in hazard of his life.
Then was it ^old to king Pharao, what a bewtifull woman Abraham had brought
with him into Egypt. The king now^ knowing thereof, commanded the woman to be
brought unto him, and with all gentle entertainment received her into his
house, and entreated Abraham well for her sake. But when he saw so many
plagues fall on him and on all his householde, understanding that it was for
withholding another man's wife from him, he restored the woman (without
dishonestie) to Abraham her husband again. Giving also his men a great charge
concerning the man and his wife. Then (soon after) Abraham returned from Egypt
13. cap.
into the country of Canaan where he had been before. And when he had lain some
space in the land, there fell such a strife between the herdemen of Abraham's
cattle, and the herdemen of Lottes cattle, that Abraham was feign to deuyde
the land between his Nephewe Lot and him, and so they removed the one from
the other. Abraham 16. cap.
had now been so long without issue, that he took (by consent an advise of
Sara) one of his Maids, named Agar, to wife, who conceived and brought him
forth a son, which was called Ismael, Abraham then being at the age of
fourscore years and six. And when he was come 17. cap.
to the number of ninety and nine, God gave unto him the covenant of
Circumcision, which he received first in himself, and then made Ismael and all
the reast of his householde to receive the same. The next year after, when
Abraham 21. a. b.
was just an hundred year old, Sara conceived and brought him forth his long
promised son, named Isaac, whom he circumcised the eight day following, and
would (after that) have offered him up in sacrifice, but that God 22. cap.
(seeing his prompt obedience) stayed his hand. Finally, after the death of
Sara, Abraham took him another wife 25. cap.
called Ketura, who bare unto him six sons. Which children he would not
suffer to remain and company Abraham dyed before the incarnation of Christ
1838. years.
with his son Isaac, but (before he died) sent them away with great rewards
and gifts, and made Isaac heir of all his goods. He dyed at the age of an
hundred seauentie and five, and was buried beside Sara his wife, in the double
Cave, which he bought of Ephron the Hethite.

Look more in the histories of Lot, Sara, and Melchisedech. Abraham, a Father
of a great Multitude.


2. Reg. 3. 2.
Absalom, the son of David, whom he begat on his wife Maacha the daughter of
Thalmai, King of Gessur, was y^ goodlyest personage in all Israel, for (as
Scripture 14. f.
witnesses) God had so framed the form and ornaments of his body, that from
the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, was no member amiss. And yet
among all, the hear of his head excelled, which so increased daily, that the
weight thereof compelled him at every years end, to ^haue it off. This Absalom
had a brother named Ammon, 2. Reg. 13. ca.
to who^ he bare a privy grudge for defiling his sister Thamar: And to be
revenged on him for the same, he invited al his brethren unto a banquet (made in
y^ time of his sheep shearing) to the which banquet, Ammon came with the rest
of his brethren, and in the midst of their cheer, Absalom killed Ammon, and
fled to the king of Gessur his Grandfather. With whom he abode three years.
In the which space, by mediation of friends, he was (at the last) fette 14.
cap.
home again, and brought (by Ioab his Auntes son) to Jerusalem, where he
remained two years after. Then Absalom marueyling why Ioab had not brought him
to the king his father in all that space, sent once or twyse for him to come
and speak with him: And when he saw that he came not, he commanded his men to
go and burn up the field of Barley which parteyned to Ioab, and lay joining
to his ground. Then Ioab hearing thereof, went to Absalom, demanding wherefore
his men had destroyed his Corn: Marry (quoth Absalom) I sent for thee twyse
and thou would not come, wherefore did thou bring me from Gessur: had it
not been as good for me and better to have continued there still, than here to
lie so nigh the King my father, and cannot be suffered to see him? Then Ioab
considering the matter, had him to the king, where he was joyfully received.
After all this, Absalom began 15. cap*
certain practices, to aspire to the kingdom, wherein he prospered so far,
that (at length) he proclaimed himself king in Hebron. Causing his father for
fear to fly out of his Realm, against whom he called his counsel to devise
what way he might best overcome his Father. But God (by whose providence all
things are stayde) so 17. a. b. c. d.
wrought with his Counsaylers, that the success of his enterpris^ turned to
his own destruction: For when it came so to pass, that both the armies were
joined in battle togithers, 18. a. b. c. d
Absaloms men had the woorsse, and he himself a sod^ine mischaunce, for as he
rode on his Mule through the wood to have escaped, a twyste of an Oak caught
him so Rebellion never escapes gods punishment.
fast in the heir of his head, that it took him quite out of his Saddle. And
so he hanged on the tree, till Ioab came with his spear and slew him, whose
Carkeys after, was taken down, and cast into a pit, and covered with an
heap of Stones. Absalom, A Father of Peace, or the Fathers Peace, or Reward.


Joshua. 7. cap.
Acan, was the son of Charmy, and of the Trybe of Judah, who being at the
wynning of the City of Jericho, and hearing Joshua pronounce the City and al
things therein to be excommunicate, and accursed of the Lord, took
notwithstanding, certain jewels of the same and hid them privily under the
ground in his tent. Then after, when Joshua went about the taking of Hai, and
had sent three thousand soldiers to win it, the men of Hai issued out of the
city and slew thirty and six of the Israelites, and chased the rest back
again, whereat Joshua was so discomfited that he rent his clothes, and called
on God, to know the cause of their overthrowing, who made him answer that
Israel could not stand before the men of Hai, forasmuch as some of them had
transgressed his commandment, and told him the way and means how he should
search it out: which thing being done, he found that Acan had taken of the
spoil at Jericho, a Babilonish garment, two hundred sicles of silver, and a
wedge of gold, which being tried and brought forth before the whole
congregation, Joshua took Acan, his sons, and daughters, cattle, goods, and
all that he had, and carried them out to the valley of Acor, where they were
stoned to death, and consumed with fire. Acan, Troubling.


3. Reg 16. g.
Achab, the son of Amrie, began his reign over Israel in the xxxviij. year
of the reygne of Asa king of Judah. He took Iezabel the daughter of Ethbaal
king of the Sydonites to wife, by whose means he fell into all wicked and
strange Idolatry and cruel persecution, for the 18 cap.
which God plagued him so, that in three years space neither dew nor rain
fell down from above, to moisture the earth, whereof ensued so great a
Murrayne of men and beasts, that innumerable dyed thereof, and all the fault
and cause of this plague, he laid on Elia the Prophet, 21. f.
and sought by all means how to destroy him. This king was so wicked, that
(Scripture says) he had even sold himself to work wickedness, and yet
notwithstanding, God gave him a marvelous victory of 20. cap.
Benhadad king of Siria (who had in his company.xxxij. kings) with whom he
fought twyse and bette him, and at the third time, brought Here God (as he
many symes does) did punyshe one wicked by another.
him into so miserable a case, that he was feign to humble himself to Achab
with a rope about his neck, who (nevertheless) had pity on that wicked King,
and made a bond with him, and let him go. Now for this mercy, which Achab
had showed to Benhadad (whom the Lord had cursed, and put into Achabs hands
to be slain) God was angry with Achab, and promised his utter destruction for
the same. This greedy Cormorant 3. Reg. 21. c^^
was not content with his kingdom, and spoil of his victories, which God had
given him, but caused Naboth (that innocent man) to be murdered, only to have
his vineyarde, which lay so nigh his nose, whose blood did crave such vengeance
of God, that word was brought him by the Prophet Elia, that in the same place
where dogs had licked the blood of Naboth, should dogs lycke his also:
and that he would do unto Achab and his posterity, even as he had done to
the house of Jeroboam and Baasa, which terrible threatenings of God so feared
Achab, that he His repentance was not true, but plain ypocrisie.
repented and humbled himself in sackecloth, for the which, the Lord deferred
his plague, and would not perform it in Achabs days, but in the time of his
sons reygne. Finallye, it came in the mind of Achab to go into Siria, to
recover the City of Ramoth, 22. cap.
which he claymed by inheritance. And trusting more to the counsel of four
hundred false Prophets, than he did to Micheas, the true Prophet of God: he
took his journey toward Ramoth, and being in battle against his enemies the
Sirians, he was shot in with an arrowe standing in his Charet, of the which
stroke, he dyed. And then when his Charet was had to the poole of Samaria to be
washed, the dogs lycked up the blood that ran through the Charet, and so was
the word of the Lord fulfilled, which he had spoken before concerning the
same. He reigned.xxij. years. Achab, The Fathers Brother.


1. Cor. 16. c.
Achaicus, was a faithful Christian brother, whom Saint Paul sent with
Stephana and Fortunatus from Philippos to the Corinthians with his Epistle.
Achaicus, Mourning, or sad. Achaz, look Ahaz.


Judith. 5. cap.
Achior, was Captain and governor of all the Ammonites under Holofernes, and
had the spirit of Prophecy so plentiful in him, that when Holofernes
demanded what manner of people the Jews were, he stepped forth before him and
said: If it please thee (O Prince) I will tell thee of a truth what they be.
They are a people which came of the generation of the Chaldeys, and because
they would not serve their gods, nor yet follow their customs, they went
and dwelt first in Mesopotamia, worshipping one God that made heaven and earth,
at whose commandment they went from thence and dwelt in the land of Chanaan,
where in process fell so great a dearth, that then from Chanaan, they went
down to Egypt, and dwelt among the Egiptians four hundredth years: In the
which space they grew to a mighty number, and were sore oppressed of the king
of that land, but as soon as they cried to their God for help, he sent down
such plagues upon the king and all his land, that he was feign to suffer them
to depart, yet when they were gone, and the plague ceased, he then pursued, to
have brought them back again into bondage: But God perceiving his people to
be in a strayte, opened the Sea before them, and brought them through on dry
ground, and closed the sea upon their enemies, and so drowned Pharao with all
his host. And now being passed the red Sea, they came to the wilderness of
Mount Sinay, where the waters being bitter, he made them sweet, and fed them
forty years with meat from heaven. They had such power of their God, that
they cast out before them the Chananites, the Pherisites, the Iebusites, and
the Hethites, with many great Nations mo. For so long as they stood in awe of
their God and did not offend him, so long was no Nation, yet ever able to
molest or hurt them. But if (any time) they declyned from his will and
ordinance, then were they quickly destroyed in battle, and brought to
captivity and bondage. Wherefore (O Prince) let inquisition now be made,
whether they have offended their God or no, and if they have, then let us go
against them, for God shall deliver them into thy hand: But if they have not
displeased their God, he will so defend them, that we shall not surely be able
to stand before them, but become a reproach unto all the world. Now was
Holofernes so Iudit. 6. ca.
mad with Achior, that he commanded his men to carry him to the Jews, that
he might perish with them in their destruction. And as they went toward
Bethulia with Achior, and saw they might not come nigh the City, without great
peril of their lives. They went to a tree, and bound him fast to the same, and
so leaving him, went their ways: Then came the Jews to Achior, and loosed his
bands, had him into the City, and set him before the Senators, who demanded
the cause wherefore the Assirians had so cruelly used him, to whom he declared
the matter in order as he had spoke it before to the prince Holofernes, which
being done, the whole assemble gave praises and thanks to God, which had given
to Achior (being an heathen man) such boldness of spirit to set forth his
power and glory. And from that time forth they comforted Achior, and had him in
great estimation, who fell from his heathenishe belief, and put all his trust
in Judith. 14. a.
the living God, and became a Jew, and was circumcised and numbered among the
people of Israel, he and all his posterity for ever. Achior, the Brothers
Light.


1. Reg. 21. c. d
Achis, was the son of Maoth king of Geth, who on a time when David feygned
himself to be mad Here it is said that David feined himself mad before
Achis, and in the. 34 Psalm, before Abimelech, which two were both one man:
for here he is called by his proper name Achis, and in the other place, by his
general name Abimelech.
before him, said unto his servant that brought him on this wise: What mean
you Sirs, to bring this mad fellow before me? have I so great need of mad
men, that ye have brought this man to play the mad Bedlem in my presence?
Away with him (I say) out of my house. At this time Achis despised David and
would not receive him: but the next time 27. cap.
he came again with his bond of men and their housholdes, he retained them
all, and gave unto David the City of Zikleg to dwell in, and had him in such
estimation, that when he himself should go with the Phylistines to battle
against the Israelites, he then took David with him, and made him the keeper
29. cap.
of his person, for the which, the Philistines were sore offended with Achis,
and would not suffer him to go in their company, so long as David was with
him, wherefore Achis (for fear of the Philistines displeasure) entreated David
to go home again, and so went Achis forth with the Philistines against king
Saul. Achis, Even so it is.


Gene. 4.
Ada, There be two women of this name in the Bible. The one was Lameches wife,
and mother to Iaball. The other was the daughter of Elom the Hethite, 36.
and wife to Esau, Jacobs brother. Ada, a Company, or Congregation.


Gene. 1.
Adam, was the first man that God created, and had dominion of all the beasts
and fowls of the earth, and to every beast and foul, he gave his proper name.
God set him at the first in a place of passing joy, full of all manner of
fruitful trees, pleasant both to the eye and in taste, whereof he might eat
at will and was not prohibit, save only from the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, for whenever he tasted of that tree, God told him he should surely
dye. Now Adam being in this goodly paradise of pleasure, God thought it good
to make him a companion to bear him company. And so casting Adam into a sound
sleep, he took out a ryb of his side, whereof he made the woman, and brought
her to Adam, who by and by confessed her to be of his bone and flesh, and from
that time forth they lived togythers as man and wife, in all pureness and
innocence of life, till that by the subtlety of old Satan the Serpent, (who
had deceived the woman) he was entysed by his wife to eat of the forbidden
tree. Which thing he had no sooner done, but both their cies were opened, to
see in what case they were. And when they saw themselves all naked and bare,
they were so ashamed that they made them garments to cover their priuities, and
hid themselves that the Lord should not see them. But Adam being found out
of God, and demanded wherefore he had hid him, alleged, because he was naked.
And also to excuse his transgression, he burdened God with his fault, because
he had given him the woman, which had allured him to eat of the Tree. But
nevertheless, for as much as Adam had obeyed the voice of his wife, and
neglected the Lords precept, God cursed the earth for his sake, and drove him
forth of that welthy place, for to live in sorrow and care, and be subject to
death and all other calamities and miseries of the world, both he and all his
offspring for ever. In the Bible is mention made, both of sons and daughters
which Adam had of Heua his wife, but none of their names be rehearsed, save
only Cain, Habel, and Seth. He lived nine hundredth and thirty years. Adam,
Man, Earthly.


2. Reg. 3. a.
Adonia, was a goodly young man, the son of David borne unto him in Hebron of
his wife Agith. When 3. Reg. 1. cap.
Adonia perceived his father to be feeble and weak through extreme age, he
began to exalt himself, saying he would be king. And gat him both horses and
Charets, and also footmen to run before him even like a king, to the which
his father said nothing, nor would not displease him but let him alone, and do
what he would. And so Adonia proceeded in his purpose, and by the counsel of
Ioab the Captain, and Abiathar the Priest (who took his part) he made a great
sacrifice of sheep and Oxen, whereunto he called his brethren, and also the
kings servants, who eating and drinking before him with great rejoicing,
said: God save king Adonia. But as soon as David had knowledge of Berseba his
Mother, and Nathan the Prophet, how all the case stood, he commanded Sadocke
the Priest, and Nathan, to annoint Solomon, and to set him upon his own Mule,
and so to go forth and proclaim him King. Which news was no sooner come into
the new Kings Court, but every man shrunk away for fear, leaving Adonia all
alone. Who then (for his own safegarde) fled to the Tabernacle of the Lord,
and would not from thence till Solomon granted him his pardon, upon condition
that hereafter he would be quiet, and a good man. And so being pardoned, he
departed quietly home to his house. But after this, when David his father was
dead, Adonia (casting 3. Reg. 2. d. ^.
his favor upon Abisag the Sunamite) went to Bethsabe Salomons mother,
requesting her to speak unto the King, that he would give him Abisag to wife.
Then Solomon hearing his mothers request, perceived that Adonia (being the
elder brother) went about to aspyre to the kingdom, wherefore to prevent his
purpose, he put him to death. Adonia, the Lord is the ruler.


Iudic. 1. a. b.
Adonibesech, King of the Cananites, was of such might and power, that he
subdued seventy Kings, who being all brought into his Court, he cut of
their thumbes and great toes, and made them gather their meat under his Table,
which great cruelty he showed unto them, being puffed up with pride and
ostentation of his victory. This wicked King chanced to reign over the
Cananites, when Judah had the governing of the host of Israel, against whom
Judah began his conquest, and slew the Cananites, and put Adonibesech to
flight, but being sore pursued, the men of Judah took him, and cut of both his
thumbes and great toes, which thing the tyrant confessed himself by and by to
be the just judgment of God, for as he had done to other, so had he worthilye
received again. And so he was carried to Jerusalem, and there dyed.
Adonibesech, the Lords Thunder.


4. Reg. 19. g.
Adramelech, the son of Senacherib king of Assyria with his brother Saresa,
slew their father in the Temple, as he was worshipping his God Nisroch, and
fled into the land of Armenia, leaving Asarhaddon their other brother, to
possess the kingdom after their father. Adramelech, the Kings Cloak, or his
greatness, on power, or the greatness of Counsel.


3. Reg. 12. c.
Aduram, was receyuer of all Roboams trybute, and being sent in Commission to
pacify the people which 2. Par. 10. d.
were divided and fallen from the King, they (for hatred they bare to Roboam)
took this man, and stoned him to death. Aduram, Their Cloak, or their power,
or greatness.


1. Reg. 15. ca.
Agag, was a very fat man, and king of the Amalekites, which Nation God had
commanded to be utterly destroyed. And because King Saul had reserved Agag
alive, and not killed him with the rest, the Lord was grievously displeased
with Saul, and would not suffer Agag so to escape, but sent Samuel to execute
his judgment upon him, who calling for Agag, he came out unto him very
pleasantly, fearing nothing less, but that all bitterness of death had been
past, but contrary to his expectation, Samuel said unto him: as thy sword
has made women chyldelesse, so shall thy mother be chyldelesse, among other
women, and with that he fell upon Agag, and hewed him in pieces before the
Lord in Gilgal. Agag, An House, or sollour.


Act. 11. d. 21. c
Agabus, was a certain Prophet, which came from Jerusalem to Antioch, where
he prophesied of a great dearth that should be thoroweout all the world,
which came to pass (as this Prophet had said) in the Emperor Claudius
days. Also while Paul lay at Cesarea in the house of Philip the Euaungelist
purposing to keep his journey to Jerusalem, this Prophet chauncing to come
thither, took Paul's girdle, and therwithall bound his own hand and feet,
saying: Thus says the holy ghost, so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the
man that owes this gyrdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the
Gentyles. Agabus, A Grasshopper.


Genesis 16. cap.
Agar, was handemayde to Sara Abraham's wife, which Sara (being long barren and
chyldelesse) gave Agar her Maid unto Abraham to be his wife, who being
conceived and feeling her self with child, began to despise and set light by
Sara her Mistres, for the which Sara complained to Abraham her husband, who
giving her power to correct the Maid at her pleasure, she began to deal so
roughlye with Agar, that in no wise she would abide it, but ran away into
the wilderness, and sitting there beside a fountain of water (not knowing
whither to go) an Angel appeared unto her, and said: Agar from whence come
thou? and whither intendest thou to go? I fly (said Agar) from Sara my
mystresse, which fares so foul with me, that I am even weary of my life. Well
(said the Angel) return to thy dame again, and submit thy self under her
hands, for the Lord will so increase thy seed, that it shall not be numbered
for multitude: Thou art with child, and shall bear a son, whose name shall
be Ismael. Then Agar (giving God thanks for his consolation in trouble)
returned home again to Sara her mystres, submitting her self unto her, and in
process of time brought forth her son Ismael, as the Angel had said* But
when it pleased God to visit 21. a. b. c.
Sara, that she conceived and brought forth Isaac, a new contention arose
between Sara and Agar for their children: for Sara perceiving Ismael to be a
mocker and a despiser of Isaac, would not suffer Ismael to company with her
son Isaac, but made her complaynt to Abraham, causing him to put both Agar
and her son away: which thing although it grieved Abraham so to do, yet
being comforted of God that he would multiply Ismael, (because he was of his
seed) he obeyed the voice of Sara his wife, and with provision of victuals,
sent Agar away with her son to shifte for her self. Then Agar being
departed from Abraham, gat her into the forest of Beerseba, where she wandered
so long up and down, till all her provision of meat was spent and gone. And
when she saw no remedy, but that both she and her child must needs perish
for lack of sustenance, she laid down the child behind a bushe, and went
her self away, because she would not see it dye, and as she sat a far off,
mourning and weeping for her son, she was comforted again by the Angel of
God, who had so provided for her and her son, that they were both relieved,
and lived togithers a long time after, to her great joy and comfort. Agar, A
Stranger.


1. Esd. 5. a.
Aggeus, was one of the twelve Prophets which prophesied, in the time of
Zorobabel, King of the Jews, and rebuked them for that they were slack in
the work of the Lord. Aggeus, Solemn: festival, or wynding and turning
himself.


Act. 25. d. e. f. g.
Agrippa, was a certain king, who (as Paul reports) had good knowledge in
the Law and Prophets, but understood not the true applying of the same: Which
King (on a time) came to Cesarea to see Festus and to welcome him into the
Country, who was then but newly entered into his office. And being there a good
while with Festus, and hearing of him what a do there was about Paul, whom
the Jews had accused unto him, was much desirous to see the man, and to hear
him speak. Where upon the next day following, Paul was brought into the
common Hall before Agrippa, and other Magistrates of the City there assembled
to hear his cause. And when Festus had declared for what purpose he had
brought forth Paul, that after examination had, he might have somewhat of
certainty to write 26. cap.
to Caesar, to whom Paul had appealed, Agrippa permitted the prisoner to
speak, and to say what he could for himself. Who then so approved his
innocence by rehearsing his conversation before the audience, that Agrippa
(interrupting his tale) confessed and said unto Paul: Thou have almost
persuaded me to become a Christian. And when the prisoner had ended his matter,
the king arose and all the Court, among whom was much secret talk of Paul,
and for a final sentence, Agrippa said unto Festus: I see no worthy cause of
death or of bands in this man, but that he might have been loosed, if he had
not appealed to Caesar. Agrippa, is a Latin word, and signifies, That which
hardly labors or trauayleth in chyldebearing, or delivering. Also be which
at his birth comes with his feet forward.


4. Reg. 16. ca
Ahaz, the son of Iotham King of Judah, at the age of twenty years began his
reygne, in the xvj. year of 2. Par. 28. ca.
Pekah King of Israel, and did not walk in the ways of his godly Father, but
gave himself to all kind of ydolatrie and abominations of the heathen,
consecrating his children in fire, and offering incense on every hill and
Mountain. For the which (his wickedness) the Lord forsook him, and
delivered him into the hands and power of Razin king of Siria, and Pekah king
of Israel, which two Kings on the one side, with the Edomites and Philistines
(inuading his land, and spoiling his Cities and towns) on the other side,
brought him very low: And yet in all his adversity would he not once lift up
his heart to call upon God for his aid and help, but (contrary to the
Prophets admonition) sought for the Esaias. 7. 2. b.
succor of man, spoiling the Temple of God, and sending the treasure thereof
to Thiglath Pileser king of Assiria, to come and deliver him out of trouble, by
whose coming, Ahaz was nothing the more strengthened, but rather troubled and
hindered. Then Ahas measuring Gods favor by the prosperity of his enemies
(not considering how God oftentimes does punish those whom be loves, and
gives to his enemies good success for a time) turned his heart full and whole
to the Sirians Gods, who (as he thought) had plagued him. And to the intent he
might serve them and worship them in all things, according as the Heathen did
(to have their help also) he took the pattern of an altar at Damascus, the
which he sent to There is no Prince so wicked, but he shall find flatterers
and false Ministers to serve his purpose.
Vria his Priest, to make him the like against his coming home, who being such
a minister as was content to serve the Kings turn, made it with all speed,
on the which Altar the King at his coming home, offered to those Idolles,
abolishing all the holy laws and ordinances of God, to stablyshe his own
wicked and ungodly proceedings, which turned to his utter confusion. He
reigned sixtene years, and was buried in the City of David, but not among the
sepulchers of Kings, leaving Hezekia his godly son to enjoy his place. Ahas,
Taking, or Possessing.


3. Reg. 22. g.
Ahazia, the son of Achab, began his reign over Israel in the.xvlj. year of
Iosaphat king of Judah, and 4. Reg. 1. cap.
followed the steps of that wicked Idolatour Achab his father in all things,
for the which, the Lord punished him two manner of ways. First, the Moabites
rebelled against him, refusing to pay any tribute. Second, as he walked upon
his house (for his recreation) he fell down at a grate of the same, which was
made to give light beneath. And being sore bruised with the fall, and in peril
of death, he sent to Baalzebub was an Idol which the Philistines that dwelt at
Ekrom worshipped, and signifies the God of flies. Thinkinge that he could
preserve the^ from biting of flies: or else he was so called, because flies
were engendered in great abundance of the blood of the sacrifices that were
offered to that Idol. This note I find set out in the Bible.
Beelzebub the God of Ekrom, to enquire of him, whether he should recover or
no. And as the Messengers were going, Elia the Prophet (by the providence of
God) met them and said: is there no God in Israel to ask counsel at, but
your Master must send to Beelzebub? return and tell him, he shall not live.
The Messengers returned and told the King. Who (perceiving by all the marks
and tokens of the man, that it was the Prophet Elia) sent forth a Captain
with fifty Soldiers to bring him with violence, if otherwise he would not
come. And when the Captain came to the Prophet he said: Thou man of God, come
away, the King has sent for thee. If I be the man of God (quoth the Prophet)
fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and all thy men, which words
were no sooner gone out of his mouth, but fire fell down from heaven and
destroyed them all. The King sent again, and they were likewise destroyed.
Then went the third, who fell down before the Prophet and said: O thou man
of God, let my life (I pray thee) and the life of these thy fistie servants, be
precious in thy sight. With this man, the Prophet went boldly to the King, and
told him plainly be should not recover, and so he died in the second year
of his reygne, and for lack of issue, his brother Iehoram succeeded. Ahazia,
The apprehending, or possessing of the Lord, or the vision, or seeing of him.


Ester. 1 cap.
Ahasuerus, (otherwise called Artaxarzes) King of Persia, reigned over an
hundredth and Daniel chap. 6. Makes mention but of six score, leaving out the
number that is vnpersit, as the scripture in diverse places uses.
twenty seven Provinces. This King, in the third year of his reign, made a
feast royal in the City of Susan, to all his Princes and Nobles, which
continued an hundredth and four score days. And these days expired, he made
another feast to all the people great and small, for the space of seven days,
and in the seventh and last day of the feast, the King (being merry and
pleasantly disposed (sent diverse of his Chamberlaines to fetch the Queen named
Vasthy, and to bring her to him with the Crown Imperial upon her head, that
the people might see her beauty. But for so much as she would not come at the
Kings commandment, it was decreed that the King should put her away, and
take another at his pleasure. And according to the same decree, the King was
divorced from Vasthy, and took Ester in her place, for whose sake he showed
great pleasure to her nation the Jews, promoting Mardocheus (which had
preserved him from the danger of Treason) and put down Aman whom he had
(above all) exalted. Ahasuerus, a Prince, or head.


2. Reg. 17. c. d. e.
Ahimaaz, the son of Sadoch with Ionathas the son of Abiathar, stood
waiting without the City of Jerusalem, at the Well called Rogell, to bear
such news to David, as they should hear from their fathers, being within
with Absalom. And when they were instructed of all things, by a certain Maid
sent from their fathers, what they should do and say unto David, they
departed with speed. But being espied by a certain young man, who went and
told it to Absalom, Messengers were sent forth in post haste, which followed
them so sore, that they were constrained to slip into a certain man's house in
Bahurim, which had a Well in his yard, into the which they were conueyghed:
and being hid in the Well, the wife of the house spread a Couerlet over the
Wells mouth, and strawed corn thereon, whereby the Well was not seen. Then
Absaloms men coming into the house, demanded of the wife, where the two men
were which came in before them. They be gone (said she) over the brook of
water. The men believing the woman, went after and sought, and when they could
not find them, returned home again. Then Ahimaaz and Ionathas were let out of
the Well, who went to David and did their message, as they were 18. e. f. g.
commanded. After this, when Absalom was slain, Ahimaaz desired of Ioab the
Captain, that he might bear news to the King of Absaloms death. Nay, said
Ioab, thou shall be no messenger this day, because the Kings son is dead,
but Chusy shall go. Then I pray thee (quoth Ahimaaz) let me go with Chusy. And
wherefore (quoth Ioab) art thou so desirous to go, seeing for thy tidings thou
shall have no reward: whatsoever I have (quoth he) I pray thee let me go: Then
go, said Ioab. And so Ahimaaz ran a nearer way than Chusy, and was ever before
him. And as they were coming, the watch man spied them and said to the King:
I see two men running hytherwarde, and me think the running of the foremost is
like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Sadoch: Oh said the King he is a good
man, and brings good tidings. And so Ahimaaz came to the King before Chusy,
and fell down before him and said: Blessed be the Lord thy God, which has
shut up the men that lift up their hands against my Lord the King: is the
young man Absalom safe said the King: Ahimaaz answered: When Ioab sent Chusy
and me thy servant, I saw much a do, but I wot not what it was: Well said
the King stand still. Then Chusy came and said: Good tidings my Lord the
King, for the Lord has delivered thee this day, out of the hands of all that
ro^e against thee. Is the young man Absalom safe (quoth the King:) The enemies
of my Lord the King (said he) and all that rise against thee to do thee
hurt, be as that young man is. And so the King departed, and mourned for his
son. Ahimaaz, Brother of Counsel.


1. Reg. 21. a. b. c.
Ahimelech, the son of Ahitob, the son of Phi^ehes, the son of Eli, was
Priest of the City of Nob, in whose time it chanced David (being persecuted
of king Saul) to fly unto him for succor, at whose coming (with so few
waiting on him) Ahimelech was sore astonished, and asked him wherefore he came so
alone. Then David bearing him in hand that the King had sent him of a secret
business which might not be known, desired Ahimelech to give him of such
things as he had in store, that he and his men might be refreshed and go about
the Kings affairs. Then Ahimelech (believing that all had been well between
the King and David) took him of the The Hebrews had. 3. kinds of bread (as
Lyra writes.) The first, Show bread, which was set before the lord, upon the
propitiatorye seat, and thereof might no man eat, but ye priests only. The
second, bread offered upon the altar of holocaust, which was for the Levites
to eat. The third, was common bread and of that might al men eat.
hallowed bread, because he saw his necessity great, and had no common bread
under his hand. Then David desired Ahimelech to lend him either spear or
sword, for I brought (quoth he) neither weapon nor harness, the Kings
business required such haste, and by and by he fet out the sword of Goliath,
and gave it to him. Now 22. b. c. d.
for this great kindness which Ahimelech had showed to David, Doeg a servant
of King Saules, accused him to his Lord, of Treason. And being brought before
the King with all the Priests of the Lord, it was objected against him, how
he had conspired with David the Kings enemy, and asked counsel of God for
him, and aided him both with vittayle and weapon: To the which, Ahimelech
answered and said: Oh King, who is so faithful among all thy servants as
David is? or had in more honor in all thy house? is he not the Kings son in
law, and does whatsoever thou commaundest him? have I not at other times as
well as now, asked counsel of God for him? Let not my Lord the King impute
any such wickedness in me, or in my fathers house, for truly thy servant
knew nothing of all this that thou layest to my charge, either less or more.
Well (quoth the King) thou shall surely die. And so was this innocent man put
to death, with lxxxiiij. Priests mo, and the City of Nob destroyed.
Ahimelech, a Kings Brother.


3. Reg. 11. e. f.
Ahijah, was a Prophet borne in Silo, and chauncing to meet with Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, without the City of Jerusalem, in the plain fields, having a
new cloak upon his back, he caught the cloak from him, and rent it in twelve
pieces, delivering ten pieces thereof to Jeroboam, saying: Thus will the Lord
rent the kingdom out of the hands of Solomon (because he has forsaken the
Lord and served strange Gods) and give ten Tribes unto thee. Therefore take
heed (when thou art King) that thou walk in the ways of the Lord thy God,
for so long as thou keep his statutes and holy commandments, so long will
the Lord prosper thee in the kingdom. Read more of this Prophet in the
story of Abia the son of Jeroboam. Ahijah, Brother of the Lord.


3. Reg. 15. f.
The father of king Baasa, was called Ahijah, of the house of Isachar.

Ezech. 23.
Aholah and Aholibah, were two Sisters, under whose names is set forth, the
fornication, that is to say, the Idolatrye of Samaria and Jerusalem. The Bible
note.
Aholah, signifies a mansion, or dwelling in it self, meaning Samaria, which
was the royal City of Israel, and Aholibah signifies, my Mansion in her,
whereby is meant Jerusalem, where Gods temple was.


Gene. 36.
Aholibama, was the daughter of Ana, and wife to Esau, who brought him forth
children, which became great men in the world.

Iudic. 3.
Aioth, the son of Gera, was the second Judge of the Hebrews, a man of great
strength, and valiant of courage, and had equal strength and aptness in both
his hands. He slew Eglon king of the Moabites on this wise: when Eglon had
long warred on the Jews, and taken from them diverse Cities and kept them in
much misery, this Aioth came to him to Jericho, bringyng unto him certain
presents, which lyked him well, and desired to speak with him privily, which
was granted, and all other being commanded to avoid, Aioth stroke Eglom to
the heart twice. The last time with such puissaunce that the knyfe with the
hyltes remained in the wound, and so leaving him dead, departed without
suspicion, and came unto his people, declaring what he had done, who being
glad, armed them and fell upon the Moabites, and slew of them ten thousand,
and brave all the residue out of their country. And so the Jews being
delivered by the wisdom and virtue of Aioth, after made him their Judge and
Prince. Who governed them.lxxx. years in peace, and died a very old man in
much honor. Aioth. Praising, or confessing.


1. Mac. 1. a.
Alexander, the son of Philip King of Macedonia, slew Darius king of the
Persians and Medes, This king at a supper in Babilo^ was poisoned by drinking
out of a cup made of an horses hoof, supposed to be the devise of Aristotle
sometime his master, and Antipater lieutenaunt of Macedonia.
and conquered the most part of all the world, in less than twelve years
space, whereof he became so proud that God was displeased with him. And being
visited with sickness so sore, that he must needs die, he called all his
Lords and Princes before him, and departed his kingdom among them. So that
they (after his death) were crowned, and reigned as Kings, every one severally
in his own dominion, as was to them appointed. He reigned.xij. years.
Alexander, An ayder, or a helper, manly, or very valiant.


1. Mac. 10. ca.
Alexander, the son of Noble Antiochus, took the City of Ptolomais, and
after that, moved war against Demetrius, who (to prevent Alexander) sent
Ambassadors to Ionathas (governor of the Jews) to have his friendship,
promising him as many fair and large offers, as he could devise. But
forasmuch as Ionathas had experience of his deceytfull dealings, and how
cruel an enemy he had always been unto the Jews nation, he refused the
offer of Demetrius, and joined in league with Alexander, knowing him to be a
faithful Prince, and ever his friend. And so Alexander having the Jews aid,
stroke battle with Demetrius, in the which conflict, Alexander slew
Demetrius, and overcame all his host. Now when Alexander had conquered the
land, and was set in the Trone of his progenitors, a marriage was concluded
between him and Cleopatra the daughter of Ptolomie King of Egypt, which was
finished at the City of Ptolomias, at the which triumph, Alexander made
Ionathas a Duke, and partener of his dominion, and after that (for his
worthiness) gave him the City of Accaron. Alexander now 11. a. b.
lying at Antioch, and hearing how the Cilicians had rebelled against him,
marched toward them with a great power, to suppress the rebellion. And being
there occupied with his enemies, Ptolomie in the mean season, defeated him of
his kingdom, and took his daughter Cleopatra, and gave her to Demetrius, the
son of Demetrius, in marriage. Alexander hearing of this, returned home with
all his host, but Ptolomy being to strong for him, chased Alexander out of his
Realm, who for succor, fled into Araby, where ye king of that land (against al
law of arms) smote of his head, and sent it to Ptolomie for a present.

Act. 19. cap.
Alexander, a Jew borne, and a ruler at Ephesus what time as Demetrius the
Siluersmith, moved sedition in the City against Paul for the goddess Diana,
was (in the rage) drawn out of the Common Hall, and going forward, beckonned
with his hand to have spoken, but till the Town Clarke had ceased the noise
(which lasted two hours) he could not be heard. And then, to pacify the
people, more by worldly wisdom, than for any respect he had to Religion, he
said: Ye men of Ephesus, what man is he, that knows not how that the City
of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the Image
which came from Jupiter: Seeing then that no man says here against, ye ought
to be content, and to do nothing rashely. For, ye have brought hither these
men, which are neither robbers of Churches, neither yet despysers of your
goddess: Wherefore if Demetrius and the crafts men, which are with him have
any matter against any man, the law is open, and there are rulers, let them
accuse one an other. But if ye go about any other thing, it may be determined,
in a lawful assemble. For we are in ieoperdye to be accused of this days
uproar, forasmuch as there is no cause whereby we may give a reckoning of this
concourse of people. And when he had thus spoken, each man departed.

1. Tim. 1. d.
Alexander, the Coppersmyth, forsook the faith, and became such an enemy unto
the Gospel, that he withstoode 2. Tim. 4. c.
Paul's preaching, and did him much displeasure, for the which, Paul delivered
him unto Satan, that is, excommunicated him out of the Church, desiring the
Lord to reward him, as he had deserved.

1. Mac. 7. a. b. c.
Alcimus, was a Jew borne, and come of the seed of Aaron, who
notwithstanding, became so wicked a man, that he forsook the laws of his own
Nation, to maintain the abominations of the heathen. And for the hatred he
bare to Machabeus and the Jews, he took unto him a sort of unthrifts and
ungodly persons, and went to Demetrius, unto whom he made agricuous complaint
upon Judas Machabeus, feygning that he had slain all the Kings friends, and
driven him and his company out of their own land, wherefore he willed
Demetrius to choose out some Noble Captain, to go and avenge, the Kings
quarrel on Judas. Upon the which complaint of Alcimus, the King sent Bachides
against Judas, and made Alcimus the hye Priest, who was such an enemy unto the
Jews, as the like was not among the Heathen, for all his study was, how he
might (either by word or deed) work their utter confusion. And finally, to
manifest his great malice toward his own Country men* and the laws of God,
he commanded the walls of the inmost Sanctuary (with the Monuments of the
Prophets) to be cast down and destroyed. But as this wicked Apostata went
about his deuilish purpose, the hand of God fell upon him, and smote him with
such an incurable Palsy, that his mouth was shut up, and so like a miserable
wretch he dyed. Alcimus, Strong.


Genesis 36. b.
Amalech, was the son of Eliphas the son of Esan, borne unto him of Thymna
his Concubine, of whom came the kindred of the Amalekites. This King when Exodus
17. cap.
Moses had brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, and were come into the
wilderness of Raphidim, where they both lacked water, and were wearyed with
their long journey, would not suffer them to pass quietly through his land,
but came forth with weapon, and waged battle against them. In the which
battle, Joshua guided the host of Israel, while Moses went to pray. And so
long as Moses held up his hands and prayed, so long had Israel the better,
but when he let them fall, Amalech had the better. Then Aaron and Hur
perceiving Moses hands to be weary, gat them up to Moses, and staide his
hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side, so long till
Joshua had discomfited Amalech with all his host. And for this cruelty of
Amalech, God swear unto Moses, that he would utterly put out the remembrance
of Amalech, from under heaven. Which promise 1. Reg. 15. ca.
he performed in the days of King Saul. Amalech, a Licking people.


Aman, look Haman.

2. Reg. 17. g.
Amasa, was the son of Iether, and Abigail, David's sister, was his mother.
This Amasa what time as Absalom rose against his father David, was made
Captain over Absaloms host, and after the death of Absalom, 19. c.
David received him to favor, swearing he should be Captain over his host,
in the rowme of Ioab, which office he did not long enjoy: for when Seba the
son of Bichri had begun a new commotion, and that David had sent Amasa to
gather the men of Judah togithers, and to 20. b. c.
bring them to him by the third day, it chanced Ioab to meet Amasa by the
way (which was somewhat after the time the King had appointed) and saluting him
with all gentleness, he took him by the Chinne with one hand to kiss him,
and with the other hand he smote him under the short ribs with his dagger,
and killed him. Amasa, Sparing the people.


4. Reg. 14.
Amasiah, the son of Ioas king of Judah, began his reign at the age of.xxv.
years, in whose beginning 2. Par. 25.
he did indifferently well observe the laws of God, but in the end he became
an Idolater. He prepared an host of thirty thousand men to go against the
Edomites, and yet to make himself the stronger, he hired an hundredth thousand
mo, out of the ten Tribes of Israel, for an hundred Talentes of Silver. But as
he was going with both the hosts of Judah and Israel, he was commanded by
the Lords Prophet, to send the host of Israel home again, (forasmuch as the
Lord was not with them) or else he should not stand before his enemies, how
then (said the King) shall I do for the hundred Talents, which I have given
for them: Take no thought for that (quoth the Prophet) for the Lord is able to
give thee as much more. And so he sent the host of Israel home again, who
for anger they were dimised, fell upon the Cities of Judah as they went, and did
much harm. Then Amasias with his own men set upon his enemies, and slew ten
thousand, and discomfited the rest. After which victory, whereas he ought to
have given all praise unto God for the same, he fell from God, and most vilely
dishonored him in worshipping the Idols of the Edomites, despising the This was
Amos the Prophet, whom Amasiah caused many times to be bet. His son caused a
nail to be thrust into his temples, and being half dead, was carried into
his own country, where he soon after dyed. Cooper.
Prophets admonition sent unto him from the Lord. And so persisting in his
obstinate mind and proud heart, he wrote to Ioas King of Israel, commanding
him and his people (by a Parable of the Cedar tree and Thystle) to be under his
subjection. But Ioas after defiaunce gathered an army, and went against
Amasias, whose host being discomfited, Amasiah was taken and brought to Ioas,
who carried him to Jerusalem where (notwithstanding the gates being opened
against him) he caused four hundredth cubits of the wall to be beaten down,
and entered into the City that way, leading Amasiah with him as a priso^ner,
and took all the treasure of the Temple, and of the Kings house, and caused it
to be brought into Samaria. Afterward being delivered, his own people slew
him. He reigned.xxix. years, and Azaria his son succeeded. Amasiah, the
Strength of the Lord.


2. Reg. 3. a
Ammon, the eldest son of David, had a fair sister called Thamar, with whom
he was so far in 14. cap.
love, that he could eat no meat that did him good, but pyned himself away
marvelously for her sake. Then Ionadab (his fathers brothers son) a friend
and familiar of his, and a worldly wise man, perceiving Ammon to be sore
changed, and every day more and more, went to him and said: How happens
this (Ammon) that thou being the Kings son, consumest thy self so away, and
do not tell me? Oh said Ammon, I am in love with Thamar, my brother Thamar
was Absaloms sister, both by father and mother, and Ammons by the fathers side
only.
Absaloms sister, and except I may have her company, I shall surely die. Now
to further this wicked purpose of Ammon, here was a counsayler ready at hand:
I will tell thee (said Ionadab) what thou shall do, lay thee down upon thy
bed, and feign thy self sick, and when David thy father comes to visit
thee, desire him to let Thamar thy sister come and dress thee such meat as
thou have a lust unto. Ammon did so, and when Thamar was come, and had dressed
him meat and brought it into his Chamber, he commanded all to avoid, and
never rested until he had (by force) gotten his pleasure: which done, he fell
into such an exceeding hatred of Thamar, that he could not suffer her to be in
his sight, but caused his servant to thrust her out of his house, and to bolt
the doors after her. For this shameful incest of Ammon, Absalom two years
after at a banquet, slew him. Ammon, A People.


Genesis 19. g.
Lot had a son called Ammon, which was borne him of his youngest daughter, and
of him came the Ammonites.

4. Reg. 21. d.
Amon, the son of Manasses, was.xxij. year old when he began his reign
over Judah, and walked not in 2. Par. 33. d.
the ways of the Lord, but gave himself more to wicked Idolatry, and
worshipping of stinking Idols, than ever his father did, and would never
turn unto God. Wherefore (at last) certain of his own men conspired against
him and slew him, which conspirators the people of the land (notwithstanding)
put to death, and made Josiah his son King in his stead. Amon, Faithful.


Amos. 1. 2. 3. etc.
Amos, was an heardeman or shepehearde, of a poor Town called Thieme, and one
of the twelve Prophets, which God raised up to admonish the Israelites of
their wickedness and Idolatry, and to threaten them with his plagues and
punishments, if they did not repent. Read of his death in the story of
Amasiah. Amos, a Burden.


Esaias. 1. a.
The father of Isai, David's father, was called Amos, and there the word
signifies, Strong.

Exodus 6. c.
Amram, the son of Caath the son of Leuy, took Iochebed his fathers This
kind of marriage was after in the law forbidden. Leuit. 18. b.
Sister to wife, who bare unto Number. 26. g.
him two sons, Aaron and Moses, and also a daughter called Miriam. He lived
an hundredth and thirty eight years. Amram, a Mighty, or an high people, or a
band of them.


Genesis 14. a. b.
Amraphael, was King of Sinhar, and one of the four Kings, which fought
against five other Kings in the valley of Syddin, where he and his party had
the victory. Amraphael, Speaking destruction: or speaking secrets.


3. Reg. 16. d.
Amry, was the chief Captain and governor of the whole army of Ela the
son of Baasa king of Israel. And lying at the siege of Gibbethon (a City of
the Philistines) the whole host there (hearing of the death of Ela)
constituted Amry King in his stead: But the residue of the Israelites, which
abode at home and were not with Amry at the siege, made Thebni the son of
Gineth King. So that the people were divided and in great contention for their
King, which continued for the space of three years, till Thebni chanced to
dye, and then the whole multitude received Amry for their King, who began his
reign in the.xxxj. year of the reign of Asa king of Judah, and reigned most
wickedly of all others before him.xij. years, and dyed, leaving his son
Achab to succeed him. Amry, a Band, or handful, a power, or a bitter and
rebellious people.


Genesis 36. a. c.
Anah, the son of Zibeon, as he fed and kept his fathers Asses in the
wilderness, was the first that found out the monstrous generation of Mules,
between the Ass and the Mare. He had a Sister also, called Anah, whose
daughter Aholibamah was wife to Esau the son of Isaac. Anah, Afflicting,
aunswering, or singing.


Act. 5. 2.
Ananias, was a certain man, who to be counted one of the Christian religion,
sold his possession (with his Wives consent) and (notwithstanding) kept away
part of the price thereof, and brought the rest, and laid it down at the
Apostles feet, whose dissembling hypocrisy being revealed unto Peter, he
said unto him: Ananias, how is it that Satan has filled thine heart that
thou should lie unto the holy Ghost, and keep away part of the price of
the possession: Perteyned it not unto thee only, and after it was sold, was
it not in thine own power? how is it that thou have conceived this thing in
thine heart: Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. And when Ananias heard
these words, he fell down and dyed. Ananias, the Cloud of the Lord.


Act. 9. b. c. d.
Ananias, the Disciple of Christ, dwelling at Damascus, had a vision appeared
unto him, saying: Ananias, arise and go into the street which is called
Straight, and seek in the house of Judas for one Saul of Tharsus: for behold
he prays, and has seen a vision, a man named Ananias coming unto him, and
putting his hands on him, that he might receive his sight. Then said Ananias,
Lord* I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done to thy
Saints at Jerusalem, and here he has authority of the hye Priests, to
bind all that call upon thy name* Well (said he) go thy ways, for he is a
chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentyles and Kings and the
children of Israel. For I will show him how great things he must suffer for
my names sake. Then Ananias went to Saul, and laid his hands on him, and
said: Brother Saul, the Lord that appeared unto thee in the way as thou
came, has sent me, that thou might receive thy sight, and be filled with
the holy ghost. And so by the hands of Ananias, Saul received his sight
again.

Act. 23. a.
There was another Ananias, who being hye Priest, commanded Paul to be smitten
on the mouth, as he was aunswering for himself before the Counsel.

Math. 4. c.
Andrewe, a poor Fisher man* was called (with his brother Peter) to be an
Apostle. When Christ demanded John. 6. a.
of his Disciples, where they might buy bread to Andrew suffered Martyrdom,
in the city of Achaia.
satisfy the people that followed him: Andrewe made answer and said: there
is a little boy here, which has five Barley loaves and two fishes, but what
is that among so many. Andrewe, Manly.


2. Mac. 4. f.
Andronicus, being a man of authority and in great favor with Antiochus King
of Siria, was left in Iewrie, and made Lieutenaunt over the Jews until the
return of the King, who was gone to pacify a certain commotion made by the
Tharsians and Mallacians. And in the mean time, being corrupt with bribes and
rewards of that ungracious man Menelaus, to dispatch the good and godly man
Onias, (whom he so hated) out of the way, he went to Onias, who for his
safegarde, had taken the benefit of Sanctuary, and with fair words
persuaded him to come forth, binding himself with an oath, he should have no
harm: And when he saw that Onias suspected him, he fell upon him
incontinently, and without any regard of righteousness slew him. Whose
innocent death so offended the people, that they made a grievous complaint of
Andronicus to the King at his coming home, who caused that wicked murderer to
be stripped out of his purple clothes, and led most villanously through the
City to the place where he had committed his ungracious act, and to suffer
most shameful death. Andronicus, a Conqueror, or victorer.


Romans 16. b.
Andronicus, the faithful Disciple of Christ, to whom Paul sends
commendations on this wise: Salute Andronicus and Iunia my Cosins, and fellow
prisoners with me, which are well taken among the Apostles, and were in Christ
before me.

Ge. 14. b. c. d.
Aner, Mamre and Eschol were three brethren, which (when Lot was taken Prisoner
among the Sodomites, and carried away by Kadorlaomor, and other Kings that
took his part) joined themselves with Abraham, in the rescuing of Lot his
brothers son, for the which their faithful assistance at that present,
Abraham dealt liberallye with them, in the parting of the spoil won at that
voyage. Aner, an Answer, or a song of the Candle, or light, or that which
troubles, or hurt^th the Candle.


1. Reg. 1. cap.
Anna, the wife of Elkana was long barrayne and without child, which
barrainnesse, her companion and Mate Phenenna did daily cast in her teeth to
her great reproach. Wherefore Anna was so full of heaviness (that God had made
her such a railing stock) that she could eat no meat. And being thus
tormented and troubled in her mind, she gat her into the Temple, making there
her hearty prayers to God, to give her a man child. And as she prayed, it
fortuned Eli the Priest as he sat in the Temple, to mark her mouth, and
perceiving her lips to move and no voice heard, thought she had been
drunken, saying: Thou woman, how long will thou be drunken? put away thy
drunkenness from thee: Nay my Lord (quoth she) I am a woman troubled in
spirit, and have drunken neither wine nor strong drink, but pour out my
soul before the Lord, count not thine handemaide to be a daughter of Belial,
for out of the abundance of my heaviness and grief have I spoken hitherto,
and so desiring Eli to pray for her, she departed chearefully home to her
house, and shortly after conceived by Elkana her husband, and bare him a son
whose name she called Samuel. And when she had brought up the child, and
weaued it, she prepared a sacrifice, and went to the Temple, presenting both it
and her child to Eli the Priest, putting him also in remembrance that she was
the same woman which stood before him (of late) and prayed unto God for that
child, and that now (according to her promise) she was come to dedicate him
unto the Lord. And so (after praise and thanks giving) she departed, leaving
the child with Eli to minister in the Temple of God. And every year after
would Anna make a little cote for Samuel her son, and bring it up, when she
Once a year they accustomed to appear before the lord with their family.
came with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice. And thus God took
away her rebuke of barrainnesse, and blessed her with children, so that after
Samuel, she had three sons mo, and two daughters. Anna, Gracious, or
Merciful.


Tobie. 2. d.
Anna, the Wife of old Tobie (her husband being blind and in poverty) took
weauing work of women, and labored sore for her living. And when (on a time)
she sent home the work to the owners, one sent her a Kidde, more than her
wages which she had earned. And when Tobie heard the Kidde bleate, he said to
Anna: from whence came that Kydde? is it not stolen? restore it to the owners
again, for it is not lawful to eat any thing of theft. Then was Anna angry
with Tobie, and rebuked him, as one whose trust in God was all in vain. After
this, it fortuned old Tobie to send young 5. d.
Tobie his son, to the City of Rages to receive certain money, which (in his
prosperity) he had lent to one Gabelus. Then Anna being full of heaviness for
the departure of her son, burst out and said to Tobie: Oh what have thou
done? why have thou sent our son away? I would to God that money had never
been required of us, but that we had been content with our poverty, and kept
our son at home: What ayled us to send him into a strange Country, which
was the only staff of our age, and comfort of our life, and the hope of our
generation. Then said Tobie, leave thy weeping, and be not discomforted, for
the man that went with our son is so 10. b. c. d.
faithful, that he will bring him to us again safe and sound. Yet could not
Anna with this be persuaded, but would daily go out to the top of an hill,
and sit there to spy his coming. And when (at the last) she saw where he
came a far of, she ran home with great rejoicing and fold her husband.
And so waiting to receive her son, she wept for joy when she saw him.

Luke. 2. f.
Anna, the daughter of Phanuel (of the Tribe of Aser) was a Prophetess, and
had been married to an husband seven years, and after continued a widow
fourscore and four years, serving God in the Temple with fasting and praying
day and night. And when Christ was brought into the Temple, she came forth at
that present, praising the Lord, and prophesied of that child, to all them
that looked for the redemption of Israel.

Tob. 7. a.
Anna the wife of Raguel, was Mother to Sara the wife of young Tobie.

John. 18. b.
Annas, had the first examination of Christ, and sent him from him, to Caiphas
his son in law, who was hye Priest for that year. Annas, Afflicting, or
bringing low.


1. Mac. 1. a. 6. a. 8. a.
Antiochus, the great, being King of Siria, and of such puissaunce and
strength, that he thought himself invincible, was at last overcome of the
Romans, and feign to relinquishe to them all his interest in Europa and Asia,
and to leave his son Antiochus in hostage, and so departed, being contented
with those countries that were left him, till at last of a covetous mind, he
went to Perfide 2. Mac. 1. b. c.
the chief City of Persia, thinking there to have robbed the Temple, and to
have had great treasure therein. And as he himself (with a few mo) was in the
Temple about his business, the Priests at a privy door came in upon him,
and cut him in small pieces, and cast him out to be devoured of the birds and
fowls of the air. Antiochus, For a Wagon, or Chariot.


1. Mac. 1. cap.
Antiochus, Epifanes, the son of Antiochus the great, being stablished in his
kingdom, warred against Ptolomie king of Egypt, until he had brought his
land in subjection. And having so good success there, he went against Israel,
and at last, took and spoiled the City of Jerusalem, and robbed the
sanctuary of all the precious Jewels and treasure therein: subverted all the
holy laws of God, compelling the Jews to worship Idols, and to do as the
heathen did in all things: he burned the books of the Law, and whosoever had
a book of the Testament, or were found to be a favorer thereof, did suffer
death. Thus this ungracious and wicked subuerter of all 2. Mac. 9. cap.
true religion and godliness, persecuted the true people of God, and so long
persisted in his great tirannie, that God at last, smote him with an incurable
disease in his body, which was so eaten with worms and vermin, that they fell
quick out of his flesh, whereof ensued so great a stink, that neither he
himself, nor none that were about him, might abide the smell. And so this
wicked Tormentour of other, was justly recompensed with a miserable end.

1. Match. 6. ca.
Antiochus, Eupator, the son of Antiochus Epifanes, being but young, and under
the governance of Lisias, went into Iewrie with a great army to subdue the
Jews, who so manfully resisted Antiochus, that he was feign (considering the
decrease of his people, and the strength of the place besieged) to offer them
peace, and to grant them liberty to live according to their own laws, whose
covenants being received, the Jews came out of the castle of Sion, to give
place to Antiochus, who (notwithstanding his oath) when he saw the defense
thereof, commanded the walls round about, to be cast down and destroyed, and
from thence departed to Antioch, where he fought with Philip, which was come
out of Persia, and wanne the City out of his hands. And lying there, 1. Mac.
7. a.
Demetrius the son of Seleuchus came to Antioch, and took Antiochus and
Lisias, and put them both to death.

1. Mac. 11. e.
Antiochus, the son of Alexander, being but a child, was first under the
governance of Emascuel the Arabian, and removed from him, to the tuition of one
Triphon, 1. Mac. 13. d.
of whom he was most traitorously murdered.

1. Match. 15. ca
Antiochus, the son of Demetrius, for as much as Triphon had been his fathers
utter enimye, made a covenant of friendship with Simon the hye Priest, and
Prince of the Jews, that he might the better overcome Triphon, whom he
persecuted and drove to the City of Dora, lying by the sea side, which City
he besieged with an hundred and twenty thousand footmen, and viij. thousand
horsemen. And lying there, Simon sent him two thousand chosen men, with silver
and gold, and much furniture to help him. Who (notwithstanding his bond of
love, he had made with Simon before) refused now his friendship, and fell at
defiaunce with him and all the Jews, and was ever after that, their continual
enemy.

Antipas, was a faithful Martyr of Christ. Antipas, Apoc. 2. d.
For all, or against all.


1. Mac. 12. b. 14. c.
Antipator, the son of Jason, first by Ionathas, and after by Simon, was sent
Ambassador to Rome, to renew the old friendship between the Jews and
Romans. Antipater, For the Father, or against the Father.


3. Esd. 4. c.
Apame, was Daughter to that famous King Bartacus, and Concubine to a certain
great King, who was of such power and might, that all lands stood in awe of
him. And where as no man durst presume to lay hands upon this King, yet Apame
sitting by his side upon the right hand, took of his Crown from his head,
and set it upon her own head, and smote the King with her left hand, who in
the mean time did nothing but gape and look upon her: if she laughed upon
him, he laughed, if she were angry, then he flattered, to win her favor
again. Apame, Expelling, or driving forth.


Romans 16. b.
Apelles, was a faithful Christen brother, and one (as it seems) that had
sustained trouble for the Gospel sake. For Saint Paul sending salutacions to
the Christians at Rome, says thus: Salute Apelles approved in Christ.
Apelles, Expelling, or driving away.


1. Mac. 3. a.
Appolonius, the Governor of Siria, came against Judas Machabeus, with a great
host of the heathen, and in the end was slain. Whose sword pleased Judas so
well, that he kept it for a memory, and used it for his weapon all the days
of his life, in time of war. Appolonius, Undoing, or destroying.


2. Mac. 4. a. 5. d.
Appolonius, the son of Thersa, Gouerneur of Celosiria and Phinches, (a man
set all upon tirannie) was sent to Jerusalem against the Jews (whom he hated)
with an army of tw^ntie thousand men, and commanded by the King Antiochus,
to kill all that were of perfect age, and to sell the Women, Maidens, and
Children, who at his first coming to the city, made a show of peace, and
lay still till the Sabbath day. And then (knowing the Jews would not break
their law to make resistance) he fell upon them, and did his commission with
all extremity.

Act. 18. d.
Apollos, was an eloquent man, a Jew borne at Alexandria, and well instructed,
and had but as yet the first principles of Christ's religion, which was the
Baptime or doctrine of John only. The same being somewhat entered in the way of
the Lord, began to be fervent in the spiritc, and to speak boldly at Ephesus,
where Aquila and Priscilla chanced to hear him, and perceiving he was not
fully instructed in the precepts of the Gospel, they This great learned and
eloquent man disdayned not to be taught of a poor crafts man.
took him home with them, and expounded unto him the way of the Lord more
perfitely, which was the way to salvation. And when he was christened, in the
name of Jesus, and had received the holy Ghost, he was desirous go into Achaia,
where (at Corinth) he did valiantly set forth the Gospel, confounding the
Jews with plain evident Testimonies of Scriptures, that Jesus was the same
Messiah whom the Jews had so many hundredth years looked for.

Act. 18. cap.
Aquila, was a certain Jew borne in Ponthus, lateiy come out of Italy with
his wife Priscilla to Corinth, because the Emperor Claudius had commanded all
Jews to depart from Rome. His Craft was to sow together skins to make
Tents and Pauilions withal. Paul (who was of the same occupation) when he
came to Corinth, lodged in this man's house, and wrought with him. And after a
year and a half, departed from Corinth, and went togithers to Ephesus, where
Aquila and Priscilla made their aboade. And remaining there behind Paul (who
had taken his journey toward Jerusalem) it fortuned Apollos (an Alexandrian
borne) an eloquent man and well learned, to come to Ephesus, and preached
Christ, so much as he had learned of him by John's Baptime, for more he knew
not. And when Aquila and Priscilla had heard his preaching, and perceiving him
not to be (as yet) fullye instructed in the knowledge of Christ, took him home
with them, and severally taught him more perfitely, the mysteries of the
Gospel. Aquila, an Egle.


Genesis 11. d.
Aran, was the son of Terah, brother to Nahor and Abraham, and father to Lot,
and the first man that scripture makes mention of, that (by the course of
nature) died before his father. Aran, an Hill, or hilly.


Math. 2. d.
Archelaus, was the son of Herod, king of the Jews. In whose time Joseph
This king reigned.ix. years over the Jews, and finallye was banished into
France, through his insolency with Glasira his brother Alexanders wydow, who^
he had married. Lanquet.
returned out of Egypt with the child Jesus, to go into the land of Israel.
But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Iewrie in his fathers stead,
fearing least he had succeeded in his fathers cruelnesse, like as in his
kingdom, durst not go thither, but turned aside into the parties of Galilie,
and dwelt there in a City called Nazareth. Archelaus, a Prince of the people.


Archippus, was the Col. 4. d.
instructour of the Colossians, and admonished by Paul, to take diligent heed
to the office which was committed unto him, to perform it, whereof he should
yield an account to the Lord at the last day. Archippus, the Chief, or
Master of Horses.


Aresna, look Ornan.

Genesis 14. a. b.
Arioch, was King of Elasar, and one of the four Kings that fought against
Bera King of Sodom, and other four mo in the vale of Siddim, and the lesser
number overcame the greater, and so took all the spoil of Sodom and Gomorra,
and went their ways. But being pursued by Abraham and his confederates, they
were all taken and stayne. Arioch, Long, or talle, or fullness, or the
drunkenness, or the lior.


Daniel. ^.
Arioch, was Captain of Nabuchodonosors Guard, and being sent of the King, to
destroy all the wise men and Soothsayers in Babylon, because they could not
interpret his dream. Daniel went to Arioch, and desired him a little to
stay, until he had obtained of the King some leisure to show unto him the
interpretacion of his dream. Daniels request being granted, and the thing
revealed unto him by God: he (after thanks given unto God for the same) went
to Arioch, and said: destroy not the wise men of Babylon, but bring me before
the King, and I shall show him the interpretacion of his vision. Then Arioch
brought Daniel before the King in all haste, and said thus unto him: I have
found a man among the children of Judah that were brought captives, that will
declare unto the King, the interpretacion of his dream. And so the wise men of
Babylon were saved.

Act. 19. e. 20. 2. 27. a. Coll. 4. b.
Aristarcus, was a Thessalonian borne, and one of Paul's companions, and in
great hasarde of his life with him at Ephesus, through the sedition of
Demetrius. But that overcome, he accompanied Paul into Asia, and so forth to
Rome, where he was his prison fellow, and never shrunk from him. Aristarcus,
The best Prince.


2. Mac. 1. b.
Aristobolus, King Ptolomies Schoolemayster, came of the generation of the
anointed Priests, unto whom the Jews which dwelt at Jerusalem, sent an
Epistle, exhorting all the Jews which dwelt in Egypt, to give thanks and
praises unto God, for the death of Antiochus, which had been so cruel unto
them.

Romans 16. b.
Aristobolous, of whom Paul makes mention in his Epistle. Aristobolus, The
best Counsayler, or the best Counsel.


1. Mac. 12. c.
Arius, was King of Sparta, which people were come of the generation of Abraham
as the Jews were, The Spartians came of Abraham's seed.
wherefore the Jews called them brethren. But in all the wars the Jews had
with the heathen, they never sought the Spartians help, more than with letters
of Recommendation one from another of brotherlye love, glad of each others
prosperity.

Judith. 1. cap.
Arphaxat, King of the Medes, was so myghtie a Prince that he subdued many
people unto his dominion. Of Arphaxat the son of Sem, came the Caldea^s.
Lanquet.
He builded a City called Ecbatane, which for strength was thought impossible
to win. But at last, he (putting to much confidence in his own power) was
subdued of Nabuchodonosor king of the Assirians, in the.xij. year of his
reign. Arphaxat, That which heals, or saves.


Genesis 11. b.
Arphaxat the son of Sem, lived four hundred thirty eight years.

1. Esd. 7. cap.
This was a common name to the Kings of Persia, as Pharao was to the Kings of
Egypt, or Caesar to the Emperors.
Artaxerses, King of Persia, licenced Esdras to take his Companions the children
of Israel with him, 3. Esd. 8. b.
and to depart from Babylon to Jerusalem again, commanding all his Officers
in all places, to aid Esdras, not only with the Kings treasure, but with
whatsoever was needful to him, for the reedifying of the Lords Temple.
Artaxerses, The light, or malediction and curse, He that causes silence: Also
that makes haste or speed: also the earnestness of reioyceyng.


3. Esd. 2. b. d.
Artaxerses, King of Persia, having a sore complaint made unto him by Belemus,
Mithridates, Tabelius, Rathumus, Beeltethmus, and Semellius the Secretary,
with other mo, against the Jews for building of the Temple, wrote to them
again on this wise: I have red the Epistle which ye sent unto me: therefore I
commanded to make diligent search, and have found that this City has ever
resisted Kings: that the same people are disobedient, and have caused much
war, and that mighty Kings have reigned in Jerusalem, which also have raised
up taxes of Celosyria and Phinice, wherefore I have commanded to forbid
those men, that they shall not build up the City, and heed to be taken that
there be no more done in it, and that they proceed no further in those wicked
works, for so much as it might be occasion of trouble unto Princes.

Tit. 3. d.
Artemas, was one of Paul's Disciples, and lay with him at the City of
Nicopole, what time as Paul sent to Crete for Titus to come unto him, but not
before he did send Artemas or Tichicus unto him to tarry in his stead, least
that Crete should be destitute of an ouerfeer.

3. Reg. 15. b.
Asa, was the son of Abia, and began his reign over Judah in the.xx. year of
the reign of Jeroboam. He 3. Par. 13. 2. and 15. cap.
honored God: cleansed his land of whorekeepers, Idols, His mother is called
Maacha, and is taken for his Grandmother.
Images, Groves, and many other Abominations. Yea, he abhorred Idolatry so
much, that he would not suffer it unpunished in his own Mother, but put her
from her estate, because she had made an Idol in the Grove, which he brent,
and cast the ashes into the brook Cedron. And for his upright heart, the Lord
sent peace and quietness in all his land, by the space of ten years: In the
which time of rest, he builded Cities and holds, and made his Realm very
strong. At last, it fortuned the king of Ethiope to come against him with an
host of ten hundredth thousand, and three hundredth Charets, where as the other
had but half so many. Then Asa putting his hope in God, made first his prayers
to him on this wise: O Lord The prayer of Asa.
it is no hard thing with thee, to help either many or few, help us therefore,
O Lord our God, for we trust to thee, and in thy name we go against this
multitude, thou art the Lord our God, and no man shall prevail against thee.
And after he had ended his prayer, he went and joined with his enemies, and the
Lord ouerthrewe them, and left not one undestroyed. After this, it chanced
Baasa 2. Par. 16. ca.
King of Israel to invade him, of whom Asa was so afraid, that he fet out of
the house of the Lord much treasure, and sent it to Benhadad King of Siria,
desiring him to break his league with Baasa, that he might depart out of his
land. And when Baasa had broke up his camp, and was gone to resist Benhadad
(which had got diverse of his Cities in Israel) the Prophet Hanani came to Asa,
and said: Forasmuch as thou have trusted in the King of Siria, and not in the
Lord, therefore is the host of Siria escaped thee. Had not the Black Moors
an exceeding great host? and yet because thou did put thy trust in God,
they were delivered into thy hand. For the the patriarch Aser, with fruit and
wine for sacrifice on an altar in front of a temple. Pingne solum tibi dona
tulit cerealia multa,
Nec Asaro desunt munera bacche tuae*
Regibus hinc prodes multis uinoque paneque:
Temperat a^brosias cum tura dapes
eyes of the Lord beholds all the earth, to strengthen them that are of
perfect heart toward him: And now seeing thou have done so foolishlye, thou
shall from hen^^forth have war. The King hearing Here we see (...) ^^at it is
not (...) ^^ough for a (...) to begin (...), and not continue to (...) end.
this, was sor^ (...) pleased with the Prophet, and (disdayning his adm^^^^on)
sent him to prison. (...) was before incarna^^^n. (...) 973. ye^^ Cooper.
Wherefore the Lord, to p^^ (...) his rebellion, smote him with a disease in
his feet ((...) could not be cured by no Physician) whereof he dyed, after he
had reigned years forty one. Reg 2. d.
(...). 6. c.


(...). 2. c. b.
Asael, was the son of Zernia David's Sister. His brethren were Ioab and
Abisai. This man Asael for his lightness on foot, is compared to a Roe bucke.
Read of his death in the story of Abner. Asael, God has wrought.


Asaph, the son of Barachia, was one of the c^^^^ singers among the Levites,
appointed by David in (...) house of the Lord. Asaph, Gathering.


Ashur, (the father of Thekoa) was the son of Herron, the son of Phares,
the son of Judah. His mothers name was Abia, he had two wives, and by them
Children. 30* b.
(...) 7. g.
(...) 1. f.


Aser, was the son of Jacob. his mothers name was Silpha. His brother of
father and mother was Gad. He had four sons, and one daughter, of whom came
many Noble men and Captains. Aser, Blessedness^*
1. 6. c.
1. b.


Asyncritus, was one of the faithful Congregat^^^ of Christ in Rome, unto
whom (among other) Pa^^ sends salutacions in his Episitle, saying thus,
salute Asyncritus. Asyncritus, Peerless, or without Comparison.


Assure, was the son of Sem. Lyra writes upon Genesisx. That Assure because he
would not rebel against God with Nimroth in the building of the tower of
Babel, fled out of the land of Sinhar into a far Country, where he
inhabited, which Country, took his name of him, and was called Assiria, and
there he builded a City, which afterward was called Niniue. Assure, Blessed,
or Traueyling.


3. Reg. 22. f.
Asuba, was Mother to Iosaphat King of Judah, and 2. Par. 20. g.
daughter to Silhi. Asuba, For saken.


1. Par. 2. c.
Asuba, Wife to Caleb the son of Hesron, bare unto him three sons: Ieser,
Sobab, and Ardon. 4. Reg. 11. ca.


2. Par. 22. ca.
Athalia, was the daughter of Amry, and wife to Ioram King of Judah. When Ioram
dyed, her son Ahaziahu Athalia in the 4. Reg. ca. 8. is called both the
daughter of Achab, and the daughter of Amrye, which (says Lyra) is me^t thus:
After the death of Amry her natural father, she was brought up with Achab her
brother, and so in process called his daughter, or else by immitating his
manners in all kind of Idolatry.
succeeded, whom she entysed to all wickedness, and after his death she
ruled, and killed all the reast of the seed of Ioram, only Ioas excepted,
which was stolen away, and hyd from her. And when she had ruled the land
(most cruelly) vj. year. In the vij. year, Ioas was brought forth by Iehoiada
the Priest, and proclaimed King: She hearing that, ran into the Temple of the
Lord with her clothes rent, crying out treason, treason. But at the
commandment of Iehoiada, the Captains and soldiers took her out of the
Temple, and slew her. Athalia, Time for the Lord.


Azaria, the son 4 Re. 15. a. b
of Amaziahu King of Judah, began his reign in the xxvij. year of Jeroboam King
of Israel, and was xvj. year old when he was made King. And so long as he gave
ear to Zacharias the Prophet, and walked uprightly, so long did the Lord
prosper him, with great victories both of the Philistines and Arabians, and
made the Ammonites also tributories unto him. He Azaria, is in the same chapter
called also Vziah.
repaired Jerusalem. He loved well husbandrye, and had great plenty of Cattle.
At length he became so mighty, that in his strength his heart arose to his
destruction. For in his pride, he went into the Temple of the Lord to burn
incense, which although he seemed to do it of a zeal and good intent, yet
forasmuch as he usurped the Priests office, he was iustlye resisted of Azariahu
the Priest, and plagued of God, who smote him with such a Leprosy, that he
went out of the Temple a Leper, and so remained all the days of his life. He
reigned.lij. years, and was buried in a part of the same field where his
Predecessors lay, but not in the same Sepulchers, because he was a Leper.
Azaria, Help of the Lord.


B.
1. Par. 5. b.
BAal, the son of Reaia was a Prince of the Rubenites, and In the dais of
Pekah, king of Israel. 4. Re. 15. ^
carried away with other his kindred into the land of Assiria, by Thiglath
Pilneser King of the Assirians. Baal, an Idol* or a Ruler.


2. Reg. 4. cap
Baanah, with his brother Rechab (the sons of Rimmon) were two Captains in
the host of Isboseth King of Israel, who (when Abner their chief Captain was
dead) went into the house of Isboseth, seeming (says Lyra) they had gone to
fetch wheat, for the King (says he) had great store of wheat, which he sold
to Merchants a far of, wherefore these two disguysed themselves like
Merchants that came to buy, and so entering into the house, they found where
their Lord and master lay upon his bed (in the heat of the day) fast a
sleep, There is nothing so vile and dangerous which the wicked will not
enterprise, in hope of lucre and favor.
and slew him, and took his head, and carried i^ to David, thinking for the
same to have had a great reward: But for their most shameful and traiterous
act, they were both put to death, and their quarters hanged over the poole in
Hebron. Baanah, In affliction.


3. Reg. 15. f. g 16. a. b.
Baasa, the son of Ahia, conspired against (...) King of Israel, and reigned
in his stead. In the third year of Asa King of Judah, began Baasa to reygne
over Israel, and walked most wickedlye in all the ways of Jeroboam, whose
house and posterity (notwithstanding) God stirred up one tyrant to punish the
wickedness of another.
he utterly destroyed, and left not one alive, for so it was 3. Reg. 14. d.
propheried, that God would stir him up one (which was this Baasa) for that
purpose. And now for as much as Baasa (whom God had exalted even out of the
dust) would still mayntaine Ieroboams ydolatrie, and cause his people to
sin, he sent him word by the Prophet Iehu, that as he had rooted out the
whole posterity of Jeroboam, so should his be served likewise. Great war
was between* Baasa and Asa King of Judah. And for to 2. Par. 16. 2.
stop the passage of Judah, that none should pass out nor in safely, Baasa
went to build a strong hold called Rama, which he was said (at length) to
leave unfinished, and to l^^se all his ^ost and traueyle, to go against
Benhadid, which had broken covenant with him. He reigned.xxiiij. years, and
was buried in Thirza, which was a place where the King remained, leaving Ela
his son to succeed him, in whose days the foresaid Prophecye of the
rooting out his posterity, took place. Baa^a* in folding together, or
pressing together, or to search ou^ and take away.


1. Mac. 7. b. 9. cap.
Bachides, was a man of great power in the dominion of Demetrius the son of
Seleucus. And being the Kings faithful friend, he sent him with a great host
against Judas Machabeus to revenge him of the injury he had done unto his
people and in the end slew him. After whole death* many of the wicked Jews
turned to Bachides, whereof he made some Lords and rulers of the land, which
(of envy) uttered the friends of Judas, and brought them into great veration
and trouble. When Bachides had given this overthrow to Judas, he sought how he
might kill Ionathas also, whom the Jews had (...) in his brothers (...). And
meeting with Ionathas about the border of Jordan, there was a great battle
stricken between them, in the which Bachides lost a thousand of his men.
After which conflict, Bachides (by occasion of Alcimus the wicked Priests
death, departed for that time, so that Ionathas lay at rest two years after,
till a sort of ungodly men conspired against him, how they might bring
Bachides upon him unawares, which matter being between them and him concluded,
Bachides returned with a great power, but or he came, Ionathas had gotten
knowledge of the Treason, and put certain of the chiefest Conspirators to
death. Then, when Bachides came, and had besieged the City of Bethbessen long,
and saw he was not able to resist the power of Ionathas, he was marvelously
displeased with those wicked counsaylers, which had caused him to traueyle in
vain, and made him ready to depart again, whereof Ionathas having knowledge,
he sent Ambassadors to Bachides, to make peace with him, to the which, he
gladly consented, and restored to Ionathas all his prisoners, which he had
taken in the land of Judah, and so returned home, and never vexed Israel more.
Bachides, One that holds of Bacchus, or a drunkerde.


Number. 22. ca.
Balaam, the son of Beor (or Bosor as S. Peter says) was a covetous Prophet,
and (for lucre sake) went to the King of Moab, to curse the host of Israel,
which thing God would not suffer him to do, but turned his curse into a
blessing. Yea, he was so far overcome with covetousness (says S. Peter)
that he could not see his 2. Pet. 2. c.
iniquity, when the tame beast speaking in man's voice, rebuked him, and
forbade his madness. He caused the Number. 31. a.
Israelites through his counsel to commit whoredom with the daughters of
Moab, and to worship Baal Peor their false God, and was slain among the
Madianites, whom Israel s^bd^ed. Balaam, The ancient of the people.


Number. 22. and. 23. cap.
Balac, the son of Ziphor King of Moab, was so afraid of the children of
Israel, which were pitched in the fields of Moab, and all about his country,
that he thought he could never be able to overcome them, unless they were
cursed of God: wherefore he sent for Balaam the Prophet, promising to promote
him to honor and dignity, so that he would come and curse his enemies. And
when the Prophet was come, Balac brought him up to the hye place of Baal, where
he might see and discern the uttermost parts of the Israelites, that he might
be sure to curse them all. But when the Prophet went about his purpose: God
would not suffer him to curse his people, but rather to bless them. Then
said Balac: did not I send for thee to curse this people, and why have thou
blessed them? I told thee (quoth Balaam) that I could speak nothing, but
that which the Lord would have me to speak. Well, said Balac, I will bring
thee where thou shall see but a portion of them, and not all, I pray thee
curse that part for my sake: But notwithstanding, the Prophet blessed them
again. Then said Balac, neither curse them, nor bless them at all. Well yet
quoth Balac, I will bring thee once more to an other The wicked imagine of God,
that that which he will not grant in one place, he will do it in another.
place, peradventure it shall please God thou may curse them there for my
sake: But when he saw in no place the Prophet would curse the people of God,
he took an anger with him, and said: I sent for thee to curse mine enemies,
and thou have blessed them now three times, therefore get thee quickly out of
my sight, for the Lord has kept thee back from promotion, and so he
departed. Balac, Inwrapping, or destroying, or with him that licketh.


Dan. 5. cap.
Balthazar, was the son of Nabuchodonosor, and the last King of Babylon. This
Prince (on a time) made a great banquet to all his Lords and great estates, in
the which he so abused the holy vessels in the Temple of the Lord (which his
father had brought from Jerusalem) making them common vessels for all his
guests to drink in, that God was sore displeased with him. And as he sat at
his banquet, praising his gods of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Stone, and
Wood, he saw the Palm of an hand, write upon the wall before him, which
thing so disquieted him, that all the joints of his body shook. And being in
that great anguishe, he sent for all the charmers and Coniurers in Babylon, to
know the meaning thereof, but none of them all could read it, neither yet
tell what it meant. Then was the King so sore afraid, that his color began to
change, and his body to be sore vexed, for the which, the Lords and all the
estate present, were sore oppressed with heaviness, to see the King in that
case. Then the old She was Nabuchodonosors wife, which for her age, was not
before at the feast, but came thither when she heard these strange news.
Queen his Grandame (hearing of all that was happened) came up to the feast
and cheared the King, bidding him to take no thought for the matter, so long as
Daniel was in his kingdom, send for him (quoth she) and he will tell thee
what the writing means. Then was Daniel sent for. And being come, he told
the King, that forasmuch as he neither remembered the fall of his father, who
for his pride and hie stomach, was turned from the shape of a man to the shape
of a beast for certain years, neither would submit his heart, but magnify
himself above the Lord of heaven, and had abused the vessels of the house of
God, and set his love upon Idols (which neither heard, saw, nor understood)
more than upon God, in whose hand consists thy breath and all thy ways,
therefore had God sent this hand, in token of his great displeasure toward
him. And these be the words (said Daniel to the King) which the hand has
written: Mane: Thetel: Phares. And this is the meaning: Mane, God has numbered
thy kingdom, and brought it to an end. Thetel, Thou art weyed in the
Balaunce, and art found to light. Phares, Thy kingdom is dealt in parts, and
given to the Medes and Perses. And the same night was Balthazar slain, and his
kingdom removed to Darius king of Medea, whose sister was Balthasars mother.
Balthazar, Without Treasure, or searcher of Treasure.


Balthemus, or Beeltethmus, look Belemus.

2. Reg. 8. d. 20. g.
Banaiah, or Bananiahu, the son of Iehoiada was a valiant man, and ruler over
the The Cherethites and Pelethites, were as the Kings guard, and had charge of
his person.
Cherethites and Pelethites. 3. Reg. 2. d. e. f
He slew two strong men in the Country of Moab, and slew a Lion in the midst
of a pyt, in the time of snow. He fought also with an Egyptian (whose spear
was like a Weauers beam) and slew him with his own weapon. And for these
Acts and such like, he gate him a name among the Worthies. He was one of
David's Counsaylers, and proclaimed Solomon King, at David's commandment. He
slew Adoniah at Salomons commandment, and also Ioab, into whose rowme he was
promoted. Banaiah, in the answer in afflliction, or in the song.


Act. 4. g.
Barnabas, (called also Ioses) was a Leuite, borne in the Country of Cypers,
who of a liberal mind, sold his land in Cypers, and brought the whole price
thereof, and laid it down at the Apostles feet, with whom he was of such
credit, that when he brought Paul unto Act. 9. c.
them (after his conversion) and declared how boldly he had done at Damascus
in the name of Jesus, they received him as a brother, of whom before they were
afraid. This man being full of the holy ghost and faith, was sent 11. d.
to Antioch to preach, and to stablish them in the faith of Christ. From thence
he departed to Tharsus to seek Saul, and brought him to Antioch, where they
two continued togithers one year. And because of a great dearth which was
prophesied to be thoroweout all the world, the Antiochians made a collection
for the poor brethren in Iewrie, which they sent by the hands of Barnabas and
Paul, at whose return to Antioch again, they brought a Disciple with them
called John Mark. After 13. a.
this (by the mind of the holy Ghost) they were sent to preach among the
Heathen, where (by the power of God) they did woonders, and turned many to
Christ. And being taken (at Lystra) for Gods, because (God working 14. b. c.
in them) they had made a lame man to go, they rent their clothes, and would
not suffer themselves to be called by that name. Finallye, when Barnabas and
Paul had 15. f. g.
been long Companions together and workers in the Lords vineyarde, they
chanced to fall at variance, for one John Mark, who had been their Minister
before: And because Barnabas would now in this journey, (going to visit their
brethren again) have had him with them, and Paul refused him, because he
forsook them at Pamphilia, the dissencion was so sharp, that the one brake
from the other. And so Barnabas took Mark with him, and sailed into Cypers,
his own natyue Country. Barnabas, the Son of Consolation.


Math. 27. b.
Barrabas, was a notable robber, which for a certain insurrection he had made,
and in the same committed Mar. 15. a.
murder, was cast in prison. It was a custom among Luke. 23. c.
John. 18. g.
the Jews, to have a prisoner delivered unto them at the feast of Easter:
wherefore when Pilate sat in judgment upon Jesus, he asked of the Jews
whether they would have Barrabas or Jesus: and they (by the counsel of the
great Priests) said, Barrabas. And so was the thief and murderer delivered,
and the innocent put to death. Barrabas, the Son of Confusion.


Act. 1. d.
Barsabas, (surnamed Iustus) was one of the two Disciples appointed to be
chosen in the rowme of Judas the Apostle. And when the lottes were cast, the
lot fell on Mathias his fellow. Barsabas, the Son of Returning* or of
Converting.


Math. 10. a.
Barthelmew, was one of the twelve Apostles. Barthelmew, the Son of him that
suspendeth waters. Mar. 3. b.
Luke 6. b.



Mar. 10. g.
*Bartimeus, the son of Timeus, was a certain blind beggar, which sat
begging by the hye ways side, *The other Evangelists mention two, but Mark
names him yt was most known.
of the people as they went by: And when he heard Jesus of Nazareth pass that
way, he began to cry and say: Jesus the son of David have mercy upon me,
and the people rebuked him to hold his peace, but the more he was rebuked, the
more he cried. Then being called and comforted of the Apostles, he threw away
his cloak for joy, and came to Jesus, who demanded of him what he would have
him to do: Master, said he, that I may have my sight and see. Go thy way
(said Jesus) thy faith has saved thee, and by and by, this blind Bartimeus
received his sight and followed Jesus. Bartimeus, a Blind son: or the son
of blindness.


Iere. 36. cap.
Baruch, the son of Neriah, wrote in a book (at the mouth of Jeremy the
Prophet, as he did indite) all the curses against Judah and Israel, which book
he read first to the Common people, and after to the Rulers, who being astonished
at the words thereof, caused Baruch to hide * The godly among the Princes
gave this counsel.
himself out of the way, till they had showed the book unto Ieohakim the
King, who (when he had heard three or four leaves thereof, caused the book
to be cut in pieces, (notwithstanding the great entreaty that certain of his
Lords made for the preservation of the same) and cast in the fire and brent.
Then Baruch wrote another book at the mouth of Jeremy, wherein was much more
added than was before. Baruch, Blessed.


Genesis 22. d. 28. a.
Bathuel, was the son of Nahor, his mothers name was Milca, the daughter of
Aran, brother to Nahor and Abraham. This Bathuel, was Father to Rebecca and
Laban. Bathuel, the Son begetting of God, the Measure of God.


Genesis 36. d.
Bela, the son of Beor reigned in Edem, after whose death, Iobab the son of
Serah succeeded him. 1. Par. 1. d.
Bela, Swalowing down, or destroying.


Number. 26. c*
Bela, the son of Benjamin, whose sons were, Ard and Naaman, and in the
first book of Chronicles 7. b. These are said to be the sons of Bela:
Ozban, Ozi, Oziel, Ierimoth and Iri. And in the. 8. chapter, these: Adar, Gera,
Abiud.

3. Esd. 2. c.
Belemus, Mithridates, Tabelius, Rathunius, Beeltethmus, and Semellius the
Secretary, with other mo, wrote a sore complaint to Artaxerses King of Persia
against the Jews, which were a building of the temple at Jerusalem, through
the which, they were commanded to cease, and to build no more. Read
Artaxerses and Rathumus.

3. Reg. 15. d.
Benhadad, the son of Tabrimon King of Siria, made a covenant with Baasa King
of Israel, which (for lucre sake) he brake at the request of Asa King of Judah,
and turned his host against the Cities of Israel, to the great displeasure of
Baasa. This Benhadad was a mighty Prince, and glorying much in his own power,
sent messengers to Achab king of Israel, commanding him to send his Silver,
Gold, Wives, Children, and all that he had unto him, and else he would come
and destroy him, which thing being denied him, he came against Achab
with.xxxij. Kings in his company, and besieged him in Samaria. And while he
trusted to much in his great strength and multitude, and was banketting with
the Kings that came with him in their pauilions, without any regard of the
small power of the Israelites, the host of Samaria issued sodeinly out of the
City, and came so courageously against the Sirians, that they put them all to
flight, and slew a great number of them. Then the Sirians which were escaped,
said to Benhadad: The Gods of the hills be their Gods, and therefore have
they now gotten the better of us? But let us fight once more with them in the
plain, and thou shall see us have the better of them. Then Benhadad gathered
his host together, so many as filled the whole Country, and Israel pitched
before them like two little flocks of Kiddes, and so stood the two hosts one
against the other.vij. days, and in the seventh day, they joined battle, in
the which, an hundred thousand of the Sirians were slain, and the rest fled to
the City of Aphek, where they began to make a wall without the City for their
defense, which building fell upon them, and killed.xxvij. thousand mo, whereof
the King was in such a fear, that he fled from chamber to chamber, to find
out a secret place, to hyde himself in, to whom his servants went, and
said: O King, we have heard say, that the Kings of Israel be merciful Kings,
let us therefore put sackcloth about our loins, and ropes about our necks,
and go and humble our selves before Achab, and see if he will save thy life.
Benhadad did so, and was pardoned, and never troubled Israel more in Achabs
days. But afterward in another Kings days, he came again, and besieged
Samaria so long, till an Asses head was sold forfoure score silver pence. And
the fourth part of a cab of Dooues dung for five sicles, and till women were
constrained to eat their own children. Finally, Benhadad fell sick, and sent
his servant Hasael to Elizcus the Prophet (which was come to Damasco) to know
whether he should recover his disease or no, and having his answer of the
Prophet, he returned and slew his Master Benhadad, as in the story of Hazael
ye shall see the patriarch Benjamin with a ewe and dead lamb, in front of farm
buildings. Sum natu minimus Beniaminus ex Cananea
Matter in enixu est morte perempta
Me scriptura Lupu^ natu^ consumere proeda^
In matutino tempore uera uocat
how. Benhadad, the Son of a Sound, or of Noise and Crying.


Benjamin, was the yoongest son of Jacob, Genesis 35. c.
his mother was Rachel, who dyed in traueyle, and therefore Of the sonns of
Benjamin, Read Gene. 46. c. 1. Par. 7. b. 8. a.
called his name Benoni, the son of sorrow: But Jacob his father called him
Benjamin, son of the right hand. His brothers name (of father and mother)
was Joseph, who loved Benjamin, above all the reast of his other brethren, as
in his story appears. Benjamin, Son of the right hand.


Act. 13. b.
Beriesus, (which by interpretacion is as much to say, as the son of Jesus)
was a Jew borne, and a great sorcerer, which name he had taken upon him, to
deceive the people, where as his right name was Elymas, which word in the
Sirians language, betokens an Enchaunter, and a false Prophet also. This
false Sorcerer was got into the City of Paphos, and there being crept into
favor with Sergius Paulus, Ruler of the Country, wythstoode the doctrine of
Barnabas and Paul, seeking by all means to turn the Rulers heart from the
says in Christ. But Paul (being full of the holy ghost) perceiving the
deuilishe and subtle craft of this sorcerer, looked steadfastly upon him and
said: O full of all subtlety and mischief, the child of the Devil, and
enemy of all righteousness, wylt thou not cease to pervert the straight ways
of the Lord: Now therefore behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and
thou shall be blind, and not able to see the Sun for a season. And when
Paul had pronounced these words, the Enchaunter was stricken with
blyndenesse, so that he (as one amazed) wandered up and down, seeking for some
man to lead him by the hand. Beriesus, an Ensorcerer, or Coniurer.


2. Reg. 17. g.
Berzelai, was a Gileadite borne, who considered the necessity of David so
much, being fl^dde out of his own Realm, for fear of his own son Absalon,
into the wilderness of Mahanaim, that he brought all things necessary for
^eddes, meat, drink, and cloth (out of Roglim) to refreshe him and his men,
and provided so for him, all the while he lay there, that he lacked nothing,
and at his return again, he holped also, to convey both the King and all his
men over Jordan. Then David seeing the great kyndenesse of Berzelai, was much
desirous to have him home with him to Jerusalem, promising that all the days
of his life, he should eat and drink with him at his own boorde, and fare
no worse than he fared, to whom Berzelai (being a very old man) said: O my
Lord, I am a man of four score years of age, and cannot discern between
good and evil, neither yet taste any thing that I do eat or drink, wherefore
if I should then go with my Lord the King, I should be but a burden unto
him: Therefore I beseech thee, let thy servant turn back again, that I may
die in mine own country, and be buried in the grave of my father: But here is
thy servant Chimeam my son, let him go with my Lord, and do unto him
whatsoever it shall please thee. And so David and Berzelai kissed each other,
and departed, but Chimeam went with David, who did not only recompense his
fathers kyndenesse in him so long as he lived, but at the day of his death,
declared to Solomon his son, the great fidelity he had found with Berzelai
in the time of his exyle, charging him therefore to show no less favor to
the sons of Berzelai (for their fathers sake) than ever he himself had done.
Berzelai, Made of iron, or as hard as iron.


2. Reg. 11. ca.
Bethsabe, was the daughter of Eliam, and wife to Urias, which was with Ioab in
the Kings wars. On a time as Bethsabe was washing her self in her priuye
garden alone. It chanced King David to look out at a window in his palace,
and saw her, whose bewty so ravished the King, that (forthwithall) he sent for
the woman, and committed adultery with her, and so sent her home again. Then
(shortly after) she perceiving her self with child, sent the King word
thereof, who then, partly to hide his own fault, and partly to save the woman
from danger of the law, sent for Urias to come home. But when David saw that
Urias would not company with his wife Bethsabe, he returned him back again
to Ioab with a letter, which caused Urias quickly to be dispatched out of his
life, after whose death, Bethsabe became David's wife, and brought forth the
child conceived in adultery, which lived not long, but dyed. After that, she
12. f.
conceived again, and brought forth Solomon. Lastly, when David was fallen
into extreme age, and that she saw Adonia the son of Agith begin to aspire to
the kingdom of his father yet living, she went (by the counsel of Nathan the
Prophet, who had taught her her lesson) unto David her husband. And making her
humble obeisance unto the King as he sat in his Chamber, and Abisag the
Sunamite ministering unto him, he said unto her, what is the matter? She
answered, my Lord, thou swarest by the Lord thy God unto thine handmayde,
saying assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon
my seat. And behold, now is Adonia King, and thou my Lord the king know it
not. He has offered Oxen, fat Cattle, and many sheep, and has called all the
Kings sons, and Abiathar the Priest, and Ioab the Captain of the host: But
Solomon thy servant has he not bidden. And now my Lord, O King, the eyes of
all Israel wait on thee, that thou should tell them who ought to sit on
the seat of my Lord the King after him: for else when my Lord the King shall
sleep with his fathers, I and my son Solomon shall be sinners. The Queen
had no sooner ended her tale, but the Prophet Nathan came and confirmed her
words. Whereupon the King assured Bethsabe, that Solomon her son should be
that day proclaimed to reign in his stead. The Queen then humbling her
self with thanks, desired of God that her Lord King David might live for
ever. Look more in the history of Adonia. Bethsabe, The seventh daughter, or
the daughter of an Oath.


Exo. 31. a. 35. d. 36. 37. and 38. cap.
Bezaleel, the son of Uri of the Tribe of Judah, and Ahaliab of the Tribe of
Dan, were two cunning workmen, most specially endued with the spirit of God,
to work all manner curious work that was to be wrought in Gold, Silver,
Brass, Wood, Stone, or with Needle work, so that by these two, the
Tabernacle of witness, with all things pertaining thereunto, was most
artificially made. Bezaleel, in the shadow of God.


Genesis 29. f. 30. a. 35. d.
Bilha, was a young Damsel, which served Laban the father of Rachel, and when
Rachel should be married to Jacob, Laban gave Bilha his maid, to Rachel his
daughter to be h^^ servant. And when Rachel perceived she could b^^re Jacob
no children, she gave Bilha her maid unto him to be his wife, who conceived by
Jacob, and brought him forth two sons, the one Dan, and the other Nephtaly.
Bilha, Old, or fading


Genesis 14. a. b.
Birsa, was one of the four Kings that fought against five other Kings in the
vale of Siddim. Birsa, in Evil, or in iniquity, or condemned, or a son that
looks back.


Read Arioch.

Ruth. 2. 3. 4.
Boos, the son of Solomon, was a great rich man, dwelling in a City called
Bethleem, within the land of Judah. Who on a time going to the fields to look
upon his Reapers, and finding there a young Damsel a leasing, demanded of his
workmen* what she was: To whom answer was made, she was a stranger come
with Naomie out of the Country of Moab. Then went Boos to the Maid and said:
hear thou my daughter? Here is a notable example for all rich Farmers which
be so unmerciful, y^ they will not suffer their needy neighbor to lease in
their ground whereas Boos was so merciful to this stranger, whose nation were
enemies to gods people.
go to no other field a leasing (I charge thee) so long as Harvest time
endures, but to mine: tarry here by my Maidens, and gather as much as thou will, and spare not, for no man shall let thee, neither yet hurt thee. And when
thou art hungry and a thirst, go with my Maidens, and eat and drink such as
they have, for they shall not deny thee. And so departing from her, he went to
his men servants, commanding them to entreat her gentlye, and to leave some
sheaues on the ground (for the nonce) for her to take up without shame. Now
after this, it chanced Boos to have knowledge, that this young Damsel was his
kinsewoman, and that it was his lot to marry her, which he was well content to
do, considering her to be a woman of good report, and of much virtue. But yet,
for as much as he knew another to be more near of kin to her than he, he
could not defraude him of his right: therefore to know what he would do in
this matter, he went and called his kinseman before the Congregation, and
said: Sir, we have here a kinswoman lately returned out of the land of Moab,
one Naomie, and she will sell a piece of land, which was our brother
Elimelechs: If thou be disposed to buie it, do: if not, then tell me, for
there is none to challenge it, save thou, and I next unto thee. Then said he
to Boos, I will purchase it. Well (said Boos) look what day thou buyest the
land of Naomie, thou must also take He would have the land, but not the woman.
Ruthe the Moabite to wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his
enheritance. Then he (reuoking his word again) said that he could not
purchase it, for marring of his own inheritance. Therefore take thou my right,
and purchase it, and so drew of his The manner of purchasing*
shoe, and gave it to Boos, for that was the custom of old in Israel,
concerning purchasing and changing of inheritance, to pluck of his shoe,
and give it to his neighbor, in witness that the thing between them, was
truly bought and sold. Then Boos having his kinsemans shoe, said unto the
people: ye are witnesses all this day that I have bought all that was
Elimelechs, and all that pertayned to his two sons Chilion, perfect, or all
like a Dove.
Chilion and Mahlon of the hand of Naomie, and also have purchased Ruth the
Moabite, the late wife of Mahlon to be my wife, to stir up the name of the
dead upon his inheritance, that his name be not put out among his brethren:
And all the people witnessed the same, praying unto the Lord for Ruth, to make
her as fruitful, as he did both Rachel, Lea, and Thamar. And so Boos married
Ruth, who in process conceived, and bare him a Son called Obed. Boos, in
Power, or strength.


C.
Exodus 6. c. 1. Par. 6. a.
CAath, was the son of Leuy, and had four sons, whereof the eldest was
Amram, the father of Moses and Aaron. He lived. 133. years. Caath, A
Congregation.


Gene. 4. a. b.
Cain, was the first son that Adam and Eve brought forth between them, and
of an unhappy disposition, given to all ungraciousness. He was the first
tyller of the ground, and would always offer the woorst and the vilest of
the fruits of the earth unto God. Wherefore the Lord had no respect to his
offering. And because God preferred his brother Abels offering before his, he
was so stirred with malice and envy against him, that he fell upon him in the
fields and slew him. Wherefore the Lord promised to withdraw the increase of
the ground from Cain, and so being in desperation, he wandered about like a
vagabonde in every corner, with much fear and treambling, least any man
should kill him, and at last Lyra says, that as Lamech was hu^ting in y^
fields, his servant spyed Cain where he lay hid in a bush, and (thinking it
had been a beast) pointed his master unto him, who shot of his Arow, and slew
him.
Lamech slew him. Cain, A possession.


John. 18. cap.
Caiphas, was son in law to Annas, and the hye Bishop in the time of
Christ's apprehension, of whom he prophesied, that it was expedient for one
man to dye, rather than all the people should perish. Which thing he spoke
not of himself, but God made him (at that time) even as he made Balaam, to be
an instrument of the holy ghost. And Christ being sent from Annas to him
(bound) to be examined, was so carried from him to Pilate, that he by the
Temporal laws might judge him to death. Caiphas, a Searcher.


Number. 13. and 14. cap.
Caleb, was the son of Iephun (otherwise called Kenes) of the Tribe of Judah,
and one of those whom Moses sent out to search the land of Canaan, what manner
of Country it was, at the which time of going out, he was about the age of.xl.
years. And when he and his company had vewed the land, and were returned home
again, certain of the explorators made an evil report to their brethren of
that good land, saying it was a country of strong and fierce people, and such
a land as did eat up the inhabiters thereof, and with like persuasions made
them both astonished and afraid, and to murmur and grudge against Moses and
Aaron, saying they would make them a Captain, and go into Egypt again. Then
Caleb and Joshua, seeing their brethren so discomfited, rent their clothes for
sorrow, and said: Oh dear brethren, be ye not discouraged at these false
surmised tales, neither yet rebel against the Lord, for we have seen the
land as well as they that have discouraged you, and know it to be a better
land than they report, a land that flows with milk and honey: And as for
the people therein, fear them not, for they be but bread for us, their
shield is departed from them, and God is with us, therefore pluck up your
hearts, and fear not. With these, and the like comfortable sayings, Caleb and
Joshua withdrew the fury of the multitude (which were ready to destroy them)
and also ceased their murmuring, which murmuration of the people so gricued the
Lord, that he swore to Moses, that not one of them all should see that good
land, save Caleb and Joshua, although their children should see it: But first
(said God to Moses) they shall wander in the wilderness forty years, and
suffer for their fathers Which is their in^idelitie and disobedience.
whoredom, until their fathers carcasses be wasted, a year for a day,
according to the number of days in searching the land, which was forty
days. And because Caleb followed the Lord continually, God swore to Moses,
that Caleb and his seed should inherit that land, which came so to pass,
for after.xlv. years, Caleb (then being at the age of.lxxxv. years, Joshua. 14.
b.
and as lusty as he was when Moses sent him first to search the land) required
of Joshua his heritage, who appointed out unto him, the City of Hebron with the
Countries thereabout, out of the which City, he drove out the three sons of
Enach. This Caleb had a younger Joshua. 15. c.
brother called Othoniel, to whom he gave his daughter Iudic. 1. c.
Acsah to wife, for taking of a certain City called Kariasepher. Caleb, as a
Heart.


2. Tim. 4. c.
Carpus, was a certain godly man dwelling at Croada, with whom Paul left
his Cloak with certain books, which he desired Timothy to bring with him,
when he came to him again. Carpus, Fruit, or fruitful.


1. Mac. 15. g. ^6. 2.
Cendebius, was Captain General of Antiochus host. And when he had done much
harm in the land of Iewrie, and builded up Cedron, and fortified it with
men of war, he was (at the last) by the sons of Simon discomfited, and put
to flight. Cendebius, Zeal, or the possession of sorrow, or grief.


2. Mac. 10. f.
Cereas, was brother to Timotheus, and Captain of a strong Castle called
Gazar, into the which, Timotheus (being overcome of Judas Machabeus) was feign
to fly for succor, Now Cereas and they that were with him in the Forte,
trusted so much to the strength of the place, that they fell to railing and
cursing of their enemies without, who (notwithstanding) set so manfully upon
the hold, that (at last) they wanne it, and took the blasphemers, and burnt
them quick, and slew this Cereas and his brother Timotheus, with another
famous Captain called Appollophanes. Cereas, Glad, or rejoicing.


Cetura, look Ketura.

Chodorlaomor, look Kedorlaomor.

1. Reg. 9. ^.
Cis, was the son of Abiel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, and father to King
Saul* Whose Asses (on a time) being strayed abroad, he said unto Saul his
Son: Take one of the Laddes with thee, and go and seek out mine Asses that
are lost. This Cis is called also, the son of Ner. 1. Par. 8. c. Cis, Hard,
or stubble, or a place where Cucumbers are.


1. Par. 8. c. 9 g
Cis, the son of Abi Gibeon, his mother was called Maacah.

1. Par. 23. c.
Cis, the son of Mahly, son to Merari. His brothers name was Eleazar. Whose
daughters (he being dead) the sons of this Cis took to their Wives.

2. Tim. 4. d.
Claudia, was a certain godly brother, who being with Paul at Rome, sent (as
other mo did) greetings to Timothy in Paul's letter. Claudia, a Proper name.


Act. 11. d.
Claudius, was an Emperor, in whose time (the * He was poisoned of of his
wife Agripina, y^ Nero her son might succeed in y^ Empire. Cooper.
fourth year of his reygne) was a great dearth thor^^ out all the world,
whereof Agabus the Prophet, proph^cied aforehande. Claudius, a proper name.


Cleopatra, the 1. Mac. 10. f. 11. b.
daughter of King Ptolomie, was married to Alexander the son of noble
Antiochus. And again (for displeasure) taken from Alexander her lawful
husband, and given to Demetrius the son of Demetrius. Cleopatra, the Glory
of the Country.


Luke. 24. b. c
Cleophas, was the husband of Mary, sister to Mary the mother of Christ, and
one of the two Disciples, which (after the death of Christ) went to the town
of Emaus talking and reasoning togithers of all things that had happened to
Jesus: and as they were reasoning the matter, Jesus joined himself personally
with them, as a wayfayring man, desirous to know whereof they talked so sadly:
To whom Cleophas made answer, and said, art thou only a stranger in
Jerusalem, and have not known the things which have chanced there of late*
of what things said Jesus* Of one Jesus of Nazareth which was a Prophet
mighty in deed and word, before* God and all the people, and how the hye
Priest, and our Rulers, delivered him to be condemned to death, and have
crucified him, but we trusted that it had been he that should have delivered
Israel: and as touching all They understood not yet, what was ye deliverance
that Jesus Christ purchased for us.
these things, to day is even the third day that they were done. Then Jesus
opened the Scriptures to Cleophas and the other, and being known of them (at
the last) by breaking of bread, they returned to the Apostles at Jerusalem,
and told them all what they had heard and seen of Jesus, by the way to
Emaus. Cleophas, All manner of glory.


Philip. 4. ^.
Clement, was one of Paul's labor fellows in the Gospel among the
Philippians, as Paul himself reports, saying: And I beseech the faithful
yokefellow, help the women which labored with me in the Gospel, with
Clement also, and with other my labor fellows, whose names are in the book
of life. Clement. Meek.


2. Tim. 4. b.
Crescens, what time as Paul sent for Timothy, was departed from Rome into
Galatia for business he had there, whereof he certifieth Timothy, saying:
Crescens is gone to Galatia and Titus unto Dalmatia. Crescens. a Latin word,
Increasing.


Acts. 18. b.
Crispus, the chief ruler of the Synagoge at Corinth, after he had heard
Paul's preaching, believed in the Lord, he and all his householde, and were
Christened in the name of Christ Jesus. Crispus. a Latin word, Curled or
Crisped.


Acts. 10. cap.
Cornelius, was an heathen man dwelling in Cesarea, and a Captain over a band
of men which were in Italy. This man notwithstanding he was a Gentile borne,
and in office a man of Arms, yet he was a good liver and feared God, as it
well appeared, chiefly in two points, which was in liberally refreshing the
poor and needy, and his continual praying unto the Lord. In the which prayer
as he was (on a time) occupied about the ninth hour of the day (which was a
little before Supper time) he saw in a vision an Angel of God coming to him,
and calling him by his name, saying: Cornelius, thy prayers and thine Alms
deeds are come up into remembrance before God, wherefore send to Ioppa for
one Simon whose Surname is Peter, he lodges with one Simon a Tanner, whose
house joins upon the Sea side, and he shall tell thee what thou ought to
do. Then Cornelius sent for Peter, against whose coming he had called
togithers all his kinsmen and special friends. And when Peter was come,
Cornelius met him and fell down at his feet to worship him, which thing
Peter would not suffer, forasmuch as he was but a man as Cornelius was. And so
going in with him, he found a great company gathered togithers, unto whom he
said: Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew
borne, to company or come to one that is of an other nation: But God has
showed me, that I should not make any man common or unclean. Therefore came I
unto you without saying nay, as soon as I was sent for. I ask therefore, for
what intent have ye sent for me? Then Cornelius said: Four days ago, and
even about this same hour I fasted, and at the ninth hour I prayed in my
house, and behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing and said:
Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine Alms deeds are had in remembrance
in the sight of God, send therefore to Ioppa, and call for Simon whose Surname
is Peter, he is lodged in the house of one Simon a Tanner by the Sea side, the
which, as soon as he is come shall speak unto thee. Then sent I for thee
immediately, and thou have well done for to come: Now therefore are we all here
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded unto thee. Then
Peter preached the word of God unto them, and while he was yet preaching, the
holy Ghost fell upon them all, so that in the end, Cornelius with all his
Company there present, were Baptized in the name of Christ Jesus. Cornelius. a
Proper name.


Number. 16. cap.
Chore, was the son of Iezchar, the son of Caath, the son of Lenie. This
Chore of a stout and proud heart, envied and detested Moses the true servant
of God, and raised up a sedicion against him and Aaron, having with him Dathan,
Abiran and On: Three great Captains, beside. 250. other noble men that took
his part, which insurrection by the power of man was vnsuppressable. But
almighty God caused the earth to open, and swallow them up, with their Wives,
Children, and all their substance.

This is the exposition of a certain learned man named Richard Turner
Bacheler of Divinity, and Reader in the College of Windsore, in the days of
king Edward the sixth.
Here is a question to be moved: If all the substance of Chore with his wife
and children were swallowed up of the earth with them? How can that be true
which is written in the title of the. 41. Psalm, that the children of Chore
were either the makers, or the singers, or the setters forth of that godly
Psalm. Answer is made Numeri. 26. where it is written, that when Chore was
swallowed up of the earth, God miraculously preserved certain of his children,
of whose offspring there came very excellent learned and notable wise men, and
specially these four. Ethan 3. Reg. 4. d.
the Ezrachite, to weete, that was borne in the town called Ezrachi, Heman,
Calcal and Darda, which four so far excelled all other in wisdom and
learning, that the wisdom of Solomon was compared to be as great as theirs.
These four are called the children of Chore, not that they were the natural
children of Chore, but that they came of the offspring of the children of Chore,
which God had miraculously preserved from the great gulf and gaping of the
earth. For it is well known that Chore lived in Moses time, against whom he
was the chief in stirring up of rebellion against him. Again, Ethan, Heman,
Calcal and Darda lived and flourished in Salomons time, which was. 480. years
(or therabout) after that Chore was killed. So that these men could not be the
natural children of Chore, but are called his children and his sons, because
they came of his progenic and offspring. Chore, Balde, or baldenesses Ice or
frost.


1. Esd. 1. d.
Cirus, King of Persia (in the first year of his reign) delivered the people
of Israel out of captivity, and gave them liberty to go and build the Cyrus
being insatiable in couetinge countries, was slain of Tomiris queen of
Scitia, with. 200000 Persians, who caused his head to be cut of, and cast into
a Vessel of blood, saying: satisfy thy self with blood, which thou have
always thirsted. Lanquet.
City of Jerusalem, and the Temple of God again (which Nabuchodonosor had
destroyed) and sent with them all the vessels of gold and silver pertaining to
the house of the Lord, which were in number. 5400. And the number of the whole
congregation that returned from the captivity of Babylon, were.xlij.
thousand, three hundredth, and three score, beside their servants and Maidens,
which were 6337. and among them also, were 200. singing men and women. And of
this Cyrus it was prophesied by the Prophet Esaye, long before Cyrus was borne,
that he should deliver the children of Israel out of captivity. Cyrus, as it
were a miserable man: or as it were an heir, a belly.


Chusan Risathaim, was Iudic. 3. b.
king of Mesopotamia, into whose hand God delivered the Children of Israel,
because they turned from him to serve strange Gods, which King kept them in
bondage eight years, till at last (they crying to the Lord for help) God
raised up Othoniel, which delivered them out of his hands. Chusan Risathaim,
Seeing, or prophesying.


Iudic. 16. b. c. b.
Dalila, was the wife of Samson, who (through the persuasions of the
Philistines) flattered him so long, until she had got knowledge where all his
strength lay: that known, she so dallyed with him that he laying down his
head upon her lap, and there falling a sleep, she caused the hear of his
head to be shaven off, and so betrayed him to the Philistines. Dalila, a
Bucket, or Consumer.


Act. 17. g.
Damaris, was a certain godly woman, dwelling at the City of Athens, who
(among other) Paul converted. Damaris, a little wife.


Genesis 30. 2.
Dan, was the son of Jacob, borne him of Bilha Rachels maid. His brothers
name (of father and mother) was Nephtaly. Jacob before his death, prophesied of
him, saying: Dan shall judge his people, as one of the 49. c.
Tribes of Israel. Dan shall be a serpent by the way, and an Adder by the path,
biting the horse heels, so that his Rider shall fall backewarde. O Lord, I
have waited Number. 1. f.
for thy salvation. The generation of the Danites grew to such a number, that
the portion which Joshua gave them, was not sufficient for all their Tribe,
wherefore they went out to seek them an inheritance to dwell in: And coming
to the quiet City of Lais (which mystrusted Joshua. 19. d.
nothing) they fell upon it, killed the people, and Iudic. 18. cap.
brent the City. And in the place thereof, they builded themselves another
City, and called it Dan. And set up the Idols therein, which they had taken
from Micah, and worshipped them, and so continued in their ydolatrie, till the
Ark of God was taken. 1. Reg. 4. Dan, Judging, or judgment.


Dan. 1. cap.
Daniel, was an holy Prophet of the Tribe of Judah, who being a welfauoured
young springalde, and of good erudition, was (among other of the children of
Israel) brought to Babylon, and there found at the Kings charges to learning,
and to profit in the Chaldeys tongue, and for the better nourishing and
bringing up of these young striplings, he appointed to them (for three years
space) a portion of his own meat every day, and of his own Wine which he
drank, to the intent, that by their good entreaty and learning of his religion,
they might rather favor him than the Jews, and to be able to serve him as
governors in their land. But Daniel being determined in his heart, that he
would not defile himself with the Kings meat and drink, desired his keeper
that he, and his three companions, to wit, Ananias, Misael, and Azarias, might
not defyle themselves, but that he would give them nothing else but Pulse to
eat, and water to drink, which thing he was afraid to do, least when the
King should call them before him, they might seem in woorser lyking than the
rest of their fellows, and so he to be in danger of his life. Well, said
Daniel, prove thy servant for ten days. Then the Keeper (whose heart God
had moved to favor Daniel) proved them ten days, and when he saw them
fatter in flesh, and in better lyking than the other, he took away their
portion of meat, and served them daily with Pulse and water. And to these, God
gave great knowledge and understanding in all learning and wisdom: But to
Daniel only, he gave the gift of Prophesying, and opening of visions and
dreams. Now when the time was expired, that all the children whom the King
had so long nourished, should be brought before him, he found Daniel and his
three associates in matters of wisdom and understanding that he required of
them, ten times better than all the learned men of his Realm, so that the King
had Danyel in great estimacion. After this, Daniel expounded the Kings
dreams, and showed him the true interpretacion and meaning thereof (which none
of the Chaldeans could do) for the which the King rewarded him with great
gifts, and made him governor over the whole Province of Babylon, wherewyth,
the other Princes and Rulers were sore offended, and sought occasion against
him concerning the kingdom, but Daniel was so faithful and upright in all the
Kings matters, that they confessed, and said: We shall find no occasion
against this Daniel, except it be concerning the law of his God: Therefore let
us persuade the king to make a decree, that whosoever shall ask a peticion of
any god or man for thirty days, save only of the King, the same to be cast
into the den of Lions. And when the King had consented to this wicked decree,
and sealed the writing, Daniel (that all men might see, that he would neither
consent in heart nor deed for these few days, to any thing that was
contrary to Gods glory) went home to his house, and set open the wyndowe of
his Chamber toward Jerusalem, and fell down upon his knees to give thanckes
and praise unto God, as his custom was three times a day to do. And thus
making his prayers and supplication to his God, his adversaries came upon him
and found him a work whereupon they went to the king and said: have thou not
sealed the decree, that whosoever shall make request to any God or man within
thirty days save to thee (O King) shall be cast into the den of Lions. True
it is quoth the king, and it cannot be broken. Then said they: This Daniel one
of thy prisoners of Judah, regards neither thee nor yet thy statute, but
makes his peticion thrice a day unto his god. When the King heard this, he was
sore displeased in himself, and sought by all means to have excused Daniel,
and when he saw no entreaty would serve, nor no way be found to alter the
law, he suffered Daniel to be cast down to the Lions, which were seven in
number, and were kept fasting that day from their ordinary diet, to the
intent they should have devoured Daniel: But God had so stopped the mouths
and fury of the Lions, that they did him no harm, and least he should perish
there for hunger, God sent his Prophet Abacucke with meat and drink to feed
him, and also moved the kings heart to take such care for Daniel, that the
seventh day after, he went to the den to see if he were a live or dead, and
finding him not perished, but whole and sound, he rejoiced greatly, and caused
Daniel to be taken out, and his accusers with their wives and children cast
down among the fierce greedy Lions*, who tore them all in pieces before they
came at the ground. Thus being delivered, he afterward prophesied of the
coming of Christ, and of the Empire of Babylon, Medea, Persia, Grecia and the
Romans. Read more of him in the story of Bell and Susanna. Daniel. Judgment
of God.


3. Reg. 4. d.
Darda, the son of Mahol, was one of the four, which came of the offspring of
the children of Chore, and so far exceeded all other in wisdom and
learning, that Solomon was compared unto them. Darda. The house of knowledge:
or the generation of knowledge.


Darius, in taking of He is called also Ahasuerus. Ester. 1. a and was (as some
think) the son of Hystaspis, called also Artaxerses.
Babylon, slew King Balthazar 1. Esd. 6. cap.
Dan. 5. d.
and possessed his kingdom. In the second year of his reign, he granted
the same license unto the Jews to build again the City of Jerusalem, and
the house of God, that King Cyrus had granted to them in the first year of
his reign. And for so much as the work had been much hindered from the first
year of Cyrus unto the second year of this King Darius, he gave a strayte
commandment, that whosoever did (from henceforth) hinder or let that work,
a Beam should be taken from that man's house and he hanged thereon, and his
house made a dunghill. And so the buylding went forward with speed, and was
perfectly finished in the sixte year of his reign. Darius. Requiring, or
inquiring for.


Number. 16. a.
Dathan, and Abiram, were the sons of Eliab, and two of the chief Captains
with Chore in the insurrection against Moses, on whom God took such vengeance
that he caused the earth to open and swallow them up quick. Read the story of
Chore. Dathan. Statute, or law.


1. Reg. 16. c.
David, was the yoongest son of Isai, and by Gods commandment anointed
King of Israel (Saul yet reigning) of the Prophet Samuel. Wherefore Saul,
fearing that David would defeat him of his kingdom, vexed him with continual
persecution, during the which time, David showed notable examples both of
patience and true obedient service to Saul his sovereign Lord. And first, to
show his obedient and faithful heart to his 17. cap.
Prince, and love he bare to his country, he put himself in danger, to fight
with that great monster Goliath and slew him, of whom the king, and all the
host of Israel stood in great fear. And after this act also, when Saul 18.
b. c.
(of envy that the women in their dance had given to David more praise than
to him) threw his Iauelin at David (as he stood and played on his Harp
before him) to have nailed him fast to the wall, David avoided and armed
himself with patience, and never sought other means to revenge: In so much,
that when Saul (by 24. ^.
the providence of God) came into the Cave to ease himself, in the which Cave
David lay hid for fear of Saul, he would not (being provoked) put forth his
hand to hurt his master: But cut of a piece of the hemme of his coat, in
token that he might have killed him. And yet after that, it sore repented him
that he had done so much injury unto his sovereign Lord and master, although
he was his most grievous enemy, and every hour sought his death. Also, when he
came into the host of Saul and 26. b. c.
found the King and his men fast a sleep, he would not for his own private
cause (though Iehu slew two Kings at Gods commandment) lay his hand upon the
Lords anointed, but only (that he should know that David was there and might
have been revenged) took his spear and pot of water which stood at his
head and went his way. Finally, when it pleased God to deliver him of his 2.
Reg. b.
enemy in battle against the Philistines, one (to get thank of David)
brought unto him Saules crown, and the Bracelet that he wore on his arm,
certifying him of the Kings death, and that he with his own hands had killed
him: whose act did so much abhor David, that he thought the man not worthy
to live, but put him to death by and by. Read more of David's pacient suffering
and obedient service, in the story of Michol, Ionathas, Ahimelech, Achis, and
Absalon his son. Now when 2. Reg. 2. b.
Saul was dead, David was admitted king and reigned over Judah.vij. years,
after which time expired, he reigned both over Israel and Judah.xxxiij. years.
And did that which was good in the sight of God, and put his trust and
confidence in the Lord God of Israel, so that before nor after him, was not his
like. He cleaued so unto the Lord, that God of him bare witness, that he had
found a man according to his hearts desire. To him, God made a promise that
Christ should come of his seed, for the which 7. ^.
cause, Christ of the Prophets is called the son of David. To this holy
Prophet, God gave many victories and excellent gifts (which are touched in
other stories) and yet among all his virtues, he suffered him to fall into the
11. cap.
abominable vice of adultery and homicide, and most grievously punished him
for the same, who notwithstanding after earnest repentance, was received
again into the favor of God, and never after offended in that sin more.
Finally, after many conflictes with his enemies, 3. Reg. 2. b.
he died, after he had reigned.xl. years, leaving Solomon his son to
succeed him. David. Beloved.


Iudic. 4. cap.
Debora, the wife of one Lapidoth, was a Prophetess, and the fourth Judge and
governor of the people of Israel: who, by the power and pleasure of God (and
help of Barack the Captain of her army) delivered them from the Tyranny of
King Iabyn, and of Sisera his Captain general, putting the king to a great
foil, in flying of his Captain Sisera. Through the which victory, the
Israelites were restored to liberty, and their enemies the Cananites utterly
confounded. She judged Israel.xl. years. Debora. a Word, or a Be.


Collo. 4. d.
Demas, was Christ's Disciple a great while, and Philem. d.
a faithful minister to Paul, and never shranke from 2. Tim. 4. c.
him nor his doctrine, so long as all things prospered well with Paul: But
when he saw Paul cast in prison, and in danger of his life for the Gospels
sake: He forsook both him and his doctrine, and (imbraceing the world)
conueighed himself to Thessalonica. Such there be, that so long as pleasure,
profit, favor, honor, glory or riches do follow the word of God, so long
will they favor the same: But when affliction, persecution, loss of goods,
riches, lands, possessions, or such like adversities do come, then they do
as Demas did, forsake the Gospel and follow the world. Demas. Favoring the
people.


1. Mac. 7. cap.
Demetrius, the son of Sceleucus came from Rome with a small company of men
to a certain City of his own, lying upon the Sea coast, and prepared an
army to go to Antioche (the City of his Progenitors) where he found
Antiochus and Lisias, which both, he caused to be slain, and being stablished
in his kingdom, he began (through the wicked counsel of Alcimus, whom 9. cap.
he had made hye Priest) to seek the destruction of the Jews, sending forth
diverse armies against them, in the which, he spedde diversely. Finally, the
son of noble 10. c.
Antiochus moved war against him, and in battle slew him. Demetrius,
coming of Ceres: whom the Heathen thought the Goddess of Corn.


1. Mac. 10. g.
Demetrius, the son of Demetrius, being in the land of Creta at his fathers
death, made haste homewarde to take possession of his Kingdom. And being
stablished therein, he began to wax mighty* ^y reason that Ptolomy King of
Egypt had withdrawn his favor from Alexander his son in law, and taken his
daughter Cleopatra from him and given her to Demetrius. And also for as much as
Ptolomy and Alexander, lived not long after the strife begun between them,
Demetrius (for a space) had great rest. The Captain of Demetrius host, was
Appolonius (a great enemy of the Jews) whom Ionathas discomfited at the first
conflict between them. Upon the which, Demetrius perceiving Ionathas power to
be strong, was content to be at peace with him, and to make all Iewry free.
Which being done, all 11. ^. f. g.
the land was in such quietness, that Demetrius sent away his host, all save
a few strangers, whereat the host was displeased. Then Triphon (who had
been a foretime on Alexand^^s party) perceiving Demetrius host to murmour
against him, moved Antiochus the son of Alexander to war against
Demetrius, who being now in great fear of the men of Antioche (with whom he
had somewhat to do) sent to Ionathas to have his aid, who sent him three
thousand of such picked men, that delivered Demetrius out of danger, and slew
an hundred thousand of the Antiocheans, so that the reast were feign to cast
down their weapons and to yield them to Demetrius: who (notwithstanding the
great fidelity of Ionathas, and the benefit he had done him) after he was at
rest again, did not reward him according, but most deceytfully dissembled,
and withdrew himself from Ionathas, and vexed him and the Jews very sore.
After this came Tryphon with all the host which Demetrius had put away, and
fought against Demetrius, and put him to flight, and made him feign (at the
last) to go into Medea to seek aid and help, where Arsaces King of 1. Mac.
14. a.
the land took him, and kept him in ward as a prisoner during his life.

Act. 19. e. f. g.
Demetrius: This man was a Siluersmyth by his occupasion dwelling at Ephesus,
which made silver Shrynes and Tabernacles for Diana the goddess. And forasmuch
as Paul (by the space of two years) had preached there, against Images made
with man's hand, saying that they were no gods: He (least his profit should
decay) called togithers all such as had advantage by making Images of Diana,
and all crafts men of the same occupacion, whom he knew would favor his
cause, and began to say unto them on this wise: Masters, ye know that by
this Craft we have vauntage: moreover ye see and hear, that not only at
Ephesus, but almost thoroweut all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned
away much people, saying: That they be no gods which are made with hands. So
that not only this our Craft comes into peril, and to be set at naught: But
also that the Temple of the great goddess Diana should ^e despised and her
magnificence destroyed, which all Asia and the world woorshippeth. With this
sedicious Oracion made by Demetrius, the people were in such a fury, that they
cried out, saying: Great is Diana of the Ephesians, and with that, rushed into
the common Hall with one assent, where they (missing of Paul) caught two of
his companions, in the which rage, some cried one thing, and some another, and
were so far out of order, that the most part know not the cause of their
concourse togithers, so that with great difficulty, the matter was pacyfied.
Read the story of Alexander the Jew borne in the same place.

3. John.
Demetrius: This was a faithful Christen man, having for a testimony thereof
a good report as well of Paul himself as of all other to be an earnest
favorer of the Gospel of Christ.

Act. 17. g.
Denis, or Dionysius, was a certain Senator, whom Paul converted at the
City of Athens, and instituted him Bishop thereof.

In Fascicul^s temporum, it is written that this Denis was martyred in France,
whereby it may euidentlye be gathered that the Gospel of Christ our Savior
was preached in France in the Apostles time, or very nigh unto their Time.

Act. 19. d.
Diana, was a Goddess whom the Ephesians most supersticiouslye did woorship.
Diana, Latinum est.


Read Demetrius the Siluersmyth, and Alexander the Jew.

^. John. b.
Diotrephes, was so wicked a man, and so malicious an enemy unto the Christian
brethren, that he could not say well of them, nor yet abide to hear other
give them good report: he would neither receive them himself, nor suffer
those that would, but thrust them out of the Church. Diotrephes: Nourished of
Jupiter.


Luke 16. c.
Dives, the rich and coueteous Glutton, so much delited and gloried in his
great abundaunce of treasure, fine and costly apparel, sumpteous and delicious
fare each day, that his whole selicitie and pleasure, was only in pampering up
of himself, having no compassion (were his misery never so great) on the
poor and needy, as it did appear by Lazarus the Beggar lying at his gates,
and looking for some relief of the scraps that fell from his board. But when
this glutton was dead and his body (with pomp) brought to his grave, and his
soul also in the torments of hell: He than lifting up his eyes, and beholding
Abraham a great way of, and the Beggar with him in joy, cried out to Abraham,
requesting him that Lazarus might now come down, and dip the tip of his
finger in water, to slake the great heat of his tongue, for I am (says he)
most grievously tormented in this Ardent flame. But to this and his other most
vain and fantastical request he made for his brethren, to have them
admonished by one that came from the dead: Abraham made answer and said.
That for so much as he had consumed and spent away the time of his life
volupteously in the pleasures and delights of the world (and would at no time
repent) he therefore was now, most justly condemned to suffer parpetuall pain
in the fire of hell. Dives: Rich.


1. Reg. 21. b.
Doeg, an Edomite borne, was King Saules servant, 22. b. c. d.
and the master of them that kept his cattle. When David came to Ahimelech
the Priest of Nob, and had received the show bread, with the sword of
Goliath: This Doeg was By Doeg (says Saint Austen) is signified Antichrist,
which with false signs, and feygned miracles shall move all the world before
the coming of the Lord to judgment. And as Doeg wrought wickedness for ye
pleasing of king Saul, by whom is signified the Devil. So shall Antichrist
move and stir the world unto sin, for the pleasing of the Devil, and
aduauncing of his name.
there present the same day, tarying to worship before the Lord, and saw and
heard all things that was done between them. And when he was returned home,
and had waited his time when he might best pleasure the King, he up and
accused Ahimelech, of all that he had done unto David: And when the King had
judged that good and godly man to dye, this Doeg, at the Kings commandment
(all other resusing that wicked deed) fell upon Ahimelech with his sword, and
slew both him, and all the Priests of the Lord, to the number of. 85. Doeg,
Careful, or vehemently moved.


Dorcas, was Act. 9. f. g.
a certain godly woman, and a Disciple of Christ, dwelling at Ioppa, who in
her life time had been virtuously occupied, and specially in the works of
mercy, relieuing the poor and needy. And while Peter was preaching and doing
his office at Lydda (which was not far from Ioppa) it was her chance to fall
sick and die. And when her friends had done with wasshing the dead corpse,
and laid it forth in an upper chamber to he anointed, they sent for Peter to
come unto them, who being come, they had him up to the Chamber where the dead
Corse lay, where the Wydowes came about him weeping, and laying forth the
Coats and other garments which she had prepared in her life time for the
poor, before him. Then Peter put them all forth of the Chamber: And being
alone, kneeled down and prayed, and turning him to the body, said: Tabitha,
a^^se, at the which word she arose and looked upon (...) who then gave her his
hand, and lift her up, and called the Saints and Wydowes, and restored Dorcas
unto them alive. Dorcas, a Do.


2. Mac. 1^. d. e. f.
Dositheus, was a certain Noble Captain with Judas Machabeus, who (by the
help of Sosipater another Captain) defended the Jews manfullye against
Timotheus, and slew ten thousand of his men which were left in a strong
hold, and after that, took Timothy himself in battle, and
(notwithstanding) let him go again, upon his promise made unto them, that he
would restore all the Jews home again which he had in prison, thinking that,
the best and most surest way, to save the lives of their captive brethren.
After this, it chanced Dositheus (a mighty man on horseback) to encounter
with Gorgias, another great Captain, and enemy of the Jews, and took him,
entending to have carried him away alive: But an horseman of Thracia fell upon
him, and smote off his arm, and so Gorgias escaped, and fled into Moresa.
Dositheus, given to God.


Act. 24. d.
Drusilla, was a Jew, and wife to Felix, by whose counsel (says the Note in
Geneuaes Bible) he called for Paul, and heard him of the faith in Christ.
Drusilla, Bedewed, or s^rinckled with blood.


E.
^c. 10. d. 11. c
EBer, was the son of Selah of the generation of Sem. He had two sons, the
one Peleg (in whose days the earth was divided) and the other Ioktan. This
Eber lived before and after he begat Peleg. 464. years. Eber, Passing, or
passage.


Of Eber came the Ebrues, which were afterward called Israelites of Israel,
which was Jacob. And Jews of Judah, because of the excellency of that Tribe.

3. Reg. 16. b.
Ela, the son of Baasa, began his reign over Israel, in the.xxvj. year of
Asa king of Judah, and walked in all the wicked ways of his father before him.
In the second year of his reign (or there about) Zimri his servant (and
Captain of his Charets) conspired against him, and finding him drunken in the
house of Drinking (as some say) till he was drunke^ in the ^^^mple of Arza the
Idol, by his house in Tirza.
Arza the Kings Steward, he fell upon him, and slew him. Ela, an Oak.


Elam, was the son of Sem. Elam, a young Man, 1. Par. 1. c.
or he that is bid, or the world.


Exodus 6. d.
Eleazar, the son of Aaron, was constituted hye Priest, after the decease of
his father, and so was the second Number. 20. d.
Bishop over the Jews. He took to wife one of Joshua. 24. g.
the daughters of Putuel, which bare him a son called Phinehes. Finally, he
dyed, and was buried in a hill that pertayned to Phinehes his son, which hill
was given him in Mount Ephraim. Eleazar, the help of God.


1. Mac. 6. ^.
Eleazar, the son of Saura, was a worthy Captain with Judas Machabeus, what
time as Antiochus Eupater came into Iewrie with a mighty strong army, both of
men and Olephants: which beasts being.xxxij. in number, were strongly fenced,
and surely harnessed, and well exercised to battle. And when the hosts were
joined together, Eleazar beholding one of the Olephants decked with royal
harness, and far excelling all the other beasts, he supposed the King
himself had been upon him, wherefore he ieoperded himself to deliver his
people, and with a good courage ran to the Olephant in the midst of the
host, slaying all about him as he went, and at last came unto the beast, and
gat himself under his feet, and smote him in the belly, and slew the
Olephant. The weight of whose dead body crushed Eleazar in pieces, and so he
dyed.

2. Mac. 6. c. d. ^.
Eleazar, was one of the principal Scribes among the Jews, and an aged man,
of a welfauoured countenance, who (when that cruel King Antiochus had sent his
Commissioners to compel the Jews to transgress the laws of their God) was
constrained to gape with open mouth, and to eat Swynes flesh, but he desiring
rather to dye grievously, than to live with hatred, offered himself willingly
to the torment, and spit it out. Then they that had the charge of the Kings
wicked act, for the old friendship of the man, took him aside priuilye, and
prayed him that he would take such flesh as was lawful to eat, and
dissemble as though he had eaten even of the things appointed by the King, even
the flesh of the sacrifice, that in so doing, he might be delivered from
death, and that for the old friendship that was among them, he would receive
this favor. But he began to consider discretely, and as became his age, and
the excellency of his ancient years, and the honor of his gray hears,
whereunto he was come, and his most honest conversation from his childehoode,
but chiefly the holy law, made and given by God: therefore he answered them
consequently, and willed them straight ways to send him to the grave: for it
becomes not our age (said he) to dissemble, whereby many young persons might
think that Eleazar being. 90. years old, were now gone to another manner of
life. And so through mine hypocrisy (for a little time of a transitory life)
they might be deceived by me, and I should procure malediction and reproach to
mine old age. For though I were now delivered from the torments of men, yet
could I not escape the hand of the Almighty, neither alive nor dead.
Wherefore I will now change this life manfully, and will show my self such as
mine age requires. And so will leave a notable example for such as be young, to
die willingly and courageously, for the honorable and holy laws: and when he
had said these words, immediately he went to torment. And as he was ready
to give up the ghost, he sighed and said: The Lord that has the holy
knowledge, knows manifestly, that whereas I might have been delivered from
death, I am scourged, and suffer these sore pains of my body, but in my mind
I suffer them gladly for his religion. Thus this man ended his life, leaving
his death for an example of a noble courage, and a memorial of virtue, not
only unto young men, but unto all his nation.

1. Reg. 1. b. 2. c. ^.
Eli, was the next Judge after Sampson, that judged Israel, and the hye Priest
descended from Aaron. He had two sons, the one called Hophni, the other
Phinehes, which were so wicked that every man complained on them. And because
that Eli did not punish them according to their deserts, God sent him word
by his Prophet, that for as much as he had not ministered due correction unto
his sons for their great offenses, he would surely remove the hye Priests
office from his house for ever, and stir him up a Meaning Sador, who succeeded
^biathar, and was the figure of christ.
faithful Priest which should do according to his hearts desire. And this
shall be to thee (said he) a sign and token that shall come upon thy two
sons, even in one day they shall both die. And so it came to pass, for when
the Philistines went out to battle against Israel, the two sons of Eli
(which 1. Reg. 4. c. d.
waited upon the Ark of God) were both stayne, and the Arc taken and
possessed of strangers. Then Eli (being at that time. 99* years of age, and
also blind) hearing of the Arc to be taken of the Philistines, was stricken
into such a sudden fear, that he fell backward of his stool, and brake his
neck, after he had judged forty years. Eli, my God.


1. Reg. 16. b.
Eliab, was the eldest son of Isai, and so goodly a man of stature and
personage, that when all the sons of Isai were brought before the Prophet
Samuel to choose out a King among them: Samuel thought Eliab to be the meetest
for that office, but God refused him, and accepted David his youngest brother,
who seemed to have more skill in keeping of sheep, than of war,
notwithstanding, after that, he proved a better Warrior than Eliab, or all
the rest of his brethren, when he fought with Goliath, and slew him. And for
that great enterprise of David, Eliab (being with King Saul in the host) 17.
d.
was sore offended, and began to rebuke David, saying: wherefore art thou now
come hither? with whom have thou left thy sheep in the wilderness? I know thy
pride, and the malice of thine heart well enough, and that of an hautie stomach
thou art come hither to see the battle, and with such tauntes and checkes he
reproved his brother David, for taking upon him to beat the Philistine, whom
he, nor none of all his fellows durst look in the face. Eliab, God my Father,
or the God of my Father.


3. Reg. 17. ca.
Eliah, was a Prophet borne in the City of Thesba, who (for the wickedness
of Achab) prophesied that it The father of this Prophet was called Sobac.
Cooper.
should not rain upon the earth, in the space of three years and an half,
and fled from the King (who sought his life) and hid himself in a little
brook before Jordan, where God commanded the Ravens to feed him with The
Ravens fed Eliah.
bread and flesh both Evening and Morning. And when the brook began to wax
dry, the Lord sent him to the City of Serepta in the country of Sydon,
where he had ordained a certain Widow to sustain him, and when he was come
to the gate of the City, the Wydowe was there gathering of a few sticks for
her Oven, to whom he called, and said: Woman, fet me (I pray thee) a little
water to drink: And as she was going, he cried unto The widow sustayneth Eliah.
her again, saying: Bring me (I pray thee) a morsel of bread in thine hand
also: she said again, as truly as the Lord thy God lives, I have no bread
ready, but even the prophet Elijah (or Elias) is fed by ravens by the stream
Cherith (or Kerith, or Karith), by a rocky outcrop. There are ships sailing on
the stream. Helias proplieta pas^itur a coruis, pane et carne, bis die: mane
nempe et vespere.

M. V. V.
H. van Luyck excu.
an handefull of Meal in a Barrel, and a little oil in a Cruse, and am now
going to dress it for me and my son, that we may eat and dye. Well (said
Elia) do as thou have said and fear not: But first of all, make me a little
Cake thereof, and bring it to me, and afterward make for thee and thy son:
for neither shall the Meal in the Barrel, nor yet the oil in the Cruse be
wasted or minished, till the Lord have sent rain upon the earth. And so the
Wydowe did as the Prophet bade her, and all things came to pass as he had
said. And during the Prophets abode in the Wydowes house, he restored her
child to life, which was dead.

3. Reg. 18. ca.
After this, he was commanded by God, to go and show himself to Achab. And
when the King saw Eliah, he said: Art thou he that troubles Israel? Nay
said the Prophet it is not I that have troubled Israel, but thou and thy
fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of God, and served
Baal: Therefore let all the people of Israel with the Prophets of Baal be
brought before me to mount Carmel, and I will tell thee what the Lord says.
And when the King had called the people togithers: The Prophet said unto
them, how long will ye hault between two Opinions? If the Lord be God,
follow him? But if Baal be God, then go after him. And now to know who is the
true God, said the Prophet, let there be two Bullocks brought, and give the
one to me (which am but one Prophet of the Lords) and the other to Baals
prophets which are. 450. let them dress the one with wood and no fire under
it, and I will dress the other likewise: And call ye on the name of your God,
and I will call on the name of my God, and then, the God that answers by
fire, let him be God. To this the Prophets of Baal agreed, and dressed there
Oxen, which Eliah mocketh the prophets of Baal.
being done, they cry to their God Baal, but they cried so long without
answer again, that Eliah mocked them, saying: Cry out alowde, for it may be
that your God is busy in talking, or occupied in following his enemies, or is
in his journey, or else fallen a sleep and must be waked with your cry. And
so they cried on still from morning to night, cutting themselves (as their
manner was) with knives and lances, till the blood did follow, and yet their
god would not answer. Then Eliah took his Bullock and dressed it, and
laid it upon the wood, and made a ditch round about the alter whereon the
sacrifice was laid, and powered water upon the Sacrifice until the ditch was
full: And as soon as he had called on the name of the Lord, fire fell down
from Heaven, and consumed the brent Sacrifice, the wood, the stones, the dust,
and all the water that was in the pit. And when the people saw that, they
turned to Eliah, and fell upon all the Prophets of Baal, and slew them at the
Brook Kyson.

3. Reg. 19. ca.
Now when Eliah had thus destroyed Baal and his prophets, he durst not abide
the manacing of Iezabell, but fled to the wilderness of Bethsabe. And having
gone a days journey therein, he sat him down under a Juniper tree, and
desired God that he would take his life from him. And as he fell a sleep
under the tree. The Angel of God touched him and bade him arise and eat,
wherewithal he awaked: And seeing a Baken cake and a pot of water standing at
his head, he refreshed himself therewith, and laid him down again to
sleep. The Angel touched him once more, and bade him arise and eat, telling
him that he had yet a great journey to go, then he arose and did eat again,
and with the strength Eliah fasteth forty days and fortye nights.
of that meat, he walked forty days and forty nights, till he came to
Horeb the mount of God, and hiding himself in a Cave all night, the voice of
the Lord came to him, and asked him what he did there: I have (said he) been
very ielous for the Lord God of hosts: For the Children of Israel has
forsaken thy covenant, broken down thine Alters, and slain thy Prophets,
with the sword, and I only am left, and they seek my life to take it away.
Then the Lord commanded him to come out of the Cave, and sent him to annoint
Hazael King over Siria: And Iehu King of Israel, and Eliseus in his rowme.
Read more of this Prophet in the stories of these three aforesaid, in Achab,
Ahazia and Obedia, and Elizeus. Eliah. God the Lord.


Judith. 4. cap.
Eliachim, was the hye Priest among the Jews, at what time Holofernes went
about to subdue them, which sent letters all about to the Jews, to take in
the mountains, and to stop all the ways and passages to Jerusalem, that
their enemies the Assirians might have no recourse thither. That done, he
exhorted the people to earnest prayer and fasting, assuring them that the Lord
would hear their peticions, if they continued steadfast in the same, and give
them such power to overthrow the Assirians, as he gave to Moses the servant
of God, which overthrew the Amalechites (trusting in their own strength) not
with weapon, but with holy prayer. Eliachim, The Resurrection of God, or Gods
affirmacion, or the God of resurrection, or the God of strength.


Ruth. 1. a. b.
Elimelech, was an Ephraite borne, dwelling in the City of Bethleem Judah, in
whose days there fell such a dearth in the land of Judah, that he with his
wife and two sons (the one Mahalon, the other Chilion) went into the land
of Moab, where in process, he and his tw^ sons died. Elimelech. My God the
king, or the Counsel of God.


Genesis 36. ^.
Eliphas, was the son of Esau, and his mothers name was Ada. Eliphas, the
Sight of God, or his intent, or endeavor.


Job. 2. d.
Eliphas, the Themanite, was one of those that came to Job in his extreme
afflictions to comfort him. And 4.
yet (notwithstanding) he blamed Job for impaciencie, 15.
injustice, and for the presumption of his own righteousness. 12.
Also he reproved him, because he challenged wisdom and pureness to
himself. Affirming also that he was punished for his sumes, and accused him of
vnmercyfulnesse, and that he denied Gods pr^^^dence, and therefore exhorts
him to repentance. But the Lord was angry with Eliphas and with his other
Companions, 42. b.
because they had condemned Job by the outward afflictions, and not comforted
him with his mercy, and therefore commanded them to take s^auen* Oxen and
seven Rams* and to go and offer a burnt offering for their offense, and his
servant Job should pray for them. And they did as the Lord had commanded
them.

1. Par. 1. 2.
Elisa, was the son of Iauan, his brethren were: Tharsis, Citim, and
D^^^^int. Elisa, it is God, or the ^ambe of G^d, or God that does good.


^. Reg. 19. d.
Eliseus, was the son of Saphan. And being at the plough with twelve yoke of
Oxen before him, Eliah coming by him cast his mantell over him, and went his
ways. Then (...) (being instinct with the holy Ghost) left his plough, and
ran after Eliah, desiring him that he might first go home and take his leave
of his friends, and then he would come and follow him, which thing being
done, he returned and ministered to Eliah, and went with him to Bethel, and from
thence to Jericho, 4. Reg. 2. ca.
where the children of the Prophets came to Eliseus and said: Know thou
not that the Lord will take thy master from thine head this day? Yes (quoth
he) I know it well, hold ye your peace and be still. And so forth from
Jericho, they went to Jordan, where Eliah ^he waters divided.
smote the waters with his mantell which divided themselves, so that they two
went over on dry land. And when they were on the other side of Jordan, Eliah
said to Eliseus: Ask what I shall do for thee, or I be taken away from thee:
I pray thee (quoth Eliseus) let thy spirit be double upon me. Thou have asked
(quoth he) an hard thing: Yet if thou see me when I am taken from thee, thou
shall have it so, if not, it shall not be. And as Eliah is taken up in the
fiery Charet.
they were walking and talking togithers Eliah was taken up in a whirlewinde of
fire and in a Charret of fyrie horses, which sight Eliseus saw and cried: My
father, my father, the Charret of Israel and the horsemen thereof, and saw him
no more* Then Eliseus, rent his own Cloak in two pieces, and took up Elias
mantell, which he had let fall from him, and returned to the bank of Jordan
and smote the waters, saying: Where is the Lord God of Eliah and he himself,
and at the second smiting, the waters divided, so that he went over on dry
land to the other ^yde again. Then the Children of the Prophets perceiving
the spirit of Eliah to be upon Eliseus, came and fell down before him, saying:
We doubt lest the spirit of the Lord has taken thy master and cast him upon
some mountain, therefore let us* send forth our men to go and seek him. But
Eliseus (knowing assuredly that he was taken unto God) willed them not to do
so: yet they* not there withal satisfied, entreated him so much till he was
ashamed, and so let them go. And when they had sought three days and three
nights and could not find him, they returned to Eliseus, who said unto
them: Did not I say, ye should not find him.

The water^ are healed.
Now, as the Prophet lay at Jericho, the men of the City came unto him,
saying: Sir, the scituacion of this City (as thou see) is pleasant, but the
water is so evil and the ground so barrayne, that it kills the inhabitaunts
thereof. Then said Eliseus, bring me a Cruse, and put Salt therein. And when
they had brought him the Cruse, he took it and went unto the spring of the
waters, and cast the Salt therein, saying: Thus says the Lord, I have healed
this water, death shall no more come thereof, neither barrenness to the
ground.

4. Reg. 3. cap.
After he had thus healed the water at Jericho, and was departed thence to go to
Bethel, there came little children out of the City, who in mockery said unto
him: Come up thou balde head, come up thou balde head. The The children for
mocking the Prophet, are devoured with bears.
Prophet then turned back and beheld the children, and perceiving their
malicious hearts, he cursed them in the name of the Lord, which Curse was no
sooner pronounced out of the Prophets mouth, but two Bears came out of the
forest and ran upon the Children, and tore in pieces. 42. of them: And so went
he forth to mount. Carmel, and from thence to the City of Samaria.

It came to pass that when Iehoram y^ King of Israel, and Iehosaphat King of
Judah with the King of Edom, in their progress toward the King of Moab, lacked
water, for them and their people* they went (by the counsel of Iehosaphat King
of Judah) to Eliseus the Prophet, beseeching him to make intercession for them,
that they might have water to sustain their host, which else were in
ieoperdie of perishing: And when the Prophet saw the Kings, he said to the
King of Israel: What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the prophets of Achab
thy father, and to the Prophets of Iezabel thy mother: as truly as the Lord
of hosts lives, in whose sight I stand, if it were not that I regard the
presence of Iehosaphat King of Judah, I would not have looked toward thee, nor
seen thee: But now bring me a This was no such Minstrell, as use to fill the
peoples cares with songs of ribaudry: but one that sang songs to Gods glory,
and so stirred up the Prophets heart to prophecy.
minstrell, and when the mynstrell playde, the hand of the Lord came upon
Eliseus, that he began to prophecy of water, and of the overthrow of the
Moabites, which came to pass on the next morrow, as the Prophet had said,
for the Moabites being deceived by the Suns shining upon the water that fell,
which made it seem as red as blood, thinking, it had been the blood of
the Kings host that had slain one another, but when they came, they found
the host of Israel ready, who fell upon the Moabites, and destroyed and put
them to flight every one. Eliseus, Gods salvation, or a God which saves.


4. Reg. 4. a. b
There was a certain woman, late wife to one of the Prophets, which came and
complained to Eliseus, that her husband had left her so far in debt, that
her creditors were come to fet her two sons away to be their bondemen. What
have thou in thy house, said the Prophet. Nothing (quoth she) but a little
Pitcher of oil: The widow left in debt.
Well (said he) go thy way home, and borowe of thy neighbors, as many empty
vessels as thou can get, and pour out the oil of the Pitcher into the
empty vessels, until thou have filled them all. And when the woman had done
all as the Prophet had commanded her, she came back again, and told him
how mightily her oil was increased. Now go (said the Prophet) and sell so
much of the oil as will pay thy Creditours, and then live thou and thy
children of the rest.

4. Reg. 4. b. c. d. e.
There was a certain woman of great estimacion in the City of Sumen, who
hearing tell that Eliseus was come to the City, invited him home to her house,
and made him great cheer. And whenever after that, he came into that
quarters (which he haunted much) he would ever take that Gentlewomans house in
his way. Then she seeing that, said unto her husband, I perceive that this is
an holy man, that comes so often by our place, let us make him a little
chamber with all things Eliseus obtains a son for the Sunamite.
necessary for the same, that when he comes this way, he may lodge there,
and be quiet therein. And when the new Chamber was made, and finished, the
Prophet at his next coming was brought into the same, there to take his rest.
He then (considering the great provision the woman had made, and how careful
she had been for him) said unto Gehezi his man: Go and ask of her what she
will have me to do for her? whether it be to speak unto the King, or to the
Captain of the host, or any thing else, and I will do it. The servant went
and The Sunamites son restored from death to life.
brought him word again, that she had no child, and her husband was old.
Well, said the Prophet, she shall have a son, which in process she had in
deed. And when the child was a few years grow^n up, it had a desire to go
and see his Father and the Reapers in the field, and being there in the heat
of the day, it fell suddenly sick, and was carried home to his mother, and
dyed: But for the woman's sake, the Prophet restored her son to life again.

4. Reg. 4. g.
On a time Eliseus commanded his Cook to make a great pot of pottage for the
children of the Prophets which boorded with him, and as one went out for
herbs, he gathered (unawares) his lap full of wild Coloquintidas, He makes
the pottage sweet.
and came and shred them into the pot of pottage. And when the children of the
Prophets had tasted a little of the pottage, they (fearing least they had been
poisoned) cried out, saying: O thou man of God, there is death in the pot. Then
the Prophet called for Meal, and threw it into the pot, and all was well, and
no more harm in the pot.

4. Reg. 4. g.
A certain man (the dearth being great in the land) came from Baal Salisa,
and brought to Eliseus twenty Barley loaves of the first fruits of his new
Corn, the which he commanded his man, to give to the people to satisfy their
hunger. How shall I (said he) set this before The loaves are multiplied.
so many, will it satisfy an hundred persons? Well, said Elizeus, set it
before them, for thus says the Lord, they shall eat, and there shall remain:
And so the loaves were set before the people, and they did eat, and left over,
according to the word of the Lord.

4. Reg. 6. a.
Eliseus had so many of the Prophets children with him at boorde and down
lying, that his house was to little for them all, wherefore they said to him,
that they would go to Jordan, and build them a bygger house to dwell in,
desiring him to go with them. And as a certain man was felling down a tree to
serve for the buylding, the Axe head slipped of the Helue, and fell into the
water. Iron swimmeth.
Then the man cried to Eliseus, and said: Alas, Master, help me to have it
again, for it was lent me. Where fell it in, said the Prophet, and when the
man had told him, Eliseus cut down a piece of wood, and cast it into the
water, and immediately, the iron did swymme. And then the man stretched forth
his hand, and took it up.

4. Reg. 8. a.
He prophesied unto the Sunamite (whose son he had raised from death) of a
great dearth which should come and continue upon the land seven years,
giving her counsel therefore, to go and soiourne in some other plentiful
country, till these years were expired, whose counsel she followed, and went
with all her household into the Philistines land, where she remained these
seven years of dearth, which being ended, she returned home again. And when
she came to her house, another having possession thereof, withhelde it from
her, wherefore she went to the King to make her complaynt, at which time it
happened the King to be talking with Gehezi The Sunamite is restored to her
house and land again.
the servant of Eliseus the Prophet, who was declaring unto the King what great
and notable deeds his Master Eliseus had done, and among all, declared of a
dead body which he had raised up from death to life, and as he was telling of
these things unto the King, the woman came with her son, and required her
house and land again: And when Gehezi saw the woman, he said: O my Lord
and King, this same is the woman that I told your Grace of ^uen now, and this
is her son that was raised from death. Then the King commanded her house and
land to be restored her again, with all the rent and profits thereof, from
the first day she l^st it* till that present time.

4. Reg. 13. c. d
Finallye, when the time drew me, that Eliseus the Prophet should dye, Ioas
King of Israel came to visit him, and as he stood before him, and considered
what a loss he should have of that good man, which had been so great a defense
unto his Realm, the tears ran down his cheeks, and said: O my father, my
father, the Charet of Israel, and the horsemen of the same. And when the
Prophet saw the King, he bade him take his bow and arrows in his hand, and
make him ready to shoot. The Prophet put his hand upon the Kings hand, and
caused a window to be opened Eastwarde, (which was toward Siria) and bade the
King shoot, and he shot: The arrow of health of the Lord (said Eliseus) and
the arrowe of health against Siria. For thou shall smite Siria in Aphek, till
thou have made an end of them. Now take thine arrows in thine hand (said
the Prophet) and smite the ground, and he smote thrice and ceased. Then was
the Prophet angry, that he had smitten the ground no oftener, for if (said
he) thou had smitten five or six times, thou had smitten Siria until thou
had made an end of them, where now thou shall smite them but thryce, and so
Eliseus dyed, and was buried. The same year came the Moabites into the land
of Israel, and as some of the Israelites were burying of a man, and had spyed
the Soldiers, they cast the man into the sepulcher where Eliseus the Prophet
was buried, and when the dead man was rolled down, and touched the body of
Eliseus, he revived, and stood up upon his feet as lively as ever he was.

Luke 1. c. d. e. f.
Elizabeth, was the wife of Zachary the Priest, and came of the daughters and
posterity of Aaron. She was long barren, but at last she conceived by
Zachary her husband (according as the Angel of God had said unto him.) And
being great with child, Marie the wife of Joseph (which was also conceived by
the holy ghost) came to visit Elizabeth her cousin, who had no sooner heard
the salutacion of Marie the Mother of God, but the Babe sprang in her belly,
wherewith she was filled with the holy ghost, and cried out with a loud voice,
saying: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb:
And whence happens this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
For behold, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the
Babe sprang in my belly for joy: And blessed is she that believed, for those
things shall be performed, which were told her from the Lord. And when the
time was come that Elizabeth should be delivered, she brought forth a son,
which her neighbors and kinsefolkes, would have named Zachary after his
father, but Elizabeth would none of that, but said his name should be John.
Elizabeth, the Oath of God, or the fullness of God.


1. Reg. 1. a. b. c
Elkana, the son of Ieroham an Ephraite borne, had two wives, the one named
Anna, and the other Phenenna. By his wife Phenenna he had children. But by Anna
he had none. It was his manner every Feastfull day to go up and pray. And to
offer unto the Lord of hosts in Silo (where the Ark of the Lord was at that
time) and in one solemn feast day (among all other) as he offered unto the
Lord, he gave unto Phenenna his wife, and to her sons and daughters,
portions: but unto Anna (whom he loved) he gave a portion with an heavy
cheer. And on a time when he saw his wife Anna weep in the house of the
Lord for sorrow she could have no child, he said: Anna why weepest thou?
and why is thy heart so troubled that thou can not eat? Am not I better to
thee than ten sons? as though he should say, is it not enough for thee, that
I love thee, no less than if thou had children. This he said to comfort
her. And at the last, God gave him a Son by her, named Samuel, after whose
birth he went up to offer unto the Lord, and to give him thanks. But Anna
would not go with him until she had weyned her son. Elkana, the Zeal of
God, and the possession of God.


Phil. 2. d.
Epaphroditus, was a certain godly Brother, whom the Philippians sent to
Paul (being in bonds at Rome) with their charitable relief. Who being there,
ministered unto him in his need, and was so faithful a fellow soldier with
Paul in setting forth the Gospel of Christ, and put himself in such hazard,
that he fell sick and was like to have dyed. Now Paul, to comfort the
Philippians, which were full of sorrow and heaviness for Epaphroditus their
Apostle, because they heard he was sick, was the more desirous (after his
recovery) to send him home again in the company of Timotheus, with his
Epistle that they might be the less sorrowful, and rejoice the more at his
coming, willing them to receive him with a loving Christian affection in all
ioyfulnesse, and not to make much on him only, but on all such as were like
unto him. Epaphroditus, Pleasant.


Collo. 4. d.
Epaphras, was a faithful servant, by whose labor and preaching the
Colossians heard the Gospel, and believed it, and being in prison with Paul
at Rome, prayed for those Colossians, that they might be perfect, and filled in
all the will of God after true knowledge. He bare a fervent mind to them of
Laodicia, and them of Hierapolis. Epaphras, Frothing.


Romans 16. a.
Epenetes, was the first that Paul brought to Christ's religion, among them of
Achaia, unto whom Paul had him saluted. Epenetes, Worthy of praise.


Genesis 48. c. d.
Ephraim, was the yoongest son of Joseph, and borne in Egypt. His mothers
name was Asuath the * God prefers that (many times) which man despises, and
despises that which man allows.
daughter of Putipher Priest of On, and his eldest brother was Manasses, which
two being brought before the prophet Isaias (or Isaiah) sits with an open book
on a rocky outcrop in a small settlement with a forge, blacksmith, and farm
workers, one ploughing a field. A hilltop town, visible behind him, is haloed
by the sun. Iesaias sub figura editissimi montis, describit augustissimum
Christi regnum

M. van Valckenb. inven.
C. van de Pas sculp.
H. van Luyck excud.
their Grandfather Jacob to receive his blessing, he preferred Ephraim the
yoonger, before Manasses the elder, yet putting Joseph their father in comfort
that Manasses should be great, but Ephraim should be greater. Of the
Genealogy of Ephraim, read. 1. Par. 7. d. Ephraim, Fruitful, or increasing.


Genesis 23. cap.
Ephron, the son of Zoar, dwelt among the Hethites, having a piece of land
which Abraham had a mind to buy, to bury Sara his wife therein. And when the
matter was broken to Ephron (by Abraham) to sell h^s ground for so much money
as it was worth: Ephron willingly offered to give it him freely to burye his
dead, and to do withal what he would. But notwithstanding, Abraham forced
him so much to know the price thereof, that Ephron said: My Lord, the land
is worth four hundredth The common Sicle is about the value of twenty pence.
Sicles, but what is that between thee and me, take it freely (I beseech thee)
and bury thy dead at thy pleasure. And so he received of Abraham for his
land, the sum aforesaid. Ephron, Dust, or low on the ground.


Genesis 38. a.
Er, the eldest son of Judah the son of Jacob, was married to a woman called
Thamar, and for his great wickedness, the Lord slew him. Er, Watchful, and
making bare, or pouring forth.


Act. 19. d.
Erastus, was the Chamberlain, or Receyuer of Romans 16. d.
the City of Corinth, and one of Paul's ministers, whom 2. Tim. 4. d.
he sent from Ephesus into Macedonia, with one Timotheus (int^nding him self
to foll^we after) to gather men's alms for the relieuing of such as were needye
and poor at Jerusalem. Erastus, Amiable.


Esaias, the son of Amos was the father of Esaye, was brother to Azariah king
of Judah* and Esaias was father in law to Manasses, who put him to death.
Amos was an holy Prophet of Esaias. 1. a. 42.
the Tribe of Judah, in whom was such abundance of the a. b. 43. b. and 53. cap.
spirit of Prophecy, that he prophesied so much of Christ, that he seemed
rather to be an Evangelist, than a Prophet. He was of such holiness, that in
the time of King Ezechias, when a City was besieged, he by his prayer obtained
of God, that water sprang up in little quantity, so that the people did not
perish for lack of water, and when the enemies had won the City, and
besieged Seloum, as often as the Jews came for water, the water ran out of
the earth abundantly, and they took water. But the strangers when they came,
could not find it. This holy man for his liberty of speech, in rebuking of
the sin of the Princes and the people, and for the prophesying of the
vengeance of God upon that country and people, was cut in two pieces with a
Saw, and buried under an Oak, but afterward he was translated and buried by
the sepulcher of Kings. He was before the coming of Christ. 800. years.
Eliote. Esaias, The health of the Lord.


Genesis 25. d.
Esau, was the eldest son of Isaac, borne with his brother Jacob at one birth
of their mother Rebecca. Jacob Of Esau came the Edomites. Esau was called Edom,
that is red, because he sold his birth right for a mess of red pottage.
was smooth of body, and Esau rough and heary, who became a great hunter,
wherefore his father l^ued him the better, because (now and then) he did eat
of his Venison. On a time coming from hunting, he was so weary and faint for
hunger, that he was almost dead: And seeing his brother Jacob to hane sod a pot
of pottage, he prayed him to give him a few thereof to ^ate. Sell me now thy
birthright (quoth he) and I will. Then Esau esteeming more his belly, than the
benefit of his birthright, sold it to Jacob for a mess of pottage. And when
he had filled his belly well, he went his way and passed forth, till he came
about the age of forty years. And 26. g.
then he took him two wives, the one Judith the daughter of Bery, and the
other Basmoth the daughter of Elon, both which women were disobedient to their
father and mother in law. After this (his father being old and 27. cap.
blind for age) he went out to kill some Venison for his father, that he might
eat thereof, and bless him before he dyed: But when he had dressed it, and
brought it for his father to eat, Jacob had prevented Esau, and gotten his
blessing from him, for the which, he hated Jacob, and threatened to kill him,
wherefore Jacob was sent away 28. a. b.
into Mesopotamia, partly to avoid the malice of Esau, and partlye to get him
a wife there, because his father would not have him marry with the Cananites.
Then Esau perceiving that the daughters of Canaan, displeased Isaac, he (to
please his father) took to wife, the daughter of Ismael, Abraham's son. And
so these two brethren being thus separated the one from the other, in process
became both very rich. And in the end, when (by the providence of God) they
met togithers again. God had so altered and changed the mind of Esau, that
he most lovingly embraced his brother Jacob, ministering to him such kindness,
as though he had never borne him any displeasure at all: And so in fine,
departed as loving friends, Jacob toward Succoth, and Esau to Mount Seir his
own possession. Esau, Working.


Genesis 14. c. d.
Eschol, was brother to Mamre and Aner, which three were Abraham's confederates,
and his pertakers, in the rescuing of Lot his brother out of the hands of
Kedorlaomor. Eschol, a Cluster.


1. Esd. 7. a. 8. cap.
Esdras, the son of Saraia, was a notable Scribe in the law of Moses, and
long in captivity at Babylon, but at last by the license of Artaxerses, he
came from Babylon to Jerusalem again, with the Jews to repair the law and
City of God, and to teach the people the right way of the Lord. He gathered
and brought in order all the books of the laws of God, which were by the
Chaldeys scattered and destroyed. This man's living 9. and. 10. cap
was so upright and holy, and so esteemed among the people, that when they had
offended the Lord in contracting themselves with the Gentyles, at his godly
preaching and counsel, they repented, and put away their strange Wives, and
turned to the Lord again. Esdras, an Helper.


Ester. 2. cap.
Ester, the daughter of Abian a Jew borne, was a goodly young Damsel. And
(after the death of her father and mother) nourished and brought up in the
house of Mardocheus her fathers Uncle: During which time, Vasthi (for her
disobedience to Ahasuerus the King) was deposed from her Princely state: And
then to have another placed in her room, certain fair young Damsels and
Virgins (among which Ester was one) were taken up by Commission, and brought to
the Court, and there found at the Kings charges for the space of.xij. months
with all manner of sumptuous deckinges, to the end the King might choose one of
them (whom he fancyed best) to be his Queen. And when the time of choosing
came, he lyked Ester above the reast, and made her Queen in the room of
Vasthi. It happened after this, a mischief to Ester. 3. cap.
be devised against the Queens nation the Jews, by one in great authority
about the King, called Haman: and being certifyed thereof by Mardocheus her
Uncle, she was so sore astonished, that she wilt not what to do: for no help in
that matter was to be had, but only in the King, to 4. cap.
whom she durst not go, because he had given a commandment, that whosoever
should presume to come unto him before they were called, should suffer death.
Wherefore Ester not being called in thirty days before, was afraid of the
danger. Nevertheless, she considering with her self, that either she must
put her life in hazard, or else to suffer the whole Nation of the Jews to
perish, cast all fear aside, and went to the King: And presenting 5. cap.
her self before him, he put forth his golden Scepter in token of his special
favor toward her, demanding what she would have: Nothing (quoth she) but
that it would please your Majesty, and Haman, to come to the banquet which I
have prepared. To the which he went, and being there, demanded of Ester, what
thing it was she required. Oh (quoth she) if it shall please your Highness to
give me my peticion, and to fulfill my request. Then let my 7. cap*
sovereign Lord and Haman come again to morrow, and I will certify your
Grace of all. And on the morrow when the King was come, he said to Ester: Now
what is thy request, I pray thee say. Then spoke Ester and said: If I thy
poor handemayde have found so much favor in thy sight (O King) to have my
peticion granted, then I most humbly beseech thee to grant me my life, and
the lives of all my people the Jews, which are not only sold to be bond
servants (for I would to God it were so) but to be slain and utterly
destroyed all in one day. Who is he (said the King) that dare presume to do
such a deed. Oh said Ester, and if it shall please your Majesty to know the
truth, our great enemy and adversary that has conspired our deaths, is even
this wicked Haman, whom your Grace has exalted so hye. Upon the which
complaynt of Ester, the Kings indignation was kindled so sore against Haman,
that he was hanged, and the Jews restored for Esters sake. Read the story of
Mardocheus. Ester, Hid.


2. Tim. 4. d.
Eubolus, was one of the faithful congregation at Rome with Paul, when he
sent his Epistle to Timothy. Eubolus, Wise, or of good Counsel.


4. Reg. 25. g.
Euilmerodach, was Nabuchodonosors son. And being King after him, he
delivered Iehoakim King of Judah out of prison, wherein he had lain by the space
of thirty years, and exalted him above all the Princes in Babylon, assigning
him a certain portion every day from his own table as long as he lived.
Euilmerodach, Bruising, or beating in pieces the fools bitterness. A fool
bitterly bruised, or contryte.


2. Tim. 1* a.
Eunica, was the daughter of Lois, and the Mother of Timothy, which women
(both the mother and the daughter) are highly commended of Paul for their
sincerity of faith, which he desires Timothy earnestly to follow. Eunica, a
good victory, or Conquest.


Phil. 4. a.
Euodias, was a certain faithful Preacher of Christ, to whom Paul sent
commendations, desiring him and Sintiches to agree in one true concord of
minds, in promoting the Gospel of Christ. Euodias, a good savor, or well
smelling.


Act. 20. b. c.
Eutichus, was a certain young man, which when the Disciples were gathered
togithers upon one of the Sabbothes days (as their custom was) to break
bread, that is to say, to celebrate the Lords supper, gat him up into one of
the windows of an upper Chamber (where were many lights set, because it was
night) to hear Paul preach, who continued his preaching so long, that the
young man wared sleepy, and at the last, sleep came so sore upon him, that he
fell out of the wyndow down to the ground three floores high. And when the
people ran to take him up, they found him dead, and brought him into the
house: when Paul perceived that he was dead, he went down to the young man,
and embraced him, and said to the Disciples: Be ye not troubled with this
chance, for there is life in him. And so Paul went up again, and made an
end of his Sermon. And in the morning after Paul's departing, the young man
was brought up into the chamber alive, to the great comfort of all them that
were there. Eutichus, Fortunate.


the prophet Ezechiel sits above a town, writing in a book. Ezechiel propheta
Hierosolymam depingit, et eius euersionem proedicit.



Eze. 1. a.
Ezechiel, the son of Buzi the Priest, was a Prophet of the country Sareta
in Siria, and of the line of Bishops. He had many revelations and visions. And
by him God showed many great miracles, for in the time of a great scarcity, he
by prayer obtained of God abundance of fish, whereby the people were
sufficiently refreshed. This storye is drawn out of Master Gliots Dictionary,
with the story of Esaias before.
Also when the people were oppressed, he stood and made their enemies so
abashed with miracles and wonderful sightes, that they ceased of their
enterprice. Being in the country of Chalde, he told the people of many
things done in the Temple of Jerusalem. He brought the people out of Chalde to
Jerusalem, to the reproach of the Infidels. He being in Babylon judged the Trybe
of Dan and Gad, for that they had wickedly done against the Lord, in
persecuting them which believed on the Law. And he showed unto them a terrible
token, for Adders devoured their children, and all their cattle. At the last,
he was slain at Babylon by the Duke of the people (who caused him to be drawn
with wild horses, which bet out his brains) because he reproved him of
ydolatrie, and he was buried in the field Manre, in the Mount of Sem and
Arphaxad, progenitors of Abraham. He prophesied of the return of the children
of Israel, and also of the coming of Christ. He lived before the incarnation of
Christ. 617. years. Ezechiel, Strength of the Lord.


F.
Act. 24. cap.
FElix, was ye hie President at Cesarea under the Emperor, to whom Lisias the
hie Captain sent Paul prisoner to be examined before him. And when he had
brought Paul forth before his accusers, and heard his accusation made by one
Tartullus an orator, Felix beckened to Paul, that he should answer for
himself, and when he had heard Paul's answer, he deferred the examination of
the matter until another time, saying unto Paul's adversaries, that for as
much as Lisias the hye Captain did know the whole matter as it stood, he
would at his coming, hear them further. And so gave commandment unto his
under Captain, that he should in the mean season keep Paul in ward, but
yet so, that he might be gently ordered, and be sometime at liberty, and that
his familiers might freely repair unto him, and bring unto him such things as
he lacked. It was not long after this, or that Felix (being returned to Cesarea
again with his wife Drucilla a Jew borne) called forth Paul, being desirous
to have further knowledge of him as concerning the sect that he professed. And
as Paul preached unto him of Righteousness, of Temperance, and of Judgment to
come, Felix trembled for fear, and sent him away for that time, saying, that
at a convenient leisure he would send for him again. This corrupt Magistrate
gaped for brybes and rewards to loose Paul, and therefore called him the
oftener, thinking that Paul would have given him a piece of money to be
delivered, but when he saw that none would come, and Portus Festus was sent
from Nero the Emperor to succeed him in his room, then willing rather to
show the Jews a pleasure, than to deliver Paul, left him in prison bound.
Felix, Happy.


Act. 25. cap.
Festus, Portius (by Nero the Emperor) was made President in the room of
Felix. Which Festus within three days he came to his Province, ascended from
Cesarea to Jerusalem, where the hye Priests and Elders of the Jews, informed
him of Paul, desiring his favor against him, and that he would send for him
to have the matter pleaded there. Whose request if Festus had granted, they
were fully bent to have slain Paul in the way coming to Jerusalem: But
Festus made answer that the prisoner should remain at Cesarea until his
coming, whither (said he) I entende shortly to repair, and if there be any
among you that is able to accuse him, let them go down with me, and they shall
be heard. And so when Festus was come to Cesarea, the next day after he sat
in judgment upon Paul. Against whom the Jews laid many sore matters to his
charge, which they were not able to prove, so long as Paul answered for
himself. Then Festus (willing to do the Jews a pleasure) said unto Paul:
wylt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me.
Then said Paul: I see no cause wherefore I should go thither, but may be
judged as well here as there. But forasmuch as the Jews seeks my
condemnation against all right and Justice, I appeal to the Emperor. Well
(said Festus) thou have appealed to the Emperor, and to him shall thou go.
Within a few days after this, it chanced King Agrippa with Bernice his wife,
to come unto Cesarea to salute and welcome Festus the new President. And
during the Kings aboade there, Festus (by occasion) rehearsed Paul's matter
unto him, saying: Felix my predecessor left here a certain man in hold, whom
the hye Priests and Elders of the Jews at Jerusalem, complained on, desiring
me for their sakes to give sentence against him. To whom I answered, that it
was not the custom of the Romans, to give sentence against any man, before
his accusers were brought before him, that he might make answer for himself.
And so when his accusers were come hither, I on the next day sat in judgment,
and commanded the prisoner to be brought forth before me, against whom, his
accusers brought no accusation of such things as I supposed they would have
done, but demanded certain questions of him concerning their own
superstition, and laying to his charge one Jesus which was dead, whom he
affirmed to be risen from death to life again. And forasmuch as I wilt not well
what to say in this matter, I asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem, and
there to be judged. And when he had refused that, and appealed to Caesar, I
commanded him to be kept in prison, until I might have occasion to send him
to Caesar. Then said the King to Festus: I have heard much of that same Jesus
and his Disciples, and therefore am much desirous to hear the fellow speak my
self, before he go to Caesar. Whereupon, Festus on the next morrow brought forth
Paul into the Common hall before Agrippa the King, saying on this wise: King
Agrippa, and you all that be here present, ye see this man, whom all the Jews
have complained on to me, both at Jerusalem and here, crying that he ought not
to live any longer, and yet have I made inquiry, and can find nothing worthy
of death that he has committed: nevertheless, for as much as he has appealed
to the Emperor, I am determined to send him thither, and yet because I have
no certain thing to write unto his Majesty, I have brought him forth before
you, and specially to the King Agrippa, that after examination had, I might
have somewhat to write, for me think it stands with no reason, to send a
prisoner, and not to show withal what is laid to his charge. And when Agrippa
saw Paul stand before him, he Act. 26. cap.
said: fellow, thou have pardon to speak for thy self, if thou have any
thing to say in thy defense, say on. Then began Paul to speak, and made such
a pithy declaration of his former life, and of his calling to Christ, that
Festus (which was not skillful in the Jews religion) thought all his sayings
to be but madness, and cried out with a loud voice, saying that he was beside
himself, and that much learning had made him mad. Then after sentence given
by King Agrippa that Paul should be sent to the Emperor, Festus delivered
him and certain 7. ^.
other prisoners in bands to the Emperors under Captain named Julius, who
conueyghed them into Italy. Festus, Sol^mne, or Holyday.


the patriarch Gad stands in armor with a sword, outside a town, over
discarded armor and weapons..8.
Gad animo magnus belli uirtute probatus
Victoris lauds abstulit ense suo
Ex me prognatus uates proeclarus Elias
Quem currus uiuum igneus eripu


1. Cor. 16. c.
Fortunatus, was a faithful Soldier of Christ, whom Paul sent in the
company of Stephana and Achaicus with his letters from Philippos to the
Corinthians. Fortunatus, Luckie.


G.
Tobi. 1. ^.
GAbelus, was a certain man of the kinrede and Tribe of Tobias, dwelling in
the country of Medes in a City called Rages. And being fallen into poverty,
Tobias lent him ten Talents of silver upon a byll of his hand, whereby Gabelus
was 9. cap.
greatly helped, and in process paid the same again to Tobie when he had
need, with great thanks. Read Tobie the younger. Gabelus, The end, or
border, or thresholde, and entrance.


Genesis 30. b.
Gad, the son of Jacob and Silpha. When the Tribe of Gad had long iourneied
with the reast of the Israelites Number. 32. cap.
their brethren, toward the land of Canaan: Gad and Ruben with the half
Tribe of Manasses, desired of Moses to have their possession on this side of
Jordan Eastwarde (and not on the other side) because it was a land meet for
Cattle, whereof they had great store. To whom Moses answered, saying: Shall
your brethren go harnessed before the Lord, and ye sit still and do nothing?
wherefore will ye discourage the hearts of the people? so did your fathers when
I sent them from Cades Barn, to search and see the land, discouraging the
hearts of the people, reporting so much evil of the land, that they were
ready to turn into Egypt again, whose doings did so provoke the Lord to
anger, that he swear that none of them all should see that good land, save
Caleb and Joshua. Therefore (said he) if ye do now leave your brethren, and
will not go harnessed before them until the Lord have cast out their enemies,
ye do so much sin against the Lord, that he will surely find it out. And
when they heard Moses say so, they answered, saying: We do not intend to
leave our brethren, our meaning is nothing less than so to do, but rather
that we might be suffered to make in this place, sheepefoldes for our cattle,
and houses for our wives and children, to leave them therein, which being done,
we our selves will go forth before our brethren harnessed, and will not return
home to our houses, until we have brought them to their places, and that every
one of them be possessed in his enheritance. Then Moses contented with this
answer, granted their request. And so they builded sheepecotes for their
Cattle, and houses for their families, wherein they left them, and went forth
with their brethren, until they had performed their promise, and then returned
home again. And when they had rested Joshua. 22. cap.
a while at home, they went and builded an Altar fast by Jordan, and that a
very great one. And when the reast of the children of Israel, heard that the
children of Ruben, Gad, and Manasses, had buylt them an Altar in This co^trye
also was called Candan, because the Amorits dwelling there, were called
Cananites.
Geliloth beside Jordan, even on the same side that they were of in the land
of Canaan, they were sore offended, and so angry, that they gathered themselves
together to battle against them. And being ready prepared, they sent Phinehes
the son of Eleazar the Priest, and with him ten Lords, of every chief house
one, to know for what purpose they had made them an Altar, and whether it
were to rebel against the Lord or no. And when they had done their
Commission, the other answered, and said that God was their witness, that
they had done it for no evil purpose, either to rebel against the Lord, or
to swerve from his laws and ordinances in any point, but rather for this
consideration, to be a witness between us and you, and our generations after
us, least it should chance another day, your children to say unto ours: what
have ye to do with the Lord God of Israel (ye children of Ruben and of Gad)
the Lord (ye see) has made Jordan a border between us and you, and therefore
ye can have no part in the Lord with us, and so should your children make our
children cease from fearing the Lord. And therefore to prevent such an
inconvenience, we took aduisement, and made this Altar, that if any such
kind of talk should be ministered of your children to ours in time to come,
that then our children might answer and say again: Behold the facion of the
Altar of the Lord, which our fathers made, neither for burnt offerings nor
sacrifices, but for a witness between us and you, that our part is in the
Lord as well as yours. And when Phinehes and the other Lords had heard their
answer, they were well content, and returned, and so the matter ended. They
called the Altar, our witness that the Lord is God. Gad, a Band, or
Garrison.


1. Reg. 22. a.
Gad the Prophet, came to David lying in the land of Moab, saying: abide not
in hold, but depart and go 2. Reg. 24. c.
into the land of Judah. At another time when David had offended the Lord in
numbering his people, Gad was sent unto him, to give him choice of three
things, whether he would have Three years of famine were past for the
Gibeonytes matter, and this was the fourth year, to the which should have
been added other three years. 1. Par. 21. b.
seven years hunger, or three months to fly before his enemies, or but
three days pestilence in the land.

Gaius, a certain Act. 19. c. 20. a.
faithful brother dwelling in Derba, was one of Paul's companions, and in
great ieoperdie of his life at Ephesus, through the sedition of Demetrius the
Siluersmith, but after the business was ended, he accompanied Paul into Asia.
To this man S. John wrote his third Epistle. Gaius, the Lord, or Master of
the tongue.


Act. 18. b. c.
Gallio, was Proconsull of Achaia, to wit, the Lord Deputy under Caesar the
Emperor in the country of Achaia. In this time, it happened the Jews which
had made a conspiracy against Paul, to bring him before the place of
judgment where Gallio sat as Judge, accusing Paul unto him, of new
learning. But when Gallio perceived the controucrsie between the Jews and
Paul, was concerning Iewishe religion, he sought to rid his hands of them:
and preventing Paul (which was ready to speak in his own defense) said: Dye
Jews, if it were a matter of wrong, or an evil deed, reason would that I
should hear you, but if it be a question of words, of names, or of your
law, look unto it your self, for I will be no Judge in such matters. And so
caused them to avoid the place. Gallio, giving Milk, or having Milk.


Act. 5. f. g.
Gamaliel, one of the ancient Pharisees, was Paul's Schoolemaister, and in
high estimation among the people, both for his excellent knowledge in the law,
and for his singular wisdom. When the Apostles were brought and other of the
Counsel for preaching in the name of Christ, whose lives (he perceived) the
Counsel sought: he desired that for a while the Apostles might depart out of
the Counsel house. And when they were gone, he said: ye men of Israel, take
heed to your selves what ye intend to do as touching these men, for before
these days rose up one Theudas boasting himself, to whom resorted a number
of men, about. 400. who was slain, and they all which believed him, were
scattered abroad, and brought to naught. After this man, rose up one Judas of
Galile, in the time when Tribute began, who drew away much people after him,
he also perished, and all that obeyed him were scattered abroad. And now I
say unto you, refrain your selves from these men, and let them alone: For if
this Counsel, or this work be of men, it will come to naught: but if it be of
God, ye cannot destroy it, least ye be found to strive against God. Gamaliel,
Gods reward.


4. Re. 25. f. g.
Gedalia, the son of Ahicam, was a great Captain under Nabuchodonosor, whom
he made gouerneur Iere. 40. cap.
of the land of Judah to rule the rascal people which he had left behind him
at the destruction of Jerusalem, who entreated the people so gently and so
friendly, that all the Jews which were scattered about in the land (hearing
of his gentleness) resorted unto Gedaliah, and found great favor at his
hand, for the which they bare unto him their hearty good wills. Insomuch
that when Baal King of the Ammonites had sent one Ismael (under pretense of
friendship) to slay him. The Captains Murdercommitted under pretense of
friendship.
of the Jews (having knowledge thereof) were so sore afraid of Gedaliah,
least any misfortune should chance him, that they told him of Ismaels
conspiracy. And one among the reast named Iohanan, offered himself to dispach
Ismael out of the way so secretly, that the deed should never be known. But
Gedaliah not crediting their words, neither yet mistrusting Ismael, would
suffer nothing to be done unto him. And so forsaking the Iere. 41. a.
counsel and admonition of his friends, and trusting to much to Ismael, he
was of him (in fine) most guylefully slain within his own house. Gedalia, the
Greatness of the Lord, the hem, or skirt of the Lord.


Iudic. 6. cap.
Gedeon, the son of Ioas, was of the Tribe of Manasses. To whom the Angel
of the Lord appeared as he was threshing of Wheat, saying: The Lord is with
thee thou valiant man. Then said Gedeon, if the Lord be with us, why is all
this cuill come upon us? we have heard (by our fathers) of all the miracles
which the Lord did for his people in Egypt, and now has he forsaken us, and
given us over into the hands of the Madianites. Well (said the Angel) go
thy way in this thy might and strength which I have given thee, for thou shall
deliver Israel out of the hand of their enemies. Oh Lord (quoth Gedeon)
wherewith shall I save Israel, seeing my kindred is but poor, and I the least
of all my fathers house. With my help (says the Lord) shall thou save
Israel, for I will be with thee, and thou shall smite the Madianites as if they
were but one man. Then I beseech thee, O Lord (quoth Gedeon) show me a sign
that thou talkest with me, depart not hence till I come again with mine
offering, which offering being brought and dressed accordingly, the Angel had
no sooner touched it with the end of his rod, but fire came out of the stone
whereon the sacrifice lay, and consumed it altogether, and so the Angel
vanished out of sight. The same night following (at the Lords commandment)
Gedeon went and destroyed the Altar of Baal which his father had made, and cut
down all the Grove about it, for the which deed, the people (having knowledge
thereof) would have stoned him to death: Then By this example of Ioas we ought
to justify the^ that are zealous of Gods cause, though all the multitude be
against us.
Ioas (to save Gedeon his son) said unto them: what will ye do, will ye
plead Baals cause, or will ye be his defenders? If Baal be a god, let him
revenge his own cause upon him that has done the deed: And from that day
forth, Gedeon was called Ierobaal, that is: let Baal plead for himself,
because he has broken down his Altar. At this time, the Madianites and the
Amalakites had pitched themselves in the valley of Iezrael, and the spirit of
the Lord came upon Gedeon, so that he called his people togithers to go
against them. And for to be the better confirmed in his vocation, he took a
fleece of wool, and laid it in the threshing place, and made his request unto
God, saying: Oh Lord, if thou will let the dew (this night) fall upon the
fleece only, and be dry on all the ground beside, then shall I be sure that
thou will save Israel by my hands, as thou have said: And on the morrow when
Gedeon came to take up the fleece, it was full of dew, and the ground dry
all about. Then said Gedeon, O Lord, be not angry, that I prove thee once
more: let now the fleece be dry only, and dew upon all the earth, and so in
the morning, the fleece was dry, and the ground all dewy. Gedeon now, being
thus confirmed, pitched his host to fight with his enemies. But when the Lord
saw the number of his army, he said to Gedeon: the people that thou have with
thee, are to many, therefore make a proclamation thorowout all thine host,
that whosoever is timorous or fearful, let him depart home again, and there
returned.xxij. thousand, and ten thousand remained. Then said the Lord to
Gedeon, the people are yet to many: Bring them down to the water side, and I
will appoint them that shall go with thee. So many as do lap the water with
their tongues as Dogs does, shall thou take with thee, and the reast that
kneeleth down upon their knees to drink shall thou resuse, as men unmeet for
this purpose. And when it came to trial, all kneeled down to drink, saving
300. which lapped This story here of Gedeon and Ionathas* 1. Re. 14. b. c. and
of Sennacherib. 4. Reg. 19. g. does manifestlye show, that no King (as the
prophet David says) is preserved by the multitude of his men, or strength of
his armies, but is stayde and holden up, by the providence of God.
water with their hands, and those Gedeon took with him, and sent the rest
away. Then the Lord to strengthen Gedeon (least he should faint in so great an
enterprise) bade him take Phara his servant with him, and go down that night
to the host of the Madianites, and harcken what they did say. And when they
came near to the host, they heard one man say to another: I have dreamed a
dream, and me thought a lofe of Barley bread tumbled into the host of Madian,
and came unto a Tent and smote it, that it fell and lay along on the ground.
This is nothing else (quoth his fellow) save the sword of Gedeon the son of
Ioas a man of Israel: for into his hands has God delivered Madian, and all
the host. Then Gedeon (hearing this) praised God, and returned to his men, who
were so animated with his joyful tidings, that most courageously they fell
upon the infinite number of the Madianites, and overthrew them, and put them to
flight every one, in the which flight, y^ Ephraims (on the other side of
Jordan) took Oreb and Zeb (two mighty Captains of the Madianites) and sent
their heads to Gedeon, Iudic. 8. cap.
who was following the chase after Zebah and Zalmana (Kings of Madian) which
two (at the last) he took and led them back to the men of Socoth and Phanuel
(who had denied him sustenance before) and said unto them: Behold, here be the
men by whom ye vpbrayded me, saying: are the hands of Zeba and Zalmana already
in thine hands, that we should give bread unto thy weary people, I told you
then, that when the Lord had delivered them into my hands, I would reiurne
and tear your flesh with Thorns and Briers of the wilderness, and break
down the tower of Phanuel: And so to perform his promise, he fell upon the
men of Socoth and Phanuel, and put them to most paynefull torments and death,
and slew Zebah and Zalmana, with his own hands. Thus he delivered Israel out
of the hands of the Madianites which had kept them seven years in
subjection. And when he had judged them forty years, he dyed, leaving behind
him. 70. sons (for he had many Wives) beside Abimelech, which his Concubine
bare unto him in the City of Sichem. But when Gedeon was dead, the Israelites
turned from God again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baal-bereth
their God, forgetting the Lord their God, which had delivered them out of the
hands of their enemies: neither showed they mercy on the house of Ierobaal,
according to all the goodness which he had showed unto them: But contrarywife
(like men unthankful, and void of all faithfulness) consented to the utter
destruction of all his posterity. Gedeon, a Breaker, or destroyer.


4. Reg. 5. cap.
Gehezi, waited upon Eliseus the Prophet, and was his servant. On a time, there
came to his Master out of the land of Siria, a certain Prince named Naaman,
to be helped of his leprosy. The which Prince being restored to health,
offered to Eliseus a great reward, which he refused. And when Gehezi saw the
great man gone, and that his Master had received nothing, he then (being
stricken with covetousness) followed after Naaman. And when the Prince saw the
Prophets servant come running so fast after him, he (for the reverence he bare
to his Master) descended from his Charret to meet him, and asked of him if
all were well with his Master or no. Yea (said Gehezi) all is well: But even
now there is come to my Master from Mount Ephraim, two young men of the
sons of the Prophets, wherefore he has sent me, to desire thee to let him
have one Talent of Silver, and two change of garments. Then the Prince (of
his liberality) gave him two Talents, and made his men to carry the money and
stuff after Gehezi. And when the men had brought it nie unto the place where
as he would have it, he took if of their hands, and let them depart, and
conueyghed it privily into his own chamber. And as soon as Gehezi came in the
presence of his Master, he demanded where he had been. No where, quoth he. No
(said Eliseus) went not my heart with thee when the man turned again from his
Charret to meet thee? Is it now a time to receive money or garments? Well,
forasmuch as thou have offended in this, the leprosy of Naaman shall eleaue
unto thee, and to thy seed for ever. And so he went out from his Master a
Leper as white as snow. Read more of Gehezi, in the Stories of Eliseus his
Master. Gehezi, Vallie of vision.


Ex. 2. d. 1^. ^.
Gerson, the son of Moses, had a brother called Eliezer. Their mothers name
was called Zephora y^ daughter of Raguel. But of Gerson ye son of Leuy came ye
Gersonites, Exodus 6. c.
who had the governance of the habitacion, within Number. 3. c. d. 26. g.
ye tabernacle. Gerson, his banishment, or the strangers change.


Joshua. 9. cap.
Gibeonites. The Gibeonites hearing of the great destruction that Joshua had
made at Jericho and Hai, were in such fear that they wist not how to save
their lives, but by this policy. When they perceived Joshua to draw nigh unto
Gibeon. They chose out certain men among them to send as ambassadors to
Joshua, and made their provision of bread dried up and hored: And put their
wine into old bottels all to rent and torn: and shodde themselves with old
clouted shooen: and put on their backs old garments, and so sent them forth
to Joshua to obtain peace. And when Joshua looked upon them, and beheld their
simple state: he asked what they were, and from whence they came: They
answered, from a far country are thy servants come for the name of the
Lord thy God: for we have heard of his fame and power, and what he did in the
land of Egypt, and in all other places till now. And long have we travailed
to come hither as ye may see, for this our food, the day we came forth was
hot, our bottels, shoes, and garments all new, and now are they old and
torn, and our bread hored and mouled, wherefore we shall desire your favor
and peace. Then Joshua (believing it had been so) swore unto the Gibeonites, and
made a covenant of peace with them, and let them go. Within three days after
it fortuned the Israelites to come to the City of Gibeon, thinking to have
destroyed it. But when they saw that they were the people, which (a little
before) had obtained peace at their hands, would not slay them, because of
their oath, but went to Joshua and told him. Then Joshua sent for them; and
demanded wherefore they had so deceived him. They answered, it was told us,
that God commanded Moses, to give you this land, and to slay all the
inhabitants thereof, and therefore were we forced to make this provision for our
lives. And now we be in your hands, to d^e with us as shall please you. W^ll
(said Joshua) for our oath sake ye shall have your lives. But for as much as ye
have so craftilye deceived us, the Lord has determined, that ye shall be in
bondage under Israel, all the days of your lives, and be hewers of wood, and
water drawers for the congregation and house of God continually: And so the
Israelites took their Cities, but saved their lives. After this, Joshua. 10. a.
b.
the Kings of the Amorites (hearing how the Gibeonites had made peace with
Israel) came upon them, and besieged Gibeon, which was the greatest City in
all the kingdom of the Amorites, whereupon, the Gibeonites were constrained to
send to Joshua for his aid, who came from Gilgal, with a great power rescued
them, and took the Kings of the Amorites (which were five in number) and
hanged them on five several trees, and destroyed all their people and
countries. Thus the Gibeonites 2. Reg. 21. a. b
continued in bondage under the Israelites with their lives, until the time of
King Saul, who then for a zeal he had to the children of Israel and Judah,
slew a great number of them, which deed God punished in the days of King
David, at what time he sent an hunger upon the land, which continued by the
space of three years, for when David enquired at the Lord, the cause of that
plague, answer was made him of God, that it was for Saul and the house of
blood, who had killed the Gibeonites, which Gibeonites were none of the seed
of Israel, but a remnant of the Amorites, with whom the children of Israel had
made a bond of peace. Then David asking the Gibeonites what he should do for
them, and wherewith he should recompense them, they said: we will neither
have silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house, nor that any man of Israel be
killed for our sakes, but the man that has consumed us, and imagined to bring
us to naught, him will we destroy. Therefore let his seven sons be delivered
unto us, that we may hang them up before the Lord. Then David caused the two
sons of Rizpa (Saules Concubine) and the five sons of Here is Michol taken
for Merob, which was wife to Adriel, as appears. 1. Reg. 1^. d. For Michol
was the wife of Phaltiel, and had never child, as appears. 1. Reg. 25. g.
2. Reg. 6. d.
Michol whom she bare to Adriel, to be delivered unto the Gibeonites, who
took and hanged them up on an hill before the Lord. And thus were the
Gibeonites revenged on Saul.

Giliad, was the Number. 26. d.
son of Machir, and his children were these, Hiezer, Helech, Asriel, Sechem,
Semida, and Hepher. Giliad, an heap of witness.


Godolia, look Gedalia.

Golias, was a 1. Reg. 17.
mighty strong Giant, whom the Philistines had brought with them to battle
against the host of Israel. His stature was six cubits and a span. His
helmet upon his head was of brass, and the Boots on his legs of the same.
His coat of Fence weyed 5000. sicles. The shaft of his Spear which he bare in
his hand was like a Weauers beam. And the head upon the same weighed. 600.
sicles of iron. This man being thus armed, came out from the Philistines (one
bearing his shield before him) and standing between the two hosts in a
valley, he cried to the host of Israel, saying: Why are ye come to set your
battle in array? am not I a Philistine, and you the servants of Saul? choose
you out a man, and let him come down to me. And if he be able to fight with
me, and to kill me, then will we be your servants: and if I can overcome him,
and kill him, then shall ye be our servants, and serve us. Thus came he day by
day defying the whole host of Israel, the space of forty days long,
wherewith the Israelites were sore afraid and discomsited, and durst not abide
his sight. But God (who by his secret providence had appointed out a man to
match him) caused Isai to send his young son David to the host of Israel to see
his brethren how they did. And as he stood with them, and heard the
despytefull words of Golias which he spoke against the holy host of Israel:
The spirit of God (even at that instant) smote such a courage into the heart of
David, that he slipped away from his brethren unto the people (whom he saw in
great fear) and said: What shall be done to the man that kills this
Philistine, and takes away the shame from Israel? and what is this
uncircumcised heathen, that he should thus reuyle the host of the living God.
David uttering this bold manner of speech once or twyse, he was (at the last)
brought before King Saul, to whom he said on this wise: Oh King, let no man's
heart fail him, or be afraid this day, for I thy servant will go and fight
with yonder Philistine. Thou art not able to stand in his hands (quoth the
King) for he is a man brought up all the days of his life in feats of war,
and thou art yet but a child, without experience or knowledge thereof. Then
David to strengthen the weak faith of the King, said thus unto him: As thy
servant was keeping his fathers sheep, there came a Lion and a Bear
likewise, and took a sheep out of the flock. Then I (not fearing the force
of these two cruel beasts) ran out, first after the Lion, and took the
pray out of his mouth, and in spite of his bearde I slew him. Likewise I served
the Bear. Wherefore I have no doubt, but as the Lord did aid me then, so
will he now against this bragging Philistine, that has so rayled on the host
of the living God. Then Saul (perceiving the power of God to be with David)
put his armor upon him. But David (not being wont to such) put it of again,
and took him to his old accustomed weapon, which was his slyng. And so,
having that in his hand, and his shepeherdes bag about his neck, with a
few little stones provided therein, he gat him down to the place where the
Philistine stood waiting for a man to encounter with him. And as he saw David
draw near, and beholding the manner of his weapon that he bare in his hand, he
disdained him greatly. And cursing David by all his gods, he said in a great
fury: Am I a Dog, that thou come to me with staves, come hither my
child, and I will give thy flesh to the fowls of the air, and beasts of the
field. Nay (quoth David) thou come to me with sword, spear, and shield,
but I am come unto thee, in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the
host of Israel, whom thou do despise and blaspheme. He shall this day
deliver thee into my hands, and I shall smite thee, and take thy head from
thee, and give the carcasses of all your host to the fowls of the air, and
beasts of the field to devour and eat, that thou, and all the world may
know, that there is a God in Israel. The Philistyne now was in such a chafe,
that he began to buskell him to his weapon, thinking to have dispatched David
with no great ado. But David having his slyng prepared ready in his hand,
slang out the stone at his face (the Lord directing the same) and smote the
Philistine so even, and deep in his foreheade, that he fell down groueling
unto the earth, and then ran David and smote of his head. Thus was this
monstrous Gyaunt confounded, and all the host of the Philistines put to flight
and slain. Golia, a Departing, or going away: or a heaping together, a
turning, or opening and detecting.


Ose. 1. a.
Gomer. The Lord appearing to Ose the Prophet, said: Go thy way, and take an
harlot to thy wife, and get children by her, for the land has comm^tted great
whooredome against the Lord. So he went and took Not that the Prophet did
this thing in effect, but he saw this in a vision, or else was commanded by
God to set forth under this Parable or figure, the ydolatrie of the sinagoge,
and of the people her children.
Gomor the daughter of Deblaim, who bare unto him two sons and one daughter.
The first son was called Iesrael: the daughter Lornhamah: and the second
son, La^my. Gomer, a Consumer.


Gorgias, a man of great 1. Mac. 3. c. 4. a. b.
experience in war, was Governor of Idumea, and one (among other noble
captains) whom Lysias (the ouerseer of all the Kings business) sent against
the Jews to destroy them. And thinking by his policy to have stolen upon
Judas Machabeus by night, and so to have overcome him, he was prevented, so
that he durst not meet Judas in the field, but fled into the land of the
heathen. And when Josephus and Azarias took upon them, in the absence of
Judas 2. Mac. 8. b.
(contrary to his commandment) to go out against the heathen to get them a
name, Gorgias issued 1. Mac. 5. f.
out of the City of Iamnia, and slew two thousand of their men, and chased
Josephus and Azarias to the borders of Iewrie. Finally, after many conflictes
with the Jews, a 2. Mac. 10. c. 12. f.
certain Captain named Dositheus had almost taken him, if rescue had not
been, through the which he escaped, and fled into Moresa, and was never seen
more. Read the Story of Dositheus. Gorgias, Terrible.


H.
3. Reg. 11. c. d
HAdad, being but a little boy borne in the land of Edom, and sprung of the
King of Edoms seed (what time as David went about to destroy all the men
children in Edom) fled with certain Edomites of his fathers servants into the
land of Egypt. Where (in process) he gate such favor with Pharao King of the
land, that he gave him great possessions, and married him to the Queens
sister, who bare unto him a son called Genubath, which child was brought up
in King Pharaos h^use, among his children. But when tidings was brought to
Hadad of the death of David and Ioab, he went to the King, and besought him to
let him depart into his own Country again, why said the King, what have
thou lacked here with me, that thou would now so feign return home again?
Nothing said Hadad, but that I have a mind to see my country, and therefore I
pray thee let me go. And so he departed out of Egypt from Pharao, for The Lord
had reserved this ydolater to punish and scourge his people for their sins.
the Lord had stirred him up to be an adversary to Solomon, who had turned
his heart from the Lord his God, and served strange gods. And so Hadad reigned
over Siria, and abhorred Israel sore, and vexed them so long as Solomon
reigned. Hadad, Joy.


2. Reg. 8. a. b. 10. d.
Hadarezer, the son of Reob King of Zoba, had long war with Thoi King of
Hamoth. And at the last as he went to recover the borders by the river Pherar,
David met with him, and took 1700. horsemen of his host, and. 20. thousand
footmen, and cut of the hoofes of all his Charet horses, saving an. 100* which
he reserved to himself. And took away his shyldes of Gold and brought them
to Jerusalem. And took out of his Cities exceeding much Brass, whereof
Solomon afterward made all the Brazen vessels in the Temple of the Lord.
Again, when this Hadarezer (withal the Kings that served him) went to rescue
Hanon King of the Ammonites against David, he lost. 700. Charettes, and. 4000.
footmen, and his Captain general slain. Then the Kings which served
Hadarezer, being so discomfited, made peace with David and served him, and
never would help the Ammonites more. Hadarezer. Bewtifull help.


Genesis 9. d.
Ham, was the second son of Noe. Who (on a time) seeing his Father lie
unseemly discovered in his Tent, laughed him to scorn: And in derision and
contempt of his father, brought Sem and Iapheth his two brethren to see the
uncomely sight: But they, moved with shamefastness and honesty, covered their
fathers secrets, and would not look upon them. And when Noe was awaked out of
sleep and perceived what Ham had done: He would not curse him whom the Lord
had blessed, but said to Of this Canaan came the Canaanites that wicked Nation,
who were also cursed of God.
Canaan his son (which had also, as some suppose, deryded his Graundfather
Noe): Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servant shall he be unto his brethren.
Ham. Indignacion, or Heat.


Ester. 3. cap.
Haman, was the son of Amada, and served Ahasuerus King of Persia, who so
highlye promoted him, that every man bowed the knee to Haman, and did as much
honor unto him (in a manner) as they did to the King himself. And being thus
exalted above all other Princes about the King, and honored of all men, there
was notwithstanding a certain Jew borne, named Mardocheus, which would
neither bow nor bend unto him as other did, which being marked of Haman, he
took so great indignacion against Mardocheus, that he sought his utter
destruction, and purchased a license of the King, for ten thousand talents of
Silver, to have him and all the Jews destroyed in one day. But while the
writings were a making, and posts sent into all quarters for the Jews
dispatch, Mardocheus gat knowledge of all Hamans wicked intents and purposes,
and found the means to have the same uttered unto Queen Hester. Who then (to
save Mardocheus and all the Jews) did ieoperde her self to go to the King,
and found the means to bring him and Haman to a banquet, which she had
prepared. Now was Haman so proud and joyful of the Queens favor, that he
went home to his house and called all his friends together, making great boast
to them of his glory, riches, and authority: But chiefelye what special
favor Queen Ester bare unto him above all men, in so much she had invited no
man to her banquet with the King, save only him: And to morrow (quoth he) I
must be there again. But yet all this does not satisfy me, so long as I see
Mardocheus the Jew sitting at the Kings gate. Marry (said Zares his wife) let
there be a pair of galowes made of. 50. cubits hye, and speak to morrow unto
the King, that Mardocheus may be hanged thereon. And so Haman following his
wives counsel, caused the gallows to be prepared, and on the morrow gat him
to the Court, and standing there waiting when the King would call for him,
that he might speak to dispatche Mardocheus. The King (who the night before
had looked the Chronicles and found out the fidelity of Mardocheus) sent for
Haman, and said: what shall be done to the man, whom the King would honor?
Then Haman thinking the King had gone about to honor none but him, said: Let
the man whom the King intends to bring to honor, be arayned in such Royal
apparel as the King uses to wear, and set upon the Kings horse with the
Crown Imperial upon his head, and command one of the Kings Princes to carry
him about the streates of the City with a proclamacion before him, saying:
Thus shall it be done to the man, whom the King pleases to bring to honor.
Then said the King: take the raiment and the horse, and go thou to Mardocheus
the Jew which sits at my gate, and fail not to do unto him, all that thou
have said. Then went Haman about the Kings commandment, and performed all
things according to his mind, which being done, he gat him home with an
heavy heart, to his wife and friends, declaring unto them what things had
happened unto him. Then said they? If Mardocheus be of the seed of the Jews
before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but
shall surely fall before him. And while they were thus talking, a messenger
came for Haman to go with the King to the banquet: at the end of which Banquet,
Ester opened all the wickedness of Haman before the King, who took the matter
so grievously that he rose from the boorde, and went into the garden in a great
anger. Then Haman (perceiving a mischief toward him) went and fell down at
the beds feet or coutche whereon the Queen sat, and besought her grace for
his life. And when the King came in again, and found him with the Queen, he
said: will he force the Queen also, before me in the house, which word was
no sooner gone out of the Kings mouth, but Hamans It was the manner of the
Persians, when one was out of the Kings favor, to cover his face.
face was covered, and so had out, and hanged upon the Gallows, which he had
prepared in his own house for Mardocheus. Read the storye of Ester, and of
Mardocheus. Haman, Troubling: or making hurlye burly, or preparing.


2. Par. 16. c. d.
Hanani, was a Prophet sent of God to Asa King of Judah, declaring unto him, how
greatly he had displeased the Lord, for making a covenant with Benhadad King
of Siria, and for his message doing was cast into prison. Read the story of
Asa. Hanani, Gracious, or Merciful, or Giving.


Iere. 28. cap.
Hananiah, the son of Azur, was a false Prophet, which prophesied unto the
people of Israel, that God would break the yoke of Nabuchadnezar King of
Babylon, from the neck of all Nations within the space of two years, and in
token thereof took the yoke from the Prophet Ieremies neck and brake it. But
Jeremy the true Prophet of God, reproved the false prophecy of Hananiah,
saying: That in steed of the yoke of woodde which he had taken from his
neck, the Lord would put a yoke of iron upon the necks of all these Nations
that they should serve the King of Babylon, and that the false Prophet
Hananiah himself should dye the same year: which things came truly to
pass, as Jeremy had spoken. Hananiah. Grace of the Lord.


2. Reg. 10. a.
Hanon, was the son of Nahas King of the Amonites, unto who^ David most
gently sent to comfort him upon the death of his father, which gentleness was
most vngentlye and unthankfully taken, of the Lords and counsaylers of the
young King Hanon. Who persuaded the young King, that David had not sent to
comfort him upon the death of his Father: But had rather sent a sort of spies
(under the color of friendship (to seek the means how to destroy his
Cities and whole Realm. Upon the which false and dishonest surmise of his
wicked counseylers, Hanon caused the one half of every man's bearde to be
shaven, and their garments to be cut of hard by the Buttockes, and so sent
them home again to David, with much shame and vilany. Upon which occasion
Ingratitude punished.
David became his utter enemy, and made such hot war against him, that in
conclusion Hanon was taken, and lost his Regal Crown, which David put upon
his own head, and wore it before Hanons face, and carried away all his
treasure and Jewels, took his people, whereof some he sawed in two pieces:
over other some he caused Carts new and sharp shodde with iron to be driven:
some he took and shred their flesh, as Cooks do pie meat, and cast other
some in whote burning ouens. Thus was Hanon rewarded, for his ingratitude.
Hanon, Faithful, or true, a Schoolemaister, and the mothers son, or Child.


4. Reg. ^. c. d.
Hazael, was a certain great man, which served Benhadad King of Siria, which
Benhadad fortuning to fall sick, sent Hazael to Eliseus the Prophet to know
whyther he should recover of his disease or no. And when the Prophet saw
Hazael, he could not look him in the face for shame, but cast his head a
side and wept. Then Hazael marueyling at the Prophets behavior toward him,
demanded of Eliseus wherefore he wept: I weep (quoth the Prophet) to see the
great evils that thou shall do to the Children of Israel: Thou shall brcake
down their strong Cities and set them on fire, and slaye their young men with
the sword, and dashe the brains out of the sucking children, and all to rent
in pieces the women with Child. Then said Hazael, do thou make thy
servant a dog* that I should lack so much humanity and pity, to do
these things. Well (said the Prophet) thou shall do as I have said, for the
Lord has showed me that thou shall be King of Siria. And so Hazael departed
home to the King his master, and told him that he should recover, for so the
Prophet had said unto him. But on the next morrow, when Hazael saw his time,
he took a thick Under the pretense to refreshe or ease him, he styfled him
with this cloth.
cloth and dipped it in water, and spread it so on the Kings face that he dyed:
After whose death Hazael reigned in his steed. And being stablished 4. Reg. 8.
g.
in his Kingdom, he made war with Ioram 2. Par. 22. b.
King Achabs son, and was a cruel aduersarye to Israel, all the days of his
life. Hazael, seeing God.


4. Reg. 22. b.
Helkia, was the hye Priest in the days of Josias, who in repayring the Temple
of the Lord, chanced (by * The copye that Mosess left them, as appears.
the providence of God) to find the book of the law, the which he sent to
the King by Saphan the Scribe, which he readde unto him. Helkia, the Lords
portion, or part, the Lords lenity or gentleness. 2. Par. 34. c.



2. Mac. 3. cap.
Heliodorus, being in great favor with Seleucus King of Asia, and Steward of
his house, was sent to Jerusalem to fet away the treasure out of the Temple,
which one Simon the governor thereof had betrayed unto the King. And being
come to Jerusalem, he was lovingly received of Onias the hye Priest into the
City. But when Heliodorus had uttered the cause of his coming, and that his
commission was to bring the money unto the King, there was no small fear
thorowout the whole city. For then all men from the highest to the lowest were
so oppressed with sorrow and heaviness, that they wyste not what to do, but
fell to prayer, lifting up their eyes to Heaven, and calling upon him which had
made a law concerning stuff given to keep, that he would safely preserve
the same, which was there committed in custody. And while the Priests and
people were thus lamenting and crying upon God. And on the other side
Heliodorus personally with his men of war about the treasury: There appeared
an horse with a terrible man sitting upon him decte in harnasse of gold, which
horse smote at Heliodorus with his fore feet to beat him from the place. Also
there appeared two fair and bewtyfull young men in goodly apparel, which
stood on each side of Heliodorus and scourged him, so long that he fell down
to the ground as dead, and so was carried out of the Temple, without speech or
hope of life, whereby the great power of God was manifest and known. Then
certain of Heliodorus friends, besought Onias to call upon God to give him
his life, which was even at that time giving up the ghost. Then Onias (least
the King should suspect the Jews had done him some harm) called upon God and
obtained his life. And being revived to health again, the two young men which
had scourged him before, appeared and said: Thank Onias the hye Priest for
thy life, at whose prayer the Lord has restored thee, and now that God has
scourged thee for thine offenses, give him praise and thanks, and make his
might and power manifest and open to all men. And when the men had spoken these
words and were vanished away, Heliodorus made his oblacion to God, and gave
heartye thanks to Onias for his life, and so returned home again to the King,
declaring unto him the great and manifest works of God that were done upon
him. The King (after this) being yet desirous of the treasure that was in the
Temple, asked of Heliodorus, whom he thought meet to send once again to
Jerusalem for the money: He answered, saying: Oh King, if thou have any enemy
or traitor unto thy Realm, send him thither, and thou shall be sure to have
him well punished, and hardly to escape with his life. For doubtless, (said
he) In that place there is a special power and working of God, for he that
dwel^eth in heaven, visits and defends that place, and none escapes
unpunished or plagued, that comes to do it harm. Thus did Heliodorus
magnify the power of God, and would no more enter into such danger.
Heliodorus: the Gift of the Son.


Genesis 5. ^.
Henoch, the son of Iared, at the age of.65. years, begat Mathusal^h, and
after that, he lived. 300. years, and begat both sons and daughters, and
walked always before the Lord in an upright and godly life. And when he had
lived. 365. years, the Lord To inquire where Henoch became, is mere
curiosity.
took him away, that he was no more seen. Henoch, Taught, or dedicate.


Romans 16. c.
Herman, was a faithful Christen man, unto whom Paul sent commendations from
Corinth to Rome. Herman, A proppe, or vpholder, or an earing.


2. Tim. 1. d.
Hermogenes, was a faint hollow hearted Gospeller of the country of Asia,
which forsook Paul and gave him over, whose unfaithfulness Paul pronounces
to Timothy. Hermogenes, Begotten by Mercury, or the generation, or increase
of lucre, or the refuge.


Math. 2. cap.
Herod, was an Idumean borne, and the first stranger that reigned over the
Jews. In whose time Christ the savior of the world (by the will of God) came
into this world, of whose birth he had first knowledge of the Mages, or wise
men, which came from the East to Jerusalem, demanding there, for him that was
borne king of the Jews, saying that they had seen his Star, and were come
to worship before him. Which news troubled Herod so sore, that he sent for
all the chief Priests and Scribes of the people, to know of them where Christ
should be borne. And being of them perfitely informed, that he should be
borne in the City of For there is an other Bethleem, in the Tribe of ^abulon.
Bethleem in Iewrie, he sent for the wysemen, and after inquisition made what
time the star appeared unto them, he bade them go to Bethleem, and make
diligent search for the child, and when they had found him, to bring him word
again, that he might go and worship him also. But when they had found the
child, and had made their offering, they were warned of God to break their
promise with Herod, and to return home another way. Which thing being
Eusebius says, that Herod for this slaughter done, would have killed
himself, but being let by his servant, he dyed within five days, when he had
reigned. 37. years.
told to Herod, he fell into such a rage (for being so mocked) that in his
madness he sent forth ministers to Bethleem, which killed all the Infants that
were in the City, and in the coasts thereof, of the age of two years, or
under, for whose great cruelty showed upon those Innocents, God paid him
home soon after. Herod, the glory of the skin: or boasting, and glorying
in skins.


Math. 14. a. b
Herod, the Tetrarch of Galile, was brother to Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and
being reproved of John Luke. 3. 2.
Baptist for keeping his brother Philips wife, he cast John in prison, where he
remained until Herodes birth day was come, in the which solemn feastfull
day, it chanced the daughter of Philip and Herodias, to dance before Herod,
and pleased the King so well, that he swear unto her, that whatsoever she
would ask him, it should be granted, not thinking she would have asked
Mar. 6. cap.
John Baptistes head, for (as S. Mark says) Herod knowing John to be a
just and an holy man, did both fear and reverence him, and heard his
preaching, and did many things thereafter, and was very sorye the Maid had
asked none other thing. But nevertheless, for keeping his Oath, which he had
made before so many Noble men, he caused the innocent man's head to be cut of,
and given to the Wench. This Herod and Pylate (Lieutenant of Iewry) had been
long at variaunce. And for the pleasure that Pilate showed to Herod, in
sending Jesus bound unto him to be examined, he was at one with him again.
For Herod had long desired to see Jesus. And hoping now to have seen some
miracles done by him, he demanded many questions of Jesus, to the which he
would make no answer at all. Then Herod, perceiving that Jesus would
neither speak nor do any thing at his pleasure, he began to despise and
r^uyle him, and (in mockery) arrayed him in a long white garment, and sent him
to Pylate again.

Act. 12. cap.
Herod. T^is man was a great persecutour of the Apostles. He beheaded James
the brother of John: and This Herod was called Agrippa the son of
Aristobolus: he was nephew unto Herod the great, and brother of Herodias.
seeing that deed to content and pleas^ the Jews well, he took Peter also,
and cast him into prison, intending after Easter (which was at hand) to have
him put to death* also. Finally, upon a certain day appointed to show
himself in his pomp and glory, he made such an Oration before the assemblye,
that (for the pleasantness of his speech) the common people at the end
thereof, gave a mighty shoute, saying, it was the voice of a God, and not of a
man. And because he gloryed in their boasting, and took that honor unto
himself, which he ought to have given to God, he was immediately smitten with
the Wormie sickness, whereof he most miserably dyed.

Romans 16. b.
Herodian, was Paul's kinseman, unto whom he sent commendations from Corinth
on this wise: Salute Herodian my kinseman. Herodian, the song of a young
Virgin, or of a woman conquering.


Math. 14. ^.
Herodias, was wife to Philip, Herodes brother, to whom she brought forth a
Which daughter (as Josephus writes) was called Salomen.
daughter. This woman being more familiar with Herod than honesty required,
grew into such favor with him, that he (contrary to the law of Moses)
married her, his brother being alive. Against which unlawful marriage, John
Baptist spoke so much to Herodes reproof, that she fearing least that John
would make Herod break of the incest marriage, counsayled her daughter
(which daunced before him) to ask the head of John Baptist. And so by the
wicked deuyce of this unchaste woman, John lost his head. Herodias, signifies
that, that the word Herod before does.


Genesis 46. b.
Hesron, was the son of Ruben, and of him came Number. 46. a.
the kindred of the Hesronites. Hesron, the Arrowe of reioyeeing.


1. Par. 2. c.
Hesron, the father of Caleb, being come to the age of threescore years, took
to wife the daughter of Machir, who bare unto him a son called Segub.

4. Reg. 18. and. 19. cap.
Hezakia, the son of Ahaz, was.xxv. years of age when he began his reygne
over Judah. He was the godlyest Prince that ever reigned before or after among
the Kings of Judah. He cleansed his Country from all ydolatrie, and brake down
the brazen Serpent (which Moses had set up) as soon as he saw it abused. He
brought in again the true honoring of God, and renewed the Passover. He had
such a sure trust and confidence in God, that at his prayer the Angel of the
Lord slew in one night of the Assirians (which were come to destroy
Jerusalem) an hundred, fourscore, and five thousand, and smote the rest into
such a fear, that they ran away. 20. cap.
After this he fell sick, and was admonished by the Prophet Esaias, to set his
house in order, for he should surely dye. Then he turned his face to the wall
and made his peticion to God, saying: Oh Lord remember (I beseech thee) how I
have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight, and speaking these words* he He wept, not so much
for his own death, as for fear that ydolatrie should be restored, which he had
destroyed.
wept very sore. The Lord than moved with his tears, returned the Prophet
again, to comfort him with these news, that he should receive his health,
and be able the third day to go up to the house of the Lord, and that he had
added to his days.xv. years mo, and to assure him of this his promise, he
would cause the Sun to return his course, ten degrees backewarde. At this
time, Berodach surnamed Baladad King of Babylon, sent to Hezakia ambassadors,
to signify unto him, how glad and joyful he was of his recovery, which
kindness was so greatly esteemed of Hazakia, that he thought he could not do
them to much pleasure, but made them privy to all his treasure, silver, and
gold, and whatsoever he had in his house, or in any other part of his Realm,
he Because he was moved with ambicion and vain glory, and seemed also to
rejoice in the friendship of him that was Gods enemy, the Lord was displeased.
showed it freely unto them. Wherefore the Lord (not content therewith)
commanded Esaias the Prophet to go and tell Hezakia: That forasmuch as he had
made the messengers of Babylon privy to all the commodities of his land: The
days should come that all things which he had in his house, and whatsoever
his Fathers had laid up in store before him, should be carried to Babylon.
Then Hezakia knowing the Prophet to be the true messenger of God, humbled
himself and said: Thy word (O Lord) is welcome unto me, but yet I shall
desire thee, not to send those cuils in my days, but rather peace and truth.
He reigned.xxix. years and died. Hezakia, the strength of the Lord: or the
Lords holding.


1. Tim. 1. d.
Hymeneus, after he had tasted of the word of God and been a professor of
the same, he fell away and became an utter enemy, and a spiteful rayler
against the doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, denying the chiefest point and
foundation of the Gospel, which is, that the resurrection 2. Tim. 2. c.
is past, wherewith he destroyed the faith of many persons. For the which
error, and other his railing and ieastinges against the truth of Gods word,
Paul excommunicated him, that he through correction might be ashamed of his
fault and turn again to Christ. Hymeneus: a Marriage song: or Bride song.


2. Reg. 5. b.
Hyram, King of Tire, favored David so much, that he (hearing that David went
about to build him an house) sent him both Timber and Workmen to finish the
same. Also, when Solomon (after the death of David 3. Reg. 5. cap. 9. b. c. d.
his Father) sent to this King for woodde and Timber to build the Lords
Temple, he praised God that had sent David so wise a son, to sit in his
seat, and granted him Timber of Cedar, Fyrre and other precious woodde, so
much as he would desire. Wherefore Solomon to gratify Hyram again, sent him
twentye thousand quarters of wheat, and twentye Butts of Oil, and gave him
also twentye goodly Cities, which Cities Hyram called the land of Cabul,
forasmuch as when he saw them, they pleased him not. After this, Hyram gave to
Solomon, six score Talents of Gold, and sent him Ships and men which had
knowledge of the Sea, to go with his Nauye into the country of Ophir, which
Ships brought unto Solomon In the. 2. Par. 8. d. is mencio^ made of. 30.
talents mo, which seem to have been employed for their charges.
four hundred and twentye Talents of gold. Hyram, The hight of Life.


3. Reg. 7. b.
Hyram. This man was a certain wydowes son dwelling in the Country of Tire,
and of the Tribe of Nepthaly, and did so excel in all manner of workmanship,
that Hyram King of Tire, sent him to Solomon to work and finishe all things
that pertayned to the Temple of the Lord, which Solomon went about to edify.

Hobab, was the son of Raguel, whose Some think that Raguel, Iethro, Hobab,
and Keni, were all one: Kymhi says that Raguel was Iethros father: So Hobab
was Moses father in law.
company Number. 10. d.
Moses his Father in law would so feign have had into the land of Canaan,
that he entreated him on this wise, saying: We are now going to the place
which the Lord said that he would give us, therefore (I pray thee) go with us
and we will do thee good, for the Lord has promised good unto Israel. Then
Hobab made answer, saying: I will not go, but I will depart to mine own
Country and kindred. Nay (quoth Moses) I pray thee forsake us not, but go with
us, and be our guide, for thou know our comping places, in the wilderness,
and whatsoever goodness the Lord shall show unto us, the same will we she we
unto thee: But all this could not move Hobab, but that he would depart. And
so returned home into his own country again. Hobab, Beloved.


Judith. 2. cap.
Holofernes, was the chief and most terrible Captain of all Nabuchodonosors
host, sent of him to subdue all the world. And coming to the City of
Bethulia 14. b.
(where all the Jews lay in great fear of him and his power) he was there (by
Gods provision) slain, by the hands of an holy woman called Judith. Read her
story. Holofernes, A stout and valiant Captain.


1. Reg. 1. a.
Hophni and Phinehes, the two sons of Ely were the Lords Priests, and
became so wicked, that they abused the women that waited at the door of the
Tabernacle of witness. And whereas the law was, that 2. c. d e.
whenseeuer any man did make any offering, the Priests boy should come while
the flesh was a seething (and not before) with a flesh hook in his hand
having three teeth, which he should thrust into the Pan, Kettle, or
whatsoever vessel it were, and so much as the flesh hook brought up, was the
Priests part, and no more: yet notwithstanding this law, the Priests boy
would come before the flesh was sodde, and require flesh to roast for the
Priest, and say unto him that made the offering, that his Master would have
no sod flesh, but raw. And if he would not give it him, then would the boy
take it by violence. By the which abusing of the Law, the Lords offering was
had in such contempt among the people, that they began to abhor it. Wherefore
the Lord plagued the sons of Eli, permitting the Philistines 4. c.
to slay them both in one day. Hophni, a Fyst, or as much as one may
comprehend between his thumb and two fingers, or covering.


4. Reg. 15. g. 17. cap.
Hosea, the son of Ela (by treason) slew Pekah the son of Remaliahu King of
Israel, and possessed his place, and began his reign in the.xij. year of Ahas
king This was the last King that reigned over Israel.
of Judah, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, but not so evil as other
Kings before him. He denied to pay Tribute to the Assirians, and sent to the
King of Egypt, to have his aid against them: wherefore Salmanasar King of
Assiria, came against Hosea, and besieged him in Samaria three years, and in
the end wanne the City, destroyed his kingdom, and led Hosea and all his
people captine into Assiria. Thus was Israel now delivered into the hands of
spoylers, for their wickedness, which the Lord had long suffered. Hosea, a
Savior, or health.


4. Reg. 22. d.
Hulda, the wife of Sallum, was a Prophetess dwelling in Jerusalem, in a place
called the house of doctrine. To whom Iosia King of Judah sent certain
messengers to inquire of the Lord for him and his people, concerning the book
of the Law which was found in the Temple, and red before him, and when they
had done their message, the Prophetess made answer, saying: Go and tell the
man that sent you to me: Thus says the Lord, behold, I will bring evil upon
this place, and upon the inhabiters thereof, even all the words of the book
which the King of Judah has readde, because they have forsaken me, and have
burnt incense to other gods to anger me with all the works of their hands. My
wrath also shall be kindled against this place, and shall not be quenched. But
to the King of Judah who sent you to inquire of the Lord, so shall ye say unto
him: Thus says the Lord God of Israel, the words that thou have heard shall
come to pass. But because that thine heart did melt, and thou have humbled thy
self before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against this place, and
against the inhabiters of the same (how they should be destroyed and
accursed) and have rent thy clothes and wept before me, I have also heard it,
says the Lord. Behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and
thou shall be put in thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the
evil that I will bring upon this place. And so the Messengers departed, and
told the King. Hulda, the world* or a Weesell.


Hur, came of the Tribe of Judah, and This is not that Hur which came of the
kinrede of Caleb (although they came both of the Tribe of Judah) but an other of
the same name. Lyra upon 1. Par. 2. c. This Hur was husband to miriam, sister
to Moses.
was one of the Exodus 17. d.
principal fathers and Rulers under Moses. He and Aaron 24. d. 31. a.
stayed up the hands of Moses, while the Children of Israel fought with King
Amalech: And was also appointed with Aaron (afterward) to hear and determine
all matters of controversy among the people, till Moses came down from the
Mount again, where unto he was ascended. Hur, Liberty, whytenesse, or a hole.


Husai, the Arachite, was 2. Reg. 15. d. 16. c.
a man of great wisdom, and one of David's chief Counsaylers and his assured
friend, as it well appeared when he came unto him (being fled from Absalom his
son) with his clothes regt, and ashes upon his head, declaring thereby the
great sorrow and heaviness he was in to see his Lord and master in that case,
of whose coming David was greatly comforted. But forasmuch as he thought he
should do him more pleasure otherwise, than to go with him now, he said: Oh my
most dear friend Husai, if thou do go with me now at this time, thou shall
be but a burden unto me: But if thou will return into Jerusalem, and say unto
Absalom, I will be thy servant (O King) and serve thee as I have done thy
father, thou may for my sake destroy the counsel of Achitophell, and thereby
do me great pleasure. So Husai gat him to Absalom, saying: God save the King:
God save the King: What (quoth Absalom) is this the kyndenesse thou she west to
thy friend? How chances it that thou wentest not with him. Nay said Husai,
but whom the Lord and this people, and all the men of Israel has chosen, his
will I be, and with him will I dwell: to whom shall I do service, but to his
son? as I served before thy father, so will I serve thee. Then when Absalom
had retained Husai to be of his Counsel, he said unto him: Achitophell has
counsayled thus and thus to do, shall we do thereafter or no. Husai answered,
the Counsel that Achitophell has given, is not good at this time. For (said
he) thou know thy father and his men, how they be strong, and now being
chafed in their minds, are even as a Bear robbed of her Whelps in the
field. And also thy father is a man practiced in war: and makes no tarying
with the people. Behold he lurketh now in some Cave, or in some other strong
place, and though some of his men be overthrown at the first brunt, it will be
said that thy people is overthrown, and so shall the best men thou have
(whose hearts are as the hearts of Lions) shrynke thereat. For all Israel
knows thy father to be a man of great might, and his warriors stout men.
Therefore my counsel is, that all Israel be gathered together unto thee, from
Dan to Beerseba (which are in number as the sand of the sea.) And that thou go
to battle in thine own person. For so shall we come upon him in one place or
other, where we shall find him, and fall upon him as thick as the dew
falls upon the ground, and of all the men that are with him, we shall not
leave him one. Moreover, if he be gotten into a town, then shall all the men
of Israel bring roapes to that town or City, and we will draw it into the
river, until there be not one stone found there. This counsel of Husai
pleased Absalom and the people, better than Achitophels: which was even the
Lords det^rmination, to destroy the good counsel of Achitophel, that the
Lord might bring evil upon Absalom. And so when Husai had done according to
David's request, he caused Sadoch and Abiathar the Priests, to send David
word of all that was done, whereby he escaped. Husai, Sense, or making haste,
or holding his peace.


I.
IAbes, was so named This was Othoniel, Ca lebs brother, as Lyra reports.
of his mother, because she 1. Par. 4. b.
bare him in sorrow. He (being more honorable than the reast of his brethren)
made a condicionall vow unto God, saying: Jacob made the like vow. Read his
story.
If thou will bless me in deed, and enlarge my coasts, and if thine hand be
with me, and thou wylt cause me to be delivered from cuill, that I be not hurt.
Thus far goes his request, which was granted. Iabes, Sorrow.


Iudic. 4. a.
Iabyn, was the King of Canaan, whose Captain of war was Sisera. Twenty
years he troubled Israel very sore. But at the last he was overcome of the
Israelites, and brought to naught. There was another King called Iabyn also,
whom Joshua slew, and destroyed his City called Which City being brent of
Joshua, was afterward builded again of the Canaanites.
Hazor, as ye shall read in Joshua Chap. 11. Iabyn, Understanding.


Genesis 25. c. d. 27. cap.
Jacob, was the youngest son of Isaac, and brother to Esau, whose byrthright
he bought for a mease of pottage, and afterward (by the counsel of Rebecca
his mother) got away his blessing. And then, to avoid his brothers
displeasure, he was sent into Mesopotamia to 28. cap.
Laban his Mothers brother to get him a Wife. And chaunceing to come to a place
where he was benighted, he took a stone and laid it under his head, and fell
a sleeue. And in his dream he saw a Christ is the Ladder whereby God* and man
are joined together, and by whom the Angels mynister unto us, all graces by
him are given unto us, and we by him ascend into heaven.
Ladder stand upon the earth, reaching up to heaven, and the Angels of God
ascending and descending upon it; and God himself standing upon the Ladder,
said: I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the
land which thou sleep upon, will I give to thee and thy seed, and thy
seed shall be as the dust of the earth, thou shall spread abroad to the
West, to the East, to the North, and to the South. And through thee and in thy
seed shall all the kinreds of the earth be blessed. Behold, I am with thee,
and will be thy keeper in all places where thou go, and will bring thee
again into this land, neither will I leave thee, until I have made good all
that I have promised. Then Jacob awaking out of sleep, said: Surely the Lord
is in this place, and I was not aware. Oh how fearful is this place, it is
none other but the house of God, and the gate of heaven. Then Jacob gate him up
early in the morning, and took the stone which he slept upon, and set it up
as a pyller to be a remembrance of that vision, and poured oil upon it, and
called the place Bethel, which before was called Lus. And before his departing,
he vowed, saying: If God will be with me, and keep me in this journey which I
go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothes to cover me, so that I come
again to my fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God, and this
stone which I have set up an end, shall be Gods house, and of all that 29. cap.
thou give me, will I give the tenth unto thee. And so Jacob going on his
journey, came into the East country, where (in beholding the land) he saw
certain heardemen lying with their flocks of sheep beside a Well (at the
which they commonly used to water their sheep) to whom he went and demanded
whence they were. They said, of Haran. Do ye not know (quoth he) one Laban the
son of Nahor? Yea, said they, we know him well. He is in health: And
behold, yonder comes his daughter Rachel to water her fathers sheep: who
was no sooner come, but Jacob went to the Well, and rolled away the stone The
cause why Jacob was deceived was, that in old time the wife was covered with a
veil when she was brought to her husband, in sign of chastity and
shamefastnes.
from the Wells mouth, and watered all her sheep. Which done, he kissed the
Damsel, and wept for joy. And when the Maid had knowledge what he was, she
ran to her father, and told him, who being joyful thereof, went to the man,
and brought him into his house. Now when Jacob had opened the cause of his
coming to Laban, it was agreed that Jacob should serve Laban seven years
for Rachel his daughter. But when the day of Marriage came, Lea the elder was
put in her stead, for so much as it was not the custom, that the younger
should be first married (as Laban alleged.) Then Jacob tarried seven days,
and took Rachel upon condition that he would serve other seven years for
her, which being fulfilled, he desired Laban that he Genesis 30. e. f. g.
might depart with his Wives and Children into his own country again. Nay
tarry, said Laban, for I perceive that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake,
appoint thy wages, and I will give it thee. Thou know (quoth Jacob) what
service I have done thee, and in what taking thy cattle has been under me:
for the little that thou had before my coming, is now increased to a
multitude. But when shall I traueyle, and make provision for mine own house
also. Well, what shall I give thee said Laban. Then Jacob (having knowledge
aforehande by the Angel of the Lord what his wages should be) said: Thou shall
give me nothing at all, if thou will do this thing for me. I will go again
and feed thy sheep, and keep them, and will separate all the sheep of thy
flock one from another, and so many as be black, speckled, or of party
color, let that be my wages, and whatsoever I take of the reast unspotted, let
that be counted theft with me. Content (quoth Laban.) Then went Jacob and took
out all the males and females of the sheep and goats that were black,
spotted, or of party color, and put them in the keeping of his sons, which
lay three days journey of from Jacob, and the reast, which were white, and of
one color, Jacob Jacob herin used no deceyte, for so much as he did it at
gods commandment
kept himself. And when he had made this division of Labans sheep, he took
rods of green Populer, of Hasell, and of Chestnut trees, and pilled white
strakes in them. Which rods (in the conceyuing time) he laid before the
sheep, in the gutters and watring troughes when they came to drink. And the
sheep that conceived before the rods, brought forth Lambs, straked,
spotted, and party colored, so that Jacobs flock increased exceedinglye,
whereat the 31. cap.
sons of Laban grudged, and made so heinous a complaynt to their father on
Jacob, that Laban began to disfavor him. Then Jacob perceiving Labans
countenance to be changed, he sent for his wives, and said: I see your
fathers countenance, that it is not toward me as it was wont, and yet ye
know that I have served your father truly, which has deceived me, and
changed my wages ten times, but God suffered him not to hurt me. For when he
said, the spotted should be my wages, then the sheep brought forth spotted.
And when he said, the party colored should be my reward, then the sheep
brought forth party colored: And thus has God taken away your fathers
sheep and given them to me, which thing he showed me in a dream should even
so come to pass, and has now commanded me to depart out of this Country
into the land where I was borne: The women said, we have not portion in our
Fathers house, seeing he counts us but even as strangers, and has sold us,
and eaten up our money: And now that God has taken away our fathers riches
and made it ours and our childrens, do whatsoever God has said unto thee.
Then Jacob, as soon as he had prepared all things for his journey, he fled from
Laban his Father in law toward the land of Canaan to Isaac his Father, and
being pursued of Laban.vij. days, and at last overtaken at mount Giliad, he
laid many things to Jacobs charge, whereof he discharged himself of all, and
in the end said: This twentye years have I served thee.xiiij. years for thy
daughters, and six years for thy sheep, which has not been barren, and yet
in all that space, have I not eaten one Ram of thy stock, but whatsoever was
stolen or torn of beasts, I made it good unto thee. Thou changed my wages
ten times, and w^ulde surely have sent me away with nothing, if God (which
saw my tribulation and the labor of my hands) had not been the better unto
me, which rebuked thee yesterdaye. Then Laban made a bond with Jacob and so
departed. Jacob then going forth on Genesis 32. cap.
his journey, came into the land of S^ir, and hearing of his brother Esaus
being there, was sore afraid of him, least he had continued still in his
malice toward him, wherefore he sent messengers before unto him, with three
great droues of Cattle for a present, trusting thereby to mitigate his wrath.
And as Jacob himself, tarried behind to set his wives and children in order to
meet his brother Esau, an Angel wrastled with him all night, and at last smote
him under the Thigh, and brake the sinewe of his leg, whereon he haulted ever
after. Yet nevertheless, Jacob (which had wrasteled with the Angel until the
breaking of the day) would not let the Angel depart, before he had blessed
him, who called his name Israel: for as a Prince (said he to Jacob) have thou
wrasteled with God and with man, and prevailed. And so, after the brotherly
meeting of Jacob and Esau, and Genesis 33. cap.
the great amity showed the one to the other, Jacob took his journey into the
land of Canaan, where he remained until he was of the age of an 130. years.
And then went down into Egypt withal his householde (which 46. cap.
were three score and six souls) to see his son Joseph, 49. d.
where he continued.xvij. years. And then dyed, being 50. a. b. c.
147. years of age, and from thence was conueyghed to the land of Canaan,
where he was by his children sumptuouslye buried. Jacob, a Supplantur.


Genesis 10. d.
Iachtan, was the son of Heber, and this brothers name was Peleg. Iacktan, a
little one, or Lothsomnesse, or Contencion.


Iudic. 4. c. d.
Iael, was the wife of one Haber the Kenite, which was of the Children of
Hobab, Moses father in law. And when she had heard of the great overthrow of
Sisera, and how he fled, she went and met him, saying: Turn in my Lord
turn in to me and fear not. And being come into her house, he asked her a
little water to quench his thirst, and she brought him a bottell full of Milk,
and when he had well droncken thereof, he laid him down to sleep, and as she
was covering him with cloths. He prayed her to go and stand at the door of her
tent, and whosoever does come and Now was the prophecy of Debora fulfilled,
which she prophesied to Barak, saying: this journey that thou take upon
thee now, shall not be for thine honor, for the Lord shall sell Sifera into
the hand of a woman.
ask for any man, say there is no man here. And so when Sisera was fast a
sleep, Iael went sostly unto him with an hammer in the one hand and a nail
in the other, and smote him through the Temples of his head, and nailed him
fast to the ground. Which done, she went and stood in her Tent door, and
seeing Baruck pursuing Sisera, she went and met him, saying: Come and go with
me, and I will show thee, the man whom thou seek, and so he followed
Iael, who brought him into her tent where Sisera lay dead. Iael, a Do, or
ascending.


Iudic. 10. cap.
Iair, was a Gileadite borne. He had.xxx. sons which were men of authority,
for they rode upon.xxx. Asses colts: And they had xxx. Cities lying in the
land of Gilead, which Cities were called the towns of Iair. He reigned.xxij.
years. After whose death the Children of Israel fell to wickedness again,
and served Baalim and Astharoth the gods of Siria and other strange gods, for
the which the Lord was wroth with Israel, and sold them into the hands of the
Philistynes and Ammonites, which oppressed them so sore by the space of.xviij.
years. That they were feign to cry for help of the Lord. Who then said unto
them: Did not I (when ye cried unto me) deliver you from the Egiptians, the
Amorites, the Ammonites, the Philistines, the Sidonites, the Amalakites and the
Moabites, which nations had oppressed you? And yet have ye now forsaken me and
serve their gods. Therefore cry unto these gods whom ye have chosen, and let
them help you in your tribulacion, for I will deliver you no more. Oh Lord
(said they) we have sinned, do unto us whatsoever pleases thee. Then had the
Lord so great compassion and pity on the miserye of Israel, that he styrred
up a man one Iephtah, who (by the power of God) saved them. Iair. Lightened.


Math. 4. d.
James, the son of Zebede and brother to John, Mar. 3 c.
was a poor fisherman, and being in the ship with his father He was put to
death by Agrippa, who had to name also Herod. Act.
mending of his net, Jesus came by and called him: who immediately left his
ship, his father and all, and went after Jesus, and was one of his Apostles,
and received with his brother, the name of Bonarges, which is to say: The
sons of thunder. James, a Tripper, or 12. a. Cooper.
Deceyuour. An beele, the sole of the foot, a foot step.


Math. 10. a.
James, the less, was the son of Alph^us and Marie (sister to Marie the
Lords mother.) And being bishop He suffered martyrdom in the. vi year of Nero.
of Jerusalem, he wrote to the Jews that were scattered abroad after the
persecution and death of Steven, Instructing them with sundry precepts how to
order their lives.

2 Timothy 3. b.
Iannes, and Iambres were two false Sorcerers of Egypt, who in the time of
Moses with their enchantments Exo. 7. b.
went about to put those miraculous woonders out of credence that Moses by the
power of God did. And even as they withstoode Moses, so do the adversaries of
the Gospel at this day (and ever will) resist the truth, under a certain
false pretense of godliness.

Genesis 9. d.
Iapheth, was the youngest of Noes three sons, who being informed of his
fathers unseemly lying a The nations that came of his children. Of Gomer came
the Italians. Of Magog the Scitians, and of them the Turks Of Madai the Medes.
Of Iauan, the Greeks. Of Tubal, the Spaniards. Of Mosoch, the Moscouites, and
of Tiras, the Thracians. Lanquet.
sleep in his Tent, took a garment, and bare it between him and Sem on their
shoulders, and coming toward their father (ashamed to look on his nakedness)
turned their faces backwarde, and so covered their fathers priui^ies. For the
which deed, Noe (having knowledge thereof) blessed them, saying to Iapheth on
this wise. God shall enlarge Iapheth, and he shall dwell in the Tents of Sem,
and Canaan, shall be their servant. Iapheth, persuading, or entycing.


Iairus, was Mark. 5. c. d
one of the Rulers of the Synagoge among the Jews, whose daughter of the age
of twelve years, lay sick and at the point of death. And hearing of the fame
of Jesus, went and fell down at his feet, beseeching him that he would come
home to his house, and lay his hand upon his daughter, that by the touching
thereof, she might be safe, and live. And while there was an occasion given,
whereby to reform the imperfect faith of the Ruler, and that by the ensample
of a woman diseased with an issue of blood.xij. years, there came certain *
Luke 8. f. g.
messengers from the Rulers house, which said unto him that his daughter was
dead, wherefore it should not need to trouble the Master any further. Then
Jesus perceiving the Ruler to be as a man in despair, said unto him? Be not
afraid, for although thy daughter be dead in deed, only believe, and thy
daughter shall live. And so Jesus went home to the Rulers house, and raised up
his daughter from death to life. Iairus, Lightning, or being lightened.


Genesis 5. d.
Iared, was the son of Mahalaleel, who lived an hundred sixty and two
years, and then begat Henoch, and lived after that eight hundred years, and
begat sons and daughters. And when he had lived in all, nine hundred, sixty
and two years, he dyed. Iared, Commanding, or descending.


2. Mac. b. 4. cap.
Jason, was a wicked man, and so desirous of honor, that he labored his own
brother Onias out of the hye Priests office: promising Antiochus the King to
give him for the same, three hundred and three score talentes of silver, and of
another rent four score. And also if the King would license him, to set up a
place for exercise, and a place for the youth, and to name them of Jerusalem
Antiochians: he promised an hundred and fifty Talents. And when these things
was granted to Jason, and that he had got the superiority: he began
immediately to draw his kinsmen to the customs of the heathen, abolishing the
laws and privileges of the Jews, he brought in new statutes, contrary to
the law of God. So that through the exceeding wickedness of this ungodly man
Jason, the people had a great desire to follow the manner of the Gentyles. The
Priests also, had no lust in serving the Lord, but in casting the stone, and
such wanton sportes. Now after three years, when Jason should pay the King
his money, which he had promised for his brothers office, he sent it by one
whom he most trusted, called Menclaus, who gate the office from Jason (as
appears more plainly in his story.) Then Jason being thus deceived by
Menelaus, was feign to fly into the land of the Ammonites, remaining there
till he might spy a time to be revenged. And when he heard the rumor that
went abroad of Antiochus death, he gat him a bond of men to the number of a
thousand or mo, and came suddenly upon the City, killing and slaying his
own Citizens without mercy, regarding neither kin nor friend. But
nevertheless, when he could not speed of his purpose, he fled into the
land of the Ammonites again. Where in the end it came to this point, that he
was accused to Areta King of the Arabians, and so abhorred of all men, and he
was pursued from City to City, and driven into Egypt. And going from thence
to the Lacedaemonians, thinking by reason of kindred to have had some succor of
them, he was not regarded, but suffered to perish in a strange land, no man
mourning for him, nor putting him into his grave. Jason, He that makes whole:
a Physician.


Iecksan, look Iocsan.

4. Reg. 23. f.
Iehoahas, the son of Josias, was.xxiij. year old when he began to reygne
over Judah, and had not reigned three months or that Pharao Necho, King of
Egypt came and put him down, and set up his brother in his stead. And put the
land to a tribute of an hundred Talents of Silver, and one of Gold, and
carried Iehoahas away into Egypt where he dyed. Iehoahas, The possession of the
Lord.


4. Reg. 23. g. 24. a.
Iehoakym, the son of Josias, was.xxv. years of age when he began to reygne
over Judah, and did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord. His name was
changed from Eliakim to Iehoakym by Pharao Necho, King of Egypt, which came
and deposed his brother This King dyed in the way, as they led him prisoner
into Babylon. Read Jeremy, 22. e.
Iehoahas, and made him King in his stead, and mersced the land, as before is
said in Iehoahas. For the payment of which money, Iehoakym taxed the land, and
leuyed of every man according to his ability, and paid the money to Pharao.
After this, came Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon, and besieged Jerusalem, to
whom Iehoakym yielded, and served Nabuchodonosor three years, and then
rebelled against him, into whose hand the Lord delivered him, so that the
King of Babylon took him, and bound him in two chains, and carried him and
all the vessels of the Lords house into Babylon. This King reigned a.xj.
years. Iehoakym, the Rising, or aduenging of the Lord.


He is called also Iechonias. Math. 1. b
Iehoachin, 4. Reg. 24. b. c. d.
was the son yof Iehoakm, who at the age of xviij. years, began to reign
over Judah, and did evil in the sight of the Lord as his fathers before him.
He had not reigned three months or that the King of Babylon came and deposed
him, making Mathania his fathers brother King in his stead, changing his name
from Mathania to Zedekia, and carried Iehoachym away into Babylon, where he
remained in prison xxxviij. years after, even until the coming of
Euilmerodach King of Babylon, after Nabuchodonosor his father, who had such a
mind to Iehoachym, that he delivered him out of prison, and exalted him above
all the Princes in Babylon, and fed him at his own table all the days of
his life. Iehoachin, the Resurrection of the Lord.


4. Reg. 13. a. b. c.
Iehoahas, the son of Iehu, began his reygne over Israel in the.xxiij. year
of the reygne of Ioas the son of Ahaziahu King of Judah, and walked so
wickedly in the sins of Jeroboam (by worshipping the Calves which he had
erected) that God delivered him into the hands of Hazael, and his son
Benhadad, Kings of Siria, which destroyed the people of Israel, and vexed them
so sore, that they made the Israelites like threshed dust: yet nevertheless,
when Iehoahas humbled himself, and besought the Lord, he heard him, and had
such pity and compassion on the misery of Israel, that he delivered him out of
the Sirians subjection, which had brought him so low, that they had left him
but fifty horsemen, ten Charets, and ten thousand footmen. He reigned xvij.
years, and then dyed, and was buried in Samaria, leaving behind him his son
Ioas to reign in his stead. Iehoahas, Apprehending, possesing, or seeing.


4. Reg. 11. ca.
Iehoiada, was the hye Bishop and Priest in the days of Ahaziahu King of Judah,
whose daughter he married, named Iehosabeth. He preserved Ioas the youngest son
of Ahaziahu his father in law six years in the Lords house, and in the
seventh year he brought him forth, and proclaimed him King. And (being his
governor and protector) trained him up in all godliness and virtue. So that
so long as Iehoiada lived, the King 2. Par. 24. d.
walked in all the ways of the Lord, from the which he swarued after the
death of this good Bishop Iehoiada. Who lived. 130. years, and (for his
faythfulnesse toward God and his people) was most honorablye buried in the
City of David among the Kings. Iehoiada, the Knowledge of the Lord.


4. Reg. 11. a.
Iehosabeth, was the daughter of Ahaziahu King of Judah, and wife to Iehoiada
the hie Bishop of the Jews. 2. Par. 22. d.
And when Atthalia her Graundmother went about to destroy the Kings seed, she
stole away Ioas her yoongest brother from among the Kings sons, and hid both
him and his Nurse, in her own Chamber (with her husbands consent) the space
of.vj. years, and so preserved him that he perished not, with the reast of her
brethren. Iehosabeth, the fullness of the Lord.


4. Reg. 9 ca.
Iehu, the son of Nimsi was anointed King over Israel by Eliseus the
Prophet, for to destroy the house of Achab his master: And being commanded
to go about it with speed, he began first with Ioram which lay at Iezrael to
be healed of his wounds, which the Sirians had given him. And as Iehu was
coming thitherward, the watchman espying a company coming toward the City,
told the King, who then sent out an horseman to meet them, and to know
whether they came peaceably or no. And when the Messenger came to Iehu, he
said: The King would know whether it be peace or no? What have thou to do
with peace (quoth Iehu) turn thee behind me: and so the messenger turned
behind Iehu, and went back no more, and likewise the second. Then the
watchman told the King that he thought by the dryuing of the Charret, it
should be Iehu that was coming, for he drives (quoth he) as he were mad. The
King hearing that, he made him ready to war, and took Ahaziahu King of Judah
with him, and went toward Iehu, and met him in the furlong of Naboth, saying:
is There was a Prophet also called Iehu, the son of Hanani, which prophesied
of the destruction of Baasa King of Israel and his posterity. Read. 3. Reg. 16.
a. b.
it peace Iehu or no? What peace should it be (quoth he) so long as the
whooredomes of thy mother Iezabel, and her witchcrafts are so great: and so in
the Battle, Iehu shot Ioram to the heart with an arrow, and killed him. And
fell upon Ahaziahu and slew him also. And so proceeding forth to Iezrael, he
came thither and found Iezabel looking out at a window. And as he demanded of
the company about her, who was on his side, and would (for his sake) cast her
down, two or three of her Chamberlaines threw her out at the window, and
brake her neck, notwithstanding, because she was a Kings daughter, he caused
her to be buried. Then he sent his letters to Samaria, 10. cap.
commau^ding those which had the governance of Achabs seauentie sons, to kill
them all, and to bring their heads on the next morrow to Iezrael. And when
they (for fear) had fulfilled his commandment, and brought their heads to
him, Iehu fell upon the murderers, and slew them also. And in the way to
Samaria, he slew the brethren of Ahaziahu (even forty and two) which were
going to visit Achabs sons. Finally, he trained all the Priests of Baal into
the Temple of Baal, and there slew them every one, and converted the temple to
a Iakes house. And now when Iehu had left neither Priest, Kinseman, nor any
that favored Achab alive, the Lord (for his well doing) made him this
promise, that his seed should sit on the seat of Israel, until the fourth
generation. But notwithstanding, that Iehu had thus severely punished the vice
of Idolatry in Achabs posterity, yet he himself committed the same in
worshipping the golden Calves, and caused Israel to sin, as other before him
had done. He reigned.xxviij. years. Iehu, He himself, or that which is.


Iudic. 11. cap.
Iephtah, was the son of Gilead, base borne, whose brethren (which were
legittimate) thrust him out of their company, and so hated him, that they
could not suffer him to remain among them: wherefore Iephtah departed and fled
into the land of Tob: where unto him resorted all naughty and light persons.
Now in the mean time that Iephtah was thus a stranger from his brethren, the
Ammonites made sore war against the Israelites, so that they were in great
ieoperdie and fear to be overcome of them. Then the Elders of Gilead
considering Iephtah to be a strong and a valiant man, went to Tob where he
lay, to entreat him to be their Captain against the Ammonites. How comes
this (quoth Iephtah) that ye come to me in the time of your trouble: did ye not
hate me, and Often times those things which men reject, God chooses to do
greater enterprises by.
expel me out of my fathers house? Therefore (said they) are we turned to
thee, that thou may go with us, and be our head and ruler. But will ye
promise now (quoth Iephtah) that when the Lord shall deliver the Ammonites
into my hand, ye will make me then your head and governor? They said yea.
And so he went with the Elders, who brought him to Mizpa, and being there made
and confirmed their head and Ruler, he sent his messengers to the King of
Ammon, demau^ding what cause he had to strive with Israel: who answered, and
said: Because they took away my country, when they came from Egypt, which if
they will now restore again, I will cease from war. Then Iephtah sent him
word again, that Israel took not his land from him, but coming from Egypt,
and passing through the wilderness, even to the red Sea, they remained at
Cades: and sent to Sehon King of the Ammorites, to suffer them quietlye to
pass through his Country: And because he would not show them this
kyndenesse, the Lord delivered both him and his land into their hands, and
shall they dispossess themselves of that which the Lord has given them? Nay
not so. Look what people Chamos thy God drives out, that land possess thou,
and whatsoever nation the Lord our God expels, that will we enjoy. Art thou
better than Balac King of Moab? did he not strive with Israel, and fight
against them all the while they lay in Hesbon (and there about) 300. years:
and why did thou not recover thy land in all that space? Thou do me
wrong to war against me, for I have not offended thee, and therefore the Lord
be Judge between thee and me. But when Iephtah perceived the Ammonites not to
regard his words, he prepared his army to set upon them. And before his
going, made this vow unto the Lord: That if he did deliver the Ammonites into
his hand, the first thing that met him out of his doors at his return home
again, should be the Lords, and he would offer it up unto him for a burnt
offering. And when he had subdued the Ammonites, and was coming homewarde to
his house, the first thing that met him out at his doors, was his own
daughter, who for joy of her fathers victory, came against him with Timbrels
and daunces. Then Iephtah seeing his only child come against him with a
company of women after her, he rent his clothes and said: Alas my daughter,
thou have brought me low, and art one of them that do trouble me, for I have
opened my mouth unto the Lord, and cannot go back. To whom she said: Oh my
father, if thou have promised to the Lord, then (forasmuch as the Lord has
avenged thee, and given thee victory over thine enemies) do with me according
to thy promise. But yet, this one thing I shall desire of thee, to spare me for
two months, that I may go down to the Mountains, and there (with my my
fellows) For it was counted as a shame in Israel to dye without children.
bewail my Virginity. Which done, she returned to her father, who did with
her according as he had vowed unto the Lord. After this, the Ephraites fell at
de^iance with Iephtah, because he had not called them to take his part against
the Ammonites: and for this matter was a field pitched between them and the
Gileadites, and a great battle foughten, in the which, the Ephraites were put
to flight, and seeking to have escaped over Jordan, the Gileadites had
prevented them, and stopped the passage, that no Ephraite should escape that
way. And to know who was an Ephraite, and who was not, the Gileadites used
this policy: if any preased to go ever the water, they would bid him say
Schibboleth, signifies the fall of waters, or an ear of corn.
Schybboleth, and as many as could not say Schibboleth, they slew him, for by
that they knew he was au Ephraite, for the Ephraites could not sound nor say
Schibboleth, but Sibboleth. And so were slain of the Ephraites that day, two
and twenty thousand. Iephtah vuled Israel vj. years, and dyed. Iephtah,
Opening.


Iere. 1. 2.
Jeremy, was the son of Helkia, whom some think to be he, that found out
the book of the law, and gave it to Iosia. He was borne in a city called
Anathoth, Epiphanius writes, that this Prophet Jeremy was slain of his people
at a city in Egypt called ^aphnis.
in the Country of Benjamin, and (by the commandment of God) began very young
to prophecy, that is, in the.xiij. year of Josias, and continued.xviij.
years under the said King, and three months under Iehoahas, and under
Iehoakym.xi. years, and three months under Iehoachin, and under Zedekia.xi.
years, unto the time they were carried away into Babylon. So that the time
amounts to above forty years, beside the time that he prophesied after the
captivity. This story is drawn out of Geneua, in the Argument before the
book of Jeremy the Prophet. Jeremy, the Majesty, or highness of the Lord.


Iudic. 6. f.
Ierobaal, is a name which was given to Gedeon the son of Ioas, after he had
broken down the altar of Baal, and cut down all the Grove about it.
Ierobaal, That which resists anydoll, a destroyer of ydols.


Read Gedeon.

Jeroboam, was the son of Some say that Nebat and Semei, whom Solomon put
to death, were one person: of whose death Zarnah the mother of Jeroboam, put
him often in remembrance.
Nebat, and of the 3. Reg. 11. cap e. f. g.
Tribe of Ephraim, who being nourished and brought up of Zarnah his mother in
her wyddowhed, after the death of his father, became King Salomons servant, and
was made ouerseer of Salomons works for the Tribe of Ephraim and Manasses. And
on a time as he walked abroad in the field alone, the Prophet Ahia came to
him and said, that after the death of Solomon he should reygne and be King
over ten Tribes of Israel, which words of the Prophet did so animate Jeroboam,
that he began to murmour against King Solomon his Master, who (therefore)
sought to kill him, but Jeroboam fled into Egypt, where he remained with Sisah
King of that Country, until the death of Solomon. Then (being sent for) he
returned home again, and had so much fanour of the people, that they all
forsook Roboam (save the Tribe of Judah and Benjamin) and made Jeroboam their
King. Who being surely stablished in his kingdom, began to think thus in his
heart: If this people go up* and do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at
Jerusalem, as they were wont to do, then shall their hearts turn to Roboam,
and seek to kill me. Wherefore he (by the advice of his Counsel) made two
gold^n Calves, and set the one up at Dan, and the other at Bethel, persuading
the people that they were the Gods which brought them out of Egypt, and
therefore it should not need any more for them to go up to Jerusalem, and
worship so far of, but should do it nearer hand, and with less traueyle
and pain. And when he perceived the people to incline to his purpose, he made
a Temple to build hill Aultars therein for ydolatrie, and placed a sort of
ignorant ministers (which were not of the sons of Leuye) in Dan and Bethell,
to train up the people in worshipping of these Calves. And the more to stir
up the peoples devotion, he commanded a solemn offering to be made in the
honor of these Calves, the.xv. day of the eight Month, and the same yearly to
be observed in remembrance of this new kind of ydolatrie: which in
continuance was so rooted in Israel, that it could never be clean
extinguished, till it had brought al Israel to utter destruction. Now as the
King was standing beside 13. cap.
the Altar at Bethell doing of sacrifice, there came a man of God, which cried
out against the Altar, saying: O Altar, Altar, Thus says the Lord:
behold, a child shall be borne unto the house of David (Iosia by name) and
upon thee shall he offer the Priests of the hill Aultars that burn incense
upon thee, and they shall burn men's bones upon thee. And this is the token
that the Lord has spoken it: Behold, the Altar shall rent, and the ashes
that are upon it, shall fall out. The King was so angry with this, that he
stretched out his hand against the Prophet, commanding to lay hands on him,
and by and by the Kings hand was dried up, so that he could not pull it to him
again, the Altar claue a sunder, and the ashes fell out, as the man of God
had spoken. The King seeing now Gods judgment fallen upon him, humbled
himself to the Prophet, by whose intercession to God, his hand was restored
again. Great and continual 2. Par. 13. cap.
war was between this King and Roboam King of Judah, but this ever prevailed,
till Abia the son of Roboam reigned, and then he lost as much honor and more
than he wanne before. He reigned two and twenty years, and dyed, leaving
Nadab his son to succeed him. Read more of this King, in the story of
Abia, King of Judah, and in the storye of Ahiah the Prophet, and of Baasa King
of Israel.

4. Reg. 14. f. g
Jeroboam, the son of Ioas King of Israel, began his raygne in the.xv. year
of Amaziahu King of Judah, and woorshipped the golden Calves which Jeroboam the
son of Nebat had set up, as other did before him. He was a great warryour and
victorious. He restored the coasts of Israel from the entering of Hemath unto
the Sea of the wilderness (according to Jonas Prophecy) And was styrred up of
the Lord to help Israel (being exceedingly afflicted) out of all their
trouble. He reigned xlj. years, and dyed, leaving Zacharias his son to
succeed him. Jeroboam, Increasing the people.


3. Reg. 16. g. 19. a.
Iesabel, the daughter of Ethbaal King of the Sydonites, was a wicked woman.
She entised and pricked forward Achab her husband to all kind of Idolatry,
she slew the Prophets of the Lord, and persecuted Elia. She 21. cap.
caused Naboth to be stoned to death, that her husband might inioye his
vyneyarde. Finally, as she lay at Iesrael, and hearing of Iehu his coming,
she trimmed her 4. Reg. 9. g.
self in gorgious attire, and lay looking out at a window, and as he came in
at the gate, she said unto him: Had Zimri peace which slew his master? As who
should say: Can a Traitor or any that rises against his superior have good
success? But for as much as this was even Gods* determinacion that she should
be destroyed, she was cast out at the window with such violence, that she was
dashed all to pieces, and so betramped and trodden with the feet of horses,
that when they came to take her up to be buried, they found no more of her,
save the scull, the feet and the palms of her hands. And then was the
Prophecy of Elia fulfilled, which said: In the field of Iesrael shall dogs
eat the flesh of Iezabel, and the carcass of Iezabel shall lie as dung upon
the earth, so that none shall say, this is Iezabel. Iezabel, an Ylande, or an
babitacion.


Luke 2. cap.
Jesus, the son of God was borne of the Virgin Mary in Bethleem, a city of
Judah, in the year after the Creacion of the world. 3962. Lanquet, whose birth
immediately was honored by the glorification of Angels, the Agnition of
Shepherds, the veneracion of the wisemen, and the Prophecies of holy Symeon
and Anna. And at the age of.xij. years, was had in admiracion among the
Doctors in the Temple at Jerusalem, where their parents found him, and
brought him to Narareth, but what he did from that time forth till he came to
the age of thirty years, the Euaungelistes make no mention. He was then
Baptized of John in Iordane. And to witness ^. cap.
that he was the very Messiah sent of God, the holy Ghost descended down from
heaven, in the likeness of a Dove, and lighted upon him, and also the voice
of the father was heard from heaven, saying: This is my well-beloved son in
whom I am well pleased, hear him. And after he had finished the legacy of
his father and opened the Doctrine of eternal life to the people, and
confirmed the same with miracles, he was at the age of.xxxiij. years (or there
about) betrayed of his own disciple Judas, Math. 26. b.
and by the Jews his own peculiar people, most cruellye put to death, at what
time of his passion was a great earthquake, and at six a clock of the day,
such a terrible Eclipse of the Sun, that (for darckenesse) it seemed to be
very night. The third day he arose again 28. a.
from death to life, In token he conquered sin, death and Satan. And on the
forty day (to declare himself Act. 1. b.
to be a mighty and a puissant Conqueror, he ascended into heaven, where he
sits at the right hand of the Father. And the fifty day (according to his
promise) he sent down the true comforter the holy Ghost, which should lead
the Apostles into all truth. At the end and last day of the world, he shall
come again with glory, to Judge the quick and the dead. He suffered his
passion the year after the creation of the World. 3994. or there about.
Jesus: A Savior.


Eccl. 1. cap.
Jesus, the son of Sirach, being among the Captives in Egypt, in the time of
King Ptolomy Energets, got liberty to read and write many good things, which
Jesus his Graundfather had gathered and left them with Sirach his son, which
things this Jesus took and put in order in a book, which is called
Ecclesiasticus, or the wisdom of Jesus the son of Sirach.

Coll. 4. c.
Jesus, otherwise called Iustus, was a Jew borne, and one of Paul's
workefellowes in preaching and setting forth the Kingdom of God, whom he
commended to the Collossians, desiring them, that if he or any such did come
unto them, they should receive and entreat them with all gentleness.

Exodus 4. c. 18. cap.
Iethro, the Priest of Madian had seven daughters, of the which one was called
Zephora, whom he married to Moses. And when that Iethro had heard of all the
mighty deeds which God had done for Moses, and how he had delivered the
children of Israel out of Egypt from the bondage of Pharao, and brought them
through the red Sea, he met Moses in the Wilderness, and brought to him his
wife and two children (which he had sent back before) at whose coming, Moses
was exceeding glad. Then as Iethro abode with Moses and saw the great pains
he took in judging the people from morning to night, he said unto him: what
is this that thou do unto the people? Why sit thou thy self alone and
all the people stand about thee from morning unto even? When the people (quoth
Moses) have any matter, they come unto me, and I judge between one and an
other, and declare unto them the statutes and laws of God. Thou do not well
(quoth Iethro) for thou both wearyest thy self, and the people that is with
thee: The thing is of The counsel of Iethro Moses father in law.
more weight, than thou art able to perform alone. Therefore hear my
counsel, and God shall prosper thee. Be thou for the people to God ward, and
report the causes to him: Admonish them of the ordinances and laws, and show
them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do.
Moreover, seek out among the people men of courage, and such as fear God,
true dealing men, hating covetousness, and appoint them to be rulers, over
thousands, over hundreds, over fifty, and over ten. And let them judge the
people at all seasons, and every great matter let them bring it to thee. But al
small causes, let them judge themselves, and so shall it be easier for thee,
when they shall bear the burden with thee: If thou shall do this thing (and
God so command thee) thou shall be able to endure, and all the people shall go
quietly to their place. Iethro, Excellent, or remaining, or searching forth,
or a little cord.


2. Reg. 2. cap.
Ioab, was the son of Zerniah David's Sister (and the chief Captain of all
David's host. In the first battle he made against Abner (King Saules Captain)
he was the victor, and put Abner to flight, and of malice afterward, by
treason slew him, for ^he which deed, David 3. d. e.
was fore offended, that he besought God to avenge it on Ioab, and that his
house and posterity, might always be plagued with the bloody flixe, leprosy,
feblenesse of body, the swoorde, or famine, for the death of Abner. Ioab also,
was the death of Absalom, and slew him as he 18. d.
hanged by the hair of his head, upon the twist of a tree: And when it was
told him of the great lamentacion the King made for Absalom his son, he went
unto him and said: Thou have this day shamed the faces of all thy servant,
19. a. b.
which this day have saved thy life, and the lives of all thy sons and
daughters, and the lives of thy wives and Concubins, in that thou love thine
enemies and hate thy friends: For thou have declared this day, that thou
regardest neither thy Princes nor servants: Therefore I do perceive, that if
Absalom had lived, and all we had been slain this day, that then it had
pleased thee well. Now therefore up, and come out and speak comfortably unto
thy servant, for I swear by the Lord, except thou come out, there will not
tarry one man with thee this night, and that will be worse unto thee, than all
20. cap*
the evil that fell on thee from thy youth hitherto. Also in persecuting of
Seba (which had made a new insurrection against David) he met Amasa his
Auntes son by the way and Lyra supposes that Ioab slew Amasa of envy,
because David had made an oath (in the Chapter before) that Amasa should be his
Captain in Ioabs stead.
slew him, and leaving him dead on the ground, he followed Seba, and besieged
him in a City called Abell, where the Gouernesse of the City, being a wise
woman) cried unto Ioab, demanding why he went about to destroy that City
which was a Mother in Israel, and to devour the inheritance of the Lord,
before he had offered peace: To whom he answered, saying: That he went about
no such matter, but I come (quoth he) for Seba the son of Bichri, deliver me
him, and I will be gone, and as soon as the head of Seba was thrown over the
wall to Ioab, he departed. Finallye, after the death of David (who had ordained
Solomon to reign in his stead) Ioab took part with Adonia, Salomons brother
which usurped the kingdom, and went about with all his power to stablishe him
in David's seat. But when he heard Solomon proclaimed by David's authority, he
fled to the Tabernacle of the Lord, out of the which he would not depart, but
(catching hold on the The holiness of the place ought not to save the wilful
murder. Exo. 21. b.
corners of the Altar) said he would even in that place dye. Then Solomon
(hearing thereof) commanded Banaihahu to go and kill him even there, for the
blood of Abner and Amasa, which he had shed causeless. And so was Ioab slain
in the Tabernacle, and carried out and buried in his own house in the
wilderness. Ioab, willing* or voluntary.


Luke 8. a. 24 a
Ioanna, the wife of Chusa Herodes Steward, was a godly Woman, and ministered
unto Christ of her substance, while he lived. And after he had suffered his
passion, she went with other women to seek him at his Sepulcher. And being
told by the Angels that he was not there, returned to the Apostles to bring
them tidings of his resurrection, which seemed to them but feyned things, and
therefore believed them not. Ioanna, the grace of the Lord: or the Lords
gift: or the Lords mercy.


4. Reg. 11. and. 12. cap.
Ioas, the yoongest son of Ahaziahu King of Judah, was stolen away from the
hands of Athalia his Grandmother, by his sister Iehosabeth wife to Iehoiada
the hie Priest, and hid in the Lords house, and brought up in the Chamber where
the Priests and Levites lay, the space of six years, and in the seventh
year, Iehoiada brought him forth, and proclaimed him King, who in all things
sought the Lord, so long as Iehoiada lived. He repaired the Temple. He slew
Mathan the Priest of Baal, and brake down his Aultars, with many other good
things. But after the death of Iehoiada, he fell so 2. Par. 24. c. f.
far from God, that no admonition of the Prophets (which were daily sent
him) could turn him. And last of all, when Zacharia the son of Iehoiada
came unto him to call him again unto the Lord, he (notwithstanding the great
kyndenesse and faythfulnesse of Iehoiada his father before him) caused Zacharia
to be put to death, for the which cause, the Lord stirred up the Sirians
against him, which slew a great number of his people, and in the end his own
servants conspired against him (for his ingratitude) and slew him upon his
own the patriarch Issachar holds a spade and stands next to a fully laden
donkey..6.
Isachar onusto cur sim simulatus asello,
Inque manu signet quid ligo scire capis
Finibus exiguis co^tentus far lahores.
Me iuuat et collo non recusare iugum
bed, after he had reigned forty years, and buried hm in the City of
David, but not among the Kings. Ioas, the Lords fire, or the Lords oblation.


4. Reg. 13. b. c. d.
Ioas, the son of Iehoahas began his reygne over Israel in the.xxxvij. year
of Ioas King of Judah, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, grieuing him with
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebab. Of the great victory 2. Par. 25. c.
f. g.
the Lord gave Ioas against Amasiah King of Judah, read his story: And how
he visited Elizeus the Prophet in his sickness, read the last end of his
story also. This King reigned.xvi. years, and dyed, leaving Jeroboam his son
to take his place.

Job. 1. cap.
Job, was a perfect just man dwelling in the land of Hus, and one that feared
God, who gave unto him seven sons and three daughters, and also endued him
with great riches. His substance was.7000. sheep.3000. Camels.500. yoke of
Oxen, 500. she Camels, and a very great household. So that he was one of the
most principal men among all them of the East Country. He was so careful
over his sons, least in their banketting they had committed some offense, or
been unthankful to God in their hearts, that he daily would sanctify them,
and offer for every one a burnt offering unto the Lord, he was a man also
replenished with such patience, that Satan with all his temptacions could not
move him out of the same, for when word was brought him how that the Sabes
had taken away his Oxen, and slain his servants, and that the Lord had
consumed all his sheep with fire, and that the Chaldeys had taken away his
Camels, and how that all his Children were slain in their eldest brothers
house, which the l^ynde blewe down upon them, he made no more a do but said:
Naked came I cut of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again: The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, even as it has pleased the Lord,
so is it come to 2. cap.
pass, blessed be the name of the Lord. Also when Satan (by the permission of
God) had plagued Job with extreme sores, even from the sole of the foot to the
crown of his head, so that he sat upon the ground in dust and ashes,
scraping off the filth of his sores with a potsherde: and being also inwardly
afflicted with the sharp temptacion of his wife, which tempted him to
blaspheme God, he took all in good worth, reproouing his wife, for her
foolish talking: for shall we (quoth he) receive good at the hand of God, and
not receive evil? not so, I am as well content to suffer this adversity sent
of the Lord, as I was to receive the prosperity he gave me before: And so Job
continued in his perfitenesse, and was (at the last) Job. 42. c. d.
restored to as many children as he had before, and to double riches. He lived
an hundred and forty years, and saw his chylders children to the fourth
generation before he dyed. Job, Sorrowful, or hated.


Iochebed, was the daughter of Leuy, and She was Amrams fathers sister, which
kind of marriage was after in the law forbidden. Leuit. 18.
borne in Exodus 6. c.
Number. 26. g.
Egypt. Her husbands name was Amram, to whom she bare three children, Aaron,
Moses, and a daughter called Miriam. Iochebed, Glorious.


Iocsan, was the son Genesis 25. a.
of Abraham, begotten of his wife Cetura his two children were called, the one
Seba, and the other Dedan. Iocsan, Hardness, or Offense.


Joel, the son of Phatuel, was Joel. 1. 2. and 3. cap.
an holy Prophet, and prophesied against the Jews, exhorting the Priests 1.
Par. 1. c.
to prayer and fasting, for the misery that was coming at hand. And giving
them warning of the coming and cruelty of their enemies, moved them to turn
and convert. And last of all, he sets out the Judgment of God against the
enemies of his people. Joel, willing, or beginning.


Iere. 40. d.
Iohanan, the son of Cariah Prophesied to Gedaliah (whom Nabuchodonosor King
of Babylon had made governor over the people that he left at Jerusalem) that
Ismael the son of Nathaniah (by the procurement of Baal King of the
Ammonites) should kill him, which came so to pass in deed, as ye shall read
in the storye of Gedaliah. After whose death, Iohanan with the reast of 41. ca.
42. ca.
the Captains over the Jews, persecuted Ismael, and recovered from him all
the people which he had carried away, and put Ismael to flight. Then Iohanan
(fearing the Chaldeys, because of the death of Gedaliah) consulted with the
reast of the Captains, and agreede to conueigh themselves and all the people
into Egypt, and asked counsel of Jeremy the Prophet (who had dwelt quietlye
in the land under Gedaliah) whither it were best so to do or no, who made
them answer, that if they went into Egypt they should perish, but if they
tarried still in the land, God would surely so defend them, that the Chaldeys
43. a.
should not hurt them: yet they of a proud mind despising the counsel of
Jeremy and taking his words for lies) led the people away into Egypt, to
their utter destruction.

Luke. 1. cap.
John Baptist, the son of Zacharye, was sanctified in the womb of Elizabeth
his mother, and ordained of God to be an abstayner, and to go before the Lord,
in the spirit and power of Helias, to prepare his way and make ready a
perfect people unto him through preaching the amendment of life, and baptizing
in the water Luke 3. a. b. c. d
of repentance: And was a man of so great perfection and holiness of life,
that the people stood in a doubt whither that he were Christ or no. And being
asked the question, denied plainly that he was not Christ, nor Helias, neither
that Prophet whom they dreamed so much upon, but only the voice of a crier
in the wilderness to make straight the way of the Lord. For I do Baptize
(says John) in water only, but there is one now come among you who although
he came after me, was before me, whose shoe latchet I am not woorthye to
unbuckle, and he it is that shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost. John was a
constant man and lived aunsterely. His garment was course cloth made of Camels
hair. His meat was locustes and wild honey. He was a Prophet, and (as Christ
reports) more than a Prophet. For John prophesied 7. d. c.
Christ to be come, pointing him with his finger unto the people, saying:
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, where as
all the other Prophets did but prophecy of his coming long before he came.
Finally, John using his liberty in Math. 14. a.
rebuking vice without any acception of persons, reproved King Herod, for
keeping his brother Philips wife, for the which he was cast into prison, and
soon after lost his head. Read the story of Herod the Tetrarch and of
Herodias.

Math. 4. d.
John the Evangelist, was the son of Zebede, and brother to James, and called
from his fisher boat to be an Apostle of Christ, and was of all other most
entierly John. 13. c.
beloved of Jesus, who commended his mother unto 19. c. 21. f.
him at the hour of his death. He wrote his Gospel against Cerinthus and other
Heretics, and chieflye against the Ebionites, which did affirm, that Christ
was not before Mary whereby he was constrained to set forth the divine birth
of Christ. In the time of the Emperor Domitian, he was exiled into an Isle
called Pathmos, where he wrote the Revelation, and after the death of Domitian,
in the time of Pertinax, he returned to Ephesus, remaining there till the time
of Traianus, and did raise up and set in order, many Churches in Asia, and died
three score years after the death of Christ, and was buried at Ephesus.

St John the Evangelist with an eagle, shackled by the ankle, and writing on a
tablet on a hill above a lake with ships sailing it. Three figures worship a
seven-headed beast in the valley below. S IOANNIS EVANGELISTA IN PATMOS
APOCALYPSIS cap. 18. 14.
ET VIDI ET ECCE AGNVS STABAT SVPRA MONTEM SION,

Act. 12. d.
John Mark: When Paul and Barnabas had been at Jerusalem to destribute the
Alms sent by the Antiochians, in their return, they brought this man John
(surnamed Mark) with them to Antioche. And when the holy Ghost had separated
Paul and Barnabas, from the other Disciples, to the intent that they should
go and spread abroad the Gospel among the Gentiles, and those that were far
of, they took this John Mark with them to be their Minister and companion,
who bare them company from Antioche until they came to Pamphilia, Act. 13. b.
c.
and farther would he not go, but left them there, and returned to Jerusalem
again, notwithstanding the Apostles went forth and fulfilled their office.
And when it came in their minds to go and visit these places again, wherein
they had sowed the word of God, Barnabas gave counsel to take John with them
which had been their minister before, to whose mind Paul would not consent,
forasmuch as John (of his own accord) had forsaken them at Pamphilia, before
they had finished their work. And so reasoning and disputing about this
matter, the contencion was so sharp between these two holy men, that the one
forsook the others company. And so Barnabas taking John Mark with him,
sailed into Cypres.

2. Reg. 13. a.
Ionadab, was the son of Simeah, David's brother, and a worldly wise man. He
loved Ammon his uncle David's son, above the reast of all his brethren. Of the
counsel he gave to Ammon, concerning his Sister Thamar. Read the story of
Ammon. Ionadab, Voluntary, or Willing.


Jonas. 1. cap.
Jonas, the son of Amithay was an holy Prophet, commanded of God to go to
Niniue (that great City) 4. Reg. 14. d.
to tell the people of their wickedness, who The mother of this prophet, was
the poor wydowe of Sarepta, whose Meal and Oil Elias increased, and restored
her son from death to life agayue.
notwithstanding persuaded himself by his own reason, that he should nothing
profit there, seeing he had so long Prophesied among his own Country men
(the Jews) and done no good at all: Wherefore he (minding to fly to Tharsus)
got him to Ioppa, where he found a ship ready, paid his fare and went with
them. And being on the sea, a tempest rose so vehemently, that the Mariners
were sore afraid, crying every man unto his God, and to lighten the ship,
they cast all the wares into the Sea, which nothing auayled. Then went the
master of the ship down under the hatches, and finding Jonas fast a sleep,
awoke him, saying: O thou sleeper, what meanest thou, arise and call upon thy
God, that we perish not. And when no remedy could be had, they agreed to cast
lottes, that thereby they might know for whose cause they were troubled, and
so doing, the lot fell on Jonas: They seeing that, said: Tell us for whose
cause we are thus troubled? And what thine occupasion is? And what thou art?
And whence thou come, and whither thou go? And what Country man thou art,
and of what nation? I am (said Jonas) an Hebrew borne, and fear the Lord God
of Heaven, which made both the Sea and dry land, and am fled from his
presence. And when they heard that, they were more afraid than before, and
said: what shall we do unto thee, that the Sea may cease from troubling of
us? Take me (quoth Jonas) and cast me into the Sea, and ye shall have rest, for
I wot it is for my sake, that this evil is come upon you: Nevertheless, the
men (being loath to commit such a deed) assayed with rowyng to bring the ship
to land. And when they saw the Sea so troublous against them, that it would
not be, they cried unto the Lord and said: O Lord let us not perish for this
man's death, neither lay thou innocent blood unto our charge: For thou, O
Lord, have done even as thy pleasure was. And so they took Jonas and cast him
into the Sea, which incontinent was calm and still. And a certain great fish
(prepared of the Lord) received Jonas, and swallowed him up into his body,
where he lay (in prayer) three days and three nights. And being then cast out
again on dry land. The Lord commanded him eftsoons to go to Niniue, and
do as he had charged him. And when he came to the city and was entered a
days journey in the same, he cried out, saying: There are yet forty days,
and then shall Niniue be overthrown. But when his Prophecy came to none
effect, by reason of the peoples great repentance, he was sore displeased, and
in his prayer, said: O Lord, was not this my saying (I pray thee when I was
yet in my Country, and the cause of my flying to Tharsus, that thou wast a
merciful God, full of compassion, long suffering, and of great goodness, and
would repent thee of the evil? And now O Lord, forasmuch as I am found
false in my sayings, take (I beseech thee) my life from me, for I had rather
dye than live. And so Jonas got him out of the City, and made him a booth on
the East side thereof. And as he sat under the shadow of his booth, to see
what should become of the City: the Lord caused a wild Vine to spring over
his head, to give him more shadow to defend the heat of the Sun from him,
whereof Jonas was very glad. But on the next morrow, when he perceived the
Vine withered away, and that for lack of the shadow thereof he waxed faint
through the fervent heat of the Sun which burned him so sore, he wished in
himself that he might die. Then said the Lord to Jonas, do thou well to
be angry for the wild Vine? Yea said he very well, even unto death. If thou
than (quoth the Lord) have had pity upon the wild vine, whereon thou
bestowedst no labor, nor made it grow, which sprang up in one night and
perished in an other? How much more ought I to have pity upon Niniue that
great City wherein are six score thousand persons, that cannot discern
between their right hand and their left, beside much cattle. And thus was
Jonas reproved of God, for his disobedience. Jonas, a Dove.


1. Reg. 13. a.
Ionathas, the son of King Saul, was a valiant man in all his acts, who
helped his father so mightily against 14. cap.
the Philistynes, that at the first brunt he bette down the strongest hold
they had. And after that (the Philistynes being pitched in Michmas, into the
which passage lay two sharp rocks.) He said to his Armor bearer, come, and
let us go over toward the Philistynes garrison, peradventure the Lord will
work with us, for it is no hard thing with him, to save with many, or with
few: we will go over and show our selves to these uncircumcised. Ionathas
spoke this by the spirit of Prophecy.
And if they say on this wise unto us: Tarry until we come unto you, then
will we stand still, and not remove: But if they say, come up unto us, then
will we go up, for the Lord has surely delivered them into our hands, and
this shall be a sign unto us. So they went (without the knowledge of Saul) and
showed themselves unto the Philistynes, who (when they saw them) said in
derision: see how the Ebrues are crept out of the holes wherein they had hid
themselves: but the watchmen said unto them, come up unto us, and we will
show you a thing. Then said Ionathas to his Armor bearer, come up after me,
for the Lord has delivered them into the hands of Israel. And so Ionathas
clammered up the rock upon his hands and feet, and his Armor bearer after
him. And when the Philistines saw the face of Ionathas, they were so sodeinly
smytten with fear, that they fell down before him, so that Ionathas and his
man, slew twenty of them, and put all the reast to flight. And when the
watchmen of Saul, saw the Philistynes scattered abroad, and smitten down as
they went, they told it to the King, who caused a search to be made, to know
who was gone out of the host, and not a man was found lacking, save Ionathas
and his Armor bearer. Then Saul with all his host, followed after the
Philistynes, charging the people (which had long been without sustenance) on
pain of death, no man to touch any food, until he were that day avenged on
his enemies. And so the people being sore oppressed with hunger, and coming into
a wood where much Honey lay upon the ground, durst not for their lives
comfort themselves with one drop thereof. Then Ionathas being faint (and not
knowing the charge of his father) tasted a little honey with the end of his
rod, and was greatly comforted and refreshed therewith. And being told what
danger he had incurred, for breaking his fathers commandment, he said: My
Father has troubled the land, in making such an extreme law: for seeing that
I have received my strength again, by tasting a little of this honey, how much
more should the people (if they had eaten of the spoil of their enemies which
they found) have been the stronger, and more able to have made a greater
slaughter among the Philistynes than they have done. But nevertheless, for
this offense of Ionathas, lottes were cast, and Ionathas judged to suffer
death, whereupon the people cried out to Saul, saying: Shall Ionathas dye,
which has so mightily defended Israel? God forbid, as truly as the Lord
lives, there shall not one heaire of his head fall unto the ground, for he
has wrought with God this day. And so the people delivered Ionathas. After
this, Ionathas fell into such love and amity with David (whom Saul his
father persecuted) that he made a bond with him, which was never dissolved
between them: And at his first acquaintance with David, he put off his robe,
and gave it to him, with his other garments, even to his sword, Bow, and
Girdle. And whatsoever (from that day forth) was said, done, or wrought by
Saul his father against David, that would Ionathas find the means to stay
and pacify, whereby (many times) he saved David from the cruelty of Saul, and
so continued his faithful friend, during his life. Finally, in battle with
his father against the Philistynes, he was slain. Ionathas, the gift of the
Pigeon, or Dove.


1. Mac. 2. 2.
Ionathas, the yoongest son of Mathathias, and brother to Judas Machabeus,
did so valiauntly behave 9. c.
himself in the wars, that the Jews (after the death of Judas his brother)
made him their chief governor, who (at length) vanquished Bachides. Whereby
his 10. cap.
same so increased, that both Demetrius and Alexander sought to be in league
with him: But for so much as Demetrius had vexed Israel before, Ionathas
(mistrusting Demetrius) forsook his offer, and agreed to Alexander, who had
always been his friend, and so continued, as his story declares. After
this, he vanquished Appolonius, Captain of Demetrius host, brent the City of
Azotus, with the Temple of Dagon, subdued Ascalon, and with great victory
returned to Jerusalem, where (for his worthy prowess) he received a collar of
gold from Alexander. Finallye (after long prosperity in 12. f. g. 13. c.
wars) he was betrayed by one Triphon in the City of Ptolomais, and
afterward most piteously put to death. Of Ionathas, son of Abiathar the
Priest, look in the story of Ahimaaz the son of Sadoch.

2. Reg. 21. d.
Ionathas, the son of Simea David's brother, encountered with a mighty Giant,
who had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot so many toes, and slew
him.

4. Reg. 3. cap.
Ioram, the son of Achab began his reign over Israel (after his brother
Ahazia) in the eyghtene In the first Chapter of the fourth book of Kings, it
is said that this man began his reygne, in the second year of Ioram the son
of Iosaphat, which is thus to be understand. Iosaphat going to battle
against the Sirians, made his son Ioram King in the.xvii. year of his reygne,
and in ye.xviii. year, which was the second year of his son, this man began
his reygne.
year of Iosaphat King of Judah, and wrought evil in the sight of the Lord,
but not like unto his father, for he took away the Image of Baal, which his
father had made, nevertheless, he sacrificed to the golden Calves still, which
Jeroboam had made. The King of Moab was wont yearly to render to the King of
Israel, an hundred thousand lambs, and so many Rams with the wool, and
because he now refused to pay this tribute to Ioram, he warred against him,
having to take his part, Iosaphat the King of Judah, and the King of Edom, by
whose help, and chiefelye Eliseus, (read the place in his story) he overcame
the Moabites. Also the Sirians, could lie no where, but Ioram had knowledge by
Eliseus who told him of all their secret lurking places, by which means
Ioram ever saved him self: Wherefore, the King of Siria sent and besieged the
town round about where the Prophet Eliseus lay. And as his servant was
going forth in the morning about his masters business, and saw the town so
compassed with enimi^s, he ran 6. cap.
in again, crying: Alas master what shall we do for the Sirians are come
upon us. Fear not (quoth Eliseus) for they that be with us, are me than they
that be with them: And by and by the eyes of his servant were so opened, that
he saw the mounteynes lie full of horses and fyrie Charrettes to defend his
master. And now, when the Siria^s were come to Eliseus, and thought themselves
most surest of him, they were (at his prayer) smitten with such blindness,
that they could not know the Prophet when he spoke unto them, saying that
that was not the town where the man lay which they sought, but follow me
(quoth he) and I will bring you to the place where he is, and so he led them
forth and brought them into the City of Samaria where Ioram lay, who seeing
now his enemies to be in his danger, said to Eliseus: Father shall I smite
them? No said he: Smite those which thou take with thine own swoorde and
bow, but rather set bread and water before them, that they may eat and
drink, and so depart to their master. Then the King prepared a great
refection for the Sirians, and filled their bellyes well, and sent them home
again, for the which gentle entreaty of Ioram, the King of Siria never
troubled him more. After this when Benhadad King of Siria had besieged Samaria,
so long till women were constrained to rate their own children, Ioram took
such displeasure with Eliseus (laying the cause upon him) that in his furye, he
sent to take away his head: Which thing being revealed to the Prophet, he
said to his friends that were with him in his house: See ye not how these
murderers son has sent to take away my head? Take heed and be
circumspect when the Messenger comes, and keep him at the door, for the
sound of his Masters feet is behind him, which was even so, for the Kings
mind altered, he followed the Messenger, and came to the Prophet himself,
saying: This evil is of the Lord, and what more shall I look for of him? No
more said the 4. Reg. 7. a.
Prophet: For to morrow this time, shall a bushel of fine flower be sold for a
sicle, and two bushels of Barley for another sicle in the gate of Samaria,
which came so to pass the next day, for the great host of the Sirians at the
sound of the feet of four lepers, were run away, and had left all their
tents behind them. Finally (to fulfill 9. c. f.
the word of the Lord concerning the destruction of Achabs posterity) Ioram
was slain with an arrowe ^hot of by Iehu, and his body cast into a platte of
ground that was Nabothes the Iesraelite, after he had reigned twelve years.

4. Reg. 8. d.
Ioram, the son of Iosaphat, was two an thirty 2. Par. 21. cap.
year old when he began to reygne over Judah. He married King Achabs daughter,
whose wicked steps he followed. He slew all his own brethren, with diverse of
his nobles. The Edomites which had been subject from David's time hitherto,
rebelled now against Ioram. Also Libna (which was a certain City in Judah,
given to the Levites. Joshua* 21. b.) would no more be under his hand, because
he had forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers. The Prophets letter.
Finally, the Prophet Eliseus (to admonish him of his wickedness) wrote to
Ioram on this wise: The Lord says, because thou have not walked in the ways
of Iosaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa thy Graundfather, but in the
ways of the Kings of Israel, and have made Judah to go a whoring, after the
house of Achab, and have also slain thy brethren, even thy fathers house, who
were better men than thy self: Therefore, with a great plague will the Lord
smite thy folk, thy children, thy wives, and all thy goods: And thou shall be
diseased in thy bowels, which day by day, shall fall out of thy body. And so
the Lord styrred up against Ioram, the Philistines, the Arabians, with the
black Moors, which wasted his Country, and carried away his substance, his
wives, and al his sons (save Ahaziahu the yoongest) and smote him with an
incurable disease in his bowels which held him two years, till all his gutts
fell out, and so died, after he had reigned eight years. Ioram: the bighnesse
of the Lord.


3. Reg. 15. f.
Iosaphath, the son of Asa, began his reygne over Judah in the fourth year of
Achab King of Israel, and walked in the old ways of his father David, and in
the commandments of God, and not in the ways of Israel. This godly King to
have the fear of the Lord renewed among his people, in the third year of his
reign, sent certain of his Lords thorowout all his Realm, and with them
godly learned and ancient Fathers of the Levites with the book of the law:
whose Commission was to see all ydolatrie and supersticion suppressed, and the
laws of God purely and sincerely taught and followed, which was so diligently
done, that the fear of the Lord, fell so upon all the Kingdoms round about
him, that no man troubled him, but presented him with gifts: The Philistynes
with Tribute money, the Arabians with Cattle, so that within a while, he grew
into great riches and honor. And being thus endued with abundance of treasure
and substance, he joined affinity with Achab, taking his part against the
Sirians, where (notwithstanding) the Lord preserved him, and brought him safe
home again. But for so much as in his absence, the people were somewhat
swarued from the Lord, the Prophet Iehu came to him, and said: Because thou
have helped the ungodly, and loved them whom the Lord does hate* the wrath
of God is come upon thee, nevertheless, good things are found in thee,
because thou have taken away the Groves out of the land, and have prepared
thine heart to seek God. Then Iosaphat fearing the Lord, went about all his
Realm, to bring the people again unto the Lord: And when he had set godly
Judges and Levites in every City (the one to judge in tempor all causes, and
the other in matters of the Lord) he gave to either of them his charge, saying
first to the Judges on this wise: Take heed (ye Judges) what ye do? for ye
execute not the judgment of man, but of God, which is with you in judgment:
wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you, and take heed and be
doing the thing that pleases him, for there is no vnrighteousnsse with the
Lord our God that should have any respect of persons, or take rewards. Then
he turned to the Levites, and said: Thus shall ye do in the fear of the
Lord, faithfully, and with a pure heart, what cause soever come unto you of
your brethren, between blood and blood, Law and Commandment, Statute and
Ordinance, ye shall warn them that they trespass not against the Lord, that
wrath come not upon you, and upon your brethren, thus do, and you shall not
offend: Take courage to you, and do manfully, and the Lord shall be with
such, as go about to mayntaine the laws of the Lord. After this, the Lord
gave Iosaphat a marvelous victory against the Moabites, the patriarch Joseph
takes an arrow from his quiver, while holding a bow, outside a city wall.
Filius accrescens, aspectu pulcher Joseph
Faemineo e turri conuitio pet^^^^
Inuideam mihi cotraxit mea uita pudica
Quodque manus leuibus, sit mihi pro^^^^
and the Ammonites, whose armies fell at such strife and variance among
themselves, that one killed another, and left not one alive undestroyed before
Iosaphat came at them. And the fourth day after he had gathered up the spoil,
he assembled his people in the valley of Blessing, and went to Jerusalem with
great triumph, where he gave all praise and thanks to God for his myraculous
victory. Finally, he joined himself with Ahaziahu king of Israel, and made
ten ships to go with his ships into Tharsis for gold: And because he had
The true Christians, ought not to toyne in society with Idolaters.
joined himself with so wicked a man, the Lord brake his ships, and would
not suffer them to go. He reigned.xxv. years, and was buried with his fathers
in the City of David, leaving Ioram his son to occupy his place. Iosaphat,
the Lords judgment, or the judgment of the Lord.


Genesis 30. d. 37. cap.
Joseph, the son of Jacob and Rachel, was in his youth, of his father above
all other beloved, in so much, that he made him a coat of many colors: But
his brethren hated him, because his dreams signified unto them, that he should
be Lord over them all, and they his servants. And being at the age of.xvij.
years, he was sent to them with victualles, where they lay with their sheep
at Dothan, who seeing him come a far of, began to deryde and mock him,
saying: Behold, where the Dreamer comes, and counsayled togithers to kill
him, but Ruben (the eldest brother) would not consent to that. Wherefore at his
coming they stripped him out of his coat, and cast him into an empty pit.
And as certain Ismaelites passed by, they sold Joseph to them for twenty
pence of silver, and took his Coat, and dipped it in Goats blood, and had it
home to their father, bearing him in hand they had found it by the way: Then
Jacob seeing his sons coat, cried out and rent his garments for sorrow,
thinking surely that wild beasts had devoured and torn Joseph in pieces: But
he being safe and sound carried into Egypt, was there sold again 39. cap.
to a certain great Lord of King Pharaos Court named Putiphar: and became so
lucky a man with him (by Gods providence) that his Master made him chief
ruler over all his house. And so continued in great favor with his Lord,
until his Masters wife began to cast her love upon him, and would have had
him to lie with her: Then Joseph to dysswade his Mystresse from her inordinate
love, said: Behold, my Master knows not what he has in the house with
me, but has committed all things he has into my hands. There is no man
greater in this house than I, neither has he kept any thing from me, save
only thee, because thou art his wife. How then can I do this great
wickedness, and so sin against God? And thus he put her of, and shunned her
company (from that day forth) as much as he could possible do. But one day
as Joseph entered into the house to do his business, and finding his
Mystresse there (by chance) alone, she caught him by the cloak to have him
sleep with her, which he denied and would not consent to her mind, and when
he saw her so importune upon him that he could not honestly part from her, he
wound himself out of his garment, and so departed: Then she called to her
men, declaring to them that Joseph would have ravished her, and when I began
to cry (quoth she) he left his garment behind him for haste, and ran away:
which tale being told to Putiphar at his coming home, Joseph was cast in
prison, where (by Gods provision) he found such favor with the keeper, that
he committed all things under his hand to do whatsoever he would. Now in
this prison where Joseph Genesis 40. cap.
was, lay two of King Pharaos officers: The one his chief Baker, and the
other his Butler. Which two men chanced to dream both in one night, and
telling their dreams to Joseph, he told the Butlar that within th^ee days,
he should be restored to his office again, but the Baker should be hanged:
Wherefore he desired the Butler to think upon him to the King when he was
restored, who (notwithstanding) forgot Joseph, and never remembered 41. cap.
him till two years after that Pharao the King chanced to have certain
dreams, which none could be found to tell him the meaning thereof: and then the
Butler calling Joseph to remembrance, told the King al things of him, who
being sent for, and come to the King, he opened the dreams, declaring to
Pharao, the seven plentiful years that were to come, and the seven barren and
hard years which should ensue and consume the abundance of the years
proceeding. Then the King perceiving Joseph to be a man endued with wisdom
and knowledge, made him Regent of his Realm, and called him the Savior of the
world, for by his polityke provision, Egypt was relieved in the hard and
dear years, and the King greatly enriched. At this time was Joseph about the
age of thirty years, and took to wife, Asnath the daughter of Putiphar
Priest of On, and had by her two sons, Manasses and Ephraim. Now when the
time of dearth was come, all lands being sore oppressed with famine, sent into
Egypt for Corn, among the which, Jacob sent ten of his sons, who (at their
coming before Joseph 42. cap*
their brother and governor of Egypt) fell down flat before him. Then Joseph
beholding his brethren (whom he knew very well, but they not him) demanded
straunglye from whence they came. They said from the land of Canaan. Then
Joseph remembering his dreams, spoke roughly to them, and said, they were
spies. Nay my Lord (quoth they) we are all one man's sons and mean truly.
Nay nay (quoth he) your coming is for none other purpose, but to spy out the
land where it is most weakest. Truly my Lord, quoth they, we are no Spies,
we are twelve brethren, the sons of one man, and the yoongest this day,
remains with our Father, and one, no man woteth where he is. Then I will
prove you (quoth he) whither ye mean truly or no, let one of you go fetch
your yoongest brother hither, for by the life of Pharao ye shall not depart
till I see him, and so kept them in ward three days. And then (considering
with himself) he agreed they should all go home again with food to their
Father, save one, which should remain bound for the reast, till they had
brought their other brother: And at their going away, commanded every man's
sack to be filled with Corn, and every man's money to be put into the sack^s
mouth, and so departed, leaving Simeon behind them in pledge for them all. Now
being Genesis 43.
returned again with Benjamin their yoongest brother, they were all had into
Joseph's house, and most gently entertained. And when Joseph came in and saw all
his brethren, he demanded, saying: Is your Father the old man of whom ye
told me, in good health and yet alive: Yea (quoth they) thy servant is in
good health and merry: And is this your youngest brother, of whom ye told me?
God be merciful unto thee my son (quoth he) and with that his heart began so
to melt, that he hasted into his Chamber and wept. And coming forth again
with a cherefull countenance, he went to dinner with his brethren, commanding
each one to be set down in order according to their ages, whereat his brethren
(within themselves) marueyled. And during the time of refection, he rewarded
every one from his mess, but most of all Benjamin. And when he had thus
feasted his brethren, so long 44. cap.
as pleased him, the night before their departing, he commanded their sackes
to be filled with Corn, and every man's money put into his sackes mouth as
before, and his silver cup into Beniamins sack. And in the morning, as they
were departed a little out of the City, a messenger ouertooke them, saying:
Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good: Is not that the cup, in the which
my Lord drincketh? and in the which he does Prophecy? Ye have done evil in
so doing. The men hearing this were marvelously astonyed, denying utterly
that they never thought no such deed against their Lord: but when their sackes
were searched, and the Cup found. Then they rent their clothes, and yielded
themselves, and returned with the Messenger to the governors house again, and
coming before him, he looked angerlye on them, saying: What an unkind deed
is this ye have done? Know ye not that such a man as I, can divine and
Prophecy? And now when the men had made the best excuse they could make,
Joseph could no longer refrain, Genesis 45.
but with weeping tears said to his brethren: I am Joseph, does my father yet
live? With that they were so astonyed with his presence, that they could not
answer him one word: I am Joseph your brother (quoth he) whom ye sold
into Egypt, now therefore be not grieved with your selves that ye sold me
hither, for God did send me before you for your preservation, for this is the
second year of dearth, and five more are behind, wherefore God sent me
before you, to make provision for you in this land, and to save your lives by
a great deliverance: So now it was not you that sent me hither but God, who
has made me a Father unto Pharao, and Lord of all his house, and ruler
thorowout all the land of Egypt. Therefore now go and tell my father, and bid
him come with all his household to me, and I will make provision for him. Thus
when Joseph had received 46.
his Father into Egypt, and governed the land four 50. d.
score years, he dyed at the age of an hundred and ten years, and was buried
in Epigt, whose bones were afterward translated into the land of promission,
as Joseph had bound them to do in his death bed. Joseph. Increasing.


Math. 1. ^.
Joseph, the son of Jacob the son of Matthan, a poor honest man and a
Carpenter by his occupasion, was spoused to the Virgin Mary, the Mother of
Christ, and dwelled in Nazareth a little City in Galile, and came of the same
Tribe and kindred that Mary came of, that is to say, of the Tribe of Judah, and
of the progeny and stock of David, of whose seed it was promised that
Christ should be borne. He had four sons, James, Ioses, Simon 13. g.
and Judas, which the Jews (of ignorance) called the brethren of Christ.

Math. 27. g.
Joseph, a man of honor, and of great power and substance, borne in the City
of Aramathia, which was a Disciple of Jesus, but not openly known because of
the Jews, which had made a law, that whosoever did openly confess him to be
Jesus Disciple, the same person should be cast out of the Synagoge. This
Joseph came to Pylate, and desired license of him, to take down the body of
Jesus from the Cross and to bury it, and having obtained his peticion, he
bought a fine piece of linen cloth, and therein wrapped the body, and laid it
in a new Sepulcher hewed out of the rock, and rolled a great stone before the
door of the Sepulcher, and so went his way.

1. Mac. ^. b. f. g
Josephus, the son of Zachary, and one Asarias, were two Captains under
Judas Machabeus, which two, Judas left in Iewry to keep and govern the
remnant of the host left there, while he and Ionathas with Simon their
brother, went into the parties of Galile and Galaad to deliver their brethren
which were then besieged of their enemies: giving them a great charge not to
war with the heathen, but to lie still, till he and his brethren were
returned home again. But nevertheless, when Josephus and Asarias had heard
of all the great acts done by Judas and his brethren, they said one to an
other: Let us go out and fight against the heathen that lie round about us,
that we may get us a name also. And being agreede, they went out, and pitched
their host before the City of Iamnya, who had not lain there long, or that
Gorgias issued out of the city with his men, and stroke battle with Josephus,
and slew of the Jews two thousand, and chased Josephus and all the rest of his
company to the borders of Iewrie. And thus Josephus and Asarias, neglecting
the commandment of Judas their Lord and governor, purchased in the stead
of honor and fame, great dishonor and shame.

Act. 4. g.
Ioses, a certain Leuyte borne in the Country of Cypres, sold his land
there, and brought the whole price thereof, and laid it down at the Apostles
feet, of whom he was surnamed Barnabas. Ioses, going out, or thrust out.


4. Reg. 22. ca
Josias, the son of Amon, being at the age of eight years when he began his
raygne over Judah, was a virtuous 2. Par. 34. ca.
and just Prince, for he sought the Lord God of his father David, even from his
Childehoode to the end of his life. He caused the book of the law of Moses,
which had been long lost, and found again by Helkia the Priest, to be had in
great reverence, and diligently read unto the people. He cleansed his land from
all witchcrafts, and sorcerie, and from Idols, Images and Groves. He brake
down the hill altars, and brent the bones of the Priests of Baal, and left no
wicked thing undestroyed, nor monument standing in the Cities of Manasses and
Ephraim, or other places of his Realm, where any abhominacion had been
committed. He kept a passover (in the eyghtene year of his reign) the like
never seen, and repaired the Temple. Finally, he made war upon the King of
Egypt, in the which he was wounded with a Darte (at a place called Magiddo)
whereof he dyed. Whose death was much lamented, for like unto him was never
none before nor after. Iehoahas his son succeeded him. Josias, the Lords
Fire, or the Lord burning.


4. Reg. 15. g.
Iotham, the son of Azaria or Vzia at the age of xxv. years, began his
reign over Judah, in the second 2. Par. 27. ca.
year of Pekah King of Israel, and did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord in all points, as did his father Azaria, save that He went not into
the Temple of the Lord to burn incense as his father did, contrary to the
word of god, which is spoken to the commendation of Iotham.
he came not into the temple of the Lord, neither caused the hill aultars to
be taken away, by which occasion the people ceased not to do wickedly. He
builded the sumpteous gate of the Temple, and many Cities, Castles, and Towers,
in the Mountains of Judah and other places. He subdued the Ammonites, who paid
him three years together, an hundred talents of silver, ten thousand quarters
of Wheat, and so much of Barley. He reigned.xvj. years, and was buried in the
City of David, leaving Ahas his son to enjoy his place Iotham, Persite.


Number. 27. c. d.
Joshua, the son of Nun, was first called Osea, which name Moses changed, and
called him Joshua, who was Moses minister, and ordained of God to rule and Exodus
17. c. d.
govern the people after him. He discomfited King Amalech while Moses held up
his hands, and prayed. He was one of those Explorators which were sent by
Moses, Number. 13 cap. 14. a. b.
to search the land of Canaan, and to bring the people word again what
manner of country it was: at whose return the people were ready to stone both
him and Caleb, for well reporting of that land, wherefore, the Lord (being
angrye with the people) swear that none of them all should see that good
land, but Joshua and Caleb. After Joshua. 1. cap.
the death of Moses, the Lord encouraged Joshua to invade the land of promise,
and gave him commandment to exercise himself continually in reading the
book of the Law called Deuteronomie. Which he dulye observed, and read it to
the people, that they thereby might the better learn to love and fear God,
and to obey him the Lords minister* He destroyed the City of Jericho, only
reserving Raab and her household. He brent the City of Hai, and hanged the
five Kings of the Amorites on five trees, at whose discomfiting, it rayned
stones from heaven, by the which, mo were slain than with the sword, and the
Sun also stood still in his place, and prolonged the day, till Joshua had
utterly discomfited his enemies. He slew in all, first and last.xxxj. Kings,
and brought the children of Israel into the land of promission, and divided
the land to the Tribes of Israel. He dyed at the age of an hundred and ten
years, in whose stead Judah was made governor of the Lords army. Joshua, the
Lord Savior.


Genesis 21. a.
Isaac, was the son of Abraham by his wife Sara, and a figure of Christ, for
when his father went to 22. cap.
Some say that Isaac was sacrificed of his father in the xiii. year of his
age, but Josephus affirms it to be done in the xxv. year.
offer him up in sacrifice, and coming to the Altar, and place where he
should dye, he willingly offered himself to death, that his father might (in
him) fulfill the Lords will. But being preserved of God till he came to the
age of forty years, he then took to wife Rebecca 25. c.
the daughter of Bathuel his fathers brother, who being long barren, at the
last (by the pleasure of God) brought forth Esau and Jacob at one birth. After
this, there fell 26. cap.
such a dearth and famine in his country, that he departed into the land of
the Philistines, where Abimelech was King. And as he remained in Gerar, the
Lord appeared to Isaac, bidding him to remain still in that place, and not to
remove into Egypt, and he would multiply his sede as the Stars of heaven,
and bring it so to pass, that all Nations of the earth should be blessed
therein. And so Isaac removed not: But for so much as he doubted of the fear
of God to be in that place, he durst not auouche Rebecca to be his wife, but
said she was his sister. Read the story of Abimelech King of the
Philistines, for the playner declaration of this matter. And now, while Isaac
remained in the Country of Gerar, God so increased him with abundance of
cattle and riches, that the Philistynes began to envy and hate him, and
stopped all the Wells which his father Abraham had made, that he should have
no commodity thereby: But notwithstanding, he dug up the Wells again, and
called them by the same names, that his father had given them before, and
became so mighty that Abimelech made a bond with Isaac, who feasted the King,
and departed friends. Finally, with age, he became blind, 27. a.
and so was deceived in giving his blessing to Jacob, which he thought to have
first bestowed on Esau, but both (by the will of God) ^eing blessed of their
father Isaac, he fell sick and dyed, at the age of an hundred and lxxx. years,
and was buried in Hebron. Isaac, Laughter.


2. Reg. 2. c.
Isboseth, the son of King Saul, at the age of forty years, began his
reygne over Israel. Whose only 4. cap.
stay and vpholder of his Kingdom was Abner: after whose death, two of his
own Captains slew Isboseth by treason in his own house, after he had reigned
two years. Read the story of Baanah. Isboseth, a man of sbame.


Genesis 16. d.
Ismael, was the son of Abraham and Agar, and had his name given him of the
Angel before he was borne. For when his mother Agar fled from Sara her Of
Ismael came the nation of the Ismaelytes, which after were called Sarracenes.
Mystres, an Angel found her, saying: return to thy Mystresse again, for
thou art with child, and shall bear a son, and because the Lord has
heard thy tribulation, thou shall call his name Ismael. He will be a wild
man, and his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against his.
And so she returned and brought forth Ismael, at whose birth, Abraham his
father was.lxxxvj. year old. And at the age of.xiij. years 17. d.
was Ismael circumcised, and the year following, both he and his mother cast
out of his fathers house, and sent away to shyft for themselves. But
nevertheless, the patriarch Juda stands in armor, holding a scepter, by a
lion. A city is visible behind him..4.
Felix ante alios fratres ego dicor Judah;
Non mihi uerba pater inuidiosa dedit
Sed me uictorem dixit, forteque Leonem.
Hosts qui superet uiribus ecce suos
the Lord which had promised Abraham to bless, increase, and multiply his
son Ismael, so preserved him, that he became a great Archer, and dwelt in the
wilderness 25. a. b.
of Pharan, and took him a wife out of the land of Egypt, and begat twelve
Princes, so that the Lord made of him a great nation. He lived. 137. years.
Ismael, God has heard.


Of Ismael the son of Nathaniah, which slew Gedaliah, read the story of
Iohanan and Gedaliah both.

2. Reg. 15. d.
Ithai, was a Gethite borne, and bare such love to David, that he left his own
Country to come and see Lyra says that Ithai was the son of Achis king of
Geth.
him, and the fashion of his Court, and as he continued there, and saw into
what danger Absalom had brought his father David, either to fly his Realm,
or to have lost all, he would take no part with Absalom, but followed David,
and left him not in this extremity. And when David saw him, he said unto him:
why come thou with me Ithai? return (I pray thee) and bide with the King,
for thou art a stranger, and come but yesterdaye, and therefore I would be
loath to disquiete thee. Therefore return and carry again thy brethren, and the
Lord shall she we thee mercy and truth. Nay said Ithai, as truly as God
lives, and my Lord the King lives, in what place my Lord the King shall be,
whether in life or death, even there also will thy servant be. And so he went
forward with David, and had rule over the third part of David's host, in the
suppression of Absalom. Ithai, Strong.


Genesis 29. d. 37. f.
Judah, was the fourth son of Jacob and Lea, who would not consent to the
death of Joseph his brother, but gave counsel, to sell him, saying: What shall
it avail us my brethren, to sley our brother, and to keep his blood secret,
let us sell him to the Isma^lites, and not lay our hands upon him, for he is
our flesh and blood* After this, he departed from his brethren to a place
called 38. cap.
Odollam, where he remained with a friend of his called Hyra, and in process
fell in love with a man's daughter called Sua (a Canaanite borne) and married
her, who (in time) brought him forth three Sons. The first Er: The second,
Onan: and the third Sela. The two first (one after another) he married to a
certain woman called Thamar, but for their horrible sin and wickedness, the
Lord slew them both. Then Judah fearing to marrye the third son unto her,
least he should dye also, said to his daughter in law: remain a Wydow at
thy fathers house, till Sela my son be grown: she did so, during which time,
the daughter of Sua dyed, and Judah became a wydower. Now when the days of
mourning were ended, he went to a place called Thymnah (taking his friend Hyra
with him) to see his sheep shearers. Then Thamar hearing thereof, and seeing
Sela not given her in marriage, laid away her Wydowes garment, and disguising
her self like a common harlot, went and sat her down in an open place by the
hye ways side going to Thymnah. And as Judah passed that way, and saw one sit
muffled like an whore, went unto her, and said: Come I pray thee, let me lie
with thee. What will thou give me then (quoth she.) I will (quoth he) send
thee a Kidde from the flock. Then leave me a pledge (quoth she) till thou
send it. What pledge shall I leave (quoth Judah.) Thy Signet (quoth she) upon
thy finger, thy Cloak, and thy staff. He did so, and lay with her. And
coming to his flock, he took a Kid, and sent it by his friend Hyra to
receive his pledges again. Who being come to the place, and found not the
woman, he asked of the men thereabout, where the whore was which sat in the
way as they came: They made him answer again, there was no whore there.
Then he returned to Judah and told him. Well, said Judah, let her take it to
her, least we be ashamed. Now was Thamar conceived with child, and when she
had gone three months, the thing was espied, and told to Judah, that his
daughter in law had played the whore, and was with child. Then bring her
forth (quoth he) that she may suffer according to the law: And as she was
led to the fire, she sent the pledges to Judah her father in law, saying: by
the same man to whom these things do pertayne, am I with child. Then Judah
knowing his pledges, said: she is more righteous than I: for she has done
this deed, because I gave her not to Sela my son. And so was the woman
delivered, and brought him forth two sons at one birth, Pharez and Genesis 49. b.
Zarez. Of this man Judah, it was prophesied, that the Scepter should not
depart from him, nor a Lawgiuer from between his feet, until which was
Christ.
Silo came. Judah, a Praising, or Confession.


1. Mac. 2. a.
Judas Machabeus, the third son of Mathathias the Jew, was a valiant man
in his faith, and of an invincible courage. In so much, that he overcame
Appolonius 3. cap.
and Seron, two mighty Princes of Siria, which came against him. And with
three thousand men, he put Gorgias to flight which stole upon him by night and
vanquished 4. cap.
Lisias the Lieutenant of King Antiochus and his sons, and with them forty
thousand footmen, and seven thousand horsemen, and slew of them five
thousand. Afterward, in Galilea, he slew of the host of Tymotheus 5. cap.
(an other of the Kings Captains) first three thousand, and afterward eight
thousand. After that by a 7. f. g.
valley called Adarsa, he with a thousand fought with Nicanor a Captain of
King Demetrius, and nine thousand with him, at the which battle Nicanor was
slain, and of the nine thousand almost none escaped. Finallye, 9. a. b.
to much trusting in his prosperity in wars, in going against Bachides (a
Captain of King Demetrius who had a great host) and taking with him but two
thousand of which at the last remained with him but only.viij. hundred, he
fought till it was night, and made a wonderful slaughter of enemies. But
while he forced himself to come to Bachidis, the which was on the right winge
of the battle, he fought so nobly that he escaped that winge, sleying many
about him. Finallye, being environed with the left winge, and stricken with
many wounds was slain with much difficulty. Judas: A praising. etc.


1. Mac. 16.
Judas, the son of Simon the son of Mathathias, did manfully assist John
his brother against Cendebeus, a. b. c.
Captain of Antiochus host, and was at the same time sore wounded, and
afterward, most traitorously murdered with Simon his father at a Banquet which
Ptolomy made them at his castle called Doche.

Luke 6. c.
Judas, the son of Alphe, and brother to James, is called in the tenth of S.
Matthew, Lebbeus, and is surnamed Thaddeus. When Christ said unto his
Disciples, John. 14. c.
that he would show himself unto them and not unto the world, Judas asked
him the cause why he would show himself unto them, and not unto the world.
He made an Jude. 1. cap.
Epistle in the which he Admonishes all Churches generallye The last part of
this history I find in the argument before the Epistle of Jude. Geneua.
to take heed of deceyuers, which went about to draw the hearts of the simple
people from the truth of God, whom he sets forth in their lively colors,
showing by diverse examples of the Scriptures, that horrible vengeance is
prepared for them. Finally, he comfort the faithful and exhorts them to
continue in the Doctrine of the Apostles of Jesus Christ.

Math. 10. ^.
Judas iscariote, the son of Simon of Canaan one of the Apostles (of whom it
was before hand written to be the son of perdicion) had a great conscience in
the John. 12. a.
precious ointment that Mary powered upon Christ's head, that it was not sold
for three hundred pence and given to the poor, but to sell his master for
thirty pence, Math. 26. b. c
and to be guide to them that took him, and to betraye him with a kiss, he
had no conscience at all, until he saw his master condemned, and then he
repented and had the thirty pence again unto the hye Priests and Elders,
cap. 27. 1.
saying that he had sinned in betraying the innocent blood, Act. 1. c.
and so departed in great desperacion, and hanged himself, whose body brast a
sundry in the midst, so that all his bowels gushed out.

Act. 5. g.
Judas, of Galile rose up after Theudas, what time as the whole world was
taxed by the commandment of Augustus Caesar, and taught the people that for as
much as they were dedicated unto God, they ought not to pay Tribute to
Emperors, which were woorshippers of false gods, whereby he drew to his
faction, a great part of the commons, who at the last were all brought to
naught and Judas himself slain.

Act. 9. b.
Judas, a Citizen of Damasco, to whose house the Lord sent Ananias to seek
Saul of Tharsus, who was hosted there.

Judith. 8. cap.
Judith, the daughter of Merari, was a bewtifull woman, unto the which, was
joined such virtue and godliness, that all men spoke good of her. Her husbands
name was Manasses, who at the day of his death, left her great riches. She
dwelt in the City of Bethulia, and was a woman of great Chastity. Now during
the time of her widowhead, it chanced Holofernes, to come and besiege the
City of Bethulia, of whom the Jews were so afraid, that they wyste not what
to do, but commit themselves to God, for he had destroyed all their water
condites, so that they must either sterue or yield of force. Then ran the
people to Osias the hye Priest, crying upon him to yield and give ever the
city to Holofernes, least they should all perish, who exhorted them to tarry
five days longer for the mercy of God, and if he helped them not in that
space, he would do as they had said. Then Judith (who all this while had
kept her house in prayer and fasting) hearing what promise Osias had made to
the people, sent for him and all the Elders of Bethulia, and said: How
happens this that ye have promised to deliver the City to the Assirians,
unless within these five days, the Lord turn to help you: what men are
ye, that ye tempt the Lord, your devise obtayneth no mercy of God, but
rather provoke him to wrath and displeasure: Will ye, set the mercy of the
Lord a time, and appoint him a day at your will? exhort the people to
repentance and prayer, and put them in remembrance of this: That with much
tribulasion the friends of God are tried, and that all these things which we
now suffer, are far less than our sins have deserved: And that this
correction is come upon us (as to the servants of God) for the amendment of
our lives, and not for our destruction. Now hear my devise (I pray you) and
beseech the Lord to bring it to good end. Ye shall stand this night in the
gate of Bethulia, and I will go forth with Abra my Maiden: Pray ye unto the
Lord that within the days that ye have promised to deliver up the city,
he will visit Israel by my hand. But inquyre not of me the thing I have
taken in hand, for I will not declare it, till God have finished the act.
Then every man went their ways, and Judith departed home to her secret closet
where she made her hearty prayers unto God for the peoples deliverance. Which
being done, she cast of her mourning garments, and decked her self most
brauelye, to allure the eyes of all men that should behold her, which she did
not for any voluptuousness or pleasure of the flesh, but of a right
discrecion and virtue: And so going forth of her house with Abra her Maid,
she came to the gate of the City, where the Elders stood waiting her coming:
And as they beheld her wonderful beauty, which God at that present had given
her, they were marvelously astonished. She then commanding the gates to be
open, took her leave of the people, who most heartily besought the Lord to be
her defense, and well to perform the devise of her heart, that they might
safely and joyfully receive her presence again: And so (committing her to God)
shut the gates, and looked over the walls after her, so long as they could see
her. And as she was going down the mountains, the first watch of the
Assirians took her, demanding what she was, and whither she went. I am (quoth
she) a daughter of the Hebrews, and am fled from them, because I know that
they shall be given unto you to be spoiled: Wherefore I am going to the Prince
Holofernes to tell him all their secrets, and how he shall win the City
without the loss of one man. And when the men had pondered her words and
considered well her beauty, they put her in good comfort of her life, and
brought her to Holofernes, whose Majesty so abashed Judith, that she fell
down as one almost dead for fear. But being reuyued again, Holofernes
demanded the cause of her coming, to whom she made answer on this wise,
saying: O my Lord, if thou will receive the words of thine handmayden, and do
thereafter, the Lord shall bring thy matter, to a prosperous effect. For as
thy servant Achior gave counsel unto my Lord, to make search whither they had
sinned against their God or no: It is manifest and plain that their God is so
wrath with them for their sins, that he has showed by his Prophets, that he
will give them over into the enemies hand. Wherefore they are sore afraid,
and suffer great hunger, and at this present (for lack of water) are in a
manner as dead men, and in this extremity brought, to kill their cattle and
drink the blood: And also purposed to consume all the Wheat, Wine and Oil,
which are reserved and sanctified for the Priests, and not lawful for the
people to touch. Wherefore I thy handmaide knowing all this, am fled from their
presence, for God has sent me to work a thing with thee, that all the earth
shall wonder, for thy servant fears the Lord, and woorshippeth the God of
heaven day and night: And now let me remain with thee my Lord, and let thy
servant go out in the night to the valley, and I will pray unto God that he
may reveal unto me, when they shall commit their sins, that I may show
them unto thee, and than may thou surely go forth with thine army, for no
man shall resist thee, and I will bring thee to Jerusalem in such safety, that
there shall not so much as one dog barcke against thee. Now was Holofernes
so well pleased with the words of this woman, and so far in love with her
beauty, that he commanded her lodging to be made in the Tent where his
treasure lay, and to prepare her diet of the same, that he himself did eat
and drink of, but notwithstanding she told the King, that she might not eat
of his meat, least she should offend her God, but I can satisfy my self
(quoth she) with such things as I have brought. Then how shall we do (quoth
Holofernes) if these things that thou have brought do sail: where shall we
have the like to give thee. As truly as the soul of my Lord lives (quoth
she) thine handmayde shall not spend all that I have, till God have brought to
pass in my hand, the thing that I have determined. And so being licensed to
go out and in every night at her pleasure to pray, she went three nights
together into the valley of Bethulia, calling upon God to prosper her devise,
for the deliverance of his people, and at each time returned to her Tent
again. And upon the fourth day as it happened Holofernes (by Gods
providence) to make a great Banquet unto his Lords, he sent Vago his
Chamberlayne to Judith, to counsel her to come and keep Company with him
that night for it were a shame for us (quoth he) if we should let such a woman
alone and not talk with her, we will allure her, least she do mock us. And
when the messenger had done his message, and brought Judith to Holofernes, his
spirit (by and by) was moved and ravished with her beauty: Sit down now
(quoth he) and drink with us and be merry: I will drink now my Lord (quoth
she) and rejoice, because my state is exalted more than ever it was before. And
so she eat and drancke before him, of such things as her Maid had prepared,
then Holofernes rejoiced so much in Judith, that he drank more wine at that
time, than ever he had done in one day before. Now when the evening was come,
and every man departed and gone to their lodging: Vago the Kings Chamberlayne,
shut the chamber door and went his way to bed, leaving none but Judith in
the chamber with Holofernes, for her Maid was commanded to stand without the
Chamber door, to wait her Mistress coming forth to pray. And as Holofernes
lay stretched along upon his bed overcome with Wine, Judith stood by his
beds side and prayed on this wise: O Lord God of all power, strengthen me,
and have respect unto the works of my hands in this hour, that thou may
set up thy city of Jerusalem, like as thou have promised: O grant, that by
thee I may perform the thing which I have devised, and so took down his
swoorde, and holding him fast by the heaire of his head, said: Strengthen me,
O Lord God of Israel, in this hour, and with that smote off his head, and
rolled the dead body aside, and got her forth to her maid, and put the
headde in her Wallet, and went forth togithers, as though they had gone (as
their custom was) to pray. And so passing by the host, and coming nyghe to
the City of Bethulia, she called to the watchmen to open the gate, for God is
with us (quoth she) and has showed his power in Israel. And when the gates
were set open, the people received her (young and old) with such joy as never
the like was seen. Then said Judith: Oh praise ye the Lord, and give
thanks unto our God, which has not taken away his mercy from the house of
Israel, but has destroyed our enemies this night by my hand: And behold here
his head, whom the Lord has slain by me his minister, and returned his
handmayde without any reproach of vylanie, wherefore give praise and thanks to
our God* whose mercy endures for ever. Now take the head, and hang it upon
the highest place of your walls, and in the morning when the Sun appears, go
forth with your weapons like valiant men, and make as though ye would set
upon your enemies, who will then prepare them to Armor: But when they shall go
to raise up their Captain and find him without a head, there will such a
fearfulness fall upon them, that every man will seek to save himself by
flying, then do ye follow them without all care, for God has delivered them
into your hands. And so the Israelites followed the Assirians (which kept no
order) and sieve them down right. And when they had slain all their enemies,
and gathered up the spoil, they gave the Tent of Holofernes, and all that
belonged to him, unto Judith, by whom God had so mightyly wrought their
deliverance, and had her in great honor, all the days of her life, who at
the age of an hundred and five years dyed, and was most honorably buried in
Bethulia beside her husband. Judith, he that prayseth or confesses.


Genesis 26. g.
Judith the daughter of Bery an Hethite, was wife to Esau the son of Isaac.

Act. 1. 7. a.
Julius, was an under Captain of the band of Augustus, to whom Paul (with
other prisoners) were committed to be carried to Rome, and of him gentlye
entreated. Julius, Down, or downie, and full of fine bears.


K.
Genesis 14
KEdorlaomor, was King of Elam. Who, with three Kings mo that took his part,
fought with the King of Sodom, and the King of Gomorra, Four King against five
and other three on their parties (which five kings had been.xij. years in
subjection under him) in the valley of Siddim, and put them to flight, and
spoiled the cities of Sodom and Gomorra, where they found Lot, Abraham's
brothers son, and carried him away with all the goods of Sodom and Gomorra:
which goods with Lot also, were recovered again by Abraham. Kedorlaomor, the
generation of servitude: or the house of bondage.


Genesis 25. ^.
Ketura, was Abraham's wife, who bare unto him six sons. Ketura, smelling
sweet like spice, or perfuming, or bound.


L.
Genesis 29. cap.
LAban, the son of Bethuel (called also Nahor) Abraham's brother, had two
daughters, the one named Lea, and the other Rachel, which two he married to
Jacob his sisters Son, as in the story of Jacob is at large set forth.
Laban, White.


Genesis 4. c. d
Lamech, the son of Mathuselah, came of the generation of Cain, and was the
first man that took him two Wives, whereby the lawful institution of marriage
(which is that two should be one flesh) was first in him corrupted. His two
wives were called Ada and Zilla. By Ada he had two sons, Iubal and Tubal. By
Zilla, one son called Tubalcain, and a daughter called Noema. He sieve Cain,
but not willingly, and told his wives saying: I have slain a man unto the
wounding of my self, and a young man unto mine own punishment: If Cain shall
be avenged seven fold, truly Lamech seauentie times seven fold. When
Lamech had lived. 182. years, 5. c. d.
he begotte a son, and called his name Noe, of whom he prophesied, saying:
This shall comfort us from the works and labors of our hands in the earth
which the Lord has cursed. He lived, 777. years, and dyed. Lamech, Poor, or
smitten.


John. 11. cap.
Lazarus, was a certain man dwelling in the town of Bethania, which town
pertayned to him and his sisters called Martha and Marie Magdalene. And being
sick on a time, his sister Marie sent unto Jesus, saying: Oh Lord, behold he
whom thou loouest is sick. At whose request, Jesus (when he saw his time)
took his journey into Iewrie to visit his friend Lazarus, who was dead and
buried four days before his coming. Then Jesus (who was not ignorant of that
which was done) went to his grave wherein they had laid him, and said:
Lazarus, come forth. And forthwithall he came out of his grave, bound hand
and foot with his grave clothes upon him, and a napkin bound about his face,
who being untied, came forth of his clothes, as whole and as lusty as ever he
was in all his life. For the which miracle the Jews sought not only how they
might put Jesus to death, but Lazarus also, upon whom the miracle was done,
because that for his sake many of the Jews went away and believed on Jesus.
After this (about John. 12. a.
a six days before the feast of Easter) came Jesus to Bethania again, where
they had prepared him a supper, at the which, Martha served him, but Lazarus
sat at the Table with him as other did. Lazarus, the Help, or succor of God,
or Gods Court.


Luke 16. e. f. g.
Lazarus, the poor beggar, which lay at the great man's gate full of botches
and sores, even ready to die for hunger, could not be relieved with so much as
one crum of the scrappes which fell from the rich man's boorde, when he made
his earnest peticion for them, where as the dogs were fed with great lumpes and
cantels of good bread: yea, he found more favor and gentleness with the dogs,
than with the rich man. For where as the rich glutton would refresh the poor
beggar with nothing of all his delicious and sumptuous fare, yet the hungry
dogs came and licked his sores. But when it chanced this beggar to die, he
was carried by ye Angels into Some do understand by Abraha^s bosom, the faith
of Abraham. And some, ye place where those do rest which dye in the faith of
Abraham. Which place is not expressed in Scripture.
Abraham's bosom. And contrariwise, the rich man then dying also, and being
sumptuouslye buried, was carried into hell: where in his torments he lifted up
his eyes, and saw Abraham a far of, and Lazarus in his bosom, unto whom he
cried, saying: O father Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus hither,
that he may but dip the top of his finger in water, to cool my tongue, for I
am sore tormented in this flame. Nay said Abraham, forasmuch as in thy life
time thou receiuedst thy pleasure, and had no pity on the poor, now art thou
punished. And contrariwise, Lazarus which received pain, and took it
patiently, is now comforted.

Genesis 29. c. ca.
Lea, was the eldest daughter of Laban the son of Nahor Abraham's brother, and
somewhat squint eyed. She prevented her sister Rachel in marriage, being
brought to Jacobs bed in her sisters stead, and so became Jacobs first wife,
and bare unto him (one after an other) these four sons, Ruben, Simeon,
Levy, and Judah, and so ceased, till it chanced Ruben her eldest son in the
time of wheat harvest to go out into the fields and find The Mandrake is a
kind of herb, whose root has a certain likeness of the figure of a man.
Mandrakes, and 30. b. c.
brought them home to his mother. Then Rachel hearing thereof, went to Lea her
sister, desiring to have her sons Mandrakes: who said to Rachel: is it not
enough that thou have taken away my husband, but would take away my sons
Mandrakes also? Well (quoth Rachel) let him sleep with thee this night, for
thy sons Mandrakes. And so Jacob coming out of the field at even, Lea met
him, and said: Come in unto me, for I have bought thee with my sons
Mandrakes, and that night she conceived with Jacob, and brought him forth the
fifth son, and called his name Isachar. After that, she conceived again, and
brought him forth the sixth son, and called his name Zabulon. Last of all,
she conceived and brought him forth a daughter, and called her name Dyna.
Lea, Paynfull, or wearyed.


Genesis 29. g.
Leuy, the third son of Jacob and Lea (with his brother Simeon) slew Hemor
and Sichem his son, for 34. cap.
rauishing of their sister Dyna. And therefore were they called of Jacob their
father, Cruel Instruments. Leuy had three sons, Gerson, Caath, and Merari.
The tribe Number. 18. c. d.
of Leuy, the Lord chose unto himself, and appointed Deuteronomy. 10. c.
them to serve in the Tabernacle of witness with Aaron, Joshua. 13. d.
to bear the Arc of the appointment of the Lord, to minister and bless in
his name, and had no inheritance among their brethren, but the Lord, who was
their inheritance. He lived. 137. years. Leuy, Joined, or Coupled. Exodus 6. c.



Luke. 5. f.
Leuy, otherwise called Mathewe, the son of Alpheus, was a Toll gatherer, or
a receyuer of Custom: who, at the voice of Jesus when he said: follow me, left
Mar. 2. c.
his office, and all things behind him, and followed the Math. 9. 2.
Lord. And became of a sinful Publican, a true Disciple of Christ. He invited
Jesus to his house, and made him a great Feast, at the which were many
Publicanes, beside other of his acquaintance, which sat at meat with Christ
and his Disciples, wherewith the Phariseys were much offended.

Leuite and his wife. There was a certain Leuite dwelling on this side of
Mount Ephraim which took to wife a Concubine out of Bethleem Judah, which woman
played the whore by him, and went away from him to her fathers house, where
she remained four the patriarch Levi holds a banner and directs soldiers
attacking a walled city..3.
Sichemitarum regem cum fre^ necaui,
Disiecique urbis moenia celsa ferox
Propterea Leui poenas fert, nil propriu^que.
Possidet, in certo nec manet ipse loco
Hac, f.
months. And at last, her husband being desirous to have her again, went to
entreat her friendly, and to fetch her home, and was gently entertained of his
father in law, by the space of three days. And on the fourth day, when he
would have departed, his Father in law would not suffer him so to do, but
with gentle entreatance, compelled him to tarry that day also until the next
morrow. Which being come, he prepared himself to depart. And about the midde
day (notwithstanding the great entreaty of his Father, to have him yet to
tarry one day longer) he took his Concubine, his servant, with two Asses
laden, and so departed, going forth till they came as far as Iebus, and
because it drew toward night, his servant counsayled him to go into the City,
and to tarry there all night, but his Master would not, because it was a
strange City, and pertayned not to the Children of Israel. And so passing by,
they came to Gibea a city belonging to the Beniamits. And coming thither
somewhat late, they went in, and sat them down in one of the streets of the
City. And as they were sitting there, a certain old man (which was of Mount
Ephraim also, and dwelt there as a stranger) came out of the field from his
work. And when he had spyed the Leuite (and those with him) sitting in the
street as wayfairing persons, he went unto them, demanding from whence they
came? The Leuite answered how that they came from Bethleem Judah beside Mount
Ephraim, and were going to the house of the Lord, and because that no man
receives us into house, we sit here, having all things necessary with us,
both for our selves, and Cattle. Well (quoth the old man) abide not here in
the street, but go home with me, and whatsoever ye lack, ye shall find it
there. And so he had them home to his house, and used them very friendly. And
as they were making merry togithers: The wicked men of the City came and
besette the house round about, and thrusting at the door to have been in,
they called unto the old man, to bring forth the men out of his house, that
they might know them. The good old man, perceiving the great folly of those
ungracious persons, went out unto them, and said: Oh my good brethren do not
prosecute to accomplish so wicked an act as this ye intend: yet rather than
ye should so wickedly abuse these men, which are come into my house, I will
bring forth my daughter (which is a maid) and this man's Concubine. But they in
no wise, would hearcken unto them. The Leuite seeing that, he put forth his
Concubine unto them: who, so shamefully abused her that night, that on the
morrow (when the Leuite her husband came to open the door) he found his
Concubine lying with her hands stretched out upon the thresholde, starcke
dead. Then he took her up upon his Ass, and carried her home to his house,
and took a knife and divided her into twelve pieces, and sent her into all the
quarters of Israel, desiring them, that for so much as there was never such a
deed done, nor heard of, since the children of Israel came out of Egypt, that
they would consider the matter, and take aduisement therein. Now the children
of Israel seeing this most evident token of the Beniamins wickedness, and
having the whole matter revealed unto them by the Leuite himself, they
assembled togithers as it had been one man, to the number of four hundred
thousand fighting men, and came to Gibea to fight against the Beniamites, who
in the first day had the better of the Israelites, and slew of them.xxij.
thousand, and in the second day.xviij. thousand, but the third day, the
Israelites had the better, and slew of the Beniamites xxv. thousand, and brent
and destroyed all their Cities they could come by, with man, woman, and
child, only six hundred of them fled to the rock of Rimmon in the
wilderness, and saved themselves there. Then Israel swear unto the Lord in
Mizpa: that whosoever did give his daughter to any of the Beniamites to wife,
he should be accursed, and he that came not up to the Lords offering, should
surely die. And when they had reared up an Altar in Bethel, and made their
offering, it was known that the inhabitants of Iabes Gilead came not up to the
offering. Wherefore the Israelites sent thither xij. thousand men, commanding
them to flea all the Males, with all the women also, saving such women as had
never known man fleshly. And they saved four hundred Damsels, Virgins that
never lay with man, and them they brought to the host of Sylo, which is in
the land of Canaan. Then the Israelites having pity on their brethren the
Beniamites (because that God had made such a gap among them) went peaceably
unto them that were fled unto the rock of Rimmon, and gave them wives which
they had saved of the women of Gilead, but they sufficed them not. Then the
children of Israel were very sorry for the breach that the lord had made in the
Tribes of Israel, and took great care for the Beniamins, how to replenishe
them with wives, for so much as their women were all destroyed, and that they
might not give their daughters unto them: And at last, remembering the yearly
custom of the daughter of Sylo, they said unto the Beniamins: There is a
feast of the Lord yearly kept in Sylo: Go ye thither, and lie in wait among
the Vineyards, and when ye see the Daughters of Sylo come dancing a row, then
come ye out of the vineyardes, and catch you every man a wife. And if their
friends complain unto us, we will excuse the matter, and say ye have done
it, because we did not reserve to each one of you his wife, in the time of
war. And the children of Benjamin did even so, and took them wives of the
daughters of Sylo, and went to their inheritance, and made them Cities to dwell
in, and so were friends with their brethren the children of Israel again.

Act. 16. 6.
Lidia, was a certain woman and a seller of Purple in the City of Thiatria,
and a worshipper of God, whose heart the Lord so opened at the preaching of
Paul, that she, with all her household were converted and baptized, saying
then to Paul and the other Disciples: if ye have judged me to be faithful to
the Lord, come into my house, and abide there, and so she constrained them,
who found so much faythfulnesse then in the woman, that afterward (being cast
in prison and delivered again) they returned into her house to comfort the
brethren which resorted thither. Lydia, Nativity, or generation.


1. Mac. 3. c.
Lysias, being a great man with Antiochus and of his blood, was such an enemy
unto the Jews, that the King made him. Captain of his host, who with fourtye
thousand footmen and seven thousand horsemen, went to fight against Judas
Machabeus: But Judas overcame him, and slew three thousand of his men. Then
Lysias being sore grieved at Isreal's prosperity, came 4. c. d.
at an other time with threescore thousand footmen, and five thousand
horsemen, at which time, Judas overcame him again, and slew five thousand of
his men. Finally, as he lay with Antiochus the King, at the City of Antioche,
7. 2.
Demetrius came upon them and slew them both. Lysias, Dissoluing.


Act. 22. d.
Lysias, was an hye Captain under the Emperor, and having Paul committed
unto him as prisoner, was afraid to punish him, because he was a Romayne.
And therefore to know the certayntie wherefore the Jews had accused him, he
brought him forth 23. cap.
before the Counsel, where in the end, fell such discention and debate among
them, that Lysias (fearing least Paul should have been pulde a sunder of the
Jews) took him and had him into the Castle. And having knowledge how the
Jews had conspired Paul's death, he sent him away secretly by night, to Felix
(being at that time the Emperors Lieutenaunt) to whom he wrote on this wise:
Claudius Lysias unto the most mighty ruler Felix sends greetings: As this man
was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed of them, I came upon them
with Soldiers and rescued him, perceiving he was a Romayne. And when I would
have known the cause wherefore they accused him, I brought him forth in their
counsel: There I perceived that he was accused of questions of their law, and
had no crime worthy of death or of bonds, and when it was showed me, how
that the Jews laid wait for the man, I sent him straight way unto thee, and
commanded his accusers, if they had ought against him, to tell it unto thee,
Farewell.

Ma^c. 4. c. 2 f. g.
Lysimachus, was made the hye Priest of the Jews, in the rowme of Menelaus his
brother, by whose Counsel he robbed the Temple and did much mischief: whose
wickedness was so manifest unto the people, that they rose up against him,
and made a great uproar in the City. Whereupon Lysimachus (perceiving where
about they went) got unto him three thousand unthrifts well armed for his
defense: Against whom the multitude fought so furiously with clubbe and
battes, and with hurling of stones, and such weapons as they could get, that
they wounded many, slew some, and chased the reast away, and at the last,
killed the wicked Church robber himself, beside the Tresurye. Lysimachus,
dissoluing Battle.


Ose. 1. d.
Loammy, was the second Son of Gomer the daughter of Deblaim. And when she
brought him forth the Lord said: Call his name Loammy. For why ye are not
my people, therefore will not I be your God. Loammy, not my People.


2. Tim. 1. 2.
Loys, was a faithful godly woman and Graundmother to Tymothy, who always
brought up her Children and famylie, in the fear of God, and knowledge of
Christ's Doctrine. Loys, Better.


Ose. 1. ^.
Lornhama, was the daughter of Gomer the daughter of Deblaim. And when she
brought him forth, the Lord said: Call his name Lornhama, for I will have no
pity upon the house of Israel but forget them, and put them clean out of
remembrance. Lornhama, not obtaining Mercy.


Genesis 11. d.
Lot, was the son of Aran, brother to Abraham, with whom he went out of Egypt
toward the south country to come into the land of Canaan. And when they were
come to a place called Bethel, they had such abundance of sheep and Cattle
between them, that (the land not being able to receive them both) their
heirdemen began to strive togithers. Whereupon, Abraham (to avoid contencion)
desired that Lot and he might break companies. And that he would take and
occupye what part of all the land he would, and he to take the other. Then Lot
chose the Country about Iordane, because it had plenty of water, and dwelt in
Sodom, till Chedorlaomer came and spoiled the City and carried Lot away
prisoner, who being rescued by Abraham his nephew, was brought to Sodom
again. And as he remained among the filthy Sodomites, the Lord sent his Angels
to destroy the City and Country about, which Angels, Lot received into his
house. And before his guests and he were gone to rest, the men of the city,
(replenished with all kind of wickedness) had compassed the house round
about, and called to Lot, saying: Where are the men which came into thee this
night? bring them forth to us that we may know them. Then Lot went out unto
them and said: I pray you my brethren, do not so wickedly, yet rather or ye
should so do, I have two daughters S LVCAS EVANGELISTA
Acta Apost Cap. 9. SAVLE SAVLE, QVID ME PERSEQVERIS; DOMINE QVID ME VIS
FACERE; ET DOMIN^ IHS

St Luke sits on a hilltop, writing on a table, with an ox. In the valley is a
village. which never knew man, them will I bring out unto you, and do with them
as seems you good, only to these men do nothing, for therefore are they
come under the shadow of my roof. And as the Sodomites threatened Lot and were
preasing upon him to burst up the door, the Angels within put forth their
hands, and pulled Lot into the house, and shut fast the door: At the which
instaunt the Sodomites without were so smitten with blindness, that they
groped for the door and could not find it. Then said the Angels to Lot: If
thou have any sons or daughters or whatsoever thou have in the City, bring
it out with thee, for we are sent to destroy this place, because their sin
is great before the Lord. Then went Lot to his sons in law, which had
married his daughters and told them, but they (thinking their Father had
mocked) tarried still. And so as Lot made haste (for the Angels could do
nothing till he were gone) with his wife and two daughters to the City of
Zoar, which he had requested of the Lord to fly unto, his wife looking
behind her (contrary to the Angls precept) was turned into a pyller of Salt.
Then Lot fearing to abide in the city of Zoar, (after the Cities were
destroyed) got him into the Mountains, where he dwelt in a Cave, with his two
daughters, who (forasmuch as their father was old, and not a man left in the
country thereabout, whereby they might have Children) consulted togithers and
agreede, to make their Father drunken with Wine, and so to lie with him, that
they might raise up seed unto their father. Which matter being performed and
they both with Child, the eldest brought forth Moab, which was the Father of
the Moabits, and the yoongest BenAmmi, which was the Father of the Ammonites,
both which nations, were most vile and wicked. Lot, Wrapped, or loyned.


Collo. 4. d.
Luke, was a Physician borne in the city of Antioche, 2. Tim. 4. c.
and became Saint Paul's Disciple and companion in all Luke lived 84. years,
and was buried at Constautinople.
his traueyles. He wrote the volume of his Gospel, as he had learned of Paul
and of the other Apostles, as he reports himself in the beginning of the
same work, saying: As they have delivered them to us, which from the beginning
saw them with their eyes, and were ministers of the things that they declared.
But the volume called the Acts of the Apostles, he composed as he had seen,
the story whereof came even to Paul's time, being and tarying two years at
Rome, where the work was finished. Luke, his Resurrection.


M.
2. Reg. 3. a.
MAacha, the daughter of Thalmar king of Gessur was King David's wife, and
mother to Absalom. 1. Par. 3. a.
Maacha the daughter of Absalom was 3. Reg. 1^. a. c.
wife to Roboam, and Mother to Abia, which Abia, his father Roboam ordained to
reign after him, for the love that he bare to Maacha his mother, above all the
reast of his wives* Read the storye of Asa. Maacha, a Woman pressed, or
bruised.


1. Mac. 2. 3.
Machabeus, was the third son of Mathathias, and after his fathers death, he
was made Ruler over the Jews. Who (in the defense of the holy laws) fought
most manfully against Gods enemies during his life. Machabeus, a Strike^, a
Fighter. Read Judas Machabeus.


2. Reg. 9. 2.
Machir, was the son of Amiel of Lodebar, and a great friend to Miphiboseth
the son of Ionathas, who Amiel was Father to Bethsabe King David's wife.
kept him in his house till King David sent for him, to his preferment. Machir,
Selling, or knowing.


4. Reg. 15. c. d
Manahen, the Son of Eady, besieged Sallum King of Israel in Samaria, and
slew him, whose Kingdom he possessed, and began his raygne in the nine and
thirty year of Azariahu King of Judah. And because the City of Tiphsah would
not receive him as there, he destroyed the City, and all that was within it.
And for this great wickedness and tyranny, God styrred up Phul, King of
Assiria against him, unto whom Manahen gave a thousand Talents of silver, to
break up his wars, which money he exacted of his people, taking of every
man of substannce fifty Sicles. He raygned ten years, leaving Pekahia his
son to succeed him. Manahen, a Comforter, or Leader of them, or a preparing
of heat.


Act. 13. ^.
Manahen, which was brought up of a Child with Herod, and his playsere, at
the last forsook him and followed Christ.

4. Reg. 21. ca.
Manasses, the son of Hezekia, was twelve year old when he began his raygne
over Judah, and wrought 2. Par. 33. ca.
much evil before the Lord. For he buylt up the hye places Manasses put Esaias
the prophet (who was his father in law) to death.
again which his father had destroyed. He erected up Altars for Baal, and made
Groves as Achab did, and woorshipped all the host of heaven and served them.
He offered his children in fire, as the manner of the Gentyles was, and gave
himself to witchcraft and Sorcerye, and Read the annotasion in the story of
Esaias.
favored Soothsayers, and such as used familiar spirits. He set the Image of
the grove in the house, where the Lord said he would put his name for ever.
Over and beyond all these evils, he shed so much innocent blood, that all
Jerusalem was replenished from corner to corner, and wrought more wickedness
than did all the Amorites: Wherefore the Lord gave him over into the hands of
the King of Assiria, who took Manasses and bound him with two cheynes and
carried him to Babylon. Where at the last, he so humbled him self to the Lord,
that he had compassion upon him, and restored him to his Kingdom again. Who
after that, became a good man, and put down all such abhominacions, as he
before had mayntayned, and reigned five an fifty years, leaving Amon his son
to succeed. Manasses: Forgetful, or forgetfulness.


Ester. 2. cap.
Mardocheus, the son of Iair, was a Jew borne, dwelling in the City of
Susan, and one of them which were carried away from Jerusalem with Iechonia King
of Judah (by Nabuchodonosor) into Babylon. This man had a fair Damsel in his
house named Hester, his uncles daughter, whose Father and Mother being dead, he
brought up as his own daughter, so long till at last (for her beauty and
fayrenesse) she was taken up by the Kings commission (with other mo) and had
to the Court, there to be brought up at the Kings charges, in an house
appointed, for that purpose the King had called them for. And every day would
Mardocheus walk before the women's house, to he are and know how Hester did,
and what should become of her, whose lotte in process, was to be made Queen
in the stead of Vasthi late deposed. And on a time as Mardocheus sat in the
Kings gate, he heard an ynckling of certain treason, conspired against the
Kings own person, by two of his pryuie Chamber, Bigthan and There Is, which
treason, he caused Hester to open unto the King, and to certify his grace
thereof in his name. Upon whose certification, inquiry being made and found
true, the conspiratours were put to death, and the matter Registered in
Chronicle for a remembrance of their act. After this, because Mardocheus would
do no reverence to Haman, both he and the Jews should all have been slain
in one day. Whereof Mardocheus having knowledge, he rent his clothes, and put
on mourning apparel, and so ran through the City of Susan (where their
destruction was denised) Crying out until he came to the Kings gate, where he
might not be suffered to enter, in that array. Then Hester hearing thereof, was
sore astonished, and sent him other raiment to put on: But he refusing the
raiment, declared unto the messenger the whole effect of Hamans commission and
working, and took him a Copye of the same, to give to Ester, charging her to
go unto the King, for the lives and ^afegarde of her people: For who can tell
(quoth he) whither God has called her to the Kingdom for that purpose or no,
it may be that he has: And therefore if she now hold her peace, the Jews
shall have help from some other place, and so shall she and her fathers house
be utterly destroyed. And so while Ester went about the deliverance of the
Marbocheus lived. 198. years, as Philo witnesses.
Jews, Mardocheus was exalted into the Kings favor, to the great rejoicing of
all the Jews, whose wealth he sought so long as he lived. Read the story of
Ester and Haman. Mardocheus: a bitter contricion, or repentance.


Math. 1. c.
Marie, the Virgin, and mother of God (whose parents are not expressed in
Scripture, was affianced to Luke. 1. c. d.
a certain good man of her own stock and Tribe (which was of Judah) named
Joseph. And before she came to dwell with him, the Angel Gabriel being sent of
God, came and saluted her, saying: Hayle full of grace, the Lord is with thee,
blessed art thou among women. The Virgin seeing the Angel, was sore abashed at
his words, and mused much in her mind, what salutation that should be. Then
said the Angel, fear not Mary, for thou have found favor with God, for lo,
thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a son, and shall call his name
Jesus. etc. Then Mary, because she would be resolved of all doubts, to the
end she might the more surely embrace the promise of God, said: How shall
this be, seeing I know no man? The holy ghost (quoth the Angel) shall come
upon thee, and the power of the most highest shall ouershadowe thee. Therefore
also that holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of
God. etc. Then said Mar^e: Behold the handemayde of the Lord, be it unto me
according to thy word. Upon this, she prepared her self with speed, to go and
visit her Cousin Elizabeth, with whom she remained three months, and returned
home again: And shortly after, went with Joseph her husband from the City of
Nazareth, to the land of Iewrie to a City called Bethleem, there to be taxed
(according to the Emperor Augustus In the book called Fasciculus temporum, it
is said that this Virgin was the daughter of Ioachim and Anna: and was about
the age of.xvi. years, when she brought forth Christ.
commandment) because they were of the house and lineage of David. And being
forced to lie in the stable, for lack of room in the Inn, her hour came to
be delivered, and there she brought forth Christ Jesus the Savior of the
world. And when she was purified, and had been at Jerusalem with her child,
and performed all things there according to the law, she returned with Joseph
her husband, home to the City of Nazareth again. And being accustemed
yearly she and her husband to go up at the feast of Easter to Jerusalem, she
chanced one time to forget her Son behind her, and when she had turned
back, and sought him, out, and found him, she said: Son, why have thou
thus dealt with us? thy father and I have sought thee with heavy hearts.
Another time as she was with her Son at a marriage, in Cana, a town in
Galile, when the Wine failed at the feast, she told her Son that they lacked
wine, and receiving his an^^ere meekely, bade the Ministers to do whatsoever
he commanded them. Finally, as she stood by the Cross, whereon her son
shed his blood, as well for her as all other Christians, sorrow* pierced her
heart like a sword, according to Simeons prophecy. Marie, the wife of
Cleophe, was her sister.

Mar. 1^. d.
Marie, Salome was a certain godly woman, who (among other) ministered of her
substance to Jesus, and 16. a.
followed him from Galile, and after he was erucified, bought sweet odors to
annoint his body, and was a witness of his resurrection.

Act. 12. c.
Marie, the mother of John Mark, into whose house Peter came (after the Angel
of God had delivered him out of prison, from the hands of Herod) where many
were gathered together in prayer.

John. 12. ^.
Marie *Magdalene, dwelt in Bethania, and was a sinful woman. And in token of
her great repentance, Luke. 7. f. g.
she went to Jesus as he sat at meat in one of *Magdalena signifies*
magnified, or exalted.
the Phariseys houses, with a box of Ointment in her hand, falling down at
his feet weeping and washing them with the tears distilling down from her
eyes, and wyped them with the hears of her head, and also kyssed them, and
anointed them with sweet Ointment. Then Jesus seeing the great faith of the
woman, said unto her: Mary thy faith has saved thee, go in peace. Then Mary
feeling her self much bound to Christ, which had forgiven her so many sins,
fell in so great love, that all Luke 10. g.
her whole meditacion and study was upon him. Insomuch that when Martha her
sister was cumbred about much serving of Christ at the Table, Marie (choosing
the better part) sat at Jesus feet, to hear his preaching. And when he
suffered his passion, she stood by the Cross John. 19. ^.
with Mary his mother to see the end. And the morrow 20. 2. b. c. d.
after the Sabbath day, when she came to the sepulcher, and saw the stone
taken away from the Tomb, she ran to Peter and John, and told them, who
ran to the grave, and tried the matter, and returned back again, leaving
Marie standing at the Grave weeping. And as she bowed her self into the grave,
she saw two Angels sitting in white clothing, who said unto her, woman why
weepest thou? They have taken away my Lord (quoth she) and I know not where
they have laid him. And turning her self about, she saw Jesus standing, but
knew him not, to whom he said: Woman, why weepest thou? whom do thou
seek? She (supposing it had been the Gardener) said: Sir, if thou have borne
him hence, tell me where thou have laid him and I will fet him: Then said
Jesus, Mary: with the she turned her self, and said, Rabbony, which is to say,
Master, and fell down to the ground to have kyssed his feet. But to
withdraw her from that, Jesus said: Touch me not: but go and tell my
brethren that I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and (...) God.
Then went Mary to the Disciples, and told (...) that she had seen the Lord,
and what things he had (...) unto her. Read the story of Martha her sister,
and of Lazarus her brother.

Mark, the Euaungelist, is thought to have been Peter's Disciple, and to write
his Gospel, according as he heard Peter preach, and show every thing by
mouth, and to have planted the first Church in Alexandria, where he died in the
eight year of the reign of Nero, in whose place succeeded Anianus. Of this
Mark, speaks Peter, in his first Epistle the fifth Chapter, saying: The
Congregation of them, which at Babylon are companions of your election,
saluteth you, and so does Mark my son. Mark: Fyled, or rubbed.


Act. 12. b.
Mark, otherwise called John the son of Mary, was Minister to Paul and
Barnabas, what time as they were sent by the holy Ghost from Antioche, to
preach the 14. d.
Gospel unto the heathen, which Mark at Pamphilia, departed back from them
again. For the which cause, Paul (the next journey that he and Barnabas made)
15. g.
would not suffer Mark to go with them, wherefore Barnabas departed from
Paul, taking Mark (who was his Sisters son) with him into Cypers.

Luke. 10. g.
Martha, and Mary Magdalene, were two Sisters, dwelling in the City of
Bethinia, which two had a brother named Lazarus. This Martha (on a time)
inuyted Jesus to dinner. And being cumbred about much serving, and seeing her
Sister Mary sit still at Jesus feet, said unto him: do thou not care, that
my sister has left me to minister alone? Bid her come and help me. To whom
he answered: Martha Martha, thou carest and art troubled about many things:
verilye, one is needful, Mary has chosen the best part which shall not be
taken from her. On a time as Jesus was coming to Bethinia John. 11. cap.
to heal her brother Lazarus, she met him, saying: Lord, if thou had
been here, my brother had not dyed. Nevertheless now I know, that whatsoever
thou do ask of God, he will give it thee. Then said Jesus, Thy brother
shall rise again, Yea (quoth Martha) I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day: I am (said Jesus) the resurrection and the
life, he that believes on me, yea though he were dead, yet shall he live, and
whosoever lives and believes in me shall not dye: Beleeuest thou this? Yea
Lord (quoth Martha) I believe that thou art Christ the son of God, which
should come into the world. After this when Jesus came to the place where
Lazarus was buried, and had commanded the stone of his grave to be taken away,
Martha said: Lord, by this time he stincketh, for he has been dead four
days. Said not I unto thee (quoth Jesus) that if thou did believe, thou
should see the glory of God. And so she saw her brother Lazarus restored
from death to life, to the glory of God and her great comfort. Martha. Bitter,
or Provoking.


1. Mac. 2. cap.
Mathathias, the son of Simeon the Priest, which was of the stock and kynred
of Ioaris, had five valiant men to his sons, and dwelt in Modyn, remaining
steadfast in the laws of God, notwithstanding the great calamities that were
come upon the people of Judah and Jerusalem, for the which Mathathias made
pytteous Lamentacion, crying upon God to strengthen him and his sons against
the heathen, that had so wasted the people, and defiled his sanctuary. And
while he and his sons were thus mourning in Sackcloth, for the destruction of
the holy City: Antiochus the King, sent certain Commissioners to the City of
Modyn, to compel such Jews as were thither fled, to forsake their own laws,
and to serve the Idols of the heathen. Who (after they had turned the heart of
many) spoke to Mathathias on this wise: Thou art (said they) a noble man of
hye reputacion, and great in this City, and have many Children and brethren:
Come thou first of all and fulfill the Kings commandment, like as the
heathen have done, and the men of Judah, with such as remain at Jerusalem, and
so shall thou and thy sons be in favor with the King and greatly enriched.
Nay said Mathathias: Though all Nations under the Kings Dominion, fall away
every man from the law of their fathers, yet will I, my sons and my
brethren, walk in the laws of our Fathers. God forbid we should forsake the
laws and ordinances of God, we will not, for no man's pleasure, transgress
our religion, or break the Statutes of our Law. And as he had spoken these
words, a certain Jew came forth, and openly in the sight of all men, did
sacrifice unto the Idols upon the Altar in the city of Modyn according to the
Kings commandment, which thing so grieved Mathathias, that (for very zeal he
had to the laws of God) he start him up, and ran upon the Jew, and killed
both him and the Commissioner, that compelled him so to do, and ran his way
crying through the City, and saying to the people, whosoever is seruent in the
law, and will keep and stand by the covenant, let him follow me. So he and
his sons fled into the mountayns, and many other godly men, with their wives
and children, and all that they had, got them into the Wilderness. And being
there, the heathen went against them on the Sabbath day, and slew man, woman
and Child, for on that day, the Jews would make no resistance, but would dye
in their innocence: Then Mathathias hearing of this, was very sorye, and
counsayling with his friends, said: If we do as our brethren has done, and
not to fight for our lives, and our laws, the heathen will soon root us all
out of the earth, whereupon they concluded, that whosoever did bid them battle
on the Sabbath day, that they would rather manfully fight for their laws,
than to dye as their brethren had done before. Upon the which conclusion, came
the whole Synagoge of the Jews (with all such as were fled for persecution) to
Mathathias: And being gathered togithers, they were so great an host, that
they feared not their enemies, but fell upon them and slew a great number. And
by their force and strength, they went about the coasts of Israel and
destroyed the Aultars, and circumcised their children and kept their laws in
spite of all their beards. Finally, when the time of his death drew nyghe, he
called all his sons before him, exhorting them to prefer the laws and
wealth of their Country, before their own lives, and ordained Simon his
eldest son, to be as it were their Father, and Judas Machabeus to be their
Captain, and so giving them his blessing he dyed, and was burned in his
Fathers Sepulcher in the City of Modyn. Mathathias, the gift of the Lord.


1. Mac. 16. c.
Mathathias, the son of Simon, was killed with his Father at a Banquet, which
Ptolomy his brother in law had prepared for them, in a Castle of his called
Doche.

1. Mac. 11. g.
Mathathias, the son of Absalemus stacke by Ionathas, when all his men
forsook him and fled the field, sane Judas the son of Calphi.

Matthew, the Evangelist. Read the Storye of St Matthew sits under a tree, with
an angel, writing in a book. S. MATTHAEVS EVANGELISTA

Cap. ^. VBI EST QVI NATVS EST REX IVDAEORVM; VIDIMVS ENIM STELLAMEIVS IN
ORIENT, ET VENIMVS ADORAE^ Leuy. Matthew: Given.


Act. ^. d.
Mathias, was a saithful Disciple of Christ, and one that had his conversation
always among the Apostles, ruen from the beginning of Christ's preaching to the
last end. And now, for as much as Judas the Traitor was fallen from Christ:
he (with an other godly man called Joseph or Barsabas) was appointed to stand
in election, which of them two should succeed in the place of Judas* And
when the Apostles had made their prayers to God, and given forth their lottes,
the lotte fell on Mathias, Lottes.
and so he was counted with the eleven Apostles. Mathias, the Lords Gift.


Genesis 5. c.
Mathusalah, was the son of Henoch, and lived and hundred eyghtie and seven
years, and begot Lamech. And after that he lived seven hundred an eyghtie
two years, and* begot sons and daughters, and when he had lived in all,
nine hundred and three score an nine years, he died. Mathusalah, he sent his
death, or the weapons of his death.


Genesis 14. d.
Melchisedech, is called King of Salem, and the hye Priest of the most high
God. When Abraham had Heb. 7. 2.
rescued Lot his nephew out of the hands of the Assirians, and was returned
from the slaughter of the Kings, Melchisedech met him with bread and wine, to
refreshe Abraham and his soldiers, and blessed him, saying: Blessed be
Abraham unto the hye God, possessor of heaven and earth, and blessed be the
high God which has delivered thine enemies unto thy hand: And Abraham gave
him tithes of all things. The Scripture reports Melchisedech to be, without
father, without mother, without kynne, and has neither beginning of his days,
neither yet end of his life, but is lykened unto the son of God, and
continues a Priest for ever. Melchisedech, King of Righteousness.


^. Mac. 4. c. ca
Menelaus, was brother to Simon and Lysimachus, two as ungracious as himself.
This ambicious man by deceyte, got the hye Priests office from Jason on this
wise: When that good and godly man Onias had the superiority, Jason his
brother found the means to corrupt Antiochus the King with money, and so got
the office* out of his brothers hands. And when the time came that Jason
should pay the money to Antiochus, he sent it by the hand of Menelaus, in
whom he had great confidence. But when Menelaus was come to the King, he so
craftily handled the matter with flattery and fair promises, that he both
defrauded the King of his money, and Jason of his office: which, when he had
obtained, returned with an hye stomach, more like a cruel tyrant, and the
wrath of a wild brute beast, than any thing that beseemed a Priest. But when
the King had knowledge of all his deceyte and falshoode, he discharged him
again, putting Lysimachus his brother in his room. Then Menelaus being thus
thrust out of office, waited his time to be revenged. And when he had spyed the
King about his weighty affairs (as in the suppression of certain Kebels)
leaving Andronicus behind him to be his Lieutenaunt, and supposing then to
have a convenient time, he went and stole out of the Temple certain vessels of
gold, and gave them to Andronicus. And after he had made him his assured
friend, he ministered such wicked counsel both to Andronicus and Lysimachus
his brother, that the one murdered Onias, and the other spoiled and robbed the*
Temple of God. Wherefore the King at his return again, caused Andronicus to be
put to death, and the other, the people furiouslye fell upon him and killed
him. And for so much as Menelaus* was greatly suspected to be the chief causer
of all this murder, a Court was called, and many sore complaints laid
against him. Then Menelaus (perceiving himself in the Kings displeasure, and
danger of his laws) went to Ptolomie (one of the three Ambassadors) and with
money made him his friend, who went to the King, and so labored the matter,
that he brought Menelaus into such favor with the King again, that he was
quite* discharged from all accusations, and his accusers condemned to death.
Thus through covetous Magistrates, Menelaus remained still in authority. Being
now more malicious unto the Jews (his own nation) than ever he was. As it
appeared afterward, what time as he aided Antiochus, and was his guide to the
spoiling of the Temple. But at the last, his falshoode came to a foul end,
for Lysias which was Lord Steward to Antiochus, and chief Ruler of all his
matters, so informed the King of his ungraciousness, that he commanded*
Menelaus (who had done so much mischief against the Altar of God, whose fire
and ashes were holy) to be cast into a tower of fifty cubits hye, heaped up
with ashes, and so miserably ended his life. Menelaus, Strength of the people.


1. Reg. 18. d.
Merob, was the eldest Daughter of King Saul, who promised her in marriage to
David: But or the time came that David should enjoy her, Saul gave her to an
other man named Adriel, by whom she conceived, and bare him five sons.
Merob, Fighting, or chyding, or 2. Reg. 21. b.
multiplying.


4. Reg. 3. cap.
Mesa, the King of Moab was a great Lord of sheep. And where as the Moabites
had of long time paid tribute unto the Kings of Israel, every year one
hundred thousand Lambs, with so many Rams or Wethers in the Wool, with
their fleece upon their backs. This King would pay none to Ioram the son
of Achab, for the which, Ioram made war against him, and overcame him. Mesa,
Health, or the water of health, or looking upon the water.


Iudic. 17. cap.
Micah, was a certain man dwelling in Mount Ephraim, whose mother made him an
Idol of silver, which he set up in the house of his gods, and made an Ephod,
and consecrated one of his own sons to be his Priests, and so continued,
until it chanced a young Leuite to come from Bethleem Judah to seek service:
Which Leuite Micah hired for ten siluerlings by the year, two garments, and
meat and drink. And when he had hired the Leuite, he was glad, saying: Now
am I sure that God will love me, seeing I have a Leuite to my Priest. At this
time, the Tribe of Dan (forasmuch 18. cap.
as the portion which Joshua gave them, was not sufficient for all their Tribe)
went to seek them a place to dwell in. And as they were going to the City of
Lays, they came by the house of Micah: And being informed by those men, whom
they had sent before to spy out the land, how there was in the house of
Micah, a graven and a molten Image, they turned in thither, and saluted him
peaceably, but at their departing they took his Idols against the Levites
will, persuading him, that it was not so good to be a Priest unto the house of
one man, as it was to be a Priest unto a whole Tribe or kindred in Israel, and
so took him away with them also. And being gone, Micah made a great outcrie,
and followed after the children of Dan with all the power he could make, to
rescue his gods: but being persuaded to be content, and to get him home,
least a worse thing did happen, he then (perceiving he was not able to make
his party good,) returned back again. Read the Story of Dan. Micah, who
like our God, or poverty, or the lowlynesse of the Lord, or the Lord
striking.


Michael, the son of Israhia. Michael, who is 1. Par. 7. ^.
like the Lord.


Dan. 10. c.
Michael, one of the chief Princes that was sent to comfort Daniel.

Jude.
Michael, the Archaungell which strove against the Devil, and disputed about
the body of Moses.

Apoc. 12. b.
Michael, and his Angels, that fought against the Dragon.

3. Reg. 22. ca.
Micheas, the son of Imla, was a Prophet in This was not that prophet that
wrote the book of prophecies, but another of that name.
the days of King Achab, and* for because he would not flatter the King, as
the four hundred false Prophets had done, but prophesied plainly of the Kings
death, he was smitten and cast in prison. Micheas, Poor, or low and base.


1. Reg. 18. ^. f. g.
Michol, was the second daughter of King Saul, whom he gave to David to be
his wife, that she might be a snare to bring him into the hands of the*
Philistines. But Michol loved David so well* that he could not have 19. c.
his purpose that way: For when he sent men to watch his house and to sley
him, Michol told* David* saying: Except thou save thy self this night, to
morrow thou will be slain, wherefore to save the life of David, she let him
down at a backewindowe, and laid an Image in his bed* with a pillow under
his head, stuffed with Goats heaire, and covered it with a cloth. And when
the men came into the house (in the morning) and asked for David, Michol said
he was sick* The Messengers then (thinking to have carried him, bed and all
to the King as he had commanded) went into David's chamber, and when they came
there and found nothing else in the bed but a block, they were ashamed, and
so returned to Saul and told him. Thon Mich^^ being demanded, wherefore she
had so derided him, and sent his enemy away, made her excuse, that if she had
not let him go, he would have killed her. After this her father took her from
David, and gave her to Look in the history of Psaltei how he used Michol
David's wife.
Psaltei the son of Lays to wife, with whom she remained till the death of
Saul, and then was restored again to David by Abners means. Finally, when
David came dancing before the Ark of God in his shyrte* to the City of
David, it chaunc^d Michol to look out at a window, and beholding the King how
he leaped and daunced before the Arc, she began to despise him in her heart*
and meeting him after all things were done, she said: O how glorious was the
King of Israel this day, which was uncovered to day in the eyes of the Maidens
of his servant, as a fool uncovers himself. And for thus despising of
David the servant of God, the Lord plagued her with Baraynesse that she
never* had Child. Michol, who is perfect.


2. Reg. 4. b.
Miphiboseth, the son of Ionathas was lame in his feet by reason his nurse
(by misfortune) in his infancy let him fall to the ground out of her arms,
and was brought up and nourished (after the death of his father) 9. cap.
in the h^uie of Machir, till David coming to his Kingdom, took him from
thence, and restored him to all the land of King Saul, making Ziba his
servant chief ouerseer and n^c^yu^r of the lands, and to see Micah his
masters son well brought up and cherished, for so much as Miphiboseth
should remain with him, and eat^ and drink at his own boorde* Now after
this, when David was brought into so great affliction and trouble, by reason of
Absalom his sonn^, Miphiboseth remained still at Jerusalem and never* removed.
But Ziba 2. Reg. 16. ^.
his servant went after David with a present, and by false report of
Miphiboseth his master, got his land from him* And when the King was returned
and come to Jerusalem* again, then Miphiboseth (who had neither 19. ^.
washed his seete nor dressed his bearde, nor washed his clothes from the time
the King departed, until he returned in peace) went out to meet him, and when
the King saw him, he said: Wherefore wentest thou not with me Miphiboseth?
He answered: My Lord, O King, my servant deceived me, for thy servant
said: I would have mine Ass sadled to ride thereon for to go with the King,
because thy servant is lame: Therefore Ziba has falsely accused thy servant
to my Lord the King, but my Lord the King is as an Angel of God: Do
therefore what it pleases thee, for all my Fathers house were but dead m^n
before my Lord the King, and yet dydst thou set thy servant, among them that
did eat at thine own table: What right have I to cry any more unto the King?
Then said David* why speak thou yet in thine own cause, I have said: Thou
and Ziba, divide the land between you. Yea, said Miphiboseth, let him take
all, seeing my Lord the King is come home in peace. Miphiboseth: shame or
confusion from the mouth.


^. Reg. 21. b.
Miphiboseth the son of Rizpa, King Saul's Concubine, was of the Gibeonits
(with his brother Armony) hanged for their fathers offense.

Exo. 6. c.
Miriam, was the daughter of Amram and Iochebed, and sister to Aaron and Moses.
When her brother Moses 15. c.
had brought the children of Israel through the red Sea, Miriam the
Prophetess took a Tymbrell in her hand with other women following in like
sort, and began joyfully to sing and dance, their song was this: Sing ye
unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: The horse and ryder has he
overthrown in the Sea. After this she grudged against Moses, because he had
taken a Number. 12. cap.
woman of Inde to his wife, wherefore the Lord smote her with Leprosy. Then
Moses (partly for pity, and partly at the intercession of Aaron his brother)
besought the Lord to heal her, who made him answer, saying: If her father
(in anger) had spitte in her face, should she not have been ashamed seven
days? Let her be shut out of the host seven days, which being done, she
was restored, and received in again. Finallye, when 20. 2.
Moses and the children of Israel were come to Cades, there she dyed and was
buried. Miriam, exalted, or reaching.


Dan. ^. b. 3. ca.
Misach, first called Misael, was one of Daniels companions and one of the
three, which was cast into the whote burning Oven, and myraculously preserved.
Misach, prolonging, or drawing to him, or compassing the waters, or hedging.


3. Esd. 2. b.
Mithridatus, was King Cyrus treasurer, at whose commandment, he delivered,
all the holy vessels of gold and silver pertaining to the house of the Lord,
to Salmanasar the Deputy in Iewrie. The number of which vessels was five
thousand eight hundred and three score. Mithridatus, dissoluing the law.


Act. 21. d,
Mnason, was a certain godly man, and a Cyprian borne, who had of long time
believed the Gospel, in whose house, Paul was hosted at Jerusalem. Mnason, a
searcher out, or promising, or remembering.


Exodus 2. cap.
Moses, the son of Amram and Iochebed, was myraculously preserved at his
birth. For where as Pharao the King of Egypt had straightly commanded the
Moses signifies, preserved from the water.
Mydwyues, that whenever they saw an Hebrew bring soorth a man child, they
should cast it into the river, yet Moses being borne and a proper child, was
(notwithstanding the Kings commandment) kept secretlye three months. And
when his parents could hide him no longer, they closed him in a basket made of
reed or Bulrushes dawbed with slyme and pitch, and laid him in the river. And
as the child's sister stood looking, what should become of him, it came to
pass that King Pharaos Her name was Termuth.
daughter came awalking by the river side, who seeing the basket ^leting upon
the river caused one of her folks to take it up* And when she had opened the
basket and saw the Child, she had pity upon it, and caused the Maid (his
sister) to fet her a Nurse, who went and brought his own mother. And so the
child being nursed and brought up in Pharaos house, was instructed from his
Childehoode in all manner cunning and wisdom of the Egiptians, and became
mighty in words and deeds, How that Moses impediment of speech came. The
king (on a time) for his daughters sake, took the child in his arms, and set
the crown upon his head, which Moses, as it were, chyldishly playing, hurled
to the ground, and with his foot spurned it. At the which, the Priest cried
out, saying that this was he, of whom it was prophesied, that he should
destroy Egypt. Then Termuth excused the child, alleging his infancy and
sack of discretion. And for proof thereof, caused burning coals to be put to
his mouth, which the child with his tongue licked, whereby he ever after had
impediment in his tongue. Lanquet.
saving in his speech he had an impediment. And when he was full forty year
old, it came in his heart, to go and visit his brethren the children of
Israel, whom Pharao vexed without all measure. And as he saw an Egiptian
smyting an Hebrew, he slew the Egiptian, and hid him in the sand: The next day
he went again, and found two Israelites striving togithers, and demanded of
him that had done the wrong, wherefore he smote his fellow: who made thee a
Judge (quoth he) or a Ruler over us? Think thou to kill me, as thou dydst
the Egiptian yesterdaye? Then Moses perceiving his fact to be known, for sooke
to be the son of the daughter of Pharao, and fled into the land of Madian,
where he was received into the house of Iethro, who gave to him in marriage, his
daughter Ziphora, by whom (in process) he had two sons. And when he had
continued with Iethro his father in law forty years, and kept his sheep,
the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Synay, out of a bushe, which
seemed to be all on fire, and there gave him authority to go into Egypt to
deliver his people out of the bondage of Pharao. Who at last (after diverse
miracles done by him in the sight of Pharao, for the confirmation of his
Authority) brought them through the red Sea, and delivered them quite out of
bondage. Thus was Moses whom they had before refused, both their Deliverer and
Ruler. He was a man full of meekness, he lived one hundred and twenty years,
and was buried by Angles in the land of Moab, whose Sepulcher was never
known. Moses, drawn up.


N.
NAaman, Captain of the 4. Reg. 5.
host of the King of Siria, was a mighty man, and honorable in the sight of
his Lord, because that by him, the Lord had delivered the Sirians. He was
also a valiant man, and expert in wars, but was a Leper. Wherefore the King
of Siria being informed that there was a Prophet in Samaria, that could heal
his servant Naaman of his leprosy, sent him to Ioram King of Israel with his
letter, containing this tenor: Now when this letter is come unto thee,
understand that I have sent thee Naaman my servant, that thou may heal
him of his Leprosy. And when the King had read the letter, he rent his
clothes, saying: Am I a God, to kill and to give life, that he sends to me,
that I should heal a man of his leprosy? Consider I pray you, how he
seeks a quarrel against me. The Prophet hearing of this, sent to the King,
to send Naaman unto him. And when he was come to the house of Elizeus and
stood at the door, the prophet sent him word, and bade him go wash him
scauen times in Jordan, and he should be whole. Then Naaman departed in
displesaure, saying: I thought with my self he will surely come out, and stand
and call on the name of the Lord his God, and put his hand on the place, and
heal the leprosy. Are not Abana and Pharphar, rivers of Damascus, better than
all the waters of Israel, may I not as well wash me in them and be cleansed?
Then one of his servants said: father, if the Prophet had commanded thee to
do a great thing, would thou not have done it? how much rather then, when
he says to thee, wash and be clean. And so at his servants persuasion, he
went to Jordan, and washed him seven times as the Prophet had commanded, and
being whole, he returned to the Prophet, and gave thanks unto God, saying:
Now I know that there is no God in all the world, but in Israel. And so
making promise, he would never offer sacrifice nor offering to any other God,
save unto the Lord God of Israel: he returned home into his Country again.
Naaman, Fair, or beawtifull.


1. Reg. 25. a. b
Nabal, was a great rich man, but of churlishe nature, and froward condition.
As he lay in Carmel in the time of his sheep shearing, David sent certain of
his men, desiring Nabal to help him now in his great necessity with some of
his victuals whatsoever he would, and he would requite him, at one time or
other. But he not regarding their message, made them this churlishe answer
again: who is David? or who is the son of Isai? There be many servants now
a days that break away from their masters, shall I then take away my
bread, and my water, and my flesh, which I have killed for my sheerers, and
give it unto men whom I know not whence they be? And so with this answer, the
messengers departed. Read the story of Abigail, for the reast of his life.
Nabal, a Fool.


3. Reg. 21. ca.
Naboth, was a certain rich man, and a Iesrahelite borne, whose Vineyarde lay
joining hard by the palace of Achab King of Israel, which Vineyarde, the King
would feign have bought, and given him as much for it as the ground was
worth. But Naboth considering it was his fathers inheritance, and that he had
no need to sell it, would in no wise grant thereunto. Wherefore the King
being heavy and sad, went home to his house, and said him down upon his
bed, so waywarde, that he could neither eat nor drink. Then came Iezabel his
wife, and demanded why he was so sad, who told her it was for Nabothes
Vineyarde, which he had denied him. What (quoth she) do thou govern the
kingdom of Israel? up and eat thy meat, and set thine heart at rest, and I
will give thee the Vineyarde. And so she wrote a letter in Achabs name, sealed
with the kings Signet, and sent it to the Elders of the City where Naboth
dwelt, commanding them to proclayme a fast, and ser Naboth among the chiefest
of the people, and to bring two false witnesses against him, which should say
he had blaspheemed God and the King, and then to put him to death. And so all
things were done according to the tenor of Iezabels letter, and Naboth carried
out of the City, and stoned. Naboth, Speech, or prophesying.


Dan. 1. a.
Nabuchodonosor, was King of Babylon. And by the occasion of his great and
wonderful dominion, fell into such pride, that he would have his Image
honored for God. But shortly after he saw the vision of the 2. cap.
falling tree, whereby he was warned of his fall, and He reigned ^ 4. years,
and was called the scurge of God.
suddenly (by the power of God) transformed and turned into a beastly fury,
living in the woods among beasts, eating herbs and grass for the space of
seven years. Finally, God of his mercy restored him again to his He was
before the incarnation of Christ. 633. years. Cooper.
prestyne form, who afterward lived well, and commanded that the very God of
heaven should be honored of all men, and whosoever refused so to do, should
dye. Nabuchodonosor, the Mourning of the Generation.


3. Reg. 15. ^.
Nadab, the son of Jeroboam began to raygne over Israel in the second year
of Asa King of Judah, and walked in all the wicked steps of his father. And in
the second year of his raygne (as he was laying siege to a City of the
Philistines called Gibbethon) Eaasa conspired against him and slew him. Taking
upon him to raygne in his stead. Nadab, a Prince, or liberal.


1. Reg. 11. ca.
Nahas, was King of the Ammonites. And as his predecessors before time, had
made a claim to the land Iudic. 11. cap.
of Israel, so he now purposing the same, went and besieged the City of Iabes
in Gilead. And when the men of Iabes perceived themselves in great danger of
their lives, they desired the King to make a covenant with them, and they
would be his servant. Then said Nahas: If ye will suffer me to thrust out
all your right eyes, to bring Israel to shame, I shall be content to make peace
with you. Then said they: Give us respite seven days, and if none do come to
help us in that space, we will come out unto thee. Then Nahas (thinking that
none burst come to aid them against him) granted their request. Upon the
which they sent messengers, into all the coasts of Israel, which news was so
heavy tydinges to them, that they fell a weeping. And as they were mourning and
lamenting their case, it chanced Saul (by the providence of God) to come out
of the field following the Cattle. And beholding the people what a do they
made, he demanded wherefore they mourned. And when they had told him the
tydinges of the men of Iabes, his heart was so moved by the spirit of God,
that he took out two of his Oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them
through all the coasts of Israel, saying: whosoever comes not forth after
Saul and Samuel, so shall his Oxen be served. And the people were stricken in
such a fear, that they came out to Saul, as they had been but one man, to
the number of three hundred thousand of Israel, beside thirty thousand of the
men of Judah. And then Saul sent word by the messengers to the men of Iabes,
that the next morrow they should have help. They being glad of that, sent
word unto Nahas, saying: To morrow we will come forth unto you, and ye shall
do unto us, whatsoever pleases you. And so on the morrow, Saul came upon the
Ammonites and slew them. Nahas, a Snake, or Serpent, or gessing, or divining.


Genesis 11. d.
Nahor, when he was nine an twenty years of age, begot Terah. And lived after
he had begotten him, an hundred and twenty years. Nahor, Hoarse, or Angry.


Ruth. 1. cap.
Naomy, was the wife of a certain man called Elimelech, dwelling in the land
of Judah, in a City called Bethleem. And for because of the present dearth,
which was over all the land of Judah, She went with her husband and her two
sons into the Country of Moab to sogeourne, Where (in process) her husband
died. And her two sons (being married to two of the Moabitishe Damsels)
dyed there also. So that Naomy which had dwelt in the land of Moab ten years,
was left desolate both of her husband and of her sons. Then Naomy hearing
how the Lord had visited her country again with plenty, returned from Moab
homewardes again, her two daughters in law, bringing her on the way. And
when she saw they had gone a good way with her, and coueted not to return,
she said unto them: Go now my Daughters, and return each of you unto your
mothers house, and the Lord deal as kindlye with you, as ye have dealt with
the deadde and with me. And the Lord give you, that ye may find rest
either of you, in the house of her husband, and so kyssed them, to have bid
them farewell: But when she saw that they would not depart from her, she said
unto them again: Return my Daughters I pray you, for what cause will ye go
with me? Are there any mo children within my womb to be your husbands? Turn
again therefore I say, for I am to old to have an husband. And if I did take
one this night, and had all ready borne children, would ye tarry for them till
they were grown, and refrain from taking husbands so long? Not so my
daughters, it grieueth me much for your sakes, that the hand of the Lord is
gone out against me. Then they wept all togithers, and Orpha kyssed her mother
in law, and returned into her own land again, but Ruth abode still. And so
when they came to Bethleem Judah (which was about the beginning of Barley
harnest) the women which saw Naomy said: Is not this Naomy? Nay said she,
call me not Naomy (which is as much to say, as bewtyfull) but call me Mara
(that is to say, bitter) for the Almighty God, has made me very bitter. I
went out full, and the Lord has brought me again empty, why then call ye
me Naomy, seeing the Lord has humbled me, and the Almighty has brought
me unto adversity? And so Naomy remained in Bethleem Judah, where (or it were
long) God gave her a Son by the womb of Ruth her daughter in lawa, who was
married to Boos, a kinsman of Naomyes, which Child being borne, the women said
unto Naomy: Blessed be the Lord, the which has not left thee without a
kinsman to have a name in Israel, and that shall bring thy life again and
cherishe thine old age, for thy daughter in law which loves thee, has borne
unto him, and she is better unto thee than seven sons. And Naomy took the
Child and laid it in her lap, and became nurse unto it, being glad that a
son was borne unto her, in her old days. Naomy: Fair, or commely: or
provoking much.


^. Reg. 7. 2.
Nathan, the Prophet, what time as King David was minded to build God an house
to dwell in, was sent of the Lord to forbid him not to meddle withal, for
Solomon his son should do it. Again, what time as David had committed
adultery with Vrias wife, Nathan 12. cap.
came to him and said: There were two men in one City, the one rich and the
other poor: The rich man had exceeding many sheep and Oxen, but the poor
had none at all, save one little Sheep which he had bought and n^urished up.
And it grew up with him and with his Children also, and did eat of his own
meat, and drancke of his own Cup, and slept in his bosom. And was unto him
as his daughter. Now there came a stranger unto the rich man, who refused to
take of his own sheep and Oxen to dress for the stranger, but took the
poor man's sheep, and dressed it for the man that was come to him. Then David
was exceeding wroth with the man and said: As surely as the Lord lives, he
that has done this, is the Child of death: He shall restore the lamb four
fold, because he did it without pity. Then said the Prophet, thou art the
same man, thus says the Lord God of Israel: I anointed thee king over Israel,
and delivered thee out of the hands of Saul, and gave thee thy Lords house
and his wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and Judah, and
would (if that had been to little) have given thee much more: Wherefore then
have thou despised the commandment of the lord to do evil in his sight? Thou
have kilde Urias the Hethite with the swoorde, and have taken his wife to be
thy wife, and have slain him with the swoorde of the Children of Ammon. Now
therefore the swoorde shall never depart from thine house, because thou have
despised me, and taken the wife of Urias the Hethite, to be thy wife:
Wherefore thus says the Lord. Behold, I will stir up evil against thee,
even out of thine own house, and will take thy wives before thine eyes, and
give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of
the Sun: For thou dyddest it secretly, but I will do this thing before all
Israel, and in the open Sun light. Then said David: I have sinned against
the Lord. Well (said Nathan) the Lord has also put away thy sin, thou
shall not dye. Howbeit, because of doing this deed, thou have given the
enemies of the Lord a cause to blaspheme, the child that is borne unto thee
shall surely dye: And so Nathan departed. Finally, what time as Adonya had
taken upon him to rule the Kingdom, unwitting to his Father David, Nathan came
to the King and said: My Lord (O King) have thou said: Adonya shall raygne
after me, and he shall sit upon my seat? For he is gone down this day and
David had a son called Nathan also.
has slain many Oxen, and fat sheep, and has called all the Kings sons,
and the Captain of the host, and Abiathar the Priest, and behold they eat
and drink 2. Reg. 5. c.
before him, and say: God save King Adonya. But me thy servant, and Sadocke
the Priest and Banaiahu, and thy servant Solomon has he not called. Is this
thing done by my Lord the King, and thou have not showed it unto thy servant,
who should sit on the seat of my Lord the King after him? And when the King
had declared his mind and will, Nathan and Sadocke the Priest, went and
anointed Solomon King. Nathan, Given, or giving.


John. 1. c.
Nathaniel, which was a man wonderful desirous of Messiah coming, was
brought to Christ by Philip, who finding him under a fig tree, said: O
Nathaniel, I can tell thee tidings, we have found him, of whom Moses in the
Law, and the Prophets did write: even Jesus, the Son of Joseph of Nazareth.
Is that true, quoth he, can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? if thou
do not believe me (quoth Philip) come and see thy self. And as Nathaniel
was coming with Philip to Jesus, he says of him thus: Behold a right
Israelite, in whom is no guile. Nathaniel perceiving that Jesus knew him,
said: How know thou me? I knew thee (said Jesus) before that Philip
called thee, I saw thee when thou wast under the fig tree. Then said
Nathaniel: Rabbi, thou art the son of God, thou art the King of Israel.
Nathaniel, the gift of God.


the patriarch Nephthali, with a horn slung from him belt, stands with a stag.
Neptalin ex multis seruatus saepe periclis,
Corniger infestus ceruus ut a c^^^^us
Nostra tribus te^taque fuit saepissime bello,
Sed bonitate dei mox liberat^ ^^it.


2. Esd. 1. cap.
Nehemia, a Jew borne, was Cupbearer to Artaxerses King of Persia, a man of
great learning and holiness, who being in great favor with the said King,
obtained both license and aid to reedifie the City of Jerusalem. Nehema, the
comfort, or rest of the Lord, the Lords direction.


1. Mac. 7. c. d.
Nycanor, being a great Prince under Demetrius, and an utter enemy unto the
Jews, was sent with a mighty host against Judas Machabeus, who
notwithstanding the hatred that he had to the Jews, yet unto 2. Mac. 14.
Judas himself, he bare a secret good will and love in d. e. f.
his heart, and counsayled him (when they met togithers to talk of peace) to
take a wife, and to bring forth children. But for all that, his malice was so
great against the rest of the Jews, and his heart so puffed up with pride,
through his invincible power and strength, that he held up his hand against
the house of God, making an oath that he would destroy it, and break down
the Altar, and consecrate the temple of God to Bacchus. And thinking all this
but a tryfle to bring to pass, sold the Jews 8. cap.
before he came at them, promising to every one that would buy them, four
score and ten Jews for one talent. But this blasphemer who had brought a
thousand Merchantes with him to buy the Jews* was (by the help and power of
God) for all his stout bragges, shortly overthrown, and so discomfited, that
he himself was feign to change his apparel, and to sly alone to Antioche,
1. Mac. 7. d. e.
with great dishonor and sh^nne. Finally attempting 2. Mac. ^5. ca.
to fight again with Judas upon the Sobboth day, Nicanor, which was one of the
seven D^cons, Act. 6. a.
he was at last (by the mighty hand of God) slain. Whose head Judas
commanded to be set upon the Castle at Jerusalem, and his threatening hand
to be hanged against the temple, and his blasphemous tongue cut in pieces,
and cast to the Birds to be devoured. Nicauor, a Conqueror. Valiant.


John. 3. a. b.
Nichodemus, was one of the head men among the sect of the Phariseys, but
not the best learned, although his mind were lesser corrupt than the other.
This man favored Christ, but durst not be known thereof for fear of the
Jews, wherefore he came to Jesus by night secretlye, saying: Rabbi, we know
that thou art a teacher come from God, for no man could do such miracles as
thou do, except God were with him. Jesus: Verilye, verilye, I say unto
thee, except a man be borne from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
Nichodemus: how can a man be borne when he is old? can he enter into his
Mothers womb, and be borne again? Jesus: Verilye, verily, I say unto thee,
except a man be borne of the water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God: that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: and that
which is borne of the spirit, is spirit: Marvel not thou that I said unto
thee, ye must be borne from above: The wind blows where it lysteth, and thou
hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, or whither it
goes. So is every one that is borne of the spirit. Nichodemus: how can these
things be? Jesus: Art thou a master in Israel, and know not these things?
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, we speak that we know, and testify that we
have seen, and ye receive not our witness: If I have told you earthly
things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly
things. etc. This man afterward answered for Jesus, and said 7. g.
to the Phariseys, what time as they had sent Ministers to apprehende him: does
our law judge any man before it hear him? Finally, at the death of Christ (to
honor his burial) he bought of Mire, and Aloes mingled together, 19. g.
about an hundred pound weight, and came with Joseph of Aramathia to take
down the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes, with the odours (as
the manner of the Jews was to bury) and laid him in his sepulcher.
Nichodemus, Innocent blood.


Act. 6. a.
Nicholas, a Convert of Antioche, was one of the seven Deacons, ordained in
the Congregation to do service His heresy was this: That every man might
iefully use every woman that he lusted.
in necessary things of the body, that the Apostles might wait only upon
the word of God, who notwithstanding, fell into a foul heresy, which S. John
in his book of the Revelation.ij. Chapter reprooueth. Nicholas, the victory
of the common people.


Genesis 10. b.
Nymrod, was the son of Chus, son of Cham the second son of Noe. He was
the first that took on him to reign over men, and became a cruel oppressor
and tyrant. He was called a mighty hunter, for that he 11. a.
was a deceyuer of souls, and oppressor of men. He attempted to build the
great tower of Babel, intending to have raised it above the Clouds, thinking
thereby to have escaped, if any floude should eftsoons have happened. Nymrod,
Rebellious.


Genesis 5. d.
Noe, was the son of Lamech, and five hundredth years of age, before he begat
Sem, Cham, and Iaphet. And being a just and perfect man, he found such favor
in the eyes of God, that when all flesh had so corrupt his 6. cap.
way upon earth, that God threatened the destruction of the world, yet to save
Noe, and to declare it unto him 120. before it came, he bade him prepare an
Arc of Pine trees, which should conteyne in length three hundredth cubits, in
breadth fifty cubits, and in deepenesse thirty. Now when Noe had made the
Arc, and was six hundredth years of age, the Lord told him, that after
seven days the deluge should fall: wherefore Noe (at the Lords
commandment) got him into the Arc, 7. cap.
with his wife and three sons with their wives, providing (in the mean
space) all things necessary for them. And when Noe was in the Arc, suddenly
(by the power of God, and not of man's bringing) there came into the ship two
and two together, of every kind of beast and soul, the male and the female.
And when they were all in, the Lord shut the door of the Art^, and opened the
windows of heaven, so that the rain fell continuallye forty days and forty
nights, whereupon the waters prevailed, and rose above all Mountains.xv.
cubits. So that all living creatures dyed, except fish, and such as might
endure in the bowels of the earth. And after the waters had prevailed a hundred
and fifty days. They decreased again, and in the seventh day of the
seventh 8. cap.
month (which was October) the Arc stacke upon the Mountains of Armeny. Then
Noe opened a window, and sent forth a Crow, which returned again. After
seven days, he put forth a Dove, which came again at night bringing a
branch of Olive with green leaves in her mouth. Nevertheless, he remained
seven other days, and put forth the Dove again, which never returned. Then
Noe after he had continued one year in the Arc, and saw the earth dry, he
(at the commandment of God) issued out of the Arc, and incontinent builded
an Altar, whereupon he offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, of every clean
beast, and of every clean foul, which sacrifice was a sweet smell unto the
Lord, and pleased him so well, that he made a promise to Noe, that he would
never more destroy the world with water, Genesis 9. b. c. d.
and for the confirmation thereof, gave the Rainebowe for a sure token between
him and man. Noe was the first inuenter of Wine, and therewithal was made
drunk. He lived after the fludde. 350. years. Noe, Rest.


O.
Ruth. 4. d.
OBed, the son of Boos and Ruth, begat Isai, the father of King David.

1. Par. 16. d.
Obed Edom, the son of Ieduthun had the Ark of God remaining in his house
three months, for the which 2 Reg. 6. b. c.
the Lord blessed him and all his house. And when it was told to David, that
the house of Obed Edom was blessed, because of the Ark of God, he removed it
thence, and brought it into the city of David with great triumph, and ordained
Obed Edom and his brethren (which were Levites) to keep the door of the Arc.
Obed Edom, the servant of Edom, or a servant Edomite.


3. Reg. 1^.
Obedia, notwithstanding he was chief governor a. b. c.
of all King Achabs house, yet he was a man that feared God greatly, Insomuch
that when Iezabel destroyed the Prophets of the Lord, he took an hundred
Prophets, and hid them, fifty in one Cave, and fifty in another, providing
all things necessary for them. On a time as Obedia was going about the land
(at Achabs commandment) to search for water and grass for their cattle,
which were almost overcome with drouth, he chanced to meet Elia the Prophet.
And when he saw him, he fell down and said: Art not thou my Lord Elia? yea,
quoth he, go tell thy Lord that I am here. O (quoth Obedia) what have I
sinned, that thou would deliver thy servant into the hands of Achab to be
slain? As truly as the Lord thy God lives, there is no nation or kingdom,
whither my Lord has not sent to seek thee: And when they said, he is not
here, he took an oath of the kingdom and nation, if they had not found thee.
And now thou say, go, tell thy Lord that Elia is here. And when I am gone
from thee, the spirit of the Lord shall carry thee into some place that I do
not know, and so when I come and tell Achab, and he cannot find thee, then
will he kill me: But I thy servant fear the Lord, from my youth: was it not
told my Lord what I did when Iezabel slew the Prophets of the Lord, how I
hid an hundred men of the Lords Prophets, by fifties in a Cave, and fed them
with bread and water. And now thou say, go and tell thy Lord: behold,
Elia is here (that he may sley me). Well said Elia, as truly as the Lord
of hosts lives, before whom I stand, I will show my self unto him this
day. Then Obedia (hearing him say so) went to Achab and told him. Obedia,
servant of the Lord.


2. Par* 28. b. c
Oded, when Pekah King of Israel had taken so many Captyues of the Children of
Judah, and carried them to Samaria, the Lord sent this Prophet unto him, saying:
Behold, because the Lord God of your fathers is wrath with Judah, he has
delivered them into your hands, and ye have slain them in your cruelnesse
that reaches unto heaven, and now ye purpose to keep under the children of
Judah and Jerusalem, as bond men and bond women: And do ye not lade your
selves with sin in the sight of the Lord your God? Now therefore hear me,
and deliver the Captyues again, which ye have taken of your brethren, or else
shall the wrath of God be upon you. Then certain which were the heads of the
children of Ephraim (being sorye for the great offense they had committed)
took the prisoners, and (with the spoil) clothed all that lacked, shodde
them, and fed them with meat and drinck, anointed the wounds of such as were
hurt, and the feeble they carried upon asses, and brought them to Jericho (the
city of Palm trees) to their brethren: And leaving them there, returned to
Samaria again. Oded, holding up, or erecting.


Number. 21. g.
Og, the King of Basan was a mighty great Giaunt, whose bed was made of
Iron, and in length nine Cubits, Deu. 3. a. 29. b
that is, thirteen foot and an half. And four cubits broad, that is, six
foot. This Og was next neighbor to Seon King of the Amorites. And having
knowledge of all that Moses had done to Seon his neighbor, made out a great
Army agyanst Moses thinking to have won his spurs, in revenging his
neighbors quarrel. But when it came to trial, he spedde no better than his
neighbor had done before him. Og, a Cake, or bread baked under the ashes.


Genesis 38. a.
Onan, was the second Son of Judah, who after the death of Er his eldest
brother, was married to Thamar his brothers wife to stir up seed unto his
brother. But when he perceived that the seed should be none of his, he
practiced such wickedness that the vengeance of God fell upon him and sieve
him. Onan, Sorrow, or Iniquity.


Coll. 4. b.
Onesimus, being in service with Philemon, like an unfaithful servant robbed
his master, and ran away from him to Rome. Where, by hearing of Paul (who
at that time was in bonds) he received the Doctrine of the Gospel, and served
Paul in Prison: and became so faithful a soldier of Christ, that Paul sent
him with Tichicus to the Collossians with his Epistle, commending him unto them
on this wise: And with Tichicus, Phile. cap.
I have sent Onesimus, a faithful and beloved brother, which is one of you.
Finallye, he sent him home to his master again, beseeching Philemon, not to
receive him now as a servant, but more than a servant, even as a faithful
brother, and as his own son, whom he had (in his bands) begotten to
Christ, offering himself suertye, to make good whatsoever hurt he had done him
in time past. Onesimus, Apparel, or a garment.


2. Timo. 1. d.
Onesiphorus, was a faithful godly man, and a great refresher of such as were
in bonds for the doctrine of Christ, as Saint Paul does testify of him,
saying: The Lord give mercy unto the householde of Onesiphorus, for he often
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: But when he was at Rome he
sought me out very diligently, and found me. The Lord grant unto him, that
he may find mercy with the Lord at that day, and in how many things he
ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou know very well O Tymothy. Onesiphorus,
bringing profit.


2. Mac. 3 cap.
Onias, the hye Priest among the Jews, was a man of such godliness and
holiness of life, that he always sought the honor of the laws, and wealth
of the people of God. By his prayer that wicked man Heliodorus was restored to
his health, but notwithstanding all his virtue and goodness, yet had he
enemies. For Simon (a man 4. cap.
void of all godliness) never ceased withal slanderous and evil reports
that he could devise to Seleucus the King, to bring him out of favor, which
he could never do, so long as the King lived. But Seleucus being dead, Onias
was soon put out of office, by the false deceyt and means of his own brother
Jason, and brought in such fear through him and Menelaus with other his
enemies, that he was feign to take sanctuary. Where at the last by the counsel
of Menelaus, he was (without all regard of righteousness) most traitorously
slain by the hands of Andronicus, whose innocent death, was so sore lamented,
both of the Jews, and also of Antiochus the King himself, that at his coming
home, he rewarded the malefactor according to his deeds. Onias: the strength
of the Lord.


Exodus 35. a.
Ooliab, the son of Achisamec of the Tribe of Dan, was a Crafts man, whom
the Lord had endued with great cunning, and appointed him to Moses, for one of
the chief workmen, for the finishing of the Temple.

Iudic. 7. g.
Oreb and Zeb, were two great Captains among the Madianites, whom the men of
Mount Ephraim (which had stopped the waters from Bethbarath to Iordane) took,
and smote of their heads and sent them to Gedeon, on the other side of Jordan.
Oreb, a crow, or sweet, or a surety, or evening time.


1. Par. 21. c. d.
Ornan, was a certain Iebusite, unto whom the Lord commanded David (after
he had plagued him In the second book of Kings, chap. 24. d. He is called
Are^na.
with pestilence) to go and rear up an Altar in his threshing flower. At
whose coming, Ornan fell down before him and said: Wherefore is my Lord the
King come to his servant? I am come (quoth he) to buy thy threshing flower,
and to make an Altar unto the Lord, that the plague may cease from the
people. Ornan: Let my Lord the King take and offer what seems him good in
his eyes. And moreover, here be Oxen for burnt sacrifice, and sleades with
other instruments for woodde, take them all to thee as thine own. David said:
Nay, not so, but I will buy it for sufficient money, for I will not take that
which is thine for the Lord, nor offer burnt offerings without cost. And so
David gave Ornan for that place. Six hundred sicles of gold by weight. Ornan,
Rejoicing.


Ruth. 1. cap.
Orpha, and Ruth, were two Damsels of the country of Moab, which were married
to the two sons of Elimelech and Naomy, strangers, come out of the Land of
Judah, there to dwell. Read the Story of Naomy, for the reast. Orpha, a Neck.


Judith. 6. c. d.
Osias, the son of Micha, of the Tribe of Symeon, was one of the principal
Fathers and Rulers among the Israelites, what time as Holofernes besieged the
City of Bethulia. This man comforted Achior, which had so boldlye magnified
and praised the great power and strength of God, before Holofernes, and took
him into his house, where he made him a great Supper, to the which he called
the Elders, who (altogithers) praised God in him. Also when the people came
weeping and crying out* unto him, to give over the City into the hands of the
Assirians, he said unto them: Oh, take good hearts unto you (dear brethren)
and be of good cheer, 7. c.
and let us wait yet these five days, for mercy of the Lord; peradventure
he shall put away his indignacion, and give glory unto his name. But if he
help us not after these five days be past, we shall do as ye have said,
which counsel of Osias, pleased not Judith, because he had set the mercy of
God a time, and appointed him a day at his pleasure. So that after this, Osias
remained in prayer, and followed the devise of Judith in all things. Osias, the
Lord Savior, or the health of the Lord.


Iudic. 1. c.
Othoniel, was the son of Kenes, unto whom Caleb his elder brother, gave
Acsah his daughter to wife, for winning of a certain City called Kariath
Sepher. This man delivered the children of Israel from the Captivity 3. b.
of Chusan Kisathaim king of Mesopotamia, which had oppressed them eight
years, and Judged Israel forty years. Othoniel, the time, or hour of God.


P.
Act. 7. g. 8. a.
Paul, the Apostle of Christ was borne in India in a town called Giscalis,
and was of the trybe of Benjamin. And the town being taken of the Romans, he
went with his parents to Tharsus a city of Cicilia and dwelled. But afterward
he was sent by them to Jerusalem to learn the laws, and was there taught of
one Gamaliel, a great learned man. He being with other at the martyrdom of S.
St^^en, received letters of the Bishop, willing him to go to Damasco, 9. cap.
there to persecute them that believed in Christ. And in the way he was by
reuelasion changed from a cruel persecutor, CONVERSIO SAVLI
Io. Sadeley. sculpt
C. M.
Cum priuil:

1580

F. Pourbus inven.
Saulus Tharsensis, ex itinere diuinitus prostratus, Damascum, Ananiae in
disciplinam tradendus, ducitur. An.' ab Ascenss. XI. II. Illustri ac Generoso
D. D. Ottoni Henrico, Comiti a Suuartzenberg Et^. Sa. Cae. M.it is Consiliario,
and supremo ausae Mareschallo, Sculptor obser. ergo d. d.

Saul of Tarsus (or St Paul) falls from his horse on the road to Damascus.
Roman soliders on horseback are also struck down. to an earnest preacher of
Christ, whose name he professed first at Damasco, confounding the doctrine of
the Jews, for the which they lay in wait to kill him, but being let out at a
window in a basket by night, he escaped and went to Jerusalem, where he
disputed with the Greeks, who sought to kill him also, but the brethren
conueyghed him to Cesarea, and sent him to Tharsus. And during 11. cap. d.
his abode at Tharsus, Barnabas fet him from thence to Antioch, where he
continued a whole year, and converted many to Christ's faith. From thence he
went to Cypres, and turned the Ruler of the Country called 13. cap.
Sergius Paulus, to Christ, by whom he was called Paulus, where before he was
named Saulus. Then he wandered about the Countries, and came to The other
Antioch before is in Siria.
Antioch Pisidia, where he came into the Sinagoge, and (after the lecture of
the Law and Prophets) made a long Sermon, which was so well accepted of the
Gentyles, that they were desirous to hear him again on the next Saboth, at
which time the unbelieving Jews raised up persecution against him: So that
Paul departed to I-conium, ^4. cap.
and from thence to Lystra, where he was stoned and left for dead: but being
recovered, he ceased not to exhort the people to continue in the faith of
Christ. And so passing through many dangerous places, he came at the last to
Attalia, and there he took shipping, and failed back again to Antioch,
declaring to the congregation there gathered together, all things which God had
done by him and Barnabas in their journey. After this, Paul eftsoons departed
from Antioch. And passing through many Countries, he came to Philippos (the
chief 16. cap.
City in the parties of Macedonia) where he was beaten and cast into prison,
where he converted the Iayler, and was delivered as a Roman. And from
Philippos, he passed the Countries till he came to Tessalonica, where he
preached Christ so earnestlye, that the unbelieving Jews, moved all the City
against him, notwithstanding, he escaped and went to Atthens, preaching to the
Attinians the true and unknown God. From Atthens he departed to Corinthus,
where he remained a year and a half. From thence he turned again to Siria,
and came to Ephesus, where the Siluersmiths moved sedicion against him, for
Diana their Goddess. And so forth passing many Countries and dangers, he came
at last to Jerusalem, where he was taken of the Jews, and had to prison, to be
scourged, but he professing himself to be a Roman, made the Captain
afraid, who after he had heard his cause, and had knowledge of the Jews
conspiracy against Paul, he sent him priuilye by night to Felix Licutenant of
Cesarea, where he continued in prison two years, till Festus came into Felix
room. And being examined before Festus, he appealed to the Emperor: wherefore
Festus (after a while) committed Paul suffered martyrdom by beheading under
Nero, in the.xiiii. year of his reign, and after the passion of Christ. 37.
years. Eliote.
him to a Centurion named Julius, who with much danger, brought Paul to Rome,
and delivered him to the hye Captain, with whom Paul found so much favor,
that he was suffered to dwell in an house by himself, with a soldier to
keep him, and to receive whosoever came unto him. And so Paul continued in
Rome two years, preaching and teaching those things which concern the Lord
Jesus, with all boldness, no man forbidding him. Paul, the mouth of the
Trumpet, or marvelous, or the least.


4. Reg. 15. e.
Pekahia, the son of Menahen, began his reign over Israel in the fifty
year of the reign of Azaria king of Judah, and departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam, but walked therein as his father did before him. He had not reigned
two years, or that Pekak his own Captain rose against him, and slew him in
Samaria, and reigned in his stead. Pekahia, the Lords opening.


4. Reg. 15. e. f
Pekah, the son of Remaliahin began his reygne over Israel in the.lij. year
of Azaria King of Judah. This man slew Pekahia his own Lord, and so usurped
the Crown. He kept the ways of Jeroboam as his Predecessors did. He made
war against Judah, and slew of 2. Par. 28. b. c
them in one day, six hundred thousand: and took two hundred thousand of
women, sons and daughters prisoners, and carried them away to Samaria,
purposing to have kept them in bondage and slauerye all their life long. But
being admonished by Oded the Prophet, he new arrayed them, and sent them home
again. After this, God stirred up Thiglah King of Assiria against him, which
came and dispossessed him of all the land of Nephtalim, and carried away his
people. Finally, Hosea the son of Ela conspired against Pekah and slew him,
after he had reigned twenty years, and was King after him.

Ge. 10. d. 11. ^
Peleg, was the son of Eber of the generation of Sem. His brothers name was
Iocktan. At the age of thirty years, he begot Rue, and lived after that two
hundred and nine years. In this man's days was the land divided, by reason of
the diversity of language which happened at the buylding of Babell. Peleg, a
division.


Romans 16. ^.
Persis, was a man singularlye beloved of S. Paul, for his diligence in
setting forth the Gospel, as does appear by his words, saying: Salute the
well-beloved Persis, which labored much in the Lord.

Math. 4. e.
Peter, otherwise called Simon the son of Jonas, dwelt in the City of
Bethsaida, and from a Fisher man, was called to be an Apostle, into whose house
Christ vouchedsafe Luke. 4. f.
to come and heal his wives mother of her fever. Peter was of that audacitie
and boldness, that he went Math. 14. ^.
upon the water, which was to great an enterprise for him to perform, without
the help of Christ his master, who seeing him (through weakness of faith)
in danger of drowning, saved him. Again, when Christ 16. c.
did show unto his Disciples, how that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many
things of the Elders, and of the Priests and Scribes, and be put to death, and
the third day rise again (which thing he spoke to pluck out of their
hearts, that false opinion they had of his temporal Kingdom.) Peter took him
aside and began to rebuke him, saying: Master, look to thy self, this shall
not be unto thee, with whose rash zeal, Christ was so offended that he called
him Satan, laying to his charge that he favored not the things that were of
God but of men. Also when Peter saw Christ (being transfigured) talk 17. a.
with Moses and Elias, he was so ravished with that sight, that he said unto
him: Lord here is good being for us. If thou will, let us make here three
Tabernacles: One for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. Furthermore,
when Christ said unto his Disciples (the night he Math. 26. c. ca
knew he should be apprehended) that all they should be offended because of
him, Peter (trusting to much to his own strength) said: Though all men be
offended because of thee, yet will not I forsake thee: Nay, I will suffer
death, rather than I will deny thee. And to perform this promise, when Judas
came with a multitude of the high Priests servant with swoordes and staves
John. 18. b.
to take Christ, Peter drew out his swoorde, and smote off the ear of one of
the high Priests servants: For whose foolish hardynesse, Christ rebuked him
sharplye, and bade him put up his swoorde. Then Peter seeing his master led
away, and all his fellows fled and gone, would not seem utterly to forsake
his master, but followed a far off, and at length in the darcke as unknown,
entered into the Court of Caiphas. And sitting among the ministers warming him
by the fire, a wenche came to him and said, ar^ not thou one of this man's
Discipl^s? No said he. Yes but thou art (quoth an other) for I did see thee
with him in the Garden: Peter denied again, saying that he did not know him.
Then certain which stood by knowing Peter, said: surely thou art one of
them, for thy speech does bewray thee. Then began Peter to curse and banne,
swearing and denying that ever he knew him: And immediatelye the Cock did
crow. Peter now remembering the words of Christ, which had said unto him,
that before the Cock did crow, he should deny him thrice, was touched with
inward repentance, and went out and wept bitterly. And after he had lost the
presence of his master, he went to 21. cap.
his old occupasion of fishing again: And as he (with other his companions)
had labored all the long night in vain, and were coming to land, Jesus
(which stood on the shore) asked if they had any meat: who (not knowing what
he was) said they had none. Then cast out your Net (quoth he) on the right
side of the Ship and ye shall speed, and so they cast out their net, and were
not able to draw it to land again, for the multitude of fishes that were
caught in it. And as Peter was haling up the net, and heard John say it was
Jesus which stood upon the shore, he left the net, and sprange into the Sea to
Jesus. This is that Peter, upon whose confession, Christ (when Peter
acknowledged him to be the son Math. 16. c.
of the living God) ^yd build his Congregation. Finally, to stablish Peter in
the office of an Apostle, Christ commanded him earnestlye three times, to
feed his sheep. Giving him also forewarning of his death. Peter, a Stone, or
Rock.


1. Reg. 25. g.
Phaltiel, the son of Lays, would not seem to disobey the will of King
Saul, when of hatered he had taken Lyra says that Psaltiel was a learned
man. And knowing
his daughter Mychol from David, and gave her to him, but thankefully received
her and gentlye entertained Michol, so long as the King her Father lived, who
being dead, then David required to have his wife Michol Michol to be David's
lowfull wife, he reserved her as his sister: and wept for joy that she was
without dishonesty, restored to David again.
again: And at the day of her deliverance to Abner, to be restored to David,
he brought her on the way, and came behind her weeping, till they came to a
place called Bahurim. And there, at Abners commandment, he returned home
again.

Pharao. There be diverse Genesis 12. c. d
Kings of this name expressed in Scripture. What time as Abraham came into
Egypt with Sara his wife, who was reported to Pharao to be a woman of an
excellent beauty, he took her home to his house, and gentlye entertained the
woman without any spot of dishonestie, and also entreated Abraham well for her
sake. But when he perceived that God Pharao was a general name given to the
Kings of Egypt.
had plagued his house, for keeping the woman from her husband, he called
Abraham unto him and said: Why haste thou done this unto me? Wherefore
dyddest thou not tell me, that she was thy wife? Why saydest thou she is my
sister, that I should take her to be my wife? Now therefore, behold thy
wife, take her and go thy way, and gave a commandment that no man should
hurt them either in person or goods.

41. cap.
An other Pharao there was, that delivered Joseph 47. cap.
out of Prison to expound his dreams: And for the excellent wisdom and
knowledge, that he saw to be in Joseph, he made him Ruler and Governor of all
the land of Egypt, and showed much kindness to his Father, and to all his
kindred.

Exodus 1. cap.
After this Pharao, rose there up another which knew not Joseph. And he without
all measure vexed the Children of Israel: And thinking by his humayne wisdom
to have let their increase, he commanded the Mydwyues, to destroy the men
Children of the Hebrews, as soon as they were borne: Whose policy took no
effect, for Moses (notwithstanding) was preserved and brought up, even in his
own house forty years.

Exodus 5. cap.
And after the death of this Pharao, there came an other, whose heart God did
harden, and plagued him with 7. 8. 10. 14.
ten marvelous plagues, before he would let the Israelites depart out of
his land: And persisting in his obstinacy and froward heart, God at the
last, drowned him and all his host in the red Sea.

3. Re. 3. a. 9. c.
There was yet an other mighty Prince of this name, whose kingdom joined so
nyghe to Salomons, that Solomon (to make himself the stronger) made affinity
with him, and married his daughter. And this Pharao took the City of Gaza from
the Cananites, and gave it (with the Country there about) to Solomon for his
daughters dowrye. Finallye, Pharao Necho, in the 4. Reg. 23. f. g
days of Iehoahas the son of Iosia king of Judah, came and deposed him,
making Elyakym his brother, King in his stead: and merced the land in a
hundred Talents of Silver, and one of gold, and carried Iehoahas away with him
into Egypt. Pharao, Vengeance.


Romans 16. a.
Phebe, was a certain woman, which served in the Congregation of Cenchrea, by
whom Paul sent his Epistle to the Romans, wherein he says in her praise
and commendacion, on this wise: I commend unto you Phebe our sister (which is
a servant of the Congregation of Cenchrea) that ye receive her in the Lord,
as it becomes saints. And ye assist her in whatsoever business she needs
of your aid, for she has succored many, and me also.

2. Tim. 1. d
Phigelus, was one of them in Asia, which had cleaued to Paul's doctrine, and
afterward forsook him. Of whom Paul writes to Timothy thus: This thou
know, how that all they which are in Asia be turned from me, of which sort
are Phigelus and Hermogenes.

Philemon, look Onisimus.

2. Timo. 2. c.
Philetus, was a certain man in S. Paul's time which erred from the truth,
saying that the resurrection was past already: of whose error Paul warns
Timothy, saying on this wise: Study to show thy self laudable unto God, a
workman that needs not to be ashamed, destributing the word of truth
iustlye, as for vngestlye vanities of voices, pass thou over them, for they
will increase unto ungodliness, and their words shall frette as does the
disease of a Canker: of whose number is Himeneus and Philetus, which (as
concerning the truth) have erred, saying, the resurrection is past already,
and do destroy the faith of many.

1. Mac. 6. b.
Philip. To this man, Antiochus the King (at the day of his death) committed
the governance of his young son f. g.
Antiochus, with the whole Realm, during his nonage. Which Philip afterward,
went into Persia with a great host, leaving the Kings son under the tuition
of Lysias, who in the absence of Philip, made Antiochus King in his fathers
stead, adding to his name Eupater. Then Philip hearing of this (whose intent
was to be King him self) returned with the Kings army out of Persia, and came
to Antioch, where he got the dominion. But Lysias hearing thereof, made haste
to Antioch, where he fought with Philip, and (in ^ine) got the City from him.

John. 1. c.
Philip, a man borne in Bethsaida a City of Galile, was called to be an
Apostle. After whose calling, he went to Nathaniel, and said, we have found
him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write: Jesus the son of
Joseph of Nazareth, and so brought him to Jesus. This is he whom Christ asked
(to prove him) 6. a.
where he might buy so much bread as would serve the company to eat, that
came unto him, who made answer, that two hundredth penywoorth would not
suffyce them, to have but every man a little. Also, when there 12. c.
were certain Greeks, which came to Philip, saying: they were desirous to see
Jesus, Philip went and told Andrew. And again, Andrewe and Philip told
Jesus. Furthermore, when Jesus reasoned with his Disciples about his father,
saying that they both knew him, and had seen him: Philip said: Lord, show us
the father, and 14. a.
it suffices us. Now after the death of Christ, and persecution Act. 8. b.
cap.
that was about Steven, Philip went to the City of Samaria, where he preached
Christ, and did not only convert the whole City, but also Simon Magus the
Sorcerer, who had of long time seduced the same City with his sorcerie and
witchcraft. And when he had thus sown the word of God among the Samaritanes,
the Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip, saying: Arise, and go toward the
South, unto the way that goes down from Jerusalem unto the City of Gaza,
which is in the desert. And as he was going, he met in the way (by Gods
providence) a certain man of Ethiopia, a Chamberlain and of great authority
with Candace Queen of Ethiope, which had been at Jerusalem to worship. And
returning homewarde sitting in his Chariot, he readde the book of Esaias the
Prophet. Then Philip, being commanded by the spirit of God, to go and join
himself unto the Chariote, went. And when he came near, and heard him
reading of Esaye the Prophet, he said unto the Chamberlayne: understand
thou what thou read? How can I (quoth he) except I had a guide: wherefore I
pray thee come up and sit with me. The tenor of the Scripture which he
readde, was this: He was led as a sheep to be slain, and like a Lamb dumb
before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth. Because of his humbleness, he
was not esteemed: But who shall declare his generation, and his life is taken
from the earth. When Philip had repeated this Text unto the Chamberlain, he
said unto Philip: I pray thee of whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself,
or of some other man. Then began Philip at the same Scripture, and preached
unto him Jesus. And as they went on their way, they came by a certain water.
And the Chamberlayne said to Philip. See, here is water, what does let me to
be baptized? Philip said, if thou believe with all thy heart, thou may. And
he said: I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God. Then was the Chariot
stayed, till they both went down into the water, where Philip baptized him.
And as soon as they were both out of the water, the spirit of the Lord caught
away Philip, so that the Chamberlain saw him no more, who went away
reioyceing. But the Angel set Philip down in the next City called Azotus,
who walked thorowout the Country preaching in all the Cities, till he came to
Cesarea.

Act. 6. 2. 21. b.
Philip, the Evangelist, was one of the seven Deacons. He dwelt in Cesarea,
and had four daughters which did prophecy.

Number. 25. cap.
Phinehes, the Son of Eleazar, was so gelyous over the laws of God, that
when the children of Israel had committed whooredome with the daughters of Moab
and saw an Israelite (named Zamry) bring to his brethren a Madianitishe wife
(named Cozby) even in the sight of Moses and all the multitude of Israel that
stood before the door of the Tabernacle, lamenting their offense, he took
his weapon in his hand and followed the man into his Tent, and thrust them
both through the bellyes and killed them. And then the plague (wherein were
dead four an twenty thousand) ceased. For the which deed, the Lord said
to Moses: Phinehes the son of Eleazar, has turned away mine anger from the
children of Israel while he was gelious for my sake among them, that I had not
consumed them all in my gelousie: Wherefore I give unto him, my covenant of
peace, to him and to his seed after him, even the Covenant of the Priests
office for ever, because he was gelous for his Gods sake, and made atonement
for the Children of Israel.

Math. 27.
Pilate, was Liefetenaunt of Iewrye, when Annas and Caiphas were the hye
Priests, who with the Scribes Mar. 14.
Luke. 22. 23.
and Elders of the Jews sat in counsel upon Jesus John. 18. 19.
(now betrayed unto them by Judas) how and by what means, they might dispatch
him out of the way. But having no authority to condemn or put him to death,
they brought him bound unto Pylate the temporal Judge. Saying, how that they
had found him perverting the people and forbidding trybute to Caesar, and
calling himself a King. Pilate hearing this, demanded of him, whither he were
a King or no. Jesus neither denying nor affirming that he was, made answer
that Pilate himself had said so. Then Pilate said unto all his accusers, how
that in examining of Jesus, he could not see that he had offended in any such
thing, as they had charged him withal. The people than, more vehementlye
affirmed, how that he had with his teaching and preaching (which he first began
in Galile) moved all Iewry to follow his doctrine. When Pilate perceived the
man to be of Galile, and that his matter pertayned to Herod's jurisdiction, he
sent him (forthwith) to Herod lying at Jerusalem. Who of a long time had
been desirous to see him. But when as Herod had demanded many things of him,
and could have no answer again, he despised and mocked him, and so returned
him back again to Pilate clothed all in Commonly this was a robe of honor or
excellency, but it was given to christ in mockage.
white. And from that day forth, Pilate and Herod were evermore friends,
who before were enemies. Then Pilate (for so much as Herod had sent Jesus
back again, and done nothing unto him, and that neither he nor Herod could
find anyething in him worthy of death) would have chastyned Jesus, and so
let him go. But the high Priests laid so many things against him, that
Pilate (after he had reasoned a little with Jesus, concerning his Kingdom and
other things) went and sat in judgment, knowing right well in his
conscience, that the Priests of very envy had delivered Jesus unto him. And
being set down upon the judgment seat, his wife sent to him, saying: Have
thou nothing to do with that just man, for I have suffered many things this
day in a dream, by reason of him. Which counsel of his wife, nor yet his
own knowledge, did any thing the more move him, to defend the innocence of
Christ, but asked of the people, which of these two they would have quitte,
Barrabas or Jesus, and they said Barrabas. What shall I then do (quoth he)
with Jesus which is called Christ? They all said, let him be Crucified. What
evil or great offense has he done (quoth Pilate) that deserves death? The
people being much more eager than they were before, cried out amayne to have
him Crucified. When Pilate saw this, that he could not prevail against them,
he took water and washed his hands, saying: I am innocent of the blood of
this just person, in the which saying he bare witness Pilate murdered the
Galileans, as they were sacrificing: and so their blood was mingled with the
blud of the beasts which were sacrificed.
of his innocence, before he condemned him. And so delyuering Jesus to the
Soldiers, they scourged him, and arrayed him in purple, with a crown of
thorn upon his head. In which sort Pilate brought him forth again, and
said to the people: Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know
that I find no fault in him. And when Jesus appeared before them, Pilate said:
Behold the man, which he spoke in mockerye, because that Christ had called him
self a King. And when the hye Priests and Officers saw him, they cried out,
Crucifige, Crucifige. Then said Pilate take him to you and Crucify him, for I
can find no cause of death in the man. They answered again and said: It is
not lawful for us to put any man to death, but we have a law, and by our law
he ought to dye, because he made himself the Son of God. When Pilate heard
this, he was afraid, and went again into the judgment Hall, and demanded of
Jesus what he was, but he made him no answer. Then Pilate said: Why speak
thou not? Do thou not see, that it lies in my hands, either to kill or
save thee? To that he made answer and said: Thou could have no power at
all against me, except it were given thee from above, therefore he that
delivered me unto thee, has the more sin, and from that time forth Pilate
sought by all means to deliver him. But the Jews cried upon him, saying: If
thou let him go thou art not Cesars friend, for whosoever makes himself a
King, speaks against Caesar. When Pilate heard them say so, he brought Jesus
forth, and sat him down in the Judgment seat, saying unto the people:
Behold your King, they cried, away with him, away with him, crucify him.
What (quoth Pilate) shall I crucifye your King? To that the high Priests made
answer and said: We have no King but Caesar. At that word, Pilate delivered
Jesus to be crucified, and This manne Pilate (as Eusebius says) was at the
last, deposed and banished to Lions in France, where he slew himself.
being brought to the place of execution, and spread upon the Cross, Pilate
caused this title to be set over his head: Jesus of Nazareth King of the
Jews, which was written in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, that all Nations might
understand it. With the which writing, the high Priests were offended sore,
and would have had Pilate to correct it, and not to write him King of the
Jews, but that he said, I am King of the Jews. Well (quoth Pilate: What I
have written, that have I written.

Priscilla, look Aquila.

1. Mac. 10. f. g
Ptolomy, King of Egypt had a fair daughter named Cleopatra, the which he gave
to Alexander the son of noble Antiochus in Marriage, which was solemly and
with great Royalty finished in the City of Ptolomais. But notwithstanding
this great bond of Amity now knit between them, Ptolomy afterward withdrew
his favor from Alexander, and sought by all means, how he might defeat him
of his Kingdom. And thinking to bring his purpose now better to pass, while
Alexander himself lay out of his Realm, he prepared a great host, and took
his journey into Siria, where into every City as he came, he was honorably
received according to Alexanders commandment. And being his father in law
was nothing suspected of treason. But Ptolomy meaning nothing else, left in
every City whereinto he was received, certain men of war, to fortify and
keep the same. And when he had gotten the Dominion of all the Cities upon the
Sea coast, he joined himself in league with Demetrius, and took his daughter
from Alexander, and gave her to Demetrius: Raising up a slander upon
Alexander, how he went about to kill him. And so his malice and insatiable
covetousness being openly known, he got him to Antioche, where he set two
Crowns upon his head, the crown of Egypt and Asia. Then Alexander (who at
that time lay in the Country of Cilicia) hearing of all that his Father in
law had done, returned home, and made war against him. But Ptolomy being the
stronger, chased him into the Country of Arabia, where the King of that land,
smote off his head, and sent it to Ptolomy, which pleasure he did not long
enjoy, for within three days after, Ptolomy dyed himself. After whose death,
his men of war which he had left in the Cities were all slain.

1. Mac. 16. b.
Ptolomy, the Son of Abobus, married with the c. d.
daughter of Simon, brother to Machabeus. And being made Captain of the host
at Jericho, he began (through his great abundance of Gold and Silver) to wax
proud and high minded, imagining how he might destroy Simon his Father in
law and his sons, and so to conquer the land. And being in this mind, it
chanced Simon (as he was going through the Cities of Iewrye and caryng for
them) to come down to Jericho, with Mathathias and Judas his sons, where
this Ptolomy received him under the color of great friendship, into a strong
Castle of his named Douch, and in the same made him a great banquet, at the
which, he most trayterouslye slew Simon his Father in law with both his
sons. This done, he wrote to Antiochus to send him an host of men, and he
would deliver the land of Iewry into his hand. And further, he sent certain
men to Gaza to kill John the third son of Simon, and wrote to the Captains
to come unto him, and he would reward them with Silver and Gold. But John,
having knowledge of all the treason, slew the Messengers which came from
Ptolomy, and so disappoynted him of all his purpose.

^. Mac. 10. b.
Ptolomie, surnamed Macron, being made a Ruler, purposed to do Justice unto
the Jews, for the wrongs that had been done unto them, and went about to
behave himself peaceably with them, for the which he was accused of his
friends to Eupator, and was called often times Traitor, because he had left
Cypres that Philometor had committed unto him, and came to Antiochus Epifanes:
Therefore seeing that he was no more in estimation, he was discouraged, and
poisoned himself, and dyed.

Act. 2^. b*
Publius, was a certain man dwelling in the I Will called Melite, and the
chiefest man in all the I Will, who received Paul with all the rest that had
escaped the seas, very gently: and lodged them three days in his house, whose
father which lay sick of an Ague, and of a bloody flyxe, Paul healed.
Publius, a Latin word.


Genesis 39. a.
Putyphar, was a great Lord in the land of Egypt, and Steward of King Pharaos
house. He bought Joseph of the Ismaelites, and found him a lucky man. And when
he saw that God did prosper all things under his hand, he made him Ruler and
governor of all that he had, and God did bless his house for Joseph's sake.
But in the end, through the false accusation of his wife, he cast Joseph in
prison.

R.
Genesis 31. c. d. e
RAchel, the youngest daughter of Laban the son of Nahor, was a beawtifull
young woman, and Jacobs wife. She being long barren, at the last brought forth
a son, and called his name Joseph. And at her departing from Laban her father
with Jacob her husband into the land of Canaan, she stole away her fathers
Not to worship the^, but to withdraw her father from Idolatry.
Images from him, for the which he made no little adooe with Jacob whom he
followed and ouertooke at Mount Gilead. And when her father had searched Jacobs
tents, and could not find his Idols, he came into Rachel his daughters tent,
who had hyd them in the Camels lytter, and sat upon them: And as her father
was rysling about the place where she sat, she said: O my Lord, be not angry
that I cannot rise up before thee, for the custom of women is come upon me,
and so the thing was not known. Finallye, Rachel in traueyling of her second
son, whom she called Ben Omy (the son of my sorrow) she dyed, and was
buried in the way to Ephrath which is Bethleem, where Jacob caused a stone to
be set upon her grave, which was called Rachels grave stone. Rachel, a Sheep.


Tob. 6. c. 7. ca
Raguel, was a certain man dwelling at Rages a City of the Medes, whose
sister was wife to old Toby. This Raguel had a daughter called Sara, which had
been married to seven men one after another, which men were all slain the
first night of their marriage, by the Devil Asmodius. To this Sara God had
appointed young Tobie (which feared God) to be her husband, and made his holy
Angel Raphell, to bring him to Rages, and so to Raguels house his mothers
brother, where they were joyfully received. And when Raguel had looked upon
young Toby, and beheld him well, he said unto his wife: how like is this
young man to my sisters son? And then to know who they were, he said:
whence be ye my good brethren? We be (said they) of the Trybe of Nephtaly,
and of the captivity of Nimue. Know ye (said he) Tobias our kinseman? Yea,
said they, we know him well, and this young man (said the Angel) is his
son. With that Raguel bowed himself, and with weeping eyes took him about
the neck and kyssed him, and bade his wife prepare in all haste for dinner.
Nay said Tobie, I will neither eat nor drink here this day, except thou
grant me my peticion, and promise to give me thy daughter Sara. Then was
Raguel sore astonished, and began to fear, least it should happen unto him, as
it did to the other seven. And while he stood in doubt what answer to make,
the Angel said: fear not to give him thy daughter, for unto this man that
fears God, belongs she, and to none other. I doubt not (said Raguel) but
God has accepted my prayers and tears in his sight, and I trust he has
caused you to come unto me for the same intent, that this daughter of mine,
might be married in her own kinrede, according to the law of Moses. And now
doubt thou not (my son) but I will give her unto thee. And with that, he
took the right hand of his daughter, and gave her into the right hand of
Toby, saying: the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, be
with you, join you together, and fulfill his blessing in you. And when the
Marriage and all was ended, Raguel brought his daughter into her Chamber, and
said: Be of good chere my daughter, the Lord of heaven give thee joy for the
heaviness that thou have suffered, and so went to rest. Then in the morning
about the Cock crowing, Raguel (supposing all things to have happened to Toby,
as it did to the other seven before) called up his men, and went and made
ready his grave, which being done, he bade his wife send one of her Maidens,
to look if Toby were dead, that he might burye him before day light. And when
it was told him they were both sound, and fast a sleep, he praised God, and
caused his men to fill up the grave again, and made a great feast to all his
neighbors and friends. And gave to Toby, the half of all his goods, and
made him a sure writing for the other half that remained, to be his also after
his death. And at the day of their departure, delivered the goods, and taking
his leave, said: The holy Angel of the Lord, be with you, in your journey,
and bring you forth safe and sound, that ye may find all things in good case
with your Elders, and that mine eyes my see your Children before I dye, and so
kissed them and let them go. Raguel, a Shepeherde of God.


3. Esd. 2. cap.
Rathumus, with other Officers under Artaxerses King of Persia, writes unto
him against the Jews on this wise: Sir, thy servant Rathumus the story
writer, Sabellius the Scribe, with other Judges of the Court in Celosiria and
Phinehes: Be it known and manifested to our Lord the King, that the Jews
which are come up from you to us into the rebellious and wicked City, begin
to build it again, and the Walls about it, and to set up the Temple a new.
Now if this city and the Walls thereof be set up again, they shall not
only refuse to give Tributs and Taxes, but also rebel utterly against the
King. And for so much as they take this in hand now about the Temple, we
thought it not meet to pass over such a thing, but to show it unto our Lord
the King. And to certify him thereof: To the intent, that if it might please
the King, to cause it to be sought in the books of old, and thou shall find
such warning written, and shall understand that this City has always been
rebellious and disobedient, that it has subdued Kings and Cities, and that
the Jews which dwelt therein, has ever been a rebellious, obstinate,
unfaithful, and fighting people, for the which cause this City is wasted.
Wherefore now we certifye our Lord the King, that if this City be builded
and occupied again, and the Walls thereof set up a new, thou can have no
passage into Celosiria and Phenices. And when Rathumus and the other had
received the Kings answer, they got them to Jerusalem with an host of men,
and made the Jews cease from their buylding, which was not begun again until
the second year of King Darius.

Genesis 24. cap.
Rebecca, was the daughter of Bathuel and sister to Laban. As she went on a
time, with a pitcher upon her head, to the common Well without the City to
draw water, it chanced Abraham's servant, to stand by the Well, with ten
Camels lying there about. And when the Maid had filled her pot, and set it
upon her head, ready to go away, the man desired to drink a little of her
water, who foorthwithall set down her pot and gave him drink. And when he
had droncken, she powered out the reast into the water trough, and ran again to
the Well, and drew water for his Camels, until they had all droncken their
fill. Then the man (in hope the Lord had made his journey prosperous) took
out a Golden earing and two bracelets of Gold and gave them to the Maid,
demanding whose daughter she was. I am (quoth she) the daughter of Bathuel the
Son of Milca, which she bare unto Nahor. Then tell me I pray thee, is there
rowme in thy fathers house for us to lodge in? Yea (quoth she) there is both
rowme and lodging, and also litter and prouander enough for your beasts?
Blessed be God (quoth he) that has dealt so mercyfullye with my Master, and
has brought me the right way to my masters brothers house. Then Rebecca
(hearing him speak of her fathers brother) ran home and told all things
what the man had said. And as Laban beheld his sister and saw the earyngs
and bracelets upon her hands, he ran out to the man, and with gentle
entertaynement brought him into the house, and saw his Camels dressed and
provided for, and also set meat before him to eat: But the man would not
eat, before he had declared the cause, wherefore his master had sent him,
which being done, and his request granted, he eat and made merry and tarried
all night. And on the morrow as the man made haste to go his way, the Damsel
was called forth, to know whither she would go with the man or no: and being
content to go with the man, he would not tarry, but took the Maid and had
her to Isaac his masters son, whose wife she became. And being twenty
years without a Child, at last she conceived with two: and when she felt
them strive within her womb, she made her moan to God, saying: Seeing it is
so, why am I thus with child. God made her answer, saying: There are two
manner of people in thy womb, and two Nations shall be divided out of thy bowels:
And the one Nation shall be mightier than the other: And the elder shall be
servant to the yoonger. And so when her time was come to be delivered, she
brought forth two twynnes, the one named Esau, and the other Jacob. Which
two became mighty men, but Rebecca looued Jacob better then Esau: and to
prefer him before the other she said: Hear me my son Jacob, I have
heard thy Father say to thy brother, go and kill some Venison, and make me
meat thereof, that I may eat and bless thee, before the Lord, before I dye.
Now therefore my Son hear my voice in that which I command thee: Get thee
to the flock, and bring me thence two good kyddes, that I may make meat of
them for thy father, such as he loves, and thou shall bring it him to eat,
that he may bless thee before his death. Then said Jacob: My brother Esau is
a rough man, and if my father shall happen to feel me, I shall seem unto
him, as I went about to deceive him, and so shall I bring a curse upon me, and
not a blessing. Well (said Rebecca) upon me be thy curse my son, only
hear my voice, and go and fetch me them. And when he had brought the Kyddes,
and that she had dressed the meat and made it ready, she fette out certain
raiment of Esaus, and put it upon Jacob, and covered his hands and the smoothe
of his neck with Goat shinnes, and put the meat in his hand to carry to his
Father, by which policy of Rebecca, Jacob had his brothers blessing. And when
she heard how his brother threatened to kill him for stealing away his
blessing, she told it Jacob, saying: Thy brother Esau threatens to sley thee,
therefore my some hear my voice: Make thee ready, and get thee to Laban my
brother at Haran: and tarry with him a while until thy brothers fierceness be
swaged, and that his wrath be turned away from thee, and he forget the things
which thou have done unto him, and then will I send and fet thee away from
thence, for why should I be depryued of you both in one day: And when she had
given her son this counsel, she went to Isaac her husband and said: I am
weary of my life, for fear of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob take a wife of
the daughters of Heth, such one as these are, or of the Daughters of the land,
what good shall my life do me. And so by the counsel of Rebecca, Jacob was
sent to Laban his mothers brother, where in process he got him a wife, and
purchased the love of Esau his brother again. Rebecca, Fed.


Iere. 35. b.
Rechab, was the Father of Ionadab. Which Ionadab made a Law, that the
Rechabytes should never drink Wine, their wives nor their children, neither
yet build house, nor sow seed, nor plant Vyneyardes, but should always
dwell in Tents. Which commandment they kept and obayed truly. And this their
obedience, Jeremy lays before the Jews to their great reproach, for that
they were not so ready to obey the will and commandment of God their
heavenly Father, as the Rechabytes were to obey their Father Ionadab. Rechab,
a Ryder.


Of Rechab the son of Rymmon. Read the storye of Baanah his brother.

4. Reg. 16. a. b
Rezin, King of Siria, went with Pekah King of Israel, to fight against Ahaz
King of Judah, but could not overcome him. At which time Rezin took the City
of Elath, and drove out the Jews therein and inhabited the City with Sirians.
But in fine, the King of Assiria came against him, in the defense of Ahaz King
of Judah, and at Damasco, sieve him. Rezin, will, or willing to a thing.


^. Reg. 11. d.
Rezon, the son of Eliada was a great Captain under Hadadezer king of Zoba,
which Hadadezer David had overcome in battle. And when Rezon saw his Lord and
Master discomfited, he fled from him, and gathered a bond of men, and went to
Damasco where he reigned as King, and became a great adversary to Solomon, for
the which purpose the Lord had stirred him up. Rezon, a Secretary, or leave.


^. Re. 21. b. c.
Rizpa, the daughter of Ahia, was Saules Concubine, and had by him two sons,
the one named Armony, and the other Miphiboseth: which two, with the sons of
Merob, David delivered to the Gibeonites, who (for the offense of Saul) hanged
them up upon an hill before the Lord. Then Rizpa perceiving their carcasses to
remain upon the Gybbet longer than the law required, made provision to save
their bodies, that neither Birds should fall upon them by day, nor beast by
night. And when it was told to David what Rizpa had done, he caused their
bones, with the bones of Saul and Ionathas to be carried into the Country of
Benjamin, and there buried in the Sepulcher of Cis, Saul's fathers.

3. Reg. 12. ca.
Roboam, the son of Solomon, was.xlj. year old when he began to reign, and
his mothers name was Naama. In this man's time began the Kingdom of Israel to
be divided. For when the people came to him, and said: Thy father laid a
grievous yoke upon us, now therefore remit thou somewhat of the grievous
service of thy father, and of his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we
will serve thee. He answered (as his young Counsailers had counsayled him)
saying: My little finger shall be heauyer than all my fathers loins. And where
as my father put an heavy yoke upon you, I will add more unto it: And where as
he chastyned you with whyppes, I will chasten you with Scorpions. The people
hearing this, they forsook him, all save the Tribe of Judah and The trybe of
Benjamin was given to Nathan the brother of Solomon: who nevertheless, aided
the Tribe of Judah as often as they needed.
Benjamin. Then Roboam seeing his kingdom divided, gathered an host of men,
out of the house of Judah and Benjamin, to the number of nine score thousand,
to fight with Israel, and to bring the Kingdom again unto himself. But while
he was thus minded, the Prophet Semaia came to him, and bade him cease from
his purpose, for the thing that was done, was the Lords doing. Whereupon every
man departed, according to the words of the Lord, which the Prophet had
spoken. Then Roboam fell to building of Cities, and repayring of strong holds,
which he furnished both with men and 2. Par. 11. c. d.
victuals. So that his kingdom was mighty and strongby 12. d.


(...) walked he and (...) when they had (...) making Hylaul^^^ (...) ^ome
Sodomites (...) ^^^en God forsook (...) Sisack King of (...) reign) came to
(...) of the Lord and (...) shields of Gold (...) ^hereof, Roboam (...) ^^^e,
God made the (...) ^^^^ts to Sisack (al^^ (...) the intent they (...) ^is
service, and the (...) This King Ro^^^^ (...) ^core Concubins, (...) ^bsalom
best. And (...) ^^^r all his brethren, (...) and when by his (...) ^^^^^d his
Children a^^^^ (...) cares he dyed. (...) the people.


(...) ^^cob and Lea. He (...) ^^nde in the field to (...) ^is brethren which
(...) ^^^ell to cast him into (...) ^^^^d him out of their (...) ^^^e unto the
pit and (...) ^^^s, and made great (...) ^^^ter this, (when Io^^ (...) ^ent
into Egypt for (...) ^^^^opyes, and hardly (...) said unto them: the patriarch
Ruben (or Reuben) stands outside a walled town with an ox, a goat and a water
ewer..1.
Primus Iacobi natorum nomine Ruben:
ed quia fae daui stratum genitoris ab illis,
Doni excellens imperioque prior
Exclusus, perij seu leuis unda breui
Crispin
J Ventor
G. D. Iode Excudebat
Did not I warn you and say, that ye should not sin against the Child,
and ye would not hear me, and now ye may see how his blood is required at
our hands. Gene. 49. a.
All this notwithstanding, it was his chance to lie with Bylha his Fathers
Concubine, which deed sore displeased his Father, wherefore before his death,
he declared the unstableness of Ruben, saying: That although he 1. Par. 5. a.
were the eldest, yet should he not be the chiefest. His birthright was taken
from him and given to the sons of Joseph. Ruben, seeing his son, or the
sight of his son.


Romans 16. c.
Rufus, was a virtuous and a Religious man, whom Paul remembered in his Epistle,
saying: Salute Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.

Ruth. 1. cap.
Ruth, and Orpha, were two fair young Damsels borne in the Country of Moab
where by chance, they married with the sons of Elimelech and Naomy, who were
strangers come out of the land of Judah, there to inhabit, and when both
their husbands were dead and their mother in law a wydowe also, they forsook
their own Country to go home with their mother into the land of Judah. And
when they had gone a good way togithers* Orpha (not without great entreaty of
her mother in law) turned home again, but Ruth abode still. Then said* Naomy
to Ruth: Oh see my daughter, thy sister in law is gone back again to her
people and goods? return and go after her. I pray thee (said Ruth) entreat
me not to leave thee: For whithersoeuer thou go, I will go with thee. And
where thou dwell there will I dwell also: Thy people shall be my people: And
thy God my God: look where thou dyest, there will I dye also, and there will I
be buried: The Lord do so and so unto me, if ought but death only, depart
thee and me a sundre. And so went they forth till they came to to Bethleem
Judah, which was in the beginning of Barley harvest. And as Ruth went one day
out a leasing among Ruth. 2. cap.
the harvest folks, she happened (by the prouidenc^ of God) upon the fields
pertaining to Boos, who showed her such kindness, that she neither lacked
meat nor drink, neither yet corn, so long as Harvest lasted. And when all
Harvest was done, Naomy said unto Ruth: This man in whose field thou have
leysed all this while, 3. cap.
is our nyghe Kinsman, therefore do now by my counsel. This night he
wynoweth Barley in the barn, wash thy self therefore, and annoint thee, and
put thy raiment upon thee, and get thee to the Barn, and keep thy self
close, until he have left eating and drincking. And when he goes to sleep,
mark the place where he lays him down: And when he is a sleep, go and lift
up the clothes softly at his feet and lie thee down, and he shall tell thee
what thou shall do. So when Ruth had done all things according to her Mother
in laws teaching: Boos about midnight waked out of his sleep, and feeling one
lie at his feet was afraid, and groping with his hand, he asked who it was.
I am Ruth (quoth she) thine handmayde, spread therefore the winge of thy
garment over thine handemayden, for thou art next of my kin. Now blessed
art thou (quoth Boos) for thou have showed more goodness in the latter end,
than at the beginning, inasmuch as thou followedest not young men, were they
poor or rich. And now my daughter fear not, I will do unto thee all that
thou requyrest: For thou art well known to be a woman of virtue. Howbeit,
there is one nearer of kin to thee than I, if he will do the kinsman part
unto he, well, let him do it: If he will not, 4. c. d.
then will I. And so in the morning, he gave her so much corn as she could
carye home. And shortly after she became his wife, and in process, brought him
forth a son called Obed, which was the father of Isai, the father of David.
Read the story of Boos and Naomy. Ruth, watered, or filled.


2. Reg. ^.
SAdoch, the son of Ahitob, was father to Sallum and Ahimaas, and one of the
Priests that governed the Ark of God, which he carried out of Jerusalem with
David what time as he sled from his son Absalom. And when Zadock had brought
15. e. f.
the king over the brook Kidron, he desired him to return again with the
Arc into the city, that from him and Abiathar he might have word of all
things that Absalom and Achitophell determined against him. And so he returned
with the Arc to Jerusalem, and there remained David's faithful man, in all
things that he had commanded him. And when he had knowledge of Absaloms
overthrow, 19. c.
he then exhorted all Israel and Judah, to remember the kyndenesse of David
their sovereign Lord and King: who had so many times delivered them out of
the hands of their enemies, that now like true, faithful and obedient
subjects, they would f^t him home again, and restore him to his kingdom. By
whose godly exhortacion, the hearts of all Judah were bowed to David, even as
the heart of one man. This Sadoch was ever a faithful ^. Reg. 1. a. f.
Priest, and never swarued from David. For in the end when Adoniah took upon
him to reygne as King (his father David being old and alive) Zadock consented
not unto him, but according to David's will and commandment, anointed Solomon
King, who afterward promoted him into the room of Abiathar which 2. f.
had the hye Priests office. Sadoch, or Zadok, ^ustified, or just.


4. Reg. 15. b. c*
Sallum, the son of Iabes conspired against Zacharia, There is another of
this name. The husband of Hulde the prophetess.
and slew him, and reigned in his stead. In the xxxix. year of Azaria King of
Judah began Sallum his reign over Israel, and had not reigned one noneth, but
Menahen rose up against him, and slew him in Samaria, 4. Reg. 2^. ^.
and reigned in his stead. Sallum, Peaceable.


4. Reg. 18. c.
Salmanasar, King of Assiria, came in the seventh year of Hosea King of
Israel, and besieged Samaria, and in the third year (which was the ninth year
of Hosea) he wanne it, and took Hosea prisoner, and carried him away into
Assiria. Salmanasar, Peace bound.


2. Reg. 12. f.
Solomon, the son of Bethsabe was ordained to reygne after his father David*
and anointed King over Israel, by Sadock the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet.
3. Re. ^. e. f. g.
Who being stablished in his kingdom, began to minister Justice: first upon
Adoniah his brother, which had aspired to the Kingdom. Secondlye, upon Ioab,
which had slain Abner and Amasa, and conspired with Adoniah. Thirdly, upon
Semei, which had curssed David his father. This King was so dearelye belooued
of 3. cap.
God, that in a dream he appeared to him, and bade him ask whatsoever he
would, and he should have it. Then Solomon considering in himself that he
was but young, and that (being called to the office of a King) how hard a
thing it was to govern the whole multitude of the people well, desired of God
to give him an understanding heart, to judge the people, and to discern
between good and evil. Which thing pleased the Lord so well, that he gave
him not only a wise and an understanding heart, but also riches and honor,
wherein he excelled all other Kings that ever were before or after him. And
that he 4. cap.
passed all men in wisdom and understanding, does manifestly appear by the
wise sentence he gave upon the living child, that the two Harlots strove for
before him. And also by his three thousand Parables, and his thousand and
fifty songs, wherein were declared such wise and grave sentences, that all
the world (hearing thereof) came to see his presence, and to hear his
wisdom, which did so far exceed the wisdom of Ethan, Heman, Chalcal, and
Darda (four of the notablest men then living in all the world) that they fell
a woondering, and said, that the great fame that was bruted of his wisdom
and royalty before they came forth, was nothing to be compared with that they
had now both heard and seen. And as he did exceed all men in wisdom, so he
did all other in riches. For he had.xij. Officers which provided victualles for
his household every month in a year. And his ordinary expenses every day was
thirtye quarters of Manchet flower, and sixty quarters of meal, ten stalled
Oxen, and twenty out of the pasture, and an hundred sheep, beside Hearts,
Buckes, wild Goats, Capons, and Fowls. He had forty thousand horses,
and.xij. thousand horsemen to keep them. The weight 10. cap.
of gold that came every year out of Ophir to Solomon, was six hundredth three
score and six talents of gold, beside that which Merchantes and other men
brought him. Whereof he had so great abundance, that he made the furniture of
the Lords Temple all of clean gold. Yea, there was not so much as a drinking
pot in all his own house, but it was of gold: And as for Silver, he made it
as plentye as stones in the streate. But notwithstanding 11. a.
all this his wisdom and riches, which God had given him, yet at the last he
fell to loving of outlandishe women (contrary to the law of Moses) whereof he
took so many, that he had seven hundredth Queens, and three hundredth
Concubines, which turned his heart to strange gods, and made him of a wise
king a starcke fool, and great Idolater, for the which his horrible offense,
he lost the favor of God. And when he had raygned forty years he dyed, and
was buried in the City of Dauyd, and his son Roboam succeeded. Solomon,
peaceable.


Natha the Prophet, called him Iedidia, beloved.

Iudic. 3. d.
Samgar, the son of Anath delivered Israel from the Philistines and slew six
hundred of them with an Ox goade. Samgar, desolacion of the stranger.


Iudic. 13. d.
Samson, the Son of Manoah of the Tribe of Dan, was borne in the City of
Zaraah, and became a mighty strong man. On a time as he went to the City 14.
cap.
of Thamnath and saw a woman of the Philistines which liked him well, he
entreated his parents to have her to his wife. Who not contented therewith
reproved him, saying: Is there never a wife among the daughters of thine own
people and brethren, but thou must take a wife among the uncircumcised
Philistines? Well (said Samson) let me have her for she pleases me well.
Then his parents (not knowing it was the Lords doing, that he should seek
an occasion against the Philistines) went with their son to Thamnath to see
the woman: And by the way going, Samson (unknown to his parents) slew a Lion
which came ramping upon him, and so went forth with them and talked with the
woman. And a few days after, as he came again to receive his wife, he turned
aside to see the carkeys of the Lion, and found in the bellye thereof, a
swarm of Bees and honey, whereof he took in his hand, and went eating to his
Father and mother, and gave them part of the Honey. And when the feast day of
his marriage was come, he said to thirty young men of his guestes: I will put
forth a riddle unto you, and if ye can declare it me within the seventh day
of the Feast, I will give you thirty shyrtes, and thirty change of raiment,
and if ye cannot, then shall you give me the like: The riddle is this: Out of
the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness. And ^riddle.
when the seventh day was come, and the men had not yet found out the ryddle,
they persuaded Samsons wife to suck it out of her husband and tell it them,
who never rested flattering of Samson and weeping before him till he had told
her. Then they (being taught of her) went to Samson before the Son was down,
and said: what is sweeter than honey* And what is stronger than a Lion. Then
said Samson: If ye had not plowed with my Calfe, ye had not found out my
ryddle. And so he went out to the City of Ascalon (one of the chiefest Cities
of the Philistines) and slew thirty men. And gave the spoil of them to those
that had expounded his riddle, and so got him home to his fathers house half
displeased with his wife. After a while, he went to visit his wife with a
Iudic. 15. cap.
kidde, but when he came, his Father in law had given her to an other*
thinking that Samson had hated her, and bade him take the yoonger (which was
fayrer) in her stead. Then Samson having good occasion given him against the
Philistines, went out and caught three hundred Foxes, and fastened tail by
tail, and put a fire brande between the two tails, which he set on fire
(and so sent them into the Philistines Corn, and brent it up, with their
Vyneyardes Olyues and all. The Philistines (knowing that Samson had done it)
went and set fire on his Father in laws house, and brent both him and Samsons
wife with all that ever they had. And sent three thousand men of Judah (who were
then under the Philistines) to Samson, to bind him and to bring him to them.
And when (by his sufferance) they had bound him, and brought him to the
Philistines, they gave a great shoute when they saw him, wherewithal Samson
brake a sundre his bands, as though they had been but flax. And took up a
rotten Iawbone of an Ass, and laid so about him, that he slew a thousand
Philistines or ever he rested. And being sore a thyrst, God made water come out
of a tooth in the Iawbone* and so refreshed him. After this, he got him 16. cap.
to the City of Gaza, and lodged in a woman's house that sold vittayles: And
when he perceived the Citizens to watch and to go about to kill him, he got
him up about midnight, and went to the gates of the City, which he rent off
bars and all, and laid them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the
top of an high hill before Hebron* Finallye, through his inordinate affection
to Dalila his wife, he lost Gods excellent gift, and so was betrayed to the
Philistines, who took and put out his eyes and cast him in Prison, where they
made him to grynde like a slave. And when the great day of the Philistines
came, that they should hold their feast to their god Dagon, they sent for
Samson out of prison, to play before them and to make them laugh. The house
was full of men and women, so many that in the roufe of the same, there was
about three thousand to behold Samson while he played before the Lords and
great men. And as he stood between the great pyllers which bare up all the
house, he called upon God in his mind, saying: O Lord think upon me, and
strengthen me at this time only, that I (according to my vocasion executing
thy judgment) may be avenged on the Philistines for my two eyes. And with
that he caught the pillars in his hands, saying: Let me lose my life with the
Philistines, and so shook the pillars with all his might, and brought down
the house upon them, and killed them all. Then his brethren hearing thereof,
came and took up the body of Samson and buried him with Manoah his Father,
after he had Judged Israel twenty years, who had been in subjection under
the Philistines forty years. Samson, there the second time, because the
Angel appeared the second time, at the prayer of his Father.


1. Reg. 1. c. d.
Samuel, the son of Elkana and Anna, was the next Judge after Eli, and the
last that judged Israel. And because his mother had asked him of God, therefore
she called his name Samuel. And when he was able to do any ministracion in the
Temple, his mother brought him to Eli, and gave him unto the Lord, according to
her promise. And so Samuel ministered unto the Lord before 3. cap.
Eli: And one day as he laid him down to sleep in the Temple, the Lord
called him: And Samuel (thinking it had been his Master) ran to Eli, to
know his pleasure, who said he called him not. And at the third time when
Samuel came to his master again, Eli said unto him: Go and lay thee down
once more, and if he call thee again, then say thou: Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears. And when the Lord had called him the fourth time, and had
opened unto him, all that he had determined against the house of Eli (for not
correcting his sons for their great wickedness) Samuel went to his master
Eli, and (at his commandment) told him every whit what the Lord had said.
Now Samuel (being the Lords Prophet) judged the people, and was both loved and
feared of them. And when he began to wax old, 8. cap.
and was not able to bear the burden, he made his two sons (Joel and Abia)
Judges over Israel, thinking that they would imitate his steps: But
contrariwise, they were so covetous, that (for lucre sake) they perverted all
true justice: whereupon the Elders of Israel, perceiving Samuel to be old, and
his sons given all to coueteousnesse, went to Samuel, desiring of him that
they might have a king to raygne over them as other nations had. Then Samuel
(hearing them speak of a king) was sore displeased. But nevertheless, at the
Lords commandment, who bade him make them a King, he first declared to
them, the office and authority of a King, and than anointed Saul to be their
King and governor, whom he sent to Gilgal, commanding Saul to 1. Reg. 10. b.
tarry him there seven days, and then he would come 13. b. c. d.
and tell him what he should do. And on the seventh day when Samuel came to
Saul, and saw he had offered before he came, he asked him what he had done:
Mary (quoth Saul) when I saw the people begin to scatter from me, and that
thou taryedst so long, I offered burnt offerings, least the Philistines should
come upon me, before I had made my supplicasion unto the Lord. Now (said
Samuel) thou have played the fool. For if thou had hep to the Lords
commandment, he would have stablished thy Kingdom for ever: But now it
shall not continue. For the Lord has sought him out a man, after his own
heart, which shall rule the people, and so Samuel departed to his house at
Gibea. After this, when 15. cap.
Saul had broken the Lords commandment, in saving Agag King of the
Amalachites alive, and had made a sacrifice unto the Lord of their best sheep
and Cattle which he reserved: Samuel came, whereof the King was very glad,
and told him that he had fulfilled the Lords commandment: But what means
then (quoth Samuel) the bleting of the sheep and noise of Oxen that I hear?
There are (quoth he) the best sheep and Oxen that the people has spared to
sacrifice unto the Lord, but the reast have we destroyed. Then said Samuel:
Did not the Lord when thou were little in thine olvne eyes, make thee King over
Israel, and gave thee a charge, utterly to destroy those sinners the
Amalachites? And wherefore have thou obeyed the people and not the Lord? I
have (quoth he) done all that the Lord commanded me, and saved none but
Agag: Has the Lord (quoth Samuel) as great pleasure in burnt sacrifices and
offeringes, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is
better than sacrifice, and to harcken is better than the fat of Rams: for
rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and stubbornness is as the wickedness
of Idolatry: And because thou have cast away the word of the Lord, therefore
has the Lord cast away thee from being King. Then said Saul: I have sinned
and gone further than the saying of the Lord, therefore take away my sin,
(...) turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord. Nay (quoth Samuel) I
will not return with thee: for thou have cast away the Lord, and he has
cast away thee. And as Samuel was turning himself to have gone away, Saul
^aught him by the lap of his garment, and it rent: Then said Samuel: the Lord
has rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and given it to a
neighbor of thine, better than thy self: Nevertheless, through great
entreaty of Saul, Samuel went with him. And when they had worshipped the
Lord, Agag was brought to Samuel, who took and hewed him in pieces, and so
departed to Rama: where he mourned so long for Saul, till the Lord reproved
him for it, and sent him to Bethleem to annoint David. Which thing done, he
went home again to Rama, where he remained until he dyed. Samuel, bearde of
God.


2. Esd. 2. b.
Sanabalat, the Heronite, when he heard of the grant that Nehemias had
obtained of Art^^erses, for 6. cap.
the building of the Temple at Jerusalem, he was marvelously grieved
therewith, and sought by all means how to let the Jews of their purpose.
Sanabalat, A Busbe in a secret place, or in a privy corner.


Act. 5. b.
Saphira, the wife of Ananias, being of his Counsel in keeping away part of
the price of a possession which they had sold, came unto Peter about a three
hours after her husband (ignorant of that which was done) unto whom Peter
said: Tell me Saphira, sold ye the land for so much? yea, (quoth she) for
so much. Why have ye (quoth Peter) agreed together to tempt the spirit of the
Lord. Behold, the feet of them which have buried thy husband, are at the
door, and shall carye thee out. And with that she fell down and gave up the
ghost. And the Officers came and carried her out, and buried her beside her
husband. Saphira, telling, or numbering.


1. Reg. 9. cap.
Saul, the son of Cis of the Trybe of Benjamin, was a goodly tall young man:
who on a time as he was seeking his fathers Asses, and could not find them,
happened (by the provision of God) to go and seek but Samuel, to wit of him,
some tydinges of his Asses. And as he was going toward the City, it was told
him of a great offering that should be there, and how the people waited for
Samuels coming to bless the same. And when Saul was come into the midst of
the City, he met Samuel coming against him, going up to the hill. And as
Samuel beheld Saul, the Lord said unto him: this is the man which I told
thee yesterdaye, I would send this day unto thee, to be King of Israel. Then
Samuel took him up with him to the hill, and set him in the chiefest seat
among his guestes, and made him eat with them. And the feast being done, he
went and anointed Saul King, and told him what he should 1. Reg. 10. ca.
do after his departure from him. And going from Samuel, the Lord gave him
another manner of heart than he had before. So that he prophesied among the
Prophets, and was so greatly honored of all men, that after he had delivered
the City of Iabes out of the hands 1^. cap.
of Nahas King of the Ammonites, the people renewed his kingdom, which God
would have stablished for ever, if he had not disobeyed his commandment, in
taking upon him to offer burnt sacrifice before Samuel came, 15. cap.
and also to save Agag whom he was commanded to destroy. And for this his
disobedience, the Lord took his spirit from Saul, and gave it to David, and
gave unto Saul an evil spirit to vex him withal. Then Saul 16. c.
seeing the spirit of the Lord departed from him, and gone to David, he sought
by all means to destroy him, but never could come to his purpose. Finally,
Saul being 28. cap.
sore cumbred with the Philistynes, he went to an Enchaunter (notwithstanding
he had expelled all of that Art before) to raise him up Samuel, who being
raised up, told him, that for as much as he had disobeyed the Lord, and not
executed his fierce wrath upon the Amalachytes, therefore had God forsaken
him, and rent his Kingdom out of his hand, and given it to David. And
moreover (says he to Saul) the Lord will deliver the Israelites into the
hands of the Philistines, and tomorrow shall thou and thy Sons be with me.
31. cap.
And on the next day, Saul (being overcome of the Philistynes, and his three
Sons slain) for anguishe of heart, fell upon his own sword, and killed
himself, after he had reigned forty years. Saul, Required, or commended.


Genesis 11. d.
Sara, the daughter of Aram, was Abraham's wife. And perceiving that the Lord
had restrained her from bearing of children, she gave Abraham leave to take
Agar 16. cap.
her Maiden to wife. But when she saw her self despised of her maid (which
had conceived) she began to be so sharp and quick with Agar (that she made
her run away. Nevertheless, at the humble submission of Agar, Sara received
her again. Then Sara passing forth, till she came to the age of four score
and ten years, it chanced she heard the Aungel of the Lord (as she stood in
her Tent) say unto Abraham, that Sara his wife should 18. a. b.
have a child, which words seemed so impossible unto her, that she laughed
within her self and said: Is it of a surety that I shall bear a son? Shall
I now give my self to lust being old, and my Lord old also? And when she had
talked thus to her self, the Angel of the Lord demanded of Abraham,
wherefore his wife did laugh, as though it were (quoth he) to hard a thing for
God to perform his promise. Then she being asked the question, denied it (for
she was afraid) saying, that she laughed not. And so Sara judging him
faithful which had promised, 21. a. b.
brought forth a son at the time appointed of God, and called his name Isaac.
And when the Child was borne she said: God has made me a laughing stock,
for all that hear, will laugh at me: Who would have said to Abraham, that
Sara should have given Children suck, for I have borne him a son, in his
old age. After this, when Sara perceived Ismael the son of Agar (as he
played with Isaac) to be a mocker, she said unto Abraham put away this bond
maid and her son, for the son of this bond woman shall not be eyer with
my son Isaac. Finally, when Sara had lived one hundred 23. cap.
and seven an twenty years, she dyed, in Kiriat Arba. Which is also called
Hebron. And was buried in the double Cave, which Abraham had bought of the
sons of Heth.

Tob. 3. b.
Sara, the daughter of Raguel had seven husbands one after an other, which
men, before they had lain with her, were all slain of the Devil Asmodius, to
the great discomfort and heaviness of the young woman. And yet the more to
aggreuate her sorrow, her fathers Maidens (when she did correct them for their
faults) would slander her on this wise, saying: God let us never see son
nor daughter of thee more upon earth, thou kyller of thy husbands, will thou
kill us also as thou have done them? Which words were so gricuous to Sara,
that she got her up to an high chamber of her house, where she continued three
days and three nights in prayer, beseeching God that he would vouchsafe to
lowse her out of that rebuke, or else to take her out of y^ earth. For thou
know (O Lord) that I never had desire unto man, and that I have kept my
soul clean, from all vncleanlye lust: I have not kept company, with those
that pass there time in sport, neither have I made my self partaker with
them that walk in light behavior: nevertheless, an husband have I consented
to take, not for my pleasure, but in thy fear. Now peradventure, either I have
been unworthy of them, or else were they unmeet for me: for thou happily,
have kept me for an other husband. And thus making her prayers to God, he
heard her and sent young Toby to be her husband, who being joined together in
Matrimony, lived all their days an holy life, in the fear and laws of God.

2. Reg. 20. ca.
Seba, the son of Bichri (as soon as David was restored to his Kingdom
again) begun a new insurrection, and got all Israel to follow him, save
only the men of Judah which stacke fast by David: and as he came into the
City of Abell (to the which Ioab followed him) the Gouernesse of the city
(being a woman of wisdom) smote off the head of Seba, and threw it over the
Wall to Ioab, and so the commocion ceased. Seba, vanity, or little accounted
of, or uproar.


Act. 19. c.
Sceua, was a Jew borne, and the chief Priest among the Jews. This man had
seven sons, who for lucre sake, and to purchase unto themselves a great name
thereby, attempted to cast out evil spirits by invocation of the name of the
Lord Jesus, as Paul did, saying unto the man possessed, we conjure you in the
name of Jesus whom Paul preaches, that ye depart out of the man: To whom the
spirit answered and said: Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye?
and as soon as he had spoken these words, the man in whom the evil spirit
was, ran upon them, and got the over hand on them. In so much that they had
much a do to escape with their lives, and scarce got at the last naked and
wounded out of the house. And this example of the sons of Sceua being bruted
abroad among the Jews and Gentiles, many (which believed) came to Paul and
confessed their offenses. And beside that, diverse other which had used such
curious crafts of Coniurasions, brought their books and burned them before
all men, the price whereof were counted at fifty thousand A (...) erling was
in value about a grote sterling, or more.
Siluerlinges.

Genesis 38. b.
Sela, the yoongest son of Judah, being grown to perfect age, and not given
to Thamar in marriage according to his Fathers promise, was the occasion of
Thamars playing the myswoman with Judah her Father in law. Sela, dissoluing.


Genesis 11. b.
Sela, the son of Arphaxad (of the generation of Sem) was the Father of Eber,
whom he begot when he was thirty years of age, and lived after the birth of
Eber four hundred and three years. Which make in the whole four hundred
and.xxxiij. years.

Genesis 9. b. 11. c
Sem, the eldest Son of Noe, received praise of his Father because he covered
his nakedness as he lay He is called also Melchisodech. And did first build
the City of Salem, which after was called Jerusalem.
uncovered in his Tent. Sem, at the age of an hundred years, begot Arphaxat
(two years after the flood) and lived after five hundred years.

Semei, the son of 2. Reg. 16. b. c.
Gera (of the kindred and house of Saul) dwelt in a City called Bahurim. And
as it chanced David to flee thither for fear of his son Absalom, this man
came out against him cursing and railing out of measure, with such spiteful
words as these: Come forth, come forth, thou bloudshedder, and man of
Belial: The Lord has brought upon thee now all the blood of the house of
Saul, in whose stead thou have raygned. The Lord has delivered the
Kingdom, in to the hand of Absalom thy son. And behold thou art come to
thy mischief, because thou art a murderer. And in all this, would David
suffer no man to do him harm. So that Semei went on still, cursing and
railing, and hurling of stones and dyrte at David like a mad man, but when the
time came that David should be restored to his Kingdom again, then Semei
(that in his adversity was his most cruel enemy) was n^we in his prosperity
one of the first that met him to bring him whom again: And being passed
over Iordane, he fell down flat before David, saying: Oh let not my Lord the
patriarch Simeon stands in armor with a sword and shield, over the dead bodies
of a man, woman and child..2.
Ense meo cecidere uiri dum uindico stupru^.
Germanae, fracto federe quod pepig^
Hinc pater iratus Sijmeoni dira precatus.
Nostraque posteritas heu masedicta fuit
impute wickedness unto me, nor remember the thing that thy servant did
wickedly, when my Lord the King departed out of Jerusalem, that the king should
take it to heart, for thy servant does know, how that I have done amiss: And
therefore, behold, I am the first this day Here he says, he was of the house
of Joseph, and before he says, he was of the house of Saul. Of the fathers
side (says Lyra) he was of the house of Joseph, that is to say, of the tribe
of Ephraim: but of y^ mothers side he was of the house of Saul.
of all the house of Joseph, that am come to go down to meet my Lord the
King. So David forgave him, but when y^ time of David's departure out of this
world drue nigh, among all things which he spoke to Solomon his son, he
remembered Semei, saying: Behold, thou have here with thee Semei, the son of
Gera, the son of Gemini of Bahurim, which cursed me with an horrible curse,
in the day when I went to Mahanaim, but he came to me at Iordane, and I
swear unto him by the Lord that he should not dye. But thou shall not count
him as vnguiltie, for thou art a man of wisdom and know what thou
ought to do unto him. His hoar head shall thou bring to the grave with
blood. And so Solomon being set in his Kingdom called Semei and said: Build
thee an house in Jerusalem and dwell there. And see thou pass not from thence
any whither, for be thou sure, that the day thou go out, and passest over
the river of Cedron, thou shall dye, and thy blood shall be upon thine own
head. Semei thanked the King, and dwelt in Jerusalem the space of three
years, and then it chanced two of his servant to run from him to Achis
King of Geth, whereupon Semei sadled his Ass, and went for his servant, and
brought them home again. Then Solomon hearing of his doings commanded
Banaiahu, to put him to death, for the wickedness he had done to his Father
David. Semei, bearing, or obedient.


4. Reg. 18. c.
Sennacherib, King of Assiria was a mighty prince, which seeing that
Salmanasar his predycessour had conquered the King of Israel and made them
Tributaries, thought it good to set upon the King of Judah, who at that time was
the godly and most noble Ezechias. And when Sennacherib had gotten into his
hands, all the chief Cities of Judah and Benjamin, save only Jerusalem, he
besieged that also, with such might and power, that Ezechias was feign to
submit himself to the mercy of Sennacherib, offering him tribute, so much as
he would demand. Upon which offer, Sennacherib promised Ezechias, that if he
would pay him three hundredth talents of silver, and one of gold, his land
should be safe and in quiet, which promise he kept truly till the money were
paid. But as soon as he had received the money, he sent back again three of
the greatest Captains he had, to make fresh war against Ezechias. And when
they had pitched their tents about Jerusalem, they sent for Ezechias, to come
and speak with them, who fearing his own life, sent three of his Noble men
unto them to know the matter. And when they had heard all the blasphemous
words of Rabsak, they returned and told 4. Reg. 19. ca.
them to Ezechias. Who hearing those evil news, rent his clothes, and put on
sackcloth, and fell prostrate upon his face, and prayed unto the Lord to help
him, and to have mercy upon his people, and beside that, he sent to Esaias the
Prophet, desiring him to pray unto the Lord for them: whose prayer the Lord
heard, and bade him go tell Ezechias, that the blasphemous railing of Rabsak
should turn to his great shame, for he should go home again without
victory, and never a stroke stricken. And so almighty God sent his Angel,
which plagued the whole army of the Assirians with such a pestilence, that in
one night there dyed. 185. thousand. At the which sudden death, Rabsak and
all his host that were left, ran away. And then, Sennacherib got him to
Niniue, where at the last, being in the Temple, worshipping his God Nisroch,
his own sons sieve him. Sennacherib, the bushe of destruction.


Nu. 21. e. f. g.
Seon, was King of the Ammorites, whose land bordered so upon the land of
Canaan, that Moses could not pass from the desert of Cades to Canaan, but he
must needs go through it, wherefore Moses sent messengers to King Seon,
beseeching him of license to pass through his land by the Kings hye way, and he
would neither hurt his fields nor vineyards, neither yet take so much as one
drop of water for him and his cattle to drink, but he would pay for it. Which
reasonable request, Seon refused. And thinking to have overcome Moses and all
his people (because they were strangers sore labored and wearyed and knew
not the coast of his Country, neither the shifts of the Realm) he made out
two great Armies against Moses: Who hearing thereof was so afraid that he asked
counsel of God what he should do: And God bade him not fear, but fight
manfullye and bodily with them, for the victory should be his. And so was
Seon with all his power and policy overthrown. Seon: a rooting out, or
treading under foot.


Exodus 1. ^.
Sephora, and Phua, were two of the Chiefest Mydwyues in all Egypt, unto whom
King Pharao gave a commandment, that when so ever they did execute their
office among the women of the Hebrews, and saw in the birth a man Child, to
kill it. But they, (fearing God more than man) brake his commandment, and
saved all the men children, laying for their excuse unto the King, that the
women of the Hebrews were not as the women of Egypt, but so strong and sturdy
women that they were delivered before the Mydwyues came. And for this deed,
God dealt mercyfully with the Wydowes, because they feared him, and made them to
prosper. Sephora, Fair. Look, Zephora.


Act. 13. b.
Sergius Paulus, the Lieutenaunt or Lord Deputy of Cypres, was a prudent man,
who nevertheless had been sore seduced by one Beriesu the great sorcerer. And
now, hearing the Gospel to be sown thoroweout all the Country by Paul and
Barnabas, was desirous to hear it, whereupon he sent for them: By whose
preaching and great miracles that they did before him, he was at the last
turned to the faith of Christ.

Genesis 4. d. 5. a.
Seth, was the third son of Adam, and gave himself all to virtue and
godliness. His Father was at the age of an hundred and thirty years before he
begot Seth. Seth was an hundred and five years old, before he begot Enos. He
lived after the birth of Enos eight hundred and seven years. So that all the
days of Seth, were nine hundred and twelve years. Seth, set, or put.


Sesac, look Sisach.

Genesis 34. cap.
Sichem, the son of Hemor the Heuyte, ravished Dina the daughter of Jacob.
For the which deed, Symeon and Leuy (the brothers of Dina) sigue both Sichem,
and his father Hemor with many mo.

Dan. 3. cap.
Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, were three of Daniels companions, and of the
Children of Judah. Which three young men Nebuchodonosor (at Daniels
intercession) made Rulers over all the Officers in the land of Babylon. And
because they would not fall down to the Kings golden Image which he had made
and set up to be woorshipped, they were accused to the King, as transgressors
of his commandment. And being brought before the King, he straighly charged
them, to be ready the next day when they heard the noise of Trompettes and
other Instruments of Music, to fall down and woorship his Image as other
did, or else they should be cast into the whote burning Oven, and then let see
(quoth he) what god is able to deliver you out of my hands. They answered
and said: Oh Nabuchodonosor, we ought not to consent to thee in this matter?
For why: our God whom we serve is able to keep us from the whote burning
Oven, (O King) and can right well deliver us out of thy hands: And though he
will not, yet shall thou know (O King) that we will not serve thy gods, nor
do reverence to that Image which thou have set up. The King hearing this, was
so full of indignacio^, that he caused the strongest men that were in all his
host, to bind them hand and foot, and cast them into the Oven, which Oven was
made so exceeding hot, that the flame of the fire destroyed those men that cast
them in. And as the King looked into the Oven after the men, he saw four
walking at liberty in the midst of the Oven, and the fourth man was like
unto the son of God to look upon. And being sore astonyed thereat, he went
to the Ouens mouth and said: O ye servants of God, come out of the Oven.
And when they were come forth, it could not be perceived, neither by the
heaire of their heads, neither yet by the smell of their garments, that ever
any fire had touched them. And so the King praised the God of Sidrach, Misach
and Abednago, and promoted them to honor.

Act. 15. d. g.
Silas, was a certain Disciple sent with Paul and Barnabas and other chosen
brethren, to Antioche to pacify the variaunce, which was there happened about
circumcision. And after the falling out of Paul and Barnabas about John Mark:
Silas became Paul's companion, 16. d. e. f.
and labor fellow in the Gospel a great while, and was in bonds with him at
Philippos, where they converted the Iayler and all the Prisoners, and were
delivered as Romans. From thence they departed to 17. a. d.
Thessalonica, where the Jews set the City in such a rore against them that
Paul was feign to fly to Atthens, leaving Silas behind him, with a precept,
to make 18. a.
speed after him, who came to Paul at Corinth.

Genesis 30. b.
Silpha, was hand maid or servant to Lea, who being given (by her mystresse
consent) to Jacob to wife, brought him forth two sons, Gad and Aser.
Silpha, a Rheum or distillacion at the mouth, or vileness.


2 Cor. 1. d.
Siluanus, was a great setter forth of the Gospel with Paul and Timotheus,
as is mentioned in the first and second epistle to the Thessalonians first
Chapters.

Luc. 2. c. f.
Simeon, was a blessed old man dwelling in Jerusalem, which longed sore for
the coming of Messiah. And where as he had prayed unto God, to give him the
gift, that he might but once see him with his bodyly eyes before he departed
out of this world, he received an answer of the holy Ghost, that he should
not see death until he had seen Christ with his fleshly eyes (which he had
seen many aday before with the eyes of his faith.) And when the time came that
the Child Jesus should be brought into the Temple by his parents, Symeon by
the inspiracion of the holy Ghost, came into the Temple a little before them,
and when he had seen all things done by the Priest according to the law, he
(of a godly zeal) took the Babe in his arms also and said: Lord, now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy promise: For mine
eyes has seen thy saluasion which thou has prepared before the face of all
people. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. And
when he had blessed the Babe, he said to Mary the childs mother: Behold this
child is set to be the fall and vprising again of many in Israel, and for a
sign which is spoken against. And moreover, the swoorde shall pierce thy
soul, that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened. Simeon, hearing, or a
perfect hearing.


1. Mac. 2. a.
Simon, the second son of Mathathias, was a man of great wisdom, and the
high Priest among the Jews. He helped much his brother Judas and Ionathas ^. c.
in the wars, and after the death of Judas, he discomfited Bachides, and was
made Captain over the Jews 9. g.
after the apprehension of Ionathas, and overcame Antiochus. 13. b.
But in the end, he was of Ptolomy his son 16. c.
in law most traitorously murdered.

2. Mac. 3. a.
Simon, of the Tribe of Benjamin, being a Ruler of the Temple what time as
Onias was the high Priest, went about to work much mischief in the City of
Jerusalem. And when he saw that he could not overcome Onias and the other
Priests that resisted him, he got him to Appolonius, which then was Governor
of Celosiria and Phineces and told him that the Treasurye in Jerusalem was
full of innumerable money, which did not belong to the provision of the
sacrifice, and that it were possible that these things might come to the Kings
hands: But when this bewrayer of the money and of his 4. ^.
own natural Country saw the great plague that fell on Heliodorus, (which
was sent for the money) and that his cursed devise could take no place, then
he fell to railing and slaundering of Onias, reporting of him, that he had
moved Heliodorus to that malicious enterprice, yea: so much increased his
malice against the godly man Onias, that he could not speak well of him.
Wherefore Onias (the malice of Simon compelling him thereunto) complained on
Simon to Seleucus the King, to have him reformed.

Math. 27. ^.
Simon, of Ceren, the Father of Alexander and Rufus, was compelled to bear
Christ's Cross when he went to his passion. It was the custom to make him
that was condemned, to carye his Cross: And forasmuch as Jesus was not able
to do it for weakness, they took Simon as he came out of the field, and
made him to bear it after Jesus.

Luke 7. g.
Simon, a certain Pharisey, invited Jesus to his Table. And Jesus sitting at
meat with him, there came in a certain woman with an Alabaster bore of
ointment, who stood behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with
tears, and to wype them with the hears of her head. That done, she kissed
them, and anointed them with her sweet ointment. Then Simon which had well
marked all her doings, spoke within himself, saying: if this man were a
Prophet, he would surely have known, who and what manner of woman this is
which touches him, for she is a sinner: To whose thought Jesus answered, and
said: Simon I have somewhat to say unto thee: say on Master (quoth he.)
There was a certain lender which had two detters, the one ought five hundred
pence, and the other fifty: And when they had nothing to pay, he forgave them
both, which of them therefore, tell me, will love him most? Simon said: I
suppose that he will love him best, to whom he forgave most: Thou have truly
said (quoth he.) Then Jesus turning unto the woman, said to Simon: feast thou
this woman, I entered into thine house, and thou gave me no water to my
feet, but she has washed my feet with tears, and wyped them with the hear
of her head: thou gave me no kiss: but she since the time she came in, has
not ceased to kiss my feet. Mine head with oil thou did not anoint, but
she has anointed mine head with ointment. Wherefore I say unto thee, that
many sins are forgiven her, for she Love causes not remission of sins: but
remission of sins causes love.
loved much, to whom a little is forgiven, will love a little.

Act. 8. c. d.
Simon Magus, which had of a long time seduced the people of Samaria with his
sorcery and witchcraft, was had in so great estimation among the multitude,
even from the highest to the lowest, that they counted him This Simo^ Magus, was
of so great estimation in Rome, that images were erected to him as a God.
Gods fellow, and to work all things by his power: so much were they given to
follow the illusions of Satan, more than the truth of God. But when Simon had
heard the preaching of Philip, and seen his miracles, and the number of people
converted to the faith of Christ, he was forced himself also (by the majesty
of Gods word) to confess the truth. And so (to cover his hypocrisy)
dissembled to believe, and was baptized, and continued with Philip. But after
this, when Peter and John were come from Jerusalem, and had laid their hands
on the people, by the which the holy Ghost was given: Simon (coveting to have
that gift as well as they) offered the Apostles money, to give him the power to
do the same: To whom Peter said: Thy money perish with thee, because thou
weenest that the gift of God may be obtained with money: thou have neither part
nor followshippe in this business, for thy heart is not right in the sight of
God: Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God that the thoughts
of thine heart may be forgyuen thee, for I perceive that thou art full of
bitter gall, and wrapped in iniquity: Then said Simon, pray ye unto the Lord
for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken, fall on me. And so they
left him full of malice and deuilish poison, tied in the bonds of Satan.

Of Simon the son of Onias, whose praise is set out. Eccle. 50.

Simon, one of Christ's kinsemen. Math. 13. g.

Simon the Tanner, with whom saint Peter hosted many a day. Act. 9. g. 10. a.

Simon, surnamed Niger, which was one of the Prophets and teachers, in the
Congregation at Antioche. Act. 13. a.

Simon the Cananite, surnamed Zelotes, and one of the twelve. Math. 10. a.
Luke. 6. c.

Philip. 4. 2.
Sintiches, was a certain Christian brother, to whom Paul sent salutacions
from Rome, exhorting him and Euodias to be of one accord in the Lord.

3. Esd. 6. cap.
Sisennes, the under shirife in Siria and Phenices, with other head Rulers
there, went to Zorobabel and his Companions the Jews (which were come by
Darius license, to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem again) and
demanded who had given them such commandment. And when they saw the Jews
would not cease, then he (with others) sent their letters of complaint 7. 2.
to Darius the King to know his pleasure. And when they had received the Kings
answer, Sisennes with all the reast of the Rulers, obeyed the Kings
commandment, and helped the Jews with all diligence to build the sanctuaire
again, and so the work went forth and prospered.

^. Reg. 14. g.
Sisach, King of Egypt came to Jerusalem in the fifth year of the reign of
Roboam, with twelve hundred Charets, and threescore thousand horsemen, and
people innumerable, and spoiled the Temple of the Lord, and the Kings house,
and took away all the treasure in both, with the shieldes of gold, which
Solomon had made, and so departed. Sisach, an empty, or a void sack, or
bag.


Iudic. 4. cap.
Sisera, was the general Captain of King Iabyns host. And trusting in the
great strength of his Chariots of iron (which were nine hundred) and power of
his men, he went against the children of Israel, thinking to have cuerrunne
them all. But God so wrought with the holy Prophetess Debora, and with Barach
her Captain, that they destroyed his Chariots with all his host. So that
Sisera himself was feign to fly on foot. And coming by the tent of Heber
(for there was peace between King Iabin and the house of Heber) he turned in.
And being sore a thirst, he desired Iael the wife of Heber to give him some
drink: and she brought a bottell of milk, and gave it him to drink, and when
he had drunk, and was laid down to take his rest, he said to Iael: Go (I
pray thee) and stand in the Tent door: And when any does come to enquire of
thee, if there be any man here, say nay. And so thinking he had been safe
enough, took his rest, and fell a sleep. Then Iael with a nail which she
drove into his head, slew him. Sisera, be that sees a Swallowe.


2. Reg. 17. g.
Soby, the son of Nahas out of Rabba the City of the children of Ammon, and
Machir the son of Ammiel out of Lodebar, and Berzelai the Gileadite out of
Rogel, what time as David lay with his people in the wilderness of Mahanaim,
hungrye, wearye, and thirstye, brought unto him, bedding, Wheat, Barley, with
all other necessaries, to ease and refreshe David and his men, in that time of
adversity.

Act. 18. ^.
Sostenes, of whom saint Paul makes mention in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians first Chapter, was the chief Ruler of the sinagoge in the City of
Achaia, against whom the Greeks had such indignation, for taking Paul's part
against the Jews, that they fell upon him; before the Judges feet (where
Gallio the Lord Deputy sat) and smote him: And Gallio not passing thereof,
let them alone, and would not meddle luyth the matter.

Romans 16. b.
Stachis, to whom Paul (in his letter of commendations, sends greeting,
saying: salute Urban our helper in Christ, and Stachis my beloved.

1. Cor. 16. ^.
Stephana, was a faithful lover of Christ and his doctrine, in whose
commendation, Paul to the Corinthians writes thus: Brethren ye know the
house of Stephana, and of Fortunatus and Achaicus: how that they are the first
fruits of Achaia: And that they have appointed themselves to mynister unto the
saints: I beseech you that ye be obedient unto such, and to all that help and
labor. I am glad of the coming of Stephana, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus: for
that which was lacking unto me on your part, they have supplied. For they have
comforted my spirit and yours: Look therefore that ye know them that are
such.

Act. 6. cap.
Steven, a man full of faith, and of the holy ghost, was one of the seven
Deacons chosen in the congregation, to make provision for the poor, which did
great woonders and miracles among the people. Against whom arose certain of
the Sinagoge, which were called Libertines, Cirenites, and of Alexandria,
Cilisia, and Asia, which disputed with him. And when they could not resist his
wisdom, and the spirit of God wherewith he spoke, they accused him of
blasphemy against God and Moses, and brought him before the Counsel with
their false witnesses ready, which said: we heard this fellow speak
blasphemous words against this holy place and Law, saying that Jesus of
Nazareth should destroy this place, and change the ordinances which Moses
gave us. And all the Counsel looked steadfastly upon him, and saw his face,
as it had been the face of an Angel. Then Steven (for as much as he was
accused to V. cap.
be a denyer of God) made an earnest answer unto his accusation, in the end
whereof, the Counsel waxed so angry against him, that their hearts claue a
sunder, and gnashed on him with their teeth. But he (being full of the holy
ghost) looked steadfastly up with his eyes into heaven, and saw the glory of
God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and said: Behold, I see
heaven open, and the son of man standing on the r^ght hand of God, with the
which, the people gave a great shoute, and stopped their ears, and ran upon
him all at once, and carried him out of the City to put him to death. And as
they stoned him, he said: Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And kneeling down,
cried with a loud voice: Lord lay not this sin unto their charge: And so
fell a sleep in the Lord.

Dan. 13. cap.
Susanna, the daughter of Helchia, was a very fair woman, given to all virtue
and godliness. Her husbands name was Ioachim, a man of great reputacion among
the Jews. In the first year that Susanna was married, there were two Judges
made which resorted much to Ioachyms house, and all such as had any thing to
do in the law, came thither unto them. These two Judges (being wicked men)
were so wounded with the love of Susanna, and burned so in lust with her, that
they could not tell what to do: But neither durst tell the other his grief
nor yet (for shame) utter their inordinate lust unto her. And so on a day,
when they had sit long in Ioachyms h^use about matters of the law, and waited
for to have their purpose on Susanna, and could not, they brake up and went
home to dinner. And at their return again togithers, the one brake to the
other their whole minds, and appointed a time, when they might take her alone.
And when they had spyed out a convenient time, that Susanna went into the
Garpen (as her manner was) with two of her Maidens only, to wash her self,
these two hid themselves in the Garden against her coming. And as soon as
the Maidens had shut the Drcharde doors, and were gone for Oil and Soap for
their Mystresse, the two Elders came upon Susanna and said: The Garden
doors be now shut that no man can see us, and we burn in lust toward thee,
therefore consent, and lie with us, if thou will not, we will bear witness
against thee that a young man was in the Drchard with thee, and therefore thou
sen^t away thy Maidens. Then Susanna sighed and said: If I do follow your
minds, it will be my death: and if I consent not unto you I cannot escape your
hands. It is better for me to fall into your hands without the deed doing,
than to sin in the sight of the Lord, and with that cried out with a loud
voice, and the Elders cried out against her, which clamor on both parties was
so great, that it was heard among the Servants without, which ran to the
Orcharde door and burst it open, to see what the matter was: And when the
servant, had heard the Elders report of Susanna, they were greatly ashamed,
for there was never such a report made of Susanna before. And so on the next
morrow, the two Elders (full of mischievous imaginacions) declared the matter
to Ioachym her husband to bring her to death. And when she was come with her
father and mother, her Children and all her kin, to be judged according to
the law, she stood before the two wicked Judges with her face covered, who
commanded to take the cloth from her face, that at the least, they might be
satisfied with her beauty, which thing being done: The Judges stood up and
laid their hands upon the head of Susanna, saying: As we were walking in the
Orcharde alone, this woman came in with her two Maidens, whom she sent away
from her, making fast the Orcharde door after them. Then starte their up a
young fellow which lay hid in the Garden, and went unto her and lay with
her. Then we which stood in a corner seeing this wickedness, ^anne unto them,
and saw them as they were together, but we could not hold the fellow, for he
was stronger than we, and got open the door and leaped out: And when we
demanded of her what fellow it was, she would not tell us: This is the
matter, and we be witness of the same. Then Susanna cried out and said: O
everlasting God, thou searcher of hearts, thou that know all things before
they come* to pass* thou wotest that they have borne false witness against
me: And behold, I must dye, whereas I never intended any such thing, as
these men have maliciously ymagined against me. And as she was led toward
the place of execution, the Lord of Heaven which heard her prayer, raised up
the spirit of a little Child called Daniel, who cried with a loud voice*
saying: I am clean from the blood of this woman. And when the people heard
that, they stayed to know of the Child what he meant by his words. O ye
Children of Israel (said he) are ye such fools, that without examinacion and
knowledge of the truth, ye have condemned a daughter of Israel, return again
to judgment for they have borne false witness against her. Then the people
went back again, and the Elders took Daniel, and set him among them in
judgment. Who, when he had commanded the two false witnesses to be severed
that he might examine them, he called the one before him and said: O thou that
art old in a wicked life, now thy sin^es which thou have committed before
time, are come to light: Tell me under what Tree thou saw this woman and
the young fellow together, he said, under a Mulbery Tree. Now verily (quoth
Daniel) thou have lied, and art worthy of death, in that thou have oppressed
the innocent, and letten the guilty go free, contrary to the words of the
Lord, which says: The innocent and righteous, see thou slay not. Then he
called the other and said: O thou seed of Canaan, but not of Judah. Beauty
has disceyued thee, and lust has subverted thine heart: Thus have ye dealt
with the daughters of Israel, and they (for fear) consented unto you, but the
daughters of Judah would not abide your wickedness: Now tell me, under what
Tree, dyddest thou take them companying together? He answered, under a Pyne
Tree. Now verily said Daniel, thou have lied also against thine head. The
messenger of the Lord stands waiting with the swoorde to cut thee in two,
and so to destroy you both. And with that the whole assembly cried with a
loud voice, and praised God, which so myraculously had preserved Susanna that
day. And so fell upon the two wicked Judges, and according to the law of
Moses, put them both to death.

Susanna, one of those godly women which followed Christ and his Apostles,
relieuing them with her substance, as much as lay in her power.

T.
TAddeus, was one of the twelve Apostles. Taddeus, Math. 10.
praising, or Confessing.


Act. 24. a.
Tartullus, was a certain Dratour, the which Ananias the hye Priest had
brought with him, to inform Felix the ruler against Paul. And when Paul was
brought forth. Tartullus began to accuse him, saying: Seeing that we live in
great quietness by the means of thee, and that many good things are done
unto this nation, through thy providence, that we ever allow and in all places
most mighty Felix with all thanks. Notwithstanding that I be not tedyous unto
thee, I pray thee that thou would hear us of thy courtesy, a few words:
For we have found this man, a Pestilent fellow, and a moouer of debate unto
all the Jews thoroweout the World, and a maintayner of the sect of the
Nazarites: And has also enforced to pollute the Temple, whom we took and
would have judged according to our law: But the high captain Lysias came upon
us, and with great violence, took him away out of our hands, commanding his
accusers to come unto thee. Of whom thou may (if thou will inquyre) know
the certaynetie of all these things, whereof we accuse him. Tartullus: a
sals^reporter, or a teller of tales, a liar.


Genesis 11. d.
Terah, was the son of Nahor, the Son of Serug. He, at the age of seventy
years, begot Abraham, but he had before by an other wife, Nahor and Haran. All
the days that Terah lived were two hundred and five year. Terah, Smelling.
Look in the story of Abraham.


Romans 16. d.
Tercius, was the name of him that wrote the Epistle of S. Paul to the
Romans, while Paul endited it, saying on this wise: I Tercius salute you,
which wrote this Epistle in the Lord. Tercius, a Latin word.


2. Reg. 13. a. b. c. d.
Thamar, the daughter of David was so bewtiefull a young woman that Ammon her
brother fell sick for her love. And when she had visited Ammon (at her Fathers
commandment) and dressed him certain meat and brought it into his Chamber, he
began to force her to lie with him. Then she seeing that, said: Nay my
brother do not force me, for no such thing ought to be done in Israel, commit
not this folly. For whither shall I be able to go with my shame: And thou shall
be as one of the fools in Israel: Now therefore I pray thee speak unto the
King, and he will not deny me unto thee. Nowbeit, Ammon would not hearcken
unto her voice, but being stronger than she, forced Thamar and lay with her.
And than was his hatred so great against her, that he thrust her from him, and
bade her get her out of his sight: Well (said Thamar) Thou have no cause thus
to entreat me, for this evil, that thou put me away, is greater than
that thou dyddest unto me. Nevertheless, there was no remedy, but out of his
house she must go. And when his servant had put her forth, and made fast the
doors after her, she put ashes upon her head, and rent her gay kyrtle (which
was of diverse colors, and the manner of apparel that Kings daughters, such as
were Virgins did use to wear) and so went crying home to her brother Absaloms
house, where she remained desolate. Thamar, a ^almeir^e.


Thamar, which was daughter in Law to Judah, the son of Jacob. Read her
story, in the story of Judah*

Thamar the daughter of Absalom. 2. Reg. 14. g.

Act. 5. g.
Theudas, was an Inchaunter, and false deceyuer, who by boasting himself to
the people, and promising of prodigious things, drew unto him a great company
of men, to the number of four hundred. Whose wicked enterprise (for as much as
it proceeded of a malicious stomach) came to an unthrifty end. For both he
himself suffered pains of death and his partakers, some slain and some taken
prisoners. And so the reast being scattered abroad, the sect came to naught.

4. Reg. 16. b.
Thiglath, Peleser, King of Assiria, who had received of Ahaz King of Judah a
great sum of treasure to come and help him against Rezin King of Siria, came
to Damasco and took the City, and slew Rezin the King there: And carried the
people away to Kyr.

2. Reg. 8. c.
Thoi, King of Hamath had a great enemy of Hadarezar King of Zoba. And when he
heard how David had overcome and beaten him, he sent his son Ioram to David,
with vessels of Gold, silver and brass, for a present, and to salute him with
peace, and to give him thanks, for that he had fought with his ancient enemy,
and so valyauntly overcome him.

Iudic. 10. a.
Thola, the son of Phua of the generation of Isachar dwelling in Samir in
Mount Ephraim, succeeded his uncle Abimelech and judged Israel three and
twenty years, and was buried in Samir. And after him rose Iair. Thola, a
Worm.


Math. 10. ^.
Thomas, otherwise called Didimus (which signifies in English doubtful) was
one of the twelve Apostles of Christ. Who (what time as the Disciples diswaded
Jesus from going into Iewrye again, forasmuch as the Jews had lately sought
to stone him) said: Let John. 11. c.
us go also, that we may dye with him. This Thomas 20. f. g.
doubting of the resurrection of Christ, said unto his fellows which told
him that they had seen the Lord: Except I see in his hands the print of the
nails and put my finger into the print (or place) of the nails, and put my
hand into his side, I will not believe. After eight days (Thomas being with
the Disciples) came Jesus again, and stood in the midst, saying: peace be
with you: and said to Thomas, put thy finger here and see my hands, and
thrust forth thy hand and put it into my side, and be not faythlesse but
faithful. Then Thomas conceyuing a full faith that it was the Lord, said:
Thou art my Lord and my God. Which confession Jesus did well accept and
embrace, but yet withal to reprove the hardness of his belief, he said
unto him: Thomas, because thou have seen me thou beleeuest: Blessed are they
that have not seen, and yet have believed. Thomas, A twin.


Luke 3. a.
Tiberius, was an Emperor, of whom saint Luke makes mention in his Gospel,
saying: That in the fiftene year of his raygne, the word of God came to John
Baptist in the Wilderness. Tiberius, A good sight or vision.


Act. 20. a.
Tichicus, was one of the Disciples, which went out of Asia, to Troas, where he
abode Paul's coming, who Ephe. 6. b.
sent him afterward to the Ephesians, and also to the Collossians with his
Epistles, to inform them in what Coll. 4. b.
case he stood in, and what he did in all things. Tichicus, casual, or
coming by chance.


1. Mac. 5. cap.
Timothy, was a certain Captain of the Ammonites, which was twice overcome
and put to flight of Machabeus, and at the third time so sore discomfited 8. e.
(through help of the five men which God made to appear 10. e. f. g.
on horseback, with brydels of Gold leading the Jews, and two of them
having Machabeus between them) that Timothyes host were so confounded with
blindness and so sore afraid, that they fell down and were slain of them,
twenty thousand and five hundred footmen, with six hundred horsemen, and he
himself feign to take the strong hold of Gazar, to the which Machabeus laid
siege four days, and could not win it. Wherefore they within (trusting to
the strength of the hold) fell to cursing and railing on the Jews with most
spiteful words, and made so great crakes and boast of their strength, that
on the fifth day, the Jews were so chafed in their minds, that with bold
courage they scaled the Walls, and set the Ports on fire, and brent those
crakers and blasphemers, and got the Castle which was two days in destroying,
where (at the last) they found Timothy (which was crept into a corner) and slew
him, with Cereas his brother, captain of the Castle. Read the story of
Dositheus. Timothy: the honor of God, or be that honors God.


Act. 16. a.
Timothy, was a certain godly Disciple, whose mother was a Jew, and his
father a Paynim. Of this man there went so good a report of his verteous living
among the brethren of Lystra and Iconium, that Paul was much desirous to have
him go forth with him in his journey, wherefore he took and circumcised him,
because of the Jews in those quarters, which knew his Father to be a Greek.
And so went Timothy forth with Phil. 2. c.
Paul, and (as he reports) even as a son with the Father, bestowed he his
labor with him upon the Gospel. He was a man of great study and
abstinence, through the which he fell oftentimes sick. And therefore Paul, to
measure his abstinence, exhorts him to 1. Tim. 5. d.
drink no longer water, but to use a little Wine.

Act. 19. b.
Tyrannus, was a certain schoolemayster in Asia, in whose school Paul
disputed daily by the space of two years. Tyrannus, Commanding, or a Prince,
a Tyrant.


2. Cor. 2. c.
Titus, was S. Paul's disciple, whom (for the excellent gifts that were in
him) Paul looued as if he had 7. a. 8. b. d.
been his own natural son. And made him the chief ouerseer (or as ye
would say Archbishop) of the Christian Tit. 1. a. b.
congregation in the noble I Will of Crete. And in every City within the I Will,
Titus ordained an ouerseer (which we call a Bishop) for the which cause, Paul
prescribed unto him, the true form of a Bishop or shepehearde of Christ's
flock. Titus, Honorable.


Tob. 1.
Toby, was a godly man of the Tribe and City of Nephtaly: And being brought
into great captivity, in the days of Salmanasar king of Assiria, yet would
he not forsake the way of truth, nor worship the golden Calves (as other did)
neither yet defyle himself with the Heathens meat, but always kept his heart
pure unto God. For the which, the Lord gave him such favor in the sight of
Salmanasar the King, that Toby had power to go where he would, and to do
whatsoever him list. Then Toby having this liberty, went about comforting all
those that were in prison, both with his goods and godly exhortacions. Such
was his daily exercise, to feed the hungrye, to cloth the naked, and to bury
the dead, with such like deeds of Charity. And when the time came that
Sennacherib (which hated the children of Israel) reigned in his fathers stead,
and in his wrath slew many of them. Toby buried their bodies, for the which the
King commanded to sley him, and to take away his goods, who nevertheless
(through friendship) escaped and fled. And after the Kings death, being
slain of his own sons within.xlv. days after, Toby returned, and was
restored to his goods again, and called his kindred and friends together, and
made a great feast. And sitting at the Table with his guestes, one told him
there lay an Israelite slain in the street, who then immediately lept from the
boorde, and went fasting to the dead corse, and brought him home to his house,
where he hid him privily until the Sun was down, and then buried him. For
the which deed his friends reproved him, because he had been in danger but
a little before, even for the like matter. But nevertheless, Tobias (fearing
God more than the King) would take the slain, and hyde them in his house, and
bnrie them at midnight. Insomuch that one time he was so weary with burying the
dead, that he got him home, and laid him down beside a wall for weariness,
where he fell on sleep: And so lying, there fell down upon his eyes, warm
dung out of a swalowes nest, which took away his sight, that he could not
see, against the which plague of blindness he never grudged, but remained
steadfast in the fear of God, giving him thanks as well for that, as other
gifts of health. And this temptacion God suffered to fall on Toby, for an
example of patience to all that should come after. Finally, of his great
patience, deed of charity, and other godly exhortacions, his book is full.
He lost his Tob. 14. a.
sight at the age of six and fifty years. And was restored at three score so
that he remained blind about a four year. And lived after he had received his
sight two and forty years, and so he dyed at the age of an hundred and two
years, and was honorably buried in the City of Niniue. Tobiah, the Lord is
good.


Tob. 5. cap.
Toby, the son of Toby, being brought up in the fear of God, followed the
vert uous steps of his father in all things. He was sent to the City of
Rages to one Gabelus for certain money which his father had lent him. And
(after many dangers by the way) was, by 6. a.
Gods provision, whose Angel was his guide, married 7. a.
there, to the daughter of Raguel whose name was Sara. And when he had tarried
with his father and mother in law, about a two weeks, he returned home with
much 8. d.
substance, to the great consolation and comfort of old Toby his Father, and
Anna his Mother. After whose 11. cap.
death (when he had remained at Niniue the space of two 14. d.
and forty years) he departed with his wife and seven sons to the City of
Rages, where he found his Fatheir and mother in law, both living in great
age, on whom he took the care until they died, and was heir to all there
goods. And when this Toby had lived.xcix. years, he dyed and was buried.
After whose death, his posterity continued in such an holy conversation of
life, that they were belooued and accepted both of God and man.

2. Esd. 2. a.
Toby, the Ammonite and son in law to Sechania, was one that conspired with
Sanabalat to hinder the buylding of Jerusalem. For when Sanabalat said in
derision of the Jews: What do these weak Jews? will they fortify
themselves? Will they sacrifice? Will they finish it in a day? Will they make
the stones whole again out of the heaps of dust, seeing they are burnt? Then
Toby which stood beside him said: Although 6. d.
they build, yet if a Fore go up, he shall even break down their stonye
Wall. This Toby wrought all the ways he could, both by letters and false
Prophets hired for money, to fear Esoras from the work, but could not
prevail.

Romans 16. b.
Triphena, and Triphosa, were certain godly women, to whom Saint Paul (for
their deligent labor in the Gospel) sends greetinges, saying: Salute
Triphena and Triphosa, which women labored in the Lord. Triphena: a fine,
nice, or delicate woman.


1. Mac. 11. e. cap.
Triphon, was a certain great man which took part with King Alexander against
King Ptolomy. And when Alexander was dead, Triphon found the means to get his
young son Antiochus out of the hands of Emascuel the Arabian (who had brought
him up) to reign in his Fathers streade. And when he had got the governance
of the young King, he conceived treason against him, which he thought could
never be well brought to pass, so long as Ionathas (whom the King had made
high Priest) was his friend, wherefore he sought to kill Ionathas, that he
might come the easyer by his wicked purpose. So Triphon went to a place called
Bethsan 12. c. cap.
at the which place Ionathas met him with forty thousand men. Then Triphon
perceiving the great host that Ionathas brought, was afraid, and thought it
not best to meddle with him at that time, but to use some policy how to
betraye him. And so commanding all his souldieurs to be as obedient to
Ionathas in all things, even as they would be unto himself, he received him
honorablye with great rewards. And being met togithers, Triphon said to
Ionathas: Why have thou caused this people to take such traueyle, seeing there
is no war between us? Therefore send them home again, and choose certain
men to wait upon thee, and come thou with me to Ptclomais for I will give it
thee, with other strong holds, for that is the only cause of my coming, and
so I must depart. Then Ionathas (believing Triphon) sent away his host, all
save a thousand, and so went with Triphon to Ptolomais. And as soon as
Ionathas and his men were entered the City, the gates were shut and Ionathas
put in ward, and all his men were 1. Mac. 13. a. b. c. d.
slain. After this, Triphon went into the land of Judah with a great host,
having Ionathas with him in ward. And when he had knowledge that Simon stood
up in the stead of his brother Ionathas, and that he would come against him,
he sent word to Simon, that where as he kept Ionathas his brother in ward, it
was but for money he ought in the Kings account, and other business he had in
hand. Therefore if he would send him an hundred Talents of Silver, and the
two sons of Ionathas to be their fathers surety, he would send him home
again: But Simon knew his dissembling heart well enough. Yet nevertheless
(least he should be a greater enemy to the people of Israel, and say an other
day, that because he sent him not the money and the children, therefore is
Ionathas dead) he sent him both the money and the Children. Then Triphon,
having the money and Children, kept Ionathas still, and shortly after put both
the Father and his children to death. Now Triphon to bring his long pretenced
purpose about, on a time as he walked abroad with the young King, he most
traitorously slew him, and possessed the Realm, and crowned himself King of
Asia, and did much hurt in the land. Finally, Triphon 15. b. cap.
was so behated of all men, that when Antiochus the son of Demetrius came
upon him, the most part of his own host forsook him and went to Antiochus,
who never left persecuting of Triphon, till he made him flee by ship, where
he was never seen more. Triphon, a delicate and fine man.


Act. 20. a.
Trophimus, was an Ephesian borne, who went with Tichicus out of Asia to Troas
to make all things ready against Paul's coming, and abode there till Paul
came, from thence they went with Paul to Jerusalem, where certain Jews which
were of Asia, moved the people against Paul, complaining of him, that he 21.
f. cap.
had brought Greeks with him to polute the Temple, because they saw Trophimus
with him in the City, whom they supposed Paul had brought into the Temple.

Gene. 4. c. d.
Tubal, was the son of Lamech by his wife Ada. And was the first that
invented the science of Music, by the strokes and noise of the hammers of his
brother Tubalcain which was a Smith, and the first finder out of Metal and
the woorking thereof. Iubal was his brother by father and mother, and Tubalcain
only by the Father, for Zilla was his mother. Tubal, borne, or brought, or
worldly. Tubalcain, Worldly possession.


V.
VAsthi, was a very fair woman, and wife to Ahasuerus (otherwise called
Artaxerses) King of Persia. And because she would not come to the King when he
sent for her, a law was devised and made by the seven Princes of Persia and
Medea: That forasmuch as it could not be chosen, but that this deed of Queen
Vasthi must needs come abroad into the ears of all women, both Princes and
other, and so despise their husbands, and say: Thus and thus did Vasthi to
Ahasuerus, by which occasion much dispitefulnesse and wrath should arise: The
King should therefore put her away and take an other, to the end that all
other women (great and small) should hold their husbands in more honor. And
so she was diuersed from the King, and Hester received in her place. Vasthi,
Drincking.


Urban, was a certain faithful Christian brother, to whom Paul sent
greetings, saying: Salute Urban our helper in Christ.

2. Reg. 11. cap.
Vrias, the Hethite, was a man always (for the most part) occupied in the
Kings wars with Ioab the Kings Captain general. This Vrias had a fair
woman to his wife called Bethsabe, whom King David (in his absence) had got
with child. And when the King had knowledge that the woman was conceived, he
sent for Vrias to come home. Who being come to the King, and had told him of
all things concerning Ioab and his men of war: The King bade him go home to
his house, and repose himself there a while with his wife. And so Vrias being
departed from the King, went not home to his wife, but lay without the Kings
gate, he and all his men that night. And when on the morrow, the King had
knowledge thereof he sent for Vrias, and demanded why he went not home. To
whom he said: The Arc of Israel and Judah dwell in Tents, and my Lord Ioab
and the servant of my Lord, abide in the open fields: shall I than go into
mine house to eat and drink, and lie with my wife? By thy life, and by the
life of thy soul, I will not do this thing. Then he was commanded to tarry a
day or two more, and the King wrote a letter to Ioab, the Tenor whereof was
this: That he should set Vrias in the fore front of the battle, where it was
most sharpest, to the intent he might be slain. And so Vrias departed from the
King, carrying his own death with him, and was soon dispatched out of his
life. Vrias, the light of the Lord.


4. Re. 16. c. d.
Vriah, was the hye Priest in the time of Ahaz King of Judah. And having the
pattern of an Altar sent unto him by the King from Damasco, to make him the
like against his coming home, Vriah consented to the Kings wicked mind, and
made the Altar, and did whatsoever the King would have him to do, without any
regard of the laws of God.

2. Reg. 6. 2. b.
Vza, and Ahio, were the sons of Abinadab, which waited upon the new Cart,
whereon the Ark of God, (which was taken out of their fathers house to be
carried to the house of Obeth) was laid. And forasmuch as Vza (of a good
intent) put forth his hand to stay the Arc when the Oxen stumbled, the
Lord smote him for his fault, that he dyed, even before the Arc.

Z.
Gene. 30. c.
ZAbulon, was the sixte son of Jacob and Lea. Of whom his father prophesied
before his death, saying: Zabulon shall dwell by the Sea side, and he 49. c.
shall be an haven for ships, his border shall be unto Zidon. Zabulon, a dwelling.


Luke. 1. cap.
Zachary, was a certain godly Priest in the days of Herod King of Iewrye,
which came of the course or family of Abia. And walked so perfectly in the
ordinances and laws of the Lord, that no man could justly complain on him.
But he had no child by his wife Elizabeth, for she was barren. And when his
course came to burn incense (evening and morning according to the law) he
went into the Temple. And as he was in prayer, an Angel appeared unto him,
saying: Fear not Zachary for thy prayer is heard: And thy wife Elizabeth
shall bear thee a son, and thou shall call his name John. etc. Whereby said
Zachary, shall I know this, for I am old, and my wife old also. I am Gabriel
(quoth the Angel) which am sent unto thee, to show thee these glad tydinges:
And behold, thou shall be dumme and not able to speak, until the day that
these things be performed. And so Zachary remained speachelesse until the time
came that his wife brought him forth a son. And when the child should be
circumcised, great controversy was there about his name. Some would have him
called Zachary, some by one name, some by an other, and his mother would have
him called John, but to that would none agree, because there was none of the
kindred so named. Then they made signs to Zachary, how he would have his son
called: And he calling (by signs) for writing tables, wrote therein: His name
is John. Whereat they all marueyled. And immediately the mouth of Zacharye was
opened, so that he spoke and said: Praised be the Lord God of Israel, for he
has visited and redeemed his people. etc.

4. Reg. 15. b.
Zacharia, the son of Jeroboam King of Israel, began his raygne in the eight
and thirty year of Azaria King of Judah, and walked in the sins of Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, as did other before him. He had not raygned six months,
or that Sallum conspired against him and slew him, even in the face of the
people, and reigned in his stead. This Zacharia was the fourth and the last
King of the generation of Iehu, which the Lord had promised should sit on his
seat after him, when he said: Thy children unto the fourth generation after
thee, shall 10. cap. f.
sit on the seat of Israel.

Gene. 38. g.
Zarah, was one of the two twynnes which Thamar bare unto Judah at one birth,
who proffering to come forth before his brother, put forth his hand, and when
the Mydwyfe had knit a red threede about it, he plucked in his hand again,
and than his brother came out first whom they called Phares, and than he with
the red threede about his hand, whom they called Zarah.

2. Para. 24. f.
Zacharia, the son of Iehoiada, was an holy Prophet. And when he saw Ioas
King of Judah (whom his This Prophet is also called and son of Barachia.
Math. 23. d. Because his progenitors were Iddo, Barachiah and Iehoiada.
father had trained from his youth up in the fear of god) with all his people
declined from the Lord to the woorshipping of Idols, and would not hear the
Lords admonicion sent by his prophets to call them home again, he stood up
before the people and said: Why transgress ye the commandments of the
Lord, surely it shall not prosper: because ye have forsaken the Lord, he
also has forsaken you. For the which, the King (not regarding the kindness of
Iehoiada his Father) commanded the people to stone him to death, in the court
of the house of the Lord. And as he suffered his martyrdom, he desired the
Lord to revenge his death, and to require his blood at their hands.

Luke. 19. a. b.
Zachy, was a Publican, and chief receyuer of the Kings Tribute among them.
He was a very low man of stature. And being much desirous to see Jesus what
manner a man he should be, made great means to see him. And when he saw the
prease so great that he could not, he ran before (knowing which way he
would come) and clymed up into a wild Fig tree. And when Jesus saw him in
the tree, he said: Zachy, come down at once, for to day I must abide at thy
house. And Zachy came down and received him joyfully. And showing forth the
true fruits of repentance said: Behold Lord, the half of my goods, I
give to the poor, and if I have done any man wrong, I restore him four fold.
To whom Jesus said again: This day is salvation come to this house,
forasmuch as thou art also become the son of Abraham. Zachy: pure, neat, or
clean.


1. Para. 2. b.
Zaruia, was David's sister. Her three Sons were Ioab, Abisai and Asael.

4. Reg. 24. d. cap. 25.
Zedekia, the fourth son of Iosia was one and twenty year old when
Nabuchodonosor made him King of Judah in the stead of Ieoacin his brothers
son. And made him take an oath of the Lord, faythfullye and truly to serve
the Chaldeis, in token whereof he changed his name, from Mathania to Zedekia.
This King suffered sin and wickedness so much to raygne in his land (as
well among the head rulers and Priests, as among the common sort) that God
was forgotten, his word despised, and his Prophets misused. Wherefore the Lord
styrred Iere. 37. cap.
up the Chaldeis (with whom he had broke his league) which came and destroyed
the City of Jerusalem, and the holy Temple of God with fire (as the Prophet
Jeremy had said) and took Zedekia the King (his army being dispersed abroad)
in the plain of Jericho, and brought him to the King of Babylon, who first
destroyed both his sons before his face, and then pulled out the eyes of
Zedekia, and so carried him to Babylon bound with two chains, where he dyed,
his people remaining in bondage until the days of Cyrus, which was about
three score and ten years. Zedekia, the Justice of the Lord, or the Lords
judgment.


3. Reg. 22. d.
Zedekia, the son of Canaana was one of the false Prophets which deceived
Achab. And when Micheas the true Prophet of God spoke against them, this
Zedekia, smote him on the Cheek, saying: When went the spirit of the Lord
from me, to speak unto thee: Well, said Micheas: Thou shall see in that
day, when thou shall go from Chamber to chamber to hide thee.

Number. 26. d.
Zelaphead, the Son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the Son of Machir, the
Son of Manasses the son of Joseph, had five daughters, who forasmuch as
their father dyed in the Wilderness without male issue, and was none of those
that rebelled against the Lord in the Congregation of Chore: They required of
Moses to 27. cap.
have a possession among their fathers brethren, least the name of their Father
should be utterly taken away, from among his kindred. Whose request God
allowed, and bade Moses give them a possession among their brethren, and to make
a law, that whosoever dyed without a son, his inheritance should turn to
his daughter. If he have no daughter, to his brethren. If he have no brethren
to his Fathers brethren. If his father have no brethren, than it Two of sundry
Tribes should not mary togithers.
should turn to the next of the kin. And also to stabishe their
inheritance, that it should not be removed through marriage into an other
Tribe, an order was taken, that no Tribe should marry with an other Tribe, but
every Tribe should mary with whom he list, among his own Tribe and kindred.
And so the daughters of Zelaphead were married to their Fathers brothers sons,
which were of the kindred of Manasses the Son of Joseph, by which means their
inheritance remained still in the Tribe and kindred of their Father.

Tit. 3. d.
Zenas, was first an interpreter of Moses law, and afterward became an earnest
preacher of the Gospel of Christ. Of whom Paul writes to Tite (Bishop of
Crete) that whenever Zenas departed from him, he should bring him on his
journey with all diligence, and that nothing should be lacking unto him. His
words to Tite were these: Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey
diligently, that nothing be lacking to them. Zenas, Living.


Exodus 2. d.
Zephora, was the daughter of Raguel, Priest of Madian and wife to Moses, by
whom she conceived and bare him two sons: The one Gerson and the other
Eleazer. Eleazer was not circumcised, and therefore GOD was angrye with Moses,
says Lyra.
And as she went with Moses her husband toward the land of Egypt, by the
way in her Inn, she took a sharp knyfe and cut away the foreskinne of her
son, and cast it at his feet, saying: Thou art in deed, a bloudye husband
unto me, she said a bloody husband because of the circumcision. Zephora, A
mourning.


2. Reg. 9. cap.
Ziba, was one of King Saules old servants, after whose death he belonged to
Miphiboseth the son of Ionathas, and had the over sight of all his masters
lands, which David had restored unto him, and the governance also of Mica his
Masters son. This Ziba (intending 16. a.
to deceive his master) what time as David fled from Absalom his son, and
was a little past the top of Mount Oliuete, met him with a couple of Asses
sadled, and upon them two hundred loaves, and one hundred bunches of Raysins
and an hundred frail of dried Figs and a bottell of Wine. And when the King
saw him, he said: What means thou with these Ziba? They be (quoth he) Asses
for the Kings householde to ride on, and bread and fruit for the young men to
eat, and Wine that such as be fayntie in the Wilderness may drink. Then
said the King, where is thy master Miphiboseth? Ziba said, behold, he
taryeth still at Jerusalem, for he said: This day shall the house of Israel
restore me the Kingdom of my Father. Then said David to Ziba: Behold, all
are thine that pertayned to Miphiboseth. Then said Ziba: I do homage unto
thee, I beseech thee I may find grace in thy sight my Lord O King. Thus
Ziba deceived his master, and got his land from him: But when the King was
returned again to Jerusalem and perceived by Miphiboseth that Ziba had
wrongfully accused him, he commanded the land to be divided between them.
Ziba, Fullness, or an Oath.


3. Reg. 16. b. c. d.
Zimri, was the servant of Ela the son of Baasa King of Israel, and Captain
of half his Charrettes, who, or his Master had raygned full two years,
conspired against him and sieve him, as he was in Tirzah drincking till he was
droncken in the house of Arza Stuwarde of his house in Tirzah. And raygned in
his stead in the time of whose raygne (which was but seven days) he sieve all
the house of Baasa, leaving neither kinsman nor friend of his alive. At this
time had Ela the King an host of men lying at the siege of Gibbethon a City
of the Philistines. And when they heard of the Treason of Zimri, and that he
raygned in the stead of Ela, they (with one consent) made Amry their Captain,
King, who then went and besieged Zimri where he lay in the city of Tirzah:
And when Zimri saw that the city must needs be woonne, then he, (least they
should take him a live and put him to a shameful death) brent himself and
the Kings house with fire, and so dyed. Zimri, a Singing, or making melody.


1. Esdras. 3. and 4. cap.
Zorobabel, the Son of Salathiel, withal the Jews which were delivered from
Babylon by Cyrus, returned to Jerusalem, where they repaired again the City
and Temple of God, and renewed their laws, though they were sometime hindered
and let, by their enemies about them. Zorobabel, Free from confusion, or
strange.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, and Richard Watkins. Anno. 1574.

Daniel in the lions' den. Daniel. ob Belis Sacerdotes interfectos; Bell
destructum; Draconem occisum, in sacum seonum missus, ab Habacuc nascitur. Dan:
Xiiii (...) M.D. inum:


the first three kings of the united Israel, according to the Hebrew bible,
Saul, David, and Solomon, stand in armor in front of a battle scene. SAVL
DAVID SALAMON
G. de Iode.
Saul primus in Israel rex annos. 40. regnauit propter impietatem pernt et
totum eius genus. ^xtinctum est

David regnauit annos. 40. et puniuit eum deus ob admissum adulterium.

Solomon annos. 40. rex fuit sed eo defuncto distractum regnum est propter
adulterium Dauidis.



ROBOAM ABYA ASA
Kings of Judah, according to the Hebrew bible, Roboam (or Rehoboam), Abya (or
Abijah) and Asa stand in regal robes in front of a parade of soldiers with
spears..2. Imperauit annos (...) Vitulos erexit aureos et eum parere nollet
maioru^ co^silys sequuta est regni mutatio

Filius Roboam regnauit tres annos in Judah Vicit magno proelio exercitum
Jeroboam

Regnauit annos. 14. deleuit Idola etiam sue matris impios cultus sustulit
Vicit Ethiopes



IOSAPHAT IORAM OCHOZIAS
Kings of Judah, according to the Hebrew bible, Jehoshaphat (or Josaphat),
Jehoram and Ahaziah stand, in regal robes, in front of a group of fighting
men..3. Pius et foelix regnauit annos 25 Vicit Ammonitas sine proelio Eo
regna^te Helias Vixit

Dissimilis patri coluit Idola interfeit maiores et fratres suos Regna. an. 8

Vno tantum anno in imperio fuit, captus a Rege Samariae Iehu. ex Vulnere
peryt, in Mageddo



Kings of Judah, according to the Hebrew bible, Jehoash (or Joas), Amaziah (or
Amasias, or Amatzia), and Uzziah (or Azariah) stand, in regal robes, in front
of groups of fighting men. IOAS AMASIA AZARIUS
.4. Fuit initio puis et foelix donec Vixit Ioadas swnus sacerdos, post eius
morte^ idola coluit, et interfectus aseruis suis

Rex fuit an^: 29. initio pius, Vicit Idumoeos postea coluit idola. et moto
bello no necessario Victus est.

Regn an^. 52: Vicit philistoeos postea infectus est lepra cum Veellet fungi
offitio sacerdotis



Kings of Judah, according to the Hebrew bible, Jotham (or Yotam, or Joatham),
Ahaz (or Achaz) and Hezekiah, stand in regal robes, in front of groups of
fighting men and tents. IOTHAM ACHAS EZECHIAS
.5. Regnauit sedecim annis is pius erat et foeliciter pugnauit contra Ammon

Similiter regnauit. 17: an^ In oppidis passim idola erexit Cremauit et filium
in sacrificio.

Annos. 20. rex fuit hic rursus aptryrt templu^, deleuit idola, et decimas suas
dari sacerdotibus iussit.



Kings of Judah, according to the Hebrew bible, Jehoahaz (or Joachaz),
Jehoiakim (or Joakim), and Jeconiah (or Coniah, or Jehoiachin), stand in regal
robes, in front of lines of soldiers prepared for battle. IOACHAS IOACHIM
IOACHIN
7 Menses and regnauit mente et factis impius Decapiendis Ieremia et Barucho
mandatum pro posuit Victus in AEgiptum abductus c^.

Huius temporibus inuasit totam Iudeam rex Babiloniae cuius factus c^.
tributarius regna annas. 11.

Rex fuit menses and reuersus sub id tempus Nabuchodonosor obsedit Vrbem et
dedit se ultro ex consilio Jeremy.




