(...) Hic vera felicitas

THE IVDGMENT OF Humane Actions A most Learned and Excellent Treatise of
Morrall Philosophy, which fights against Vanytie and Conduces to the fyndinge
out of true and perfect Felicytie Written in French by Monsieur Leonard
Marrande And Englished by John Reynolds

LONDON Imprinted by A. Mathewes for Nicholas Bourne, at ye Royal Exchange
1629

I Cecill sculp.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND truly Noble, EDWARD Earl of DORSET, Lord
Lieutenant of his Majesty's Counties of Sussex, and Middlesex: Lord
Chamberlain to the Queen: One of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, and Knight of the most Illustrious Order of the Garter.
His Singular good Lord and Master.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
EIther by Earthly accident, or Heavenly providence, meeting with this late
imprinted French Treatise, of The Judgment of Humane Actions, written by
Monsieur Marande (a name that I more honor then know) and diuing into the
perusal thereof, I found it for matter so solid, and for phrase so curious a
Masterpiece of Moral Philosophy, that I saw my self engaged; yea and in a
manner bound to deuest it from its French garb, and to suit it in our English
attire and habit; as desirous that England, as well as France, should
participate of that benefit and Felicity.

But as I was entering into this task, and casting my self upon the
resolution of this attempt; I was instantly met and assailed by an obstacle of
no small importance; For considering that France has now made, and declared
her self Englands enemy, and cons^quently given us no just cause or reasons
to love French men, but many to hate them, I therefore (in honor to my Prince
and Country, to whose prosperity and service, my best blood and life shall ever
be prostrated) at first began to reject this Book, because written by a
French man, and so to look on the translation thereof, rather with an eye of
contempt then of affection: But at last recollecting my thoughts, and
considering that Peace is the gift and blessing of God, and Char^ty the true
mark of a Christian, I therefore from my heart and soul wishing and desiring,
a safe, honorable, and perdurable peace between these two mighty neighbor
Sister Kingdom^s in particular, and to all Christians, and the whole Christian
world in general. And also well knowing that Learning is universally to be
cherished, and virtue honored in all persons, times, and places of the whole
world, without exception or distinction; then (these premi^es considered) this
my last consideration prevailed and vanquished my first, and so I reassumed my
former design and resolution to finish it; although (in regard of the deep
matter, and the knottie, and elegant style thereof) I ingeniously confess,
that many Gentlemen, both of England and Scotland, had been far more capable
for the discharge and performance thereof then my self.

Having thus made my self an English Echo to this French Author, and now in
these times of War taken this Book, as a rich French prise, and landed him
on our English shores; Where should this Impe of my labor look, but on your
Ho: on whom my hopes and heart have ever looked, or to whom else should it fly
for harbor and shelter, but only to your Lordship, who (in all the storms
and tempests of these my weather beaten fortunes) have so graciously and
generously served me both for shelter, and harbor, when the immerited malice
of some, and the undeserved ingratitude of others have denied it me; The which
yet I speak and remember, more out of sensibility to my self, ^hen any way
out of passion, much less of Envy to them, as resting contented with this
resolution, to keep the grief thereof to my self, to leave the shame to
them, and to give the thanks and glory to your Honor.

As this Book of Marande is curious, so he made his Dedication thereof,
wherefore led by the fame, and luster of his example, I could do no less then
immitate him herein; for as he directed it to the Cardinal of Richelieu; So
your Lordships Merits, and my duty, enforce me to inscribe it to your Honor,
who are as much the Cardinals equal in Virtues, as by many degrees his
superior in blood and extraction.

And although I well know, that shall rather wrong mine Author, then right my
self, to erect or proffer any Pa^^gerike (to his Merits and Judgment) on this
his Book; because of it self i^ sufficiently pe^formes and acts that part:
Yet when your Lordship^ leisure and pleasure shall borow so much time from your
great and weighty ^ff^ires of the State, to give it to the perus^ll and
contemplation of this his Book; I doubt not but you will then see and
acknowledge, that Marande herein, as another Cornelius Agrippa, learnedly
fights against the Vanity of Humane Sciences,; and as a second Montaigne
iudiciously contests against the poison of our hearts, I mean against our
intemperate (and therefore our pernicious) Passions.

For in this work of his (as in a rich Treasury and Sacrary of Nature) He
(with a zeal and judgment every way worthy of himself) laughes at the
Vanity of all Humane Arts, and Actions, as also generally at all the
presumptuous, and profane professors thereof; and by reasons as clear as the
Sun; passes his judgment on them, proving GOD to be the sole Author and
Giver of Wisdom; and that GOD, and none but GOD ought to be the only object
of our desires and affections. Here he has deuested and stripped our passions
naked, and curiously delineated and depointed them to us in their true colors,
and natural deformity. Here he has taught us to believe, and our thoughts
and resolutions to know, that exorbitant Ambition proves most commonly the
bane of our hearts, the poison of our minds, and the Arch-Enemie, and Traitor
to our own fortunes and f^licitie. Here he has curiously arraigned, and
anatomized the power, and functions of the Senses, and showed us how violently
and maliciously they every moment conspire to corrupt our bodies, and to betray
our souls to sin, and voluptuousness. Here he has brought home to our
Understanding, and Judgment, what power our souls have over our bodies, and
God over our souls, and that our bodies can expect no true tranquillity, or
felicity here on Earth, except our souls do first fetch it from Heaven, and
derive it from God. And here he has crowned Reason to be the Queen of our
souls, and adopted Virtue to be no less then a Princess and Daughter of
Heaven, and taught us how tenderly and religiously we ought to love either, and
honor both of them, since thereby, they will then infallibly prove the two
spiritual guides to conduct us to true happiness in this life, and
consequently to bring us to true felicity and glory in that to come.

Which considered; As also that such is the universal iniquity of our times,
and the general deprauation and corruption of our lives and manners, that
through the dark clouds of our humane Vanity, and Ambition, we many times
cannot see Reason for Passion, nor permanent Felicity, for transitory
Delights, and Pleasures. And therefore that the World (or rather the Courts of
Kings and Princes, which is the pride and glory thereof, very often uses us
not as a Lady of Honor, but as a deboshed Strumpet or Courtisan; who many
times strangleth us, when she makes greatest show to embrace and kiss us, and
the which in that regard and consideration I may pertinently and properly
parallel to the Panther, whose skin is fair, but his breath infectious.
Therefore out of the zeal of my best prayers, and the candor and integrity of
my best service and wishes, eternally desiring and wishing, that your Lordships
prosperities and Honors may be as infinite as your Virtues and Merits, and as
immortal, as you are mortal; I hope, and implore, that your Honor will
please to pardon this my presumption, for proffering up this poor Epistle to
your rich consideration; and for being so ambitious to make this unworthy
translation of mine soar so high as to your Honorable protection and
patronage, in affixing, and placing your Noble name thereto, as a Stately
Porch, or Front, to this rich and stately Temple of Virtue.

Not, but that I perfectly know that your Honor is plentifully and abundantly
furnished with great variety of sweet preservatives, and sound, and salubrious
Antidotes, both against your own humane passions, as also against the frowns,
and flatteries of the world: But yet I could give no satisfaction to my self,
before I had given this Book the desired (though not deserved) honor to kiss
your Lordships hands; For the Transplantation thereof being mine, my Duty, and
Service prompted me that I must needs direct and consecrate it to your
Honor, as well by the right of a just propriety, as by the equity of a
commanding obligation, and therefore of a necessary consequence.

Again, your Honor loving Virtue, and cherishing Philosophy, so tenderly and
dearly in your self, I thought that others would be the sooner induced and
drawn thereto by the powerful influence of your Example, and therefore, that
the Dignity and Luster of your name, would serve as a sure pasport to make this
Book pass current, with the different affections, pallates, and censures of
his Readers whom now it goes forth to meet with. In which regard I hold it
more presumption in me toward your Honor, then neglect toward them, to make
this your Epistle serve likewise for them, as being equally resolved, neither
to court their favors, nor to fear their reprehensions

And here before I shut up this my Epistle; I beseech your Honor to be
pleased farther to understand, that in this Translation I have sometimes
borrowed from the letter, to give to the sense, by adding voluptuousness to
pleasure, show to appearance, and affliction to evil, or the like; A liberty
which I hold tolerable in a modest Interpreter; As also I have sometimes added
grief, to pain, although according to the rules and grounds of Logic, I
know that the last has reference to the body, and the first to the Soul: But
I did it purposely to make it speak the more significant and fuller English;
because your Honor knows so well, as no man better; that as other Languages,
so English has her peculiar Idioms, and proper phrases and Accents, which may
but (yet in my poor opinion and Judgment) ought not to be omitted or
neglected.

I will no farther usurp on your Lordships patience, but will leave this
Book, to his fortune, and my self to your wonted Honorable favor; So
wishing all increase of Earthly happiness, and heavenly fefelicity to your
Honor, to your Honorable, and most virtuous Countess, and to those sweet and
Noble young Plants your Children. I will live and dye in the resolution, ever
to be found

Your Honors humblest Servant, JOHN REYNOLDS.

A TABLE OF THE Discourses, and Sections which are contained in this Book.
The first Discourse. Of Vanity,
Section I. MAn diuerteth his ey^s from his condition, not to know the
deformity thereof, and abandoneth them to follow his own vain imaginations.
page 1 Section II. The wisdom of man cannot free it self from Vanity, so
natural she is to it. page 17
The second Discourse. Of the Senses.
Section I. THe Soul and the Body are united together (...) strong ^^inke,
that as the (...) by the means of the Soul: so the Soul cannot move toward
external things, nor know them, but by the means of the senses. page 27
Section II. The different operation of the Senses concludes not that there are
five, no more then the different effects of the rays of the Sun, that there
are many Suns. 32 Section III. Nature being icalous of secrets, permits not
the Senses to discover the Essences of things, nor that they can convey any
thing to our understanding, that is not changed and corrupted by them in the
Passage. 37 Section IV. Science (or Knowledge) is the mark and seal of the
Divinity, but that which resides among us here in Earth, is nothing else but
abuse, trumpery, and vanity. page 44 Section V. Man having some knowledge of
himself (although it be imperfect,) as also of those whom he frequents, he
contemnes their Learning, and esteems none but that which is grown in
foreign Countries, or which he receives from an unknown hand. 68
The third Discourse. Of Opinion.
Section I. TO cut off the Liberty of Judgment, is to bereave the Sun of her
light, and to deprive man of his fairest ornament. pa. 79 Section II. All
things wonderfully increase and fortify themselves through Opinion. 88 Section
III. Opinion very ill requi^es the greatness, to hold her still in show and
esteem, and to give all the world right to control her actions. 94 Section
IV. The common people have no more certain, nor clear seeing guide, then
Opinion. 99 Section V. Opinion (as an ingenious Painter) gives those things
which enuiron us such face and figure as it pleases. 102 Section VI. Opinion
leaves nothing entire, but its corruption, and pardons not Virtue her self.
107
The fourth Discourse. Of Passions.
Section I. Storms arise not so many surges on the Sea, as Passions engender
tempests in the hearts of men. 114 Section II. We may say of Love, that which
the Romans said of an Emperor* that they knew not whether they received more
good, or evil of him. 122 Section III. Ambition has no mediocrity* and fears
not his burning, if the fire of heaven, or the thunderbolt of Jupiter furnish
him the first sparkles. pa. 133. Section IV. Covetousness is only just, in
that it rigorously punishes those whom it mastereth and commands. 141
Section V. Fortune has not a more charming Lure, or bayte, then our own hope.
199 Section VI. Fear casts her self into the future time, as into a dark and
obscure place, thereby with a small cause, or subject, to give us the greater
wonder and astonishment. 156 Section VII. Of all Passions there is no greater
Enemy of Reason, nor less capable of Council then Choler. 177 Section VIII.
Passions have so deformed a countenance, that albeit they are the daughters of
Nature, yet we cannot love them, and behold them at one time. 186
The fifth Discourse. Of Felicity.
Section I. EVery thing naturally tends to its repose, only, man strayes from
his felicity, or if he approach it, he stays at the branches, instead of
embracing the trunk or body of the tree. 191 Section II. It is not without
reason that we complain of Fortune, because hourly she teaches us, her
mutable and variable humor. pa. 202 Section III. Wealth and Riches are too
poor, to give us the felicity which we seek, and desire. 207 Section IV.
Glory and Reputation has no thing which is solid but Vanity, we must
therefore elsewhere seek our Sovereign contentment. 211 Section V. Honors,
and Dignities expose to the world all their splendor and glory: But
contrariwise, Felicity locks up all her best things in her self, and has no
greater Enemy then Show and Ostentation. 219 Section VI. Among all the fair
flowers which an extreme favor produces, we have not yet seen this
Felicity, to bud forth, and flourish. 222 Section VII. Kings, and Sovereign
Princes owe us their continual care and motion, as the Stars do; and
therefore they have no greater Enemy then repose and tranquillity. 228 Section
VIII. As the light is inseparable from the Sun, so Felicity is an inseparable
accident of Virtue. 232
The sixth Discourse. Of Moral Virtue.
Section I. Sick (or distempered minds) are not capable of all sorts of
remedies, but they shall find none more Sovereign then the diuerting thereof.
page 250 Section II. The life of a Wise man is a Circle whereof Temperance is
the Center, whereunto all the lines, I mean, all his actions should conduce
and aim. 264 Section III. To think that Virtue can indifferently cure all
sorts of evils or afflictions, is a testimony of Vanity, or else of our being
Apprentices and Nouices in Philosophy. 277 Section IV. As it belongs to none
but to the mind to judge of true or false, so our sense ought to be the only
Judge either of Pleasure or Pain. 288 Section V. Although we grant that Man's
felicity consists in Virtue, yet I affirm (against the Stoics) that Felicity
is incompatible with Grief and Pain. 299 Section VI. Man's life is a harmony
composed of so many different tones, that it is very difficult for Virtue to
hold, and keep them still in tune. page 310

THE IVDGEMENT OF HVMANE ACTIONS.
The first Discourse.
Of Vanity.
SECTION. I. Man diuerteth his eyes from his condition, not to know the
deformity thereof, and abandoneth them, to follow his own vain imaginations.
MY enterprise to depaint, and chalk out the vanity of Man, has (it may be)
no less vanity in his design, then in his subject, but it greatly skils not
to what I intend to speak, for whatsoever I say, or do, I still advance; I
say, it imports not where I strike for all my blows* are directed and bent to
fall on Vanity; and if the Pensill be not bold, and the Colors lively enough,
we will imitate the industry of that Painter, who being to represent (in a
Table) the sorrows of those who assisted at the sacrifice of Iphigenia, most
ingeniously ouervayled the face of this Virgins Father with a Courtaine; as
well knowing that all his art and industry was incapable, and confused herein;
if he should undertake to represent at life all the parts and passions which
sorrow had so lively imprinted on his face. It were a happiness if only to
overvaile the face of Man, were to cover all his Vanities, but when we have
extended this veil or courtaine ore all his body, I much fear there will yet
remain more to be concealed and hidden, then that which we have already
covered: For this imagination cannot suffer this constraint, and his desire
which follows him with out-spred wings, finds no limmits but in her infinity.

Man is composed of body, spirits, and soul; This animated body participates
most of earth, as nearest to the place of his extraction, and to say truly, is
a straying and a vagabond plant; The spirits participate most of the air, and
serve as the means or medium to fasten, join, and stay the soul, which
falls from heaven into the body of men, as a ray or sparkle of the Divinity
that comes to reside in an unknown place. Those spirits which dwell in the
blood are as little chains to unite and fasten the soul to the body, which
coming to dissolve, from thence follows the entire dissolution of this
compound. They participate as partakers of these two contrary natures by the
extremities; that which is most pure and subtle in them, is united to the
superior parts, as that which is grosser is united and fastened to the
affluence of blood; and these are they that so dexterously make affections to
fly from one to the other subject, which they embrace so strictly and dearly,
and in this marriage is sworn community of goods and wealth, or rather of
misery, they have no longer but one and the same interest, and in this mixture,
actions as passions distill from these different springs, by one only and the
self same pipe. They wedde themselves to contentions and quarrels, which are
not easily appeased; but notwithstanding this discord, they maintain
themselves in their perpetual war; fearing nothing but peace, which is
separation. Does it not seem to thee, O man, that thou much deseruest to be
lamented and pitied, since in the composition of such different pieces, thou
find thy self engaged to calm the storms and tempests which arise in thy
breast, by the contrary motion of so many different passions. If thou will cast
thine eyes upon thy birth, thou shall see, that after having languished nine
months in prison, fedd and nourished with the waters of rottenness and
corruption it self, thou come into the world with cries and tears for thy
welcome, as if despite of thee, that Destiny had placed thee on Earth to sweat
under the heavy yoke and burden of a miserable slavery; but grieve not at thy
tears, for they cannot be employed to weep at a more miserable condition then
thine own; because among other creatures thou art the most disgraced by
nature; abandoned naked on earth without covering, or Arms; swathed and bound,
and without knowledge of any thing which is fit or proper for thy necessities.
And reason it self which befalls thee afterward (as the only advantage
whereof thou may vaunt and glory) does most commonly turn to thy shame and
confusion, through vices and interior diseases which it ingendreth in thee.

Unfortunate that thou art, those weapons which thou imployest to thy ruin,
were given thee for thy conservation. Me thinks those barbarous Indians of
Mexico do singular well, who at the birth of their Children exhort them to
suffer and endure; as if nature gave no other prerogative to man then misery,
whereunto he is lincked and chained by the misfortune and duty of his
condition. Let us consider a little, that his first babbling and prattling years
are watered with nothing but with his tears; His infancy full of astonishment
and fear, under the rod of his superior; His riper years discover him by all
the parts of his body and soul, and expose him to the inevitable snares of
Love; to the dangerous blows of fortune, and to the storms and fury of all
sorts of Passions. In his declining age, (as broken with so many cares,
calamities, and labors,) he flies but with one wing, and goes coasting along
the river to land more easily, possessed and tormented (nevertheless) with
many unprofitable and superfluous thoughts. He is afflicted at the time
present, grieved at the past, and in extreme care and trouble for that to
come, as if he now began to live; He perceiues not his age but by his gray
hairs, and wrinkled forehead; and most commonly has nothing remaining to
testify that he has lived so great a number of years, but an old withred
age, which enclines him to a general distaste of all fruits that his weak
stomach cannot digest, which often imprints more wrinkles and furrows in his
mind then in his face; His body bending and bowing, which is no longer
supported but by the aid and assistance of others, like an old building
ruinous and uncovered in a thousand places; which by little and little seems
to end and destroy itself. Whiles his fugitive soul, (which meets nothing
else in this frail Vessel but that which is either sour or vinowed,) seeks
by all means to break her alliance; and in the end retires, being infinitely
weary to have so long conducted and supported so decrepit and heavy a burden,
laden with all miseries, as the sincke and receptacle of all griefs and evils;
which the influence of Heaven continually powers down upon the face of Earth.
Nothing so weak, and yet so proud; Let us hear him speak, with what
boldness does he not praise his audacious front. His heart is puff up and
swelld with glory, and many great bumbasted Words, as if mounted on some
Throne* he forms himself an imaginary Scepter, for a mark of his Sovereign
greatness; He has (says he) the Dominion and Empire over all things created;
He commands all beasts, The Sun, Heaven, and Earth are but the ministers of
his power; But wretched and proud as thou art, do thou believe thou have
power to command where thou have no right but in thy obedience? Thy
inclinations, fortune, and misfortune, which drop and destill on thy head
through those celestial pipes; do they not constrain thee with blows, and
stripes to stoop and acknowledge their superintendency? Bow down, bow down
thine eyes, for it is far more proper and convenient for thee, If not that
after the custom of the Thracians, thou will shoot arrows against Heaven,
which will after return and fall on thine own head; And if for the advantages
and privileges of the body, thou will prefer thy self to all beasts,
vouchsafe only to enter in comparison with a few of them in particular: The
courage of the Lion, the strength of the Elephant, the swiftness of the
Stagge, and the particular qualities which are found in others, will prove
thee far inferior to them. Having thus walked thine eyes upon the garden
knots of this world, now make a reflection thereof in thy self, and if thy
judgment retain any air of health, I know thou will say with me (or rather
with wise Solomon) That man is nothing else but vanity without and within, in
what form and posture of vice so ever thou contemplate him: Then we shall
have the assurance to say with the Philosophers, That laughter is proper to
man, And proper indeed it is, according to the rules of Democritus, to laugh
and mock at his folly, as at his Vanity. That other Philosopher more pitiful
then this, testified by his weeping, that he had no other weapons then tears
to defend the blows, and wipe the wounds of so miserable a condition as ours;
That if we enquire by what right he imposed on his companions, the burden of
so severe a law, and so ponderous and pressing a yoke, I find that he is no
way excusable but in this, that he submitted himself to the same slavery and
servitude. The equality of our evils herein does some way extenuate and cut off
the just subject of our complaints; For he which sees himself fettered to the
fortune of an iron chain, although thou have inroled him among the number of
thy slaves; yet he may nevertheless vaunt to see thee fight under the
displayed Ensign of the same misfortune; not like himself tied to an iron
chain, but to one a little more honorable* as it may be to a chain of gold;
or peradventure to a bracelet of hair, which captiuates thy heart and liberty
under the tempting lures of a young beauty; or else by the linkes of thy
Ambition, which inseperably chains thee to Fortune; since all sorts and degrees
of living is but slavery, and that the Scepters of Princes are far heavier in
their hands then the crookes of innocent Shepherds; That if no condition have
power to exempt and dispense thee from this slavery, what shall we accuse?
either the vice of a malicious nature, which at thy birth powered into thy
breast so many miseries; or rather the defect of thy knowledge and judgment,
which enwrapped thee in so obscure and thick a cloud, that this blindness
makes thee every moment stumble against the good which presents it self to thy
eyes, as against evil; And that in this ignorance thou art as a Ship abandoned
to the fury of the waves, which the horror of the night has surprised in the
midst of a storm and tempest, wherein in the fear of shipwreck, the surest
places where his good fortune throws him, gives him no less astonishment, and
fear then the most dangerous places. For the favors of Nature should still
put thee out of the suspicion of her malignitie. What has she not done to
prevent and remedy the discontent which may arise in thy heart, through an
object so full of discontent; she has hid from thine eyes and sight, the most
secret parts which give the life and motion, as the weakest and most subject to
corruption; and the most vile, because they resemble the inward part of the
foulest beast of all: And indeed she has given thee eyes to see abroad
only, and to admire in the world, as in a Temple, the lively images of the
Divinity: But as for those things which are without us, could she do any
thing better, or more aduantagious to man, for the consolation of so many
afflictions and griefs which incessantly assail him, then the habit or
custom thereof, as a sweet potion which administreth sleep, and eases that
part whereunto it is applied to operate his effect with more facility and
less contradiction: This favor (in my opinion) is not the least Present which
she could give him, For a habitude of suffering afflictions dulleth the first
edge and point thereof, and hardneth the body to the performance thereof: And
surely if the grief which we very often feel and endure, had so much
violence in the continuation, as in the first excess thereof, the courage and
strength of man would prove too weak so long to resist it: The Irons which
were clapped on the hands and feet of the Philosopher, seemed not so heavy to
him the second day as the first, and when they took them from him, to make him
swallow down the poison which was prepared for him, that very day and time he
saw his consolation to spring and arise from his grief, and in the midst of
his tortures and executioners the subject of pleasure and joy. Consider then if
there remain any thing to thy pride wherewith it should swell, and grow so
great, but Vanity, and what weapons there are left thee to fight against thy
misfortune, but only Patience, which ought to make thee acknowledge that thou
art indebted for thy slavery, but only to thy self, because Nature has
assisted thee with her best power; and that for the rest she referres it he
to ordain according to the rules of thy sufficiency: Or if thou will yet know
the head spring and original, from whence arise so many discontents in our
life, it is because men fear as Mortals, and desire as Immortalls: They bind
the living to the dead, Divine with Humane: They will ingraft the head of a God
upon the body of a Hog: so their desires which are derived from this
superior part, gives no end to their impatiencie: Their fear in this soul
and inferior part, gives less truce to their true torment, and the one and
the other draw for our misfortune an affliction and pain of that which is not,
because they labor for the future as for the present, upon the empty as upon
the full, and upon the inanitie as the substance: Enterprises begun hold our
minds in suspense, those which are desperate, in sorrow; as if some byas which
we have to manage and turn those things which present themselves to us, could
not meet but with causes of affliction and misery; and as if ambitious of our
own misfortune, we deuance and run before to meet it, and that it were
impossible for us to gather a Rose, except by the prickle. Also grief has
more Art to make us feel it, then pleasure has joy to make us taste it: A
little affliction presses us far more then an extreme contentment, and in
reuoking to mind those things which time has stolen from our eyes, it seems
that our memory is better edged by the sharpness of those things which we have
felt, then by the polishing of those things, which have but as it were rased
our understanding. Our remembrance cannot keep firm, his foot slides, and as
soon fails him. Our thoughts fly upon things past, and stop not but at that
which she finds sharp, angry and difficult to digest: so the time past which
afflicts us, the present which troubles us, and the future which denounces
war to our desires, or fears, does hinder us from relishing any thing which
is pure. Homer who put two Tons at the entry of Jupiters door, of Good and
Evil; ought to have said, that the Good was reserved for the Gods, and the
other remained in partage to men; or that Jupiter being a lover of that which
was good, as he is the cause, was too covetous in his expenses, and with one
hand was too prodigal in pouring out Evils upon mankind. Good and Evil is in
all things, and every where intermixed so confusedly, and are so near one to
the other, that it is not in our weak power to mark the difference thereof,
except by that place which does nearest touch and concern us, which is that of
grief and sorrow; Which side so ever we bend or incline, it is still toward
that of misery. Consider the inconstancy and irresolution of thy desires; It is
not in thine own power to stay firm and permanent in one condition and
quality: That if thy sensual appetite could be the Judge and Arbitrator of
her own voluptuousness, and that she were left to do what she pleased: I
yet doubt that she would still find some thing to crave, or desire; For this
hungry and insatiable desire, which carries her to that which is not; and the
displeasing taste which is intermixed in the enjoying thereof, makes us
presently weary thereof; Which is the reason, why the Wiseman craved nothing of
GOD, but the effects of his divine will, requiring that which was truly proper
and necessary for him: But as our desires are wauing and different, so our will
is weak toward good or evil, and cannot absolutely bear it self toward
the one and the other, without some bruise or hurt, derived from the croude and
confusion of our own proper desires. We can difficultly agree with our self,
and none with a firm and an assured heart can suggest any wicked act; but that
his conscience repines and murmures within him: She cannot consent unto crime,
and through so great a mass of flesh, she discovers and accuses her self
for want of witnesses: Or if despite her power she cannot disclose it, yet
she then secretly scratcheth, and incessantly excruciateth her self:
Constancy and Virtue which the Philosopher would lodge in the heart of the
Wise man, as in a sacred Temple, is it so firm that it will never shake: No,
it is a Vanity to think so. But as the world is but a perpetual dance or
brawle; so she goes from one dance to another a little more languishing. And
as in a sick body the parts less offended with pain, and the contagion of
the disease, are termed sound: so among this great troop of men the least
vicious are termed virtuous; and we term that firm and constant, which moves
not with so much swiftness and leuity as the rest. Qualities have no title but
in the comparison. Those Boats which seem so great on the River of Seine, are
very little at Sea, and that resplendant virtue of the ancient Philosophers,
which diffuseth and darts forth so much brightness among us, does owe this
advantage to men's folly and ignorance: She will be found vicious, if she
submit her self to be sounded, and to suffer the last touch and trial,
because the divine wisdom has baptized ours with Vanity, Weakness, and
Folly: To give it more Firmity, she has need of a foundation, more solid
then the heart of man; For as the fixed stars in their disposition and
situation, ought notwithstanding to obey the course and motion of heaven; so
constancy does always wheel and wave about, and despite her self, is
obliged to the motion and inconstancy of that whereunto it is tied and
fastened. The wisest does nothing else but go astray in all his actions; and if
he strike upon the point of constancy, it is most commonly by indirect means
and ways: He never aims where he strikes: He resembles those Muskatieres,
who knowing their defect or fault, take their aim higher or lower: And indeed
if he cannot vanquish his vices, he transformeth himself as Achelous, to
steal himself away out of the hands of his Enemies, and so endeavors by
conniuing to escape them. If he cannot choke the seed in his breast, he will
enforce himself to change the fruits, by the graft of some different passion,
which he will ingraft upon the foot and twigge of this. In this manner he
will find the means to lose the thought of displeasing remembrance, in the
throng and crowde of some other thoughts and diuertisements, where she loses
her trace and steps, and insensibly erreth and strayeth from us; To show, that
Inconstancy resounds aloude the jurisdiction which she has in our hearts; yea
in the most inward and secret motions of our soul, a small matter stays us,
and a matter of smaller value does divert us: The external show and appearance
of things deceiues us; and does touch us as much, or more then truth it self.
The complaints of Ariadne, which we know to be a fabulous invention and
fiction, does almost draw tears from our eyes: The feigned action of a
Tragedian, makes us shake and tremble: And Caesar's Roabe engendered more
grief, and sedition in the hearts of the Romans, then his fresh and bloody
death could possibly do.

SECTION II. The Wisdom of man cannot free it self from Vanity, so natural
she is to it.
Whosoever will busy himself to control the Vanity of popular spirits, who
more cherish the ornament of their face then of their life, and who fear less
to see the Commonwealth in disorder and confusion then their Periwigge; do
not testify much less in their own proper actions, as if he should employ
his time, and study to number the waves, and sands of the Sea: But our intent
and design is to seek in the condition of man, if he can find some Throne
so high erected and elevated, that Vanity cannot attain to it: It must not be
in the Thrones of Princes and Emperors, nor in great Offices and Dignities,
for then she is lodged as in her Fort and Castle, and has already surprised
all the approaches and auenewes. We shall find it in some lower seat or
station, as in the degree of Virtue termed Wisdom, which resists Iron,
Fires, Tyrants, and other Instruments of fortune. Those noble Vestments
wherewith the Ancients delighted to deck and adorn themselves, are not much
less to be esteemed then themselves, she has not much more reality in the
form then in the matter. The dreams of these Philosophers have had no less
Art to forge them, then to cause them to be believed. It is a fair Princess
which holds under her feet Fortune chained, and the world captive: It is
pity that it is not a body, as it is but a shadow, and the shadow of an
imaginary fantasy: those who have given us such great advantages in
paintings, it may be have never seen extreme grief and sorrow but in
pourtrait. That Philosopher who with a severe countenance reproached to his
sorrow, that it was not capable to make him complain, or to stoop his courage
by his hard usage, in my opinion yielded him homage and acknowledgement enough
by this refuse. The only difference of him with others, is because he
complained in other terms, as those who discourse of their loves by silence.
If he had been dumb, he had yet had a greater advantage, in not confessing
that grief and pain was an evil. But I think we need not apply any other
tortures to make his experience and feelings confess what they deem thereof.
To shut our mouth to our complaints, we cannot exempt or shut our breast
from grief, which as a furious fire, if it have not vent by this sighing
place, will grow the more enflamed by its constraint: He will find it as
sharp and irksome as a poor Country labourer: To be brave and proud in his
words, will not any way diminish his sense thereof, for his virtue consists
only in his patience, but this salubrious and wholesome remedy never wants,
but to those who are in despair. O that we were happy if this virtue could be
found amongst us; yea upon the walls of a besieged City all dustie, our hands
full of galls, and all covered with wounds and blood, as says Seneca* But we
shall as soon find cowardice as generosity, and choler as valor, which in
the fear of sacking a Town, or of our total ruin, o^ of the infallible
loss of our dignity, wealth, o^ family, borowes the apparel of valor, and
under that strange name and vesture, steals the name and glory of Virtue: In
any other place where we will lodge him, we shall find nothing but his
colors. If our particular Interes^ press us of that side, which it makes v^
stoop and bend, we would have it to be the high way of Virtue; and to make it
flexible to our actions, we give it so many disguises, tha^ to establish it in
his first Being, it will not be i^ our power, nor it may be in his own. If
she^ will permit her self to be disposed and managed by us, it must be grossly,
she must suffe^ our corruption, and wholly forget what she is to cloathe her
self with our weakness: The firmest Instruments wherewith we may sta^ and
stop her, are our natural weapons, as Weak^nesse, Inconstancy, and Vanity;
for how true o^ false is Wisdom, which gives place to frenzy, a burning
Fever, and decrepit sickness? What temperance did the Philosopher observe in
the embraces of his wife? Let us confess that in what degree or quality so
ever he be, that he is always man, and that he cannot forbear to act and
play his own part, what action so ever he will counterfeit, for his Mask and
disguise, is pulled off by truth. Take away the opinion of evil from a fool,
and that of good from a wise man, you will bring them both into their shirts,
and then find that they are two men, which differ nothing but in their
apparel; And extreme folly has yet this affinity with much wisdom, that
they are not joined, and yet not far distant, and that they are constrained
to borrowe one from the other, that which makes them appear in their chiefest
luster and glory. Consider if the soul (in the degree of temperancie) can
produce any thing, but that which is vulgar and common; or if she will discover
any greater then accustomed, she must rush forth of her self, she must
violently draw us, and taking the snaffle in her, teeth, she must bear us
upon her self, with as much temerity and rashness, as that young Son of the
Sun did his Chariot: But the excellence of Virtue consists not in eleuating
our selves high, for it matters not where we are, so we be in rule and order.
The power and greatness of the mind, consists not in an extraordinary motion
of running, but in a firm, constant, an^ sure pace, and still equal to
himself: Wha^ then shall this rash sally be, but irregularity, and this
irregularity but a degree of folly: Le^ us seek the confirmation of my speech
in the School of the Philosophers. Plato believed no^ that a solid and sound
Understanding ought or should knock at the gate of Poesy, because the Poet
(says he) sitting on the chair of the Muses, furiously powers forth all which
comes into his mind, without tasting or digesting it* It escaped from Homers
tongue; That it is goo^ sometimes to be a fool: Cato affirms, that the best
wits are those which have most variety* But Aristotle makes it clear, that a
Wit which mounts it self into the supreamest degree of excellency and rarity,
is indebted to his irregularity, which issues forth from his seat of Wisdom,
and is therefore of the jurisdiction of folly, as if the soul had no surer
sign of her perfect health then sickness: It is a misfortune to owe his
Wisdom to folly, his glory to contempt, and his reformation to Vice. To
sprinckle on us Oracles and Prophesies, according to the divine Philosopher,
the soul must abandon her usual custom and pace, and be surprised, and
forced by some heavenly raptures and rauishment, thereby to steal (as
Prometheus did fire from heaven) the secrets of the Divinity. That if he whom
antiquity believed, to merit the name of Wise above all other men, has
refused it as unworthy (although Humane Nature enforced it self to produce him
as a bright Sun among the shining wits of his age) by what right and
jurisdiction must we attribute it to him. Shall we be Judges of that whereof
we are incapable, and shall our ignorance have this reputation above his
knowledge, to be believed more true therein? We are prodigal of that which we
have not, and think to judge more truly then he, of those colors which we
have never seen, and whereof himself alone has had some knowledge, though
imperfect. Is it not true that Socrates had more knowledge of his wisdom, and
of himself, then all those vulgar people, who with confused voices, and ill
assured words, would be wiser then him in this Art and Science of wisdom?
Socrates had too much freeness in his soul, to use any counterfeiting
disguise; that if he would attribute to his modesty, the contempt which he
made of himself, his wisdom, and condition, I will esteem him guilty of no
less vanity, because there is no less error and vice, to conceal and cover
the truth one way, then another. Let us therefore stay at his free confession,
rather then to our own rash judgments; and yet notwithstanding we shall give
him no less praise and glory then antiquity has done. But let us receive this
contentment, that it be done in our sight, and to our knowledge, and that he
draw up Art and Science from the bottom of his ignorance, and his greatest
and iustest glory, (with so much reason and justice) to have despised and
contemned himself; And from thence let us derive this consequence or
Corollary: That the power of man goes no farther then this point, to cause to
issue and stream forth some riuolets of clear water, from the bottom of a
deep and dirty Well: He still savors of slime and dirt, and if he have
strength enough to dissemble it to our senses, he has not sufficient art to
disguise it to the truth. He deemes himself powerful through the use and
frequecie of his own opinions. He resounds aloude the wealth and treasure of
his imagination, and has reason to prise and value them at so high a rate,
because all his riches is but a dream, his felicities but in outward show and
appearance, his prerogatives but in discourse, and he himself is nothing else
but vanity and lies. Chiron who refused the immortality which was offered him
by the Gods, had learnt in the School of Nature, the esteem which he should
make of so miserable and wretched a condition; wherein there is nothing
immortal but vexation and labor, nor mortal, but contentment. We live in
sorrows and afflictions, or rather they live by and in us, and for the defect
of true causes, we add fantastical bodies thereunto to afflict us. And if we
are reduced to this point, to have nothing without to pain us; we yet make
our selves enemies of our selves, as if our peace and rest were but in
contradiction, and our tranquillity in perpetual apprehension and fear. But
let us proceed to examine the other springs and locks of his nature, thereby
to discover them; to see whether we shall find more or less Vanity in him,
although notwithstanding we purposely conceal the greatest part thereof: For
if all were discovered, it were to be feared, that it being but Vanity, it
would all prove but wind, which would carry away with it the subject whereon
we are to entreat.

The end of the first Discourse.
The second Discourse.
Of the Senses.
SECTION. I. The soul and the body are united together by so strong a link,
that as the body cannot move but by the means of the soul: so the soul
cannot move toward external things, nor know them but by means of the senses.
Rivers do not sufficiently discover the nature of their head Springs, and
men's actions yield not knowledge enough of their Original; their perpetual
motion, bereaues from our eyes (through its violence) the means how to know
them; and from our thoughts, the means how to judge of them: It is the flight
of a bird, which leaves no trace in the air behind him: we must therefore
follow him as he goes, to know what he is, what is the principal mark
whereby he differs from other creatures, what are his privileges,
faculties, and means, whereby he receives knowledge, the aid and assistance
whereof, (besides the perpetual trouble wherein it entertaines him) fills him
full of vain glory and presumption: In so doing, we shall see Reason in her
castle, how she establishes her self with power and authority: what is her
beginning, her progress, and her end: how she finds not in us any free,
common, and natural entrance, but by the senses, which are as the Sentinels of
the soul, disposed without to advertise her of all that passes, and to
furnish the principles and matter; to establish this proud building, wherein
she afterward sits as in her Throne of majesty, which I term Science, or the
knowledge of things: For if all things that are known, may be known only
according to the faculty of the knower; we must acknowledge that we are
solely bound to them for this knowledge, because it does necessarily begin, and
likewise end in them. For by the means of the senses, Imagination, Memory, and
Opinion is framed and formed, and from these imaginations being once placed in
quietness, and of memory and opinion, reduced in order by judgment, is
derived the knowledge of things.

To pass on, and proceed with more facility to this knowledge, we say that
the Sense is a faculty joined in a certain proportion and harmony, with its
proper object; as the Sight to colors, Hearing to sounds, Smelling to sents,
Tasting to savors, and Feeling to cold, heat, and other natural qualities,
whereof the subjects or causes consists and this by the means of the air,
which receives, retains, and bears, as a Mediator, these sorts of the one to
the other subject. These five messengers carry to the interior powers (endewed
with knowledge) all that we can comprehend or desire: And they all thrust
forward to common sense, as to their center, where they faithfully report the
images of those things, according as they have gathered and collected them,
which after judges and discerns thereof. Their particular power is confined
and limited within the bounds of the object which is prescribed them, without
whose extent they never advance: For the eyes neither judge nor know any thing
but colors, nor the ears but only those tones and sounds wherewith they are
stricken: But common sense judges of the one and the other severally, never
confounds them, and is industriously careful to present them to the
imaginatiue; who as an ingenious Painter, receives and gathers the lively
forms, which being cleansd of sensible conditions, and particular qualities,
become universal; and are capable to be presented to the Understanding, being
thus disroabd of their gross apparel, and guided by the light of the
Intellect; an agent which stands at the entry, as a Torch to hinder either the
order or confusion of images or forms which may meet and assail one the other
in the crowde; and then presently presents them to the still and quiet
Intellect; who having opinioned upon these forms that have been presented to
him, judges which are profitable, and which prejudicial; and then offers them
afterward to our Will, together with his judgment thereon: Who as Mistress
of the Powers, ordaines that they shall all embrace her party, and so to follow
that which pleases, or else to eschew and avoid that which displeases him;
But to the end, that in the absence of objects the Understanding may have
wherewith to employ and entertain himself, he commits to the guard and
custody of Memory, those forms which are showed to him by his fancy, to
present them to him as often as it is needful; and although the subtilty, and
quick actiuitie of these different motions are almost insensible, we must
nevertheless thus dispose and order them; although one only motion does in
one and the same instant touch all these different strings, which concur to
the sweet harmony of the thoughts, and motions of a well-ordered mind, thereby
to enlighten with more familiarity, the beginning, progress, and end of
matters; and how, and in what manner material things are made spiritual,
thereby to have more communication and commerce with our soul. And yet
notwithstanding, it is not a necessary consequence that this order be so
religiously observed: For I speak of free operations, which are made in a
sound Understanding, and not of those who permit themselves to be guided and
governed by their own opinions, and who content themselves simply to follow
the great high way, as the more frequented and beaten; without enquiring where
they go, nor why they follow this sort of life, because their affection and
fancy, which has received the forms which Sense presented to them, with some
particular recommendation and favor, presented them likewise as soon to the
sensual appetite under the form of good, or evil: who without communicating
it to his superior Judges, commands as a Lieutenant general over the moovable
powers who are subject to him, which are dispersed in the Muscles, Arteryes,
and other parts of the body, that they obey him, either to approach, or retire;
to fly, or follow; and to perform such other motions, as is requisite and
proper to the impression that is given them by this sensual appetite.

SECTION. II. The different operation of the Senses concludes not that there
are five, no more then the different effects of the rays of the Sun, that
there are many Suns.
IT seems to me (with some probability and appearance) that the number and
multitude of the Senses might be reduced to that of Feeling; for as the most
delicate parts of the body feel cold or heat, good or evil, more sensibly
and lively then the grosser: so Man touched with the same object, seems to be
diversely touched, because his body (in her tenderest parts) receives a feeling
so delicate and subtle, that it loses the name of feeling, and then we give
it another according to our fancy and opinion; although in effect, that
proceeds from the disposition or delicateness of the sensible part; the which
the more it is small, tender, and subtle, the more the feeling becomes
delicate and subtle. And indeed the same object which touches us, if it be
generally over all the body, that we term feeling, or if he meet with any
part more lively or animated, as in the superior part of man, where nature
has lodged (as in a heaven) the Intelligences and the lively forms and images
of the Divinity, the same object (I say) which in all the body could meet with
none but with gross parts, could not make, that the feeling should produce the
effects of all the other Senses, according to the part where he met, the which
the more delicate it is, the more this feeling does subtilise, and in the end
purifies it self so, that it seems to be absolutely some other thing, and to
have no resemblance with that which the vulgar and popular voice terms
feeling: For if the object touch our taste, the sense and feeling is far more
subtle then when it touches our foot, hand, or any grosser part of the body:
And therefore we will term it no more feeling, but savor or relish: If it be
present it self to the nose, it subtilizeth it self the more: If to the
hearing again, more: If to the sight, it is with such a subtilty and purity,
that it seems to be an opinion merely erroneous to call that sense feeling;
because the object which strikes it, touches it not hard enough, or that it
does not hurt or offend so much and so lively in this part as in others. If
nevertheless they will behold the Sun with open eyes, this pricking burning
pain which they feel in their eye, will be enough sharp and sensible to
draw this confession from their tongue: For were it so that the object touched
not our eye: but that this faculty of seeing depended wholly of him, he would
imagine all things of one and the same color. If the feeling he receives by
the degrees of the object, which are conuayed to him by the means and
assistance of the air, made him not to observe the difference, as if he
always look through a green or red glass, all that is presented to him,
appears of the same color. That if this faculty were absolutely in us, that
the thing touched us not, that the object had no right, but of patience and
reception, and not of action or emission. We should see all equally, without
being more interested of one object then of another, because on touches us not
more then another. But our weak sight cannot support or suffer the darts and
blows of the Sun, as of some Torch or simple light: We must then
acknowledge and confess, that it is the object which touches it more or
less, since Nature has operated most wisely in us, in giving us senses, which
by their proper power and suggestion, would bear themselves to our ruin and
confusion: Which would fall out if the effect that we feel in our sight by
the splendor of the Sun, proceeded only from the visible faculty, and not
from the blow or the touch of the Sun. But all objects which come to strike
our sight in a reasonable distance, she will be joyful in this meeting and
feeling; she sees and knows this object as much as she can, according to the
resemblance and conformity between her, and that which touches her. Hearing
is nothing else but a feeling of the tune or sound in this part, the which
accordingly more or less, as it strikes our ear, makes the sound grave or
harsh, sweet or displeasing: and if it strike us too rudely and violently, it
then not only touches the ear, but all the whole body, as when a great noise
or thunder makes all things tremble and shake under us, and seems to strike
and astonish the foundations of houses by this sudden and violent feeling. In
a word, feeling is performed by the means of the air, which according to the
power of the object, and as it is bent against us, or such part of our body,
makes either the visible, the sound, the smell, the taste, or the feeling, which
is universally over all the body, and which the common people believe, does
only merit the name of feeling. Nevertheless, because in all doubtful
matters my humor is not to affirm any thing; I therefore leave to the opinion
and judgment of every one, the free choice and liberty, to believe what he
pleases.

And I care not if they are one, or many, since the diversity of their functions
seems to merit, if not an essential difference, yet a different name. It
suffices that we have the center of their operations in the common sense,
which together verifies their style, their rule, their form. If he abuse it, I
appeal, He is Judge and party: Nevertheless, because the multiplicity of
motions of that thing which passes in our thoughts, and which to this end is
refined by the labor of the operation of understanding, seems at first
aboard, to disburthen it self of that which is grossest in her, and not to
retain but the simplest and most perfect Essence; to make it the sweeter, and
more familiar to the taste and palate of the mind; yet I doubt that she
estrangeth her self the more, and that the more she is spiritualized to our
fantasy and mind, the less she discovers her self, and the more she
grows great and corporal to our understanding, I mean she estrangeth her
self from the truth.

SECTION. III. Nature being jealous of secrets, permits not the senses to
discover the essences of things, nor that they can convey any thing to our
Understanding, that is not changed and corrupted by them in the passage.
THe so different opinion of things, makes us plainly see, that we are not
yet arrived thereunto. We cannot take hold of them in a good place: we deuest
them at the entrance of their proper qualities, and receive new knowledge of
the mind, and such impression as she pleases.

Of the object which presents it self to us, every one of our senses seize
that which is pleasing, and proper to him, except the essence, that is to say,
the true being thereof, so that all our Art is to know the object by this sort,
but not that he is of this sort. Vice and the defect of our knowledge, does not
change, or alter it in any thing. The child which looks through a red glass,
has he not cause to laugh to see thy face of that color, but have thou not
more cause to laugh to see how he is abused and deceived, and the soul, which
in our body will intermeddle to judge all according as it is athwart so many
gross and thick glasses, as are our senses, and susceptible of so many
different colors. Does she afford less cause? Again, if all that we see, we
saw to be all of one sort; we might then establish a certain knowledge of
our ignorance, and not of the thing, for the true Being and Essence thereof is
in it self, and cannot discover it self to our knowledge. Truth cannot glide,
and pass into our understanding, because our senses change and corrupt that
which it brings us from without; and that of things which by them comes into
our fancies, is obscured in its passage: And as much difference and distance,
as there is between the thing, and the image and resemblance thereof: so much
difference there is between the true reality of the thing, and that which we
imagine we know: yea, there is more; for between man and his picture, there
is some resemblance: but our senses being too weak to apprehend and comprehend
that of truth, cannot so much as represent us the image or figure thereof;
because there is no comparison or resemblance between true and false: But our
senses deceive themselves, and contradict and contrary one the other: as in
painting, the picture which in our eyes seems a corporal statue, is found
smooth and flat when we feel it. In these contrary apparances, the one must
needs be true, and the other false, if rather they are not both false. The
senses therefore do not carry the image of truth to common sense, since the
image ought still to be the resemblance of the thing. If we press the corner
of our eye, we shall see two Candles for one. Our hearing being somewhat
stopped, receives sounds otherwise then they are. The sick Patient finds wine
sour and bitter, which in health he holds to be sweet and pleasant. The
Senses likewise find themselves abused by the power of the understanding. The
passions of the soul change their function. Love places a thousand rarities
of beauty in her object; and Hatred, and Disdain as many imperfections. The
Vermilion and the Ceruse, which to our knowledge adornes and beautifies the
face of a woman, enflames our amorous desires, and despite of all these
shows, and apparances; we say they will never fade or fail, and we shall be
believed to have far more reason to quarrel the truth thereof it self, then
to contradict it. It is true, that if thereon we are pressed, or called in
question, we cannot retire farther back: we must fight, and it hazardeth the
entire loss of Arts and Sciences. In such a cause I know it is far fitter to
cast away our weapons, then to use them, and not to support so unjust a
quarrel, with so weak defenses: I know not who shall be judge hereof, and for
my part I name and institute complesancie, to be Arbitrator of this difference.
And I do not wonder if the Epicuriens submit us to the mercy of the senses,
with so much severity and tyranny, that they permit it to be more lawful for
us to invent all sorts of lies and fictions, then to accuse them of falsehood.
Those Philosophers cannot choose but establish excellent Arts and Sciences, since
they are so religious in their principles, and they well demonstrate by their
Atoms, the faith and sound belief which they want in their weak beginnings.

It is true that in the Spagerycall Art, the more things are discharged from
the gross accidents and qualities which enuiron them, the more they are made
perfect, and essential; but it fares not with our Understanding as with a
Lymbecke; because the labor of our mind does in nothing touch the true being
of the thing; and the strongest stroke which he can give to apprehend it, is
this first communication of the Senses to the things which are nearest by their
faculties, relation, harmony, measure, and true proportion which is betwixt
them and their object by the interuention of Nature, so as then when one of the
Senses has carried to Common Sense the figure of his object, he is so far
from being cleansed and purified by this Idea; or that he communcates more
easily by the virtue of his being, that he is much the further off it. And as
the sides of an Angle the more they are continued the more they are distant one
from the other: so the more those figures or Images are borne to the common
sense, and are purified to make them capable and worthy of our understanding,
the more they estrange themselves from the object which they represent, and
consequently from his true being. Our thoughts run afafter objects to embrace
them, but in vain, for they can overtake nothing but shadows, through the
aid and assistance of their weak imaginations. It is a handful of water,
which she will retain and hold, and the more she graspes fast her hand, the
swifter it runs out. But since thoughts enjoy nothing else of the thing then
the Id^ea, can we say, that it is a subject capable to contain him, to
possess it; yea in a being more certain, sure, and purer then she is. If we
say there is so small reason to measure a right line by a crooked one, to know
the true measure thereof, and that a square cannot be measured by an Orb or
circle, although these lines and figures are of the same nature, and differ not
but accidentally, is it possible that we would so proudly measure and know the
truth of things, by so false an instrument; and which has so small resemblance
to its true being: It is to esteem the shadow above the light, to give more
belief to dreams, then watchings, and more to prise and value appearance and
show, yea of not being, then of the true being of the thing it self. This
faculty of sense which distills through all our body, is descended from above,
and from our soul, as the light of the Sun, which exposes to our eyes the
beauty, but not the Essence of things that enuiron us: Since Nature it self
(according to Plato) is nothing else but abstruse and Enigmaticall Poesy, as
an ouer-vailed painting resplending, with infinite variety of false lights,
thereby to give unto the appearance of our reasons, and the weakness of our
conjectures more cause to admire the sacred and powerful hand of our divine
Painter, God; who in all the corners of the world, and chiefly in man, has
engraven the Caracters and Images of his Divinity.

SECTION. IV. Science (or knowledge) is the mark and seal of the Divinity,
but that which resides among us here in Earth, is nothing else but abuse,
trumperie, and vanity.
Our Knowledge is but a Vanity, his assurance has no other foundation but
doubt. There is nothing more weak or frail then his principles: His
beginnings are tender and childish, we must lead them by the hand: They had
need have aid and support from every one, of a firm and undoubted belief
for want of valable reasons. If our faith did not maintain them, they could
not subsist of themselves. Also none will permit that they be examined or
proved, for the trial and quest will be of too dangerous a consequence: But
there can be no principles, if the Divinity have not revealed them, and
therefore there is no science or knowledge. All contrary presupposition has no
less authority one then the other, If reason make not the difference. That
which we will establish for reason, it must needs be reason it self, and not
our own opinion. If it be lawful for us to inform our selves of the
Principles of Sciences; yea, of that which is held and maintained for the most
certain, and true by the common consent of all Philosophers; we shall find
that by their false presuppositions, they establish a knowledge of Truth: For
they will measure material things by immateriall; although nevertheless they
will have the thing which measures, of the same nature, with the thing
measured: As their numbers which are not measured but by numbers, and their
lines, by lines: But the point is the principle of their measure; The point is
nothing, they have therefore no point of a principle in their measure. There is
nothing so opposite and distant, as being from not being: How will they then by
the not being of the point, pass to the infallible and sure demonstration of
the true Being of the body? Can they give any other assured foundation to the
point, the line and the superficies, then their imagination? Let them not
therefore attempt to measure imaginary things, since they are of the same
nature, and that there is nothing more different then real Being to
imaginary, from the line to the perch, and from the Angle to the Compass.
Let the Surueyer of Lands make use of his perch, to measure the earth: but let
not the Astrologer form in his head or mind any imaginary pearches to measure
heaven; the distance of the planets, or the extent of the Zodiac: Let our
gross sense, be the test of true and false, since we have none more sure: It
will ill become us to play the wise men above our senses and understanding: Our
wit can neither form nor frame any thing beyond it, which has any foundation.
This is to undertake too much: They make us confess despite of our selves,
that they are the expert Masters therein, and that we have no right but in
obedience, not in counsel.

If the Mathematicians will not that the point measure the line, the line the
superficies, nor the superficies the body: Why will they that this body framed
in their imaginations, by the weauing and connection of the point, the line and
the superficies which is but imaginary; be capable to measure a body physical
and real, which admits nor knows any point, line, or superficies: It is to
establish Principles with too much tyranny, not to give leave to examine them;
Since the knowledge which results thereof, is a bird of the same nest: and that
he ought to inform himself of all, before he give us demonstrations for
Articles of faith, which have no other foundation, but doubt and incertainty:
For we most say with Epicure, that all things are compounded of points, since it
is the beginning, middle, and end of a line. But the line is to the
Superficies, that which the point is to the line, and the superficies to the
body, that which the line is to the superficies, wherefore this point being in
all, and through all to the line, must likewise be in all, and throw all to to
the body; For withdrawing by the power of the imagination (because this is
solely the work of imagination) all the points which may meet, or can be
imagined in the line; there will then remain no more line, or that which
remains will have no more points: But she cannot be divided but by the points,
therefore either the line shall be nothing more; when the points shall be
taken away, or she shall be indivisible in her length, because she is not
deuisible, but by the points which shall be no more. May I not then conclude of
the absurdity of their Demonstrations and Principles: For the same that we have
done to the line, by withdrawing of the points, we may do to the superficies
by the substraction of lines, and to the body by the substraction of the
superficies, and there will nothing remain to us but the point, which they
themselves can neither express nor define, but by negation: But can there be
found any thing in the body of Nature, which is nothing; and nevertheless is
every where, and composeth all, and that from thence we may infer, that the
Mathematician is nothing, nor yet his Art and Science: why then will we borrowe
of imagination the principle of so real and true a Being, as the body which
falls under our senses, since there is no conformity nor resemblance of the
measure, to the thing measured.

The Astrologers have more reason to form Epicicles to the Sun and Moon:
and because they cannot attain thereto, they are constrained to lend a body,
and a form to their inventions. If they cannot approach the Sun, they will
approach the Sun near to them, to form him material springs and locks, to
the end that they may manage him according to their own pleasures and fashion,
and that he may not escape from them, and as well they shall not be believed:
But what, does it seem to them, or do they think that the divine providence,
who rules and limiteth the motions of all things, could do nothing without
them, and that Heaven, if it were not hung fast by her Poles, and the Sun and
Moon linked and nailed fast to their Heaven, that they would fall on our
heads: That the Planets could not move, because every moment without rule and
order they met and contended, and troubled themselves in their course and
revolution: As if I say, this divine providence had not established so much,
but a fairer order above, among these celestial bodies, (where in outward show
and appearance he is more pleased, because he delights in cleanness and
purity) then he has done below here among the elements, which take not the
hand and place one of the other: but every one keeps himself in his proper
place and station ordained to him. Earth mounts not up to the Region of fire,
nor the air throws her self not down into that of water, but according to
their usual custom and commerce, and the harmony which Nature has contracted
between them, as is seen in the mixture of compounds: which of their
discordant accords and agreements, yield so sweet a Harmony and Diapazon: But
since this wise Mother of the world is so careful to conserve peace among
beasts, who devour not one the other: yea, likewise among corruptible bodies,
although age having destroyed them, she can easily make and propriate others of
the same clay, and of the same matter which she moulds, and works continually
in her hands, by a far stronger consideration she has reason to entertain
and maintain: a perfect peace, rule, order, and measure, among those
caelestiall bodies, and that it were not in her power to establish (if they
were entermixed and confused) in the order which was prescribed to them from
their beginning, by him who never had, nor shall have end or beginning. They
can, and are well conseru'd without them, and without their Epicicles, and he
among them who can erect his eyes in the contemplation of this great body in
comparison of the earth, of that which we possess and enjoy, will assuredly
judge that Nature uses us as children, because it gives us nothing but trifles
of small or no value, yea, which are not worth the losing: in regard of those
which we want and enjoy no^. I believe that the Epicicle which they give to the
Moon, differs not much from that of their wit, and I think I wrong them not
in the comparison. A heavenly body does at least deserve as noble a situation,
as a feeble, and earthly imagination. They conduct, and govern themselves,
very well without us, and I would to God we could do it so well without them:
and although their influence, (whereof man cannot know the cause, and motion,
if he ascend not to the head spring, and fountain,) distribute us Happiness,
or Misfortune, good, or evil; yet nevertheless, we will give them but a
younger Childs portion, and will make them trot, retire, and advance,
according to our pleasures; but our Vanity cannot be concealed, or kept from
them, they retain record thereof, so, as whosoever can break open, and
discover those seals; he shall presently, and palpably behold, things past,
present, and to come, and as the flood of all mortal matters runs
incessantly with one, and the same impetuositie. Our designs are fair, and
generous, but their execution ridiculous; our mountains of Pride, and Vanity
produce, and propagate us nothing but Mice, and are more to be lamented, and
pitied in the weakness of our wits, then those small Pigmees, for the
weakness of their bodies, and in their enterprise upon Hercules. If those
Giants, which would heretofore assault, and scale Heaven, yea, the Throne of
the Gods, and pull the Thunder out of Jupiters hands, had finished ^h^ir
intended enterprise, they would have (...) us of what matter the Sun was
(...), how he is captive, bound, and tied to (...), what is his Epicycle,
Apogee, and other (...) mysteries, and functions; if their presumption* and
rashness were not at the very instant, (...) under the very weight, and
burden of (...) ^^mour, and weapons; to show that the (...), Presumption, and
Vanity of our Reasons brings us nothing else but shame, and confusion.

The principles of these Sciences are weak, shaking, and trembling; it is a
labor to support, and affirm them, but when they are avered, and that their
principles, and demands are granted, then they afterward triumph in their
demonstrations. They approve a thousand fair things, without that there
proceed thereof any good effect: can the industry of m^n make a circle so
round, that the right line coming to make the angle of contiguitie shall not
touch it, but in one point, and not imaginary, and that there can be no
smaller sharp angle given but that: as if the sharp right-line angle, being a
quantity, cannot be divided into so many parts, that it meet with a smaller
then that, which the angle of Contiguitie gives. We must send them to the
School of Sense, and they shall find themselves far wide, and distant from
their reckoning: But how can they term demonstrations, those apparances of
reason, which prove every thing contrary. For our Mathematicians, and
Astrologers say, that the Earth is a fixed, and immovable point, about which,
mooues, and turns this great Mass of Heaven: Cleanthes, Nicetas, and
Copernicus, have proved that the Heavens were immovable, and that the Earth
wheeled about the Oblique circle of the Zodiac, turning round about his
Axell-tree: Are they not appointed, and placed directly contrary; have they
taken any other footing then on their principles, have they advanced any thing,
but by Demonstration; and yet nevertheless, we see them contradict, and
contend in the effect, and proof of their opinions: Who then shall be the
true Judge between these two different Sects; for if we permit our selves to
be carried away by the force, and strength of humane reason, they have both of
them spoken truth: Is there any thing truer then Demonstration, there is
nothing then more true, then the contrary thereof, and consequently, because
one of these two opinions, is necessarily false; if they are not both false.
Then there is nothing truer then falsehood and nothing more certain, then
incertainty, for both of them have operated by Demonstration. But humane
judgment cannot give more weight and belief to one Demonstration, then to
another: since by the chain, and dependence of precedent propositions, you are
directly led to principles, the which if you have not the liberty to
contradict; complain not afterward, to see so many, and so great absurdities,
and such resemblance of contraries, and likewise of so true apparances, if we
call that truth, which restraines, and hinders us from passing beyond the
necessary consequence of a proposition; But for my part, I am not of this
opinion, I call that truth, which is immovable, and which has no other rest,
or refuge, but in the bosom of God, it is the proper place where it reposeth,
she is not of our placing* or disposing: She does every where present, and
profer her self unto us; but a mortal hand is not capable to retain, or hold
her. We seek her, we possess her, and yet we cannot meet her; our Wit is
blind borne, which at high-noone, in the fairest Summer day, seeks the light
of the Sun. We have no nobler design; but our effects, and weak reasons
cannot follow, or second her; and when she falls into our hands, have we where
withal to seize, and maintain her in our possession? our means, and powers
are too weak to apprehend her: we perpetually run, and wheel about her, but
the contrary sh^wes, which we find in all sorts of things, and subjects, make
us apparently see, that they are but the barks, and rindes of truth; and if
we term the outside of our Discourse, Reason, (which every one frames in his
mind,) according to his capacity, to apply it to the knowledge of the thing,
shall we not then say, that there is nothing more weak, and inconstant: if
this reason have truth still on her side, see how many contrary faces, and
semblances we give to truth; There was never a proposition so firmly held, or
mainetained, which has not, or may not receive at least a hundred contrary
reasons, if we will cast off opinion, and so sail without her, to what wind
shall we expose, and abandon our sails, if not that being met, and beaten
with so many winds, equally contrary, we remain fixed, and immooueable in
our station. This point will infallibly be both the Center of all motion, and
the rest, and tranquillity of a well governed mind: But humane knowledge
does not conduct us, she never follows, or shapes this course, if we will
follow any, we must the very selfsame hour, embrace his party, and
quarells. If the Sophister, and he which controules all, knew as well how to
laugh at himself, as at others, I should think his side, and party very
strong: But to believe outward shows, or apparances, it is indeed too great a
simplicity. The liberty of the mind ought not to engage it self, except in
those things wherein we are not permitted to rest doubtful; as in our
Religion, and Faith, where we ought to hold, and retain our written lesson,
from that Wise, Holy, and Sacred Word of God; and not that so weak an
Instrument as our humane reason, should intermeddle to enquire, or judge; for
whosoever contesteth, does not freely consent. But it is not so with Sciences,
for if reason it self be not their foundation, we are not bound to pass
farther in believing them* that which is received by the opinion, and common
consent of many, must not here pass, as the form of a reuokeable law, and if
all men believe it, yet I would the more doubt it; their ignorance may have
some reputation with themselves, but not with others. From the cradle, we say,
that one and one are two: but we must acknowledge, that the greatest reason of
this principle, is, because it is so held and received among us: for this
Tenent holds more of custom then of reason, and of opinion then truth; as we
will more amply declare hereafter. It is upon this foundation that Plato by the
means of numbers, eleuates and caries his thoughts even into the very bosom
of God, seeming to serve himself hereof, as of a ladder to mount and unite
himself to this divine knowledge. Has he not reason to make great esteem
thereof. Since our Cabalists have so firmly believed them, as it seems that by
them all things (though never so far distant) do approach, and become
familiar to their minds: But they have need of a very soft and tractable wit,
to subject it to the belief of their principles, as if the composition and
collection of the number of two and three which make five, the resultance
thereof were the marriage of the whole body of Nature, which is found
conformable to the opinion of Pythagoras, that two is the matter, and three the
form: That two is the female, because it may be cu^ in two, and equally
divided, and hereby to make it self capable to receive in it self, the motive
power of the form, which is the number of three, as Male^ because it cannot be
equally divided, and therefore unworthy to receive, as the number of two, which
opens it self to receive, and grows great by this commixture, which if it
engender a Male, which is the number of three, you shall find that this three,
propagates the number of five, from whom it is issued, and being again
conjoined together, do compose the number of eight, which they term the full
number, and the accomplishment of all things; where the Creature unites it
self, to his Creator, in a perfect harmony: And this first principle, which
is generally extended every where, being reunited in it self, soundes forth
the most melodious Diapason, which the Musician terms Octaue, and the
Cabalist, the perfect, or full number. So the Musician, and the Cabalist do
need, that the principles of Arithmetique be laid, and confirmed before they
proceed farther to the establishing of their Science; but who can justly say,
that one, and one are two, so as there is no apparent, or pregnant reason to
doubt thereof; which is, that I believe not, for there cannot be found in
nature two things, which are so entirely one, and the same. It must then needs
be, that this one, which you join to the first, to make two, are somethi^g
different; for either it is the same, or i^ is (...) from the first: if it be
the same, (...) is nothing but brings forth her like, and ^hey will make but
one, and not two; as if to a sound, you add, and join the same sound, so much
the more you add the same, and it will still be one, and the same sound;
until you add, and conioyne another which is different, which then will make
the second, the third, the fourth, the fifth, or any other consort, or Diapason.
So if the one, which you add to one, be the same, you will never engender but
one. Or if it be different, as it is necessary to make two, according to the
aboue-said example; it is not then one, and one, which make two, but only
then, when one is conjoined, and added to any thing, which is different to it.

Again, is not every number a quantity, and is not number composed of his
other parts: but number is not composed but of Unities, which joined together
make all* therefore unity is a quantity, because the parts thereof* are of
the nature of all, and consequently of the whole diuisible. For Unity is a
number, if rather out of it self it give no number: and if it be not so, we
must ask them, what then shall be the number, which they will give us from
Unity, and to cut it off, since it is not; or if they give us two, or thr^e for
a number, in substracting two Unities from the one, and three from the other,
there will nothing more remain to them, therefore the number must be nothing,
or the Unity must be number, and if it be a number, it must be a quantity,
and if a quantity, then diuisible into as many parts as we please; so as
instead of joining threescore and ten unities, to make up the number of
seventy, we should not divide but one of these Unities into so many parts,
until we had met with the number of seventy, so then there will remain sixty
nine superfluous Unities: And is it not thriftie husbandry, since the division,
which I can make of one only Unity, into threescore and ten parts, has
filled up the number of seventy? But this way, and progress would be
infinite, so that when you add one, to one, thinking to make two, I say, you
make forty, or the number which I please, for every one of these Unities, may
be divided into twenty parts; which conjoined all together, will make forty,
or any such number, which I please: how then can it be proved, that one, and
one, being separated; and not being then two, if they are placed one near the
other, that this congression, should cause them to be two, and that if the one
of these Unities, which composeth these two, come to be divided in it self,
that this division should be the cause to make them two? for we meet with the
cause, why those two, are made Diametrically contrary to the former, in regard,
addition, and division produce the same effect here in, which is necessarily
false; that one, and one are two, it must be atributed to the use, and custom
of the World, thereby to facilitate commerce, and trafique betwixt Merchants,
and Countriemen. But to permit, or tolerate it in Philosophy, or Astrology;
which by a long chain of numbers, and calculations, will raise their insolency
as high, as in the rank of the Gods; in taking away, and disioynting this
piece, from his building, you see all the rest reuersed, and overthrown, and
my Philosopher to run after to gather up the pieces thereof, without being
able to recover, or sow together any rags, or fragments thereof, so that to
escape this ruin whereunder he sees himself surprised, and beaten down, he
is in the end constrained to throw himself into the arms of Ignorance, as
his nursing Mother, who is pleased with our defects, and faults, and with much
delight entertaines, and supports all our infirmities; so that all these great
Chieftaines of the School sects, who in the most perfect knowledge of things,
which fall into the wit of men, have professed to know nothing, and have
inclined, and bent themselves that way, as the sweetest pillow to repose a well
tempered brain, and head on.

If we demand of Physicians what is their Principle, they will never agree
among themselves to tell us; how then will they do it in the rest of their Art
and Science, if the more they advance, the more they estrange and retire
themselves. One tells us that water is the principle of all things, another
that the air is, another that fire, and others that the Atoms are their
principle; and thus we find to be Thales, Anaximander, Pythagoras, Parmenides,
Anaxagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, Anaximenes, Plato, Xenophon, Aristotle,
Diagoras, and Epicurus: whose different opinions will be troublesome, and not
much profitable in (...) our Discourse. They incessantly contradi^^ themselves,
and in this sedition they undo, and ou^^throw themselves with their own
proper weapons: And in this great disorder do they not openly expose
themselves to their Enemies, and so give them infinite advantage to confute and
confound them, in that they only labor to their own ruin and destruction?
As those armed children on earth, which a civil war causes to dye in their
birthes. And indeed this Philosophical sedition, does strangle Science in her
Cradle, yea before she is borne. How then will they do, since they hinder the
growth of so fair a Science, that it cannot take deep root, and sprowt forth
so high and flourishing as Heaven, and make the Gods desirous to taste and
relish the sweetness of its fruit. Every way a Vanity. But among so great a
noise and clamor of Philosophical brains, I demand who among them shall be
held the truest. Do they all want Reason, and profess as much the one as the
other: I believe that the causes of their quarrels will rather fail, then the
grounds and reasons to contradict them. They use Reason as an Ambodexter, who
adheres as much to lies as truth, and who being orevail'd with the mask of
outward show, does debosh and abandon himself to all sides: so many new
subjects, so many contrary and different opinions as their Philosophers. They
agree not among themselves, that fire is hot, when there should be none but
the Pirrhoniens, to make them rest doubtful thereof, and despite of their
knowledge, to affirm nothing certain. They suspect the senses, as if they
were half corrupted by the familiarity of those things which enuiron them. And
if we will condemn them according to the mercy of Sense, we shall find that
Beasts suffer the same jurisdiction that we do, and that by the privilege of
their sense we cannot refuse them, the liberty to leave or choose, to take or
refuse, to absolve or condemn, according to the quality of good or evil,
which presents its self to their imagination; by the particular favor, and
recommendation of their senses. For they have learnt in their School, that
fire is hot, and they know it as well as we, who can yield no other reason, and
cannot pass beyond the knowledge of this cause, above that which our
experience, and Sense has taught us. The Ape will beware, and not approach too
near the fire, except the faggot be small, and unbound, because of the
discourse he holds in himself, to avoid the like disaster, wherein he was
formerly fallen. But what have we to say, if they have their sense, and
feeling, more subtle then ours, does it not thence follow, they have a purer
knowledge, a simpler resemblance, and a more harmonious condition then we? The
Stagge has his Hearing, the Eagle her Sight, the Dog his Smelling, the Ape
his Taste, and the Tortoise her Feeling, more subtle then we, although of this
last only, as of the most brutall, some attribute us the preheminency, and
thereby they find the objects more discovered, and naked then we do: that
which a hundred ensuing propositions do but imaginarily discover to us, this
beast sees it with a simple, and first innate knowledge; and who can deny, but
that it is more noble, and perfect in this kind of beast, then in us? If it
be true, that those things which are most approaching, and nearest to the
truth, are the most worthy; Is not the Eagle to be esteemed, and held a
truer obseruer of the light, and greatness of the Sun, then the sight of
Man, which flies, and soars so low, that the least obstacle astonisheth him,
and his own proper weakness, and imbecility hinders him: That if for the
conservation of our own good temper; and the knowledge of Herbs, which are
proper, and necessary for the restoring of our health, we will atribute the
privilege, and advantage to our selves: Let us see of a Man, and a Beast
hurted, which of the two will be soonest cured: The Serpent among a thousand
different Plants, and Herbs; throws himself on that which is proper to him,
and returns to his Combat more courageous, and generous then before: whiles
Man in his conference, and consultation of Herbs, and of their properties,
and qualities, runs most incertainely after his remedy, which many times
proves more prejudicial, and hurtful to him then his wound, or sickness.
When reason fails us, we then employ experience, and the conference of events,
which most commonly produces a bad consequence, in regard they are still
different, and variable: But this knowledge which causes the Serpent without
premeditation, to take that which is proper for him; either it is given, and
infused to him by Nature, or it is done by a simple, and primary apprehension,
which at first sight, discovers him the truth of the object. But howsoever,
it is far more noble, and absolute then ours; which consists, but only of
the Taste, and comparison and conference of so many false things. So beasts do
more certainly know objects then men, because they are led, and conducted
there to, by the light of Nature, which is still certain, and cleere-seeing,
and men by their own, which is but an obscure, and glimmering light; for the
true knowledge, or truth it self, is the tranquillity of the mind; it is an
infallible point, which is expressed in one word* as the perfectest knowledge,
which is attributed to superior Intelligences, proceeds of the first ray of
the mind without reflection, I mean without deuoluing, or ratiotination; for
we need no discourse, but only to approach the thing, which is far distant
from us, or to approach our selves nearer to it: If we have our finger thereon,
there is nothing more unprofitable, then those intricate propositions, then
those lets, and stops of discourse, wherein our thoughts are frequently so
entermixed, and confused, that we shall have sooner done to tear, then to
untie the web, or knot thereof.

SECTION V. Man having some knowledge of himself, (although it be imperfect,)
as also of those whom he frequents, he contemnes their Learning, and esteems
none, but that which is grown in foreign Countries, or which he receives
from an unknown hand.
THe nimblest Wits, are accustomed to frame to themselves most conceptions, but
they are so weak, as they can give no blow to truth; and if we have found it
open, and uncovered, we will in such sort tie, and fix our selves there-to,
that the storms, and tempests, which continually arise in us by the trouble of
our passions, give us too weak iogges, or thrusts to make us forsake the
possession thereof. We should be still inseparably united, and as the heavy
body, which is arrived to his Center, is no longer weighty; so our Soul,
arrived to her Center, and united to her true object, shall have no more
lightness, weakness, or inconstancy: but she is too far estranged from it:
Those Arts, and Sciences, which the Poet said, were given us by the Gods, are
but the shadows, and Images of that which remains in their breast; we find
none but weak ones like our selves, all things go with a trembling, and an ill
assured pace, and it seems they are obliged by one, and the same law, to
follow one, and the same pace, and dance as we do: It seems that our first
Fathers have enjoyed it more pleasantly, and with less contradiction then we;
our ancient Philosophers who succeeded them, have seized it by a thorny place,
which has sown among them so many divorces, and quarrels, that if we bear
any respect, or reverence to their writings, it is as much for their
antiquity, as for their merits: Our Age has seen many great, and excellent
wits, which the farther distant they are from our sight, the nearer they
approach our praise, and recommendation: But because Learning is no longer
prised, and esteemed among us, it seems that she is choked, and smothered
between their hands; it appears to us, she has no more fame, and luster, but
among strangers: we believe, that he in whom we have seen, and observed
some faults, can produce nothing but that which is defiled, and vicious: we
value men, as we do Figures, or Statues of stone, which we prise the more for
their antiquity, and behold them more curiously, and attentively then we would
do a Statue of Gold, or Silver, which we our selves have seen made, although
it were far more enriched by the art, and labor of an excellent workman;
and this only because we have seen a deformed massy piece thereof, whereon
he has began to labor; Let him henceforth do what he can, he cannot remove
this thought from our mind, where as the other has never appeared to us but
in his luster. So those whom we have seen to play the men like our selves,
their Oracles, and Prophets have not been approved, or esteemed among us, as
those ancient Philosophers, whom it seems that we cannot otherwise imagine,
then with their eyes, and thoughts tied fast to the bosom of the Divinity; and
in a perpetual re-search of the dependence, and uniting together of second
causes, to this first sacred spring, and fountain; we have never seen them in
their bed, table, or family: If one and the same Age had made them our
time-fellowes, I know not if the familiarity of their life, had not distasted
us of the familiarity of their wits. That Medales are not prised but for their
rust, and age, and that Man (so weak, and wretched he is) deserves no honor,
or praise, but of those to whom he is unknown: if his memory be too recent,
and fresh, if the fame of his virtues be as yet but in his Orient, he aduanceth
with much difficulty. For as at the rising of the Sun, we see a great thick
fogge of gross, vapors, which seems to arise, but only purposely to
eclipse, and darken his light, until with a bold, and resolute pace, he
trample under his feet the pride of this malignant fogge, who is so ielous,
and envious of his brightness; But in the midst of his course, having
attained the point of our Zenith, then he seems to Triumph over his Enemies,
as anciently under the Image of Apollo, he quelled the arrogance of that
infamous Serpent of the Earth: So I say, the fame, and glory of all those
Illustrious personages, has commonly found its death, in its cradle, and in
her very birth: is still found obscured, yea, almost defaced by the hot vapors
of a thousand envious Spirits, until that after the tract of many years, it
in the end remains Victorious of their life, and likewise proves so of their
callumnie.

And then arrived to the point of the Zenith, their merits have found no farther
hinderance to oreshadowe their glory; and the length of time having transported
them from our sight, has then likewise transported and secured them from the
darts of envy and scandal. If Truth were borne, or resided in the tongue of
our neighbor, it should be undervalued, yea, contemned; whereas we receive it
as an Oracle from that of a Stranger. I admire not if those of elder times were
so ambiguous in their answers: for the difficulty and intricacie thereof,
brought them more admiration. We have too bad an opinion of our selves in this
only, and too good in all other things. If he who by the judgment he makes
of man in general, would yet use him with more contempt (so as it were
equally) we then should have nothing to gainsay, provided I say, That a
Stranger which comes not to us, but by his writings, and by that which is best
in him, could not hope for more particular favor, and applause then another
among us. But because it seems that the glory which we give, and confer to
this last, diminish our own: we will therefore give it far cheaper, and for
less interest to him whom we have not seen, and having nothing to
intermeddle or do with him; But for an end to all, it is always man who
gives, and man who receives. As long as Art aad learning is found in him, it
shall still be to him a reproach of incertainty and ignorance. O that the life
of man is far different from his Writings, yea from himself! Our Pen rules
and gouernes the thoughts which we commit to paper, and inconstancy, those
which we permit to run upon the waves of our imagination: but whosoever
could see them in gross, and in their ordinary demarch and pace, shall find
little less cause to laugh at the vanity and inanity of one then the other,
and at the fantasy of a Philosopher, then we do at the May-games of a
child: For despite of the order and polishing, which we use in the
dependence, and connection of our discourse, we cannot for the most part avoid
or prevent, that our reasons do not contend and assail one the other, as well
as their effects. In this small and short discourse, there are contradictions
enough, but it matters not: Reason contradicts her self; and my opinion can
turn it self no way whatsoever, that she meet not with some of her own
party, and who will maintain her in the point of her reasons, so much humane
knowledge has of auerse and different faces. We incessantly turn round about
objects, and we can neither seize nor apprehend them, but by strange qualities,
and outward apparances. But the appearance and the subject it self, are
different things. If then our judgment stop only to apparances or outward
shows, he judges of some thing which is not the subject. What certainty in
this incertaintie? What light amidst so much darkness? What truth (I say) can
result or arrive to us, if the matter or subject, according to the opinion of
Pythagoras, be in perpetual changes and revolution? If we have no
participation of a true being: If all humane nature be still in the midst
between birth and death, the time present betwixt the past and the future; and
if it be true, that Reason receives nothing, but which is brought him from
without, by the means and interuention of the senses, which cast great mists
between the true and false, and between the object and the thought; She can
very difficultly come to the knowledge of Truth, a-thwart so many clouds of
lusts, Loves, fears, and hopes; and of an infinity of false forms, which
frequently arise from our body, to ouer-vaile and shadow our mind, and to
trouble the power of our imagination: That if our soul do not estrange her
self from the contagion of the body, and from his fantasies and frenzies; it
is in vain that she attempt to reason or consult so certainly, without the
assistance of particular grace, or special privilege which may descend to him
from above. She ought to know that she is shut up, and confined in our body,
as in a strange place. True it is, she bears about her this divine desire of
knowledge; but it is a coin or money, which does nothing else but unprofitably
load and charge her, because it has no current course in that Country where
she is. The senses understand not her language, so that under their pleasure
and mercy, she is enforced and constrained to content her self, with what
portion it pleases them to give her. Her morsels are cut: if she think to
escape this slavery, by the flight of her thoughts, and the labor of a long
meditation, she but draws her chain after her, and despite of her shrill
resounding, finds her self so weak without their assistance, that for the
time which she is retained here in prison, she may say, she is wholly indebted
for the benefit of her faculties, and most free actions, to the favor, good
disposition, and sweet usage of our senses. They are indeed our servants and
our slaves; but yet they have more power and authority in the house then our
selves. We are Masters by the obedience which they voluntarily yield us, and
not by the command which we have over them. Our power lasts but whiles they
please, and if any passion throw them into confusion, our soul then retireth
into her self, all perplexed and fearful, until the disorder be appeased,
and pacified in her Estate, and that every one of our senses be re-established
in his Kingdom.

And how then, after so exact and perfect a knowledge of the weakness,
vanity, and other imperfections of man; shall we yet have the courage to place
him in the rank of the Gods, according to the opinion of Pythagoras, when he
spoke of Dion, whom he said to be as virtuous as a God? yea, and by a higher
strain and ladder; If we will enter into the school of Seneca; Then says
he, When a wise man by the degrees of Reason, has attained so high, that he
has gotten an absolute power, and command over his passions: he has done
that thing which God cannot do; because it is beyond all passions. Is it not
from man's impotencie, to derive a power more sovereign then that of God: For,
for man to glory in his actions, he does a thing which God cannot do: Is not
this a fair consequence of our reasons! O vanity of man, vanity of Science and
Knowledge, the more we advance, the more we still have to advance. Can we
then believe, that this reason which so puffes up our heart, and fills and
enflames our courage, has any thing permanent or subsistent in it, but pride
and vain glorious outward appearance? She knows not how to fight, but
faignedly. Our reasons impetuously follow their point; but meeting with a
stronger they conniue, they escape; and commonly those which are Diametrally
contrary, and so affirmatively maintained, that they seem to partake and
engage in their quarrel the authority of the greatest wits, are yet Diametrally
false, and as much distant from the center of the truth, one as another. We
have nothing more certain then doubts: And for me, if I doubt of the reasons
and principles of those Sciences, whereof we have above discoursed: it may be I
doubt more of the reasons which I have alleged to the contrary.

The end of the second Discourse.
The third Discourse.
Of Opinion.
SECTION. I. To cut off the liberty of Judgment, is to bereave the Sun of
her light, and to deprive Man of his fairest Ornament.
THe senses conduct us (as by the hand) to the knowledge of things: but our
Judgment stumbles at every step, and many times Shipwracks her self against
the error of Opinion: For if the eye of the body judge of the difference of
colors, the eye of our reason very often horrowes a strange light to judge the
qualities of her object. As if our passions and vices, did not fill us with
defects and faults enough, without having need to join those of others,
thereby to bring us the more anxiety and trouble, and the more to obscure us
the knowledge of the truth.

This abuse teaches us, that to know well how to keep, and maintain the
opinion of others, is the end of our knowledge. That Philosopher seeking in the
secrets of Nature, the Being and Essence of things, (notwithstanding any lively
conceptions and true apprehensions, wherewith his soul shall be possessed,)
he shall be likewise fed with many false and absurd ones, the which we
confusedly embrace and espouse, with an equal passion, through the reputation
which they have purchased and gotten among us, upon the pasport of a popular
Judgment. Good money should not authorize the course and passage of false; nor
for bad opinions to condemn those which deserve to be approved and applauded.
It is one and the same fault, absolutely to praise, or to condemn all things
in a man; and I hold it cannot be performed with Justice. Those who have
sought the truth before us, should be our guides, but not our Masters, in such
manner, that they rather teach us how to believe, then dispute. But this
advantage and profit which we receive by them, should be but as a sparkle to
enkindle and inflame our courage, with a generous desire of enjoying this
truth. All the world seek her; their ways are open, and free to all those who
will approach her. Some one think they have given her some assault: Others
stay half way, and yet there will be place found for our reasons. It is the
Butte whereat all aim, but none can strike; it is too far distant from us:
And I believe that as many powers as we employ to attain thereto, they are so
many arrows darted up against this divine Sun, which are scattered and lost
in the clouds of our weak and vain imaginations. Nevertheless, to believe
the only report of others, and to content our selves of their proofs; I hold
it better to essay, and be assured of our own weakness, then to rely upon
the reputation and authority of other men. Our actions are of so small
importance and consequence, that if in their loss they yet enwrappe that of
our time, we should less grieve to employ them in this curious research, then
yet to consume them unprofitably in the vanity of things, where we feel our
selves carried away by the stream and current of the water; I mean by the
error of opinion. Our senses have formerly taught us, that without them reason
is nothing, nor has no place from whence to draw her forces; or from whence
she may take her motions, thereby to know the truth of things, and to
establish a firm foundation, to the end, that by the perquisition which she
makes of things known and discovered, she may pass on to the knowledge of
those, which are obscured and hidden* Let us for this regard content our selves
of the vice and fault which is in us, without contributing any more, through
the vice of our own opinion, and the weakness of our Judgment; which dares
not undertake to con^roule the opinion of others, and less to weigh or balance
the the reasons, which many times are more esteemed, and considerable in the
white beards of their Authors, then in a solid or lawful value; which makes,
that we ought not to admire, if we find so many learned personages among us;
It is, that relying, and resting our selves upon principles, which we have
never proved or essayed; we by this way, find our reason well grounded, and
still assi^^ed by truth her self; if it be true that authority and opinion,
ought to have this credit and reputation. Being curious to know, we do as
those who go to seek fire in their neighbors houses; and having found some,
we stay there to heat our selves, without any more thinking to bring home any
to our own. We stop at the knowledge of others, and forget that which Nature
has infused in us, of the most sucsseptible of this flame; and it may be,
which may produce a more shining fire, then that of whom we have borrowed the
first sparks. This voluntary tyranny of the Pythagoriciens cannot please me,
who for all reasons, and satisfaction of their doubts, make answer, that their
Master held it so. If Pythagoras had been so Religious in the Rules, and
Principles of his Master, so many excellent secrets, had remained buried in the
bosom of Nature, or at least, had never been discovered to him. But because
there are found so few well governed souls, that we ought to assure our
selves, by their proper comportment, and conduction; and that without the use
of common opinions, can follow a firm, and sollid way, it is more fit to
commit them to tuition, not to lose the sight of them, and to stay them against
their nature, by fear of the rod, under the privilege, and authority of their
Superior. How many are there daily seen, who relying upon the only Mercury
of their Wit, flying the common way, do ouerflow in the licentiousness of
their own opinions, and afterward find nothing firm, or stable: no more in
their manners, then in their imaginations: and so of a Wit, too vain, and
subtle to their own prejudice, thinking to erraise, and eleuate themselves
beyond the vulgar, in the research, and knowledge of the most curious things,
they sincke, and drown themselves in the misprision, and not knowing of
themselves: and with the third of their own presumption, do weaue out their
own inevitable loss, and ruin: This confusion of true, and false, and the
perpetual disorder, where their thoughts are engaged in a new Philosophy,
without end, middle, or beginning, may suffice of it self to replace them (as
by force) in the right way, or at least to rectify; and make them see, and
know their erring, and straying; if they love not to be absolutely blind, yea,
to pull out their own eyes, not to be obliged, to see the rays of this divine
Sun of Justice, no more then they do the shadows of their own gross
ignorance: Let us farther believe, that in denying this divine Justice, it is a
reasonable way, and means to decline it. Madmen that you are; what recusation
can you give to that Judge, which makes you to fly from his Jurisdiction. If
you see that all things of Nature, under one same Law, reverence one, and the
same Lord; how can you then escape him? If not, that your Soul being infected
with so mortal a poison, unites, and fastens her self to the corruption of
the body, and will follow the course of mortal things, rather then aspire to
the place of her birth. The liberty they believe they have to penetrate, and
sound the truth of Religion, by the point of their weak, and unprofitable
reasons, is the head spring of so prejudicial a contagion, imagining with
themselves, that it is but a piece of men's invention, requisite, and proper to
link, and chain together their society. But it is not with Religion, as with
Sciences, for they have very opposite, and different proofs; for Science, (or
Learning) is the subject, and handmaid of Reason, and humane reason must be
the handmaid of Religion, not but that she some times essayeth to set, and
place us aloft on her shoulders, that we may thereby see a far off, and to
make us see the truth of that sacred Word, which in his height laughes at the
most proud, and astonisheth the most attentive, with his profunditie; feeds
great ones with truth, and descending to the capacity, and understanding of
the least, entertaines them with a pleasing, and affable language;
Notwithstanding, i^ will be more requisite for us, not to submit it to the
test, or approbation of our humane Reasons, because Religion being singular of
it self, and beyond comparison of any natural things; it is vain, and
ridiculous, for man to fasten thereunto his weak reasons, because they are
incompatible, and have no trafique, or commerce together. Humane, and Divine
things conioyne together, but by a Diameter, which is not of the purchase of
our Knowledge; much less, that which is presented to us by the hand of God;
and yet every one among us, (notwithstanding) having right to contribute his
reasons, thereby to fortify himself, gives him pretext, and color, seeming
to submit to man's reason, and judgment, that which ought absolutely to be
excluded, and chiefly of the vulgar sort of men; who from the depth of their
ignorance, endeavor to advance, and eleuate their heads, to speak their
opinion thereof; which makes, that if we condemn^ any thing of Superstition,
and that if we give it the audacitie, to contemn any opinion which it
reuerenceth, he presently shakes off the yoke to all others, does lose, and
confound all, one among the other, and as if freed, and disburthened of all
which formerly most opressed him, does afterward abandone himself to those
exemptions, and liberties, which through their poison, and contagion, are
capable to engender most dangerous diseases in the estate of the body; and if
we contemn his Judgments, and Counsels in common affairs, is it
reasonable, we permit him to speak in a matter of so great importance?

SECTION. II. All things wonderfully increase, and fortify them selves through
opinion.
Man's judgment has elsewhere enough to employ it self, without he interest,
or engage himself herein; let him look round about him, and he shall find
nothing but corruption, both within, and without, if he desire to remarke, or
remedy it. Which comes to pass by the means of false opinions, who having
usurped the Empire of our reason, have banished the pleasures, which a sweet
Nature presents us, to lodge strange lusts, and desires instead thereof, which
have nothing in themselves but shadows, smoke, and vain apparitions;
resembling those foreign forces, who having violently possessed themselves of
a City, do exclude, and banish the natural inhabitants thereof. I may say,
we have done as the Companions of Ulysses, who despite the prohibition of
their Master, being led by a curious desire to see what was in the bladder
which they carried in their Ship; as soon as their rash curiosity had opened,
and given way to the winds there enclosed, they presently disturbed the calm
Empire of the Sea, with so many storms and tempests, that Ulysses himself
saw himself within two fingers of Shipwreck, and of death. Right so, man
retaining enclosed, and pent up in his imagination, the seed of so many
vanities, cannot refrain from disclosing them; and giving way to his errors,
has risen up so furious a tempest, that the Wiseman himself, although
innocent, can difficultly save his Ship from the fury of the waves, and from
the dangerous Sea Monsters, which of all sides appear, and approach to swallow
him up. Our passions are the winds, from whence proceed the tempests of our
soul; winds pent and shut up, which can find no other issue or passage, but
by false opinion, who weak and tender in his beginning, having surpised the
most simple, under the authority of number and antiquity of witnesses, has
extended himself to the most judicious and capable. But he who can ascend to
his head-spring, shall find but a very small brook, which being difficultly
known at the place of his first birth and original, is wonderfully increased
and fortified by the course and current of his age. The birth and beginning of
Estates and Empires, do fade and wither by degrees, through the very
greatness and w^ight of their augmentation. By the same hands which Princes
held their Scepters, they also carried the Sheepe-hooke, and the Senate of Rome
disdained not to borrow her Consuls from Agriculture; to commit the helm of
the Estate into his hands, who formerly contented himself to conduct the
Plough; and this new dignity filled their courages with so little vanity, that
they preferred the ease and tranquillity of their Country life, to the greatest
honors they could exspect from their dignities. But it seems that man's
Invention, would extenuate, and quell the troublesome burden of these
dignities, by the lures and charms of a vain glory, which it has sown and
disperced upon the approaches, to the end that, that which heretofore was
contemned by the most worthiest, may give them some cause to affect themselves:
As that adulterous Woman, who having not l^res enough to make her desired, does
(by the means of painting) borrowe a thousand other foreign fashions, the
more easily to seduce, and abuse those whose affection she seeks and desires.
But since that deceitful painting and decoration, has poisoned the hearts of
men, they have all inconsiderately ran thereto who should be first: so as
that which heretofore could difficultly be desired; is now so passionately
beloved and embraced of that passion, that our wealth, our pleasures, and our
life, has nothing but bitterness out of the painful employment, and
troublesome exercise of some public dignity or office, which more truly
oppresses and loades our minds, then our backs; and wholly engages our
liberty in popular affairs and disturbancie: as if our own had not enowe,
whereof sufficiently to employ our selves; if it be not that too familiarly
casting our sight upon our own affairs and businesses, that the favor which
we confer and give to our selves, preuents and hinders the effect of our
judgment, by diuerting it other where is. Which is that, that has occasioned
the Poet to complain with us, in that being too much known to the world, we
yet dye only unknown to our selves. That if we laugh at those who anciently
commended themselves for weeping at Funerals, and so to purchase true profit,
by their false and feigned tears; What ought we then say of those, who to wed
themselves to other men's passions, and to make themselves slaves to their
affections, do engage their wealth and liberty. The sorrow of those was in
show, and their profit in effect: but the wealth and honor of those, is but
in Opinion, and their labor and solicitude in truth. The profit and honor
which succeedes thereof, does too ill requite and pay this subjection, without
needing to buy it so dearly, yea at the double value thereof, by engaging our
goods and persons. And yet if desert or merit could be received in payment, it
were well: but it seems that Merit is one of the weakest means to arrive
thereto. Gold and Silver will find place in the worser sort of people, and by
their splendour, does so eclipse and blind the eyes of the vulgar, that the
very report and belief thereof suffices with them, to give those the title of
wiser, whose gravity, fortune, and roabe, gives belief to a thousand vain,
and ill-beseeming discourses. Apelles was not discommendable, who seeing a
Knight in his Shop very bravely and richly apparelled, and covered with many
Bracelets and Chains of gold, who after a long silence, intermedled
impertinently to praise some of his courser Pictures; Apelles returned him this
answer: Thou art much to be reproved and blamed, because before thou spakest,
thy followers, thy countenance, and rich apparel, made my Apprentizes esteem
thee to be some great and wise personage; but now by thy speeches having
discovered thy ignorance, they no more prise, or regard thee: A regular silence
is no small grace, and advantage to a man raised in dignity. We still presume
all things of him, whereof he ought to be capable, until his discourse
confirm and ratify it to be the contrary, and many times to the prejudice of
his reputation. And many one will find in this man's tongue matters of
admiration, which in another, he will repute worthy of contempt and laughter:
so much Judgment is ore-mastred, and curbed by opinion, which of it self
produces nothing, but feigned and disguised.

SECTION. III. Opinion very ill requites the greatness to hold her still in
show, and esteem, and to give all the World right to control her actions.
THe privilege of Princes, and great Men sufficiently testifies it, by the
false exterior show, and appearance; those sumptuous buildings, adorned with
Marble, and Porphyry; those Robes enriched, and embroidered with Gold, and
Pretious-stones, touch us but exteriourly, they deceive our eyes, but if our
fight could as well perceive the Rust, which they engender by the use thereof
in their Souls, as the spark^ling splendour, which they outwardly defuse; we
shall find, that Fortune delights to strew Roses about them, and that she
hides the Thorns in their hearts, thereby to give all the World more cause to
envy her favors, which are but in show, and appearance. It seems that to be
advanced, and elevated in so high a Throne, they must renounce the common
pleasures of the society of men, and that having no more commerce, and
familiarity with them, by reason of so great a disparity, they must converse,
and disport themselves a part; and no more entermeddle with the delights, and
pleasures of life, which seems to be so inter-wouen, and linked together,
that they cannot please us, except others have the same interest therein with
us: If their greatness give them a facile, and easy enioyance of their
desires, meeting with no difficulty, which eggs them forwards, or rather,
which inflames their appetites; then this facility makes them presently the
more to loathe, and distaste it; and so those delights, and pleasures which
Fortune seems to present, and prostitu^e to them, it is only to the end, and
purpose they shall not enjoy them: that which she gives them with her left
hand, she snatcheth from them with her right; I mean, she gives them
imaginary good things, and but too true, and assured evils: in a word, their
condition has more Dignity, then Content, or profit. A^las, on whose
shoulders our Poets have placed this great Stupendous Mass of Elements, and
Heavens dared not to bow, or slumber, for fear less the weight of this
burden, meeting with weak, and feeble shoulders, through the vapors of a
slumber, coming to be reuersed, and overthrown, should return to his first
Chaos, and confusion.

The vigilance of a Prince, must defend the houses, his care the rest, and his
diligence the delights, and pleasures of his people; and as another Sun, he
must incessantly stray among the houses of his Zodiaque, that by his continual
motion, all things be preserved, and entertained in a constant, and an
immooueable order: Add here unto, that they are of the same metal we are,
and that their Crowns, and Diademes, do not cover them from the Sun, or
Rain; what remains there, but only the bare, and naked opinion, which draws
after her the true feeling of a most painful, and trouble-some care? But to
be too far estranged from the quality, and condition of men, they fly, and
stray from themselves, and their vices, and passions, and feeling themselves
flattered by all those who enuiron them, do so augment, and increase, that
through so thick, and dark a cloud, their reason can no more judge of that
which may be truth in others, and much less in themselves: all that which
they see about them is veiled, and masked, and if it be true, that the
knowledge of our wretched condition, and the contempt which we make of our
selves, cannot but difficultly suffocate, and strangle in our Souls, Ambition,
Presumption, and the other vices of a corrupted nature. Judge then, to what
point, and height they ought to ascend in the persons of Princes, and if they
do not infinitely, and immeasurably grow, when they are approved, and
applauded of all the World. They therefore must have a wonderful care, and
constancy to be able to resist them; for who is he among us, who environed
with Flaterers, and of those who praise him, does not then most flatter
himself; a degree of flattery, much more dangerous then the other, because
the Mind being arrived to this point, has no more diffidence of her self: I
understand it of a most dangerous flatterer, from whom he is to defend
himself: There is no step more slipperie then that, nor fall more dangerous,
because chiefly, our will disdaineth to lend us her hand to lift us up, and
seems to mock at our misfortune, without knowing it; as those Barbarians, who
unaccustomed to see the Engines of War, do remisly, and carelessly see those
work who besiege them, without understanding, whereunto those works, and
approach tend, which they see made toward them. Our Soul surprised by the
lures, and charms of a false praise, finds her self insensibly besieged of
so many vices, without knowing their approaches, until she have no more
means, or power to resist them. Opinion comes, and assailes her, drawing after
her Animositie, Detraction, Lying, Inconstancy, Irresolution, Incertainetie,
Sorrow, Superstition, Envy, Jealousy, Covetousness, Ambition, and an infinite
other irregular, mad, and undaunted appetites, and passions, which coming
suddenly to fall, and rush pell-mell upon her, she finds her self to be
sooner vanquished, then beaten down, and quite overthrown, before she know
the forces of her Enemies, against whom she is to contend, and fight.

SECTION. IV. The Common People have no more certain, nor cleere-seeing guide
then Opinion.
THe condition of the vulgar seems to be in a more peaceable estate, and
tranquillity, and in a Station more firm, and secure to wrestle with his
Enemies. Truth is more familiar with him, and the liberty which is in every
one to contradict the vices, and ill manners of his friend, gives a great
advantage, and way to find out the knowledge of his own imperfections, which
is the first, and most necessary means to apply wholesome preparatiues, and
remedies: But he is so deeply plunged, and ingulphed in vice, that he has
lost all feeling thereof; the more he is spurred on, the deeper he sticks fast
in dirt, and mire: He has his interior, and exterior so infected, and
corrupted, that it seems, it is the only rocks, and shelues, which we must
eschew in the tempestious sea of our life, and against which, nevertheless,
the current of the water draws us after it, with so much violence, and
impetuositie, that it is almost impossible for us to secure our selves from
Shipwreck; for who is he, who being desirous to introduce himself in the way
of Wisdom, has not had more to do, to fight against Opinion, then against
any other particular Vice? Those common Imaginations which we find about us,
and which are infused into our Soul, by the seed of our Fathers, are so
general, and natural, that they give us enough shameless Art, to condemn of
Error, and Barbarism, all that grows in foreign Coun^ries; It is not thus,
that we must abandone the liberty of our Judgments, to the slavery of Opinion.
Wherefore serves this faculty of Reason to him, which has not resolution
enough to examine, and know the vice of things, which are in credit, and
reputation with himself; and the good of those which he finds used, and
practiced by his neighbors. It is very far distant, to measure the bounds
of his City, by those of the Sun; in a moment to behold all the habitable
Earth, and to nourish in him this generous design, to produce such excellent
actions, that the service, and utility which the place of our birth may
receive thereby, may generally redound to all the parts, and corners of the
Earth. Partiality, is an enemy to Liberty, and as long as we shall be
subject to this example, it is but an abuse of our Judgment. He is beloved,
and privileged of the people, who esteems every thing according to its value:
It is Injustice in all things, to make the Balance fall to our side, if it be
not by the weights of Reason. It seems that the eye of our Understanding is so
much shortened, that it ought to be confined to the knowledge of those things
which enuiron us; we are so much, and so fast tied to our own particular
interest, as we believe the Sun shines only for us, and that the Clouds
which cover our Hemisphere, should over shadow all the Earth: All goes in the
same Braule, and Dance as we do; that which out-flyes, and exceedes the
limits of our use, and custom, are no more birds of our Understanding; he
must shut himself up in this strait; and that this Guide, and Torch which
Nature had given us, to conduct us through all the parts of the World, should
be strangled by the multitude of Opinions, wherein we have been bred, and
are so grown up with Age, that they have taken the hand, and place of Reason,
and after having dispossessed her of her Empire, they have interdicted us all
other knowledge of truth, but that which we can perceive, and discern
through the foggie thickenesse of so many false Clouds.

SECTION V. Opinion (as an ingenious Painter,) gives those things which inuiron
us, such face, and figure as it pleases.
He that can take off the mask of all our fears, and apprehensions, shall
find that they are vain Idols, which we have so clad, and that affrighted
with the apparel we have given them, and the lineaments which we have painted
in their faces, we go hide our selves, and dare no more cast our eyes upon
this ghost, who fills us with wonder, and astonishment, at the sight of his
fearful posture. If we have so much resolution, and courage to affront him,
to take from him that which we have given him, and to deuest him of that which
he has borrowed of our Opinions, we shall find that we are true children,
which formerly feared nothing, but the ma^^e, loss of Honor, Exile,
Banishment; and all that afflicts us: except grief, which is derived of
Nature; have they any grounds* or foundations but Opinion. Honor wherewith we
are so passionately surprised, and taken, that Grief, Death, and all that
Nature has depainted us so fearful, and ghastly, is nothing in comparison of
this lose. What brings she with her, at her arriual but wind, and smoke? or
what else does slay draw after her? (...) us feel every place* and part of
our (...), to see what mark she has (...) us, and what she has taken, and
cari^d from us, and we shall find all that we had before to be whole, and
sound. What is this Exile which we so much fear, if we transport, and carry
all our virtues with us; what loss, what damage can we be reproached of? Bias
being reduced, and stripped to his shirt, and enforced, and driven from his
Country by the Sacking, and burning of his City, did nevertheless vaunt to
have lost nothing, because the goods which were stolen from him, were subject
to Fortune. He never held them but perishable, and the which he could lose
without lamenting them? and to use but one word; Fortune could never make a
breach in his Virtue: Do we not see the Sun, and Stars in all parts of
the World; and is not Virtue an excellent coin, and money to purchase us
friends every where? Man borne to see all things, if he be lincked to the
place of his birth, through the duty of an Office, or Dig^itie, or the love of
his Parents, does he no voluntarily banish himself from all the World, to
live in one place of his Country; an^ he whom Fortune will drive from his
home, ^he consents thereto, (...) in his will, whom find you, who deserve, to
(...) most Lamented; either he who wedding himself to a particular passion,
exiles himself from all the World, to enclose, and shut himself in some
smaller Island; or he who banisheth himself from this little Island, to give
himself to all the other parts of the Earth? If we are taken away from our
bed, we are so tender, and delicate, that we can no more repose our selves: The
Bird cannot stay contentedly in his Cage, though never so well used; as holding
no greater enemy, then constraint, and man no greater friend then slavery: If
you expel him his house, you put him out of content, and countenance. So
cowardly, and vncouragious is he, that he wondereth at his own wit,
undertakes, and triumphs over all, whiles Cords, and Fetters every where
inseperably bind, and chain him to slavery; and he were happy, if this
affliction flying from his eyes, might be insensible to him: But he has now
as little right, and power over his mind, as his body; all is a like engaged;
he lives not, he thinks not, he mooues, nor shakes not, but upon Credit; his
Soul, bound, and constrained under other men's opinions, makes her self slave,
and captive to their authori^ie. Should not Beasts have reason, having so well
known how to conserve that which Nature has given to every one of them in
particular, to mock man, who only for a piece of bread, has either lost, or
engaged the favors, whereof Nature had given him the preheminencie, and
predominancie above all other Creatures? but when he looks a little about him;
I assure my self, that he shall yet find Tyrants, who after they have
stripped him to his shirt, (as a Thief does a Merchant in a Wood, who ties
him to a Tree, for fear that he reveal him,) after I say, they have
hood-winked his eyes, they have so subtly fettered him to his passions, that
he every where draws after him his own chain, without knowing it: Vanity,
and Opinion have reduced him to the same estate, wherein you see him: they are
still at his elbowes, and for fear that he do not reknow himself, they never
lose sight of him. One makes him believe he is a God on Earth; the other
presents him the Vows, and Prayers of the multitude; the Honor, and esteem
of all the World, as we do to a Child, Castles of Gold, and Silver, or some
other ridiculous thing, to make him endure more patiently a phlebotomising: And
yet he is not in so bad an Estate, that he should despair of his health; but
he treates, and parlies with them too much. If he receive any good, and
wholesome instruction, it is as soon corrupted by their too frequent
familiarity: at least, if that which he could not do by mere force, he
would yet endeavor to perform by the address, and dexterity of his body. If
he could not vanquish, and overthrow them by high wrestling, he would yet find
means to avoid, and escape them: the joint promise, and condition which he
has passed them, may be disolued, when he desires it, for two chief, and
principal reasons; the one, the violence which he may allege to the
contrary, the other, to have subjected them to a thing, which of its nature
cannot be of this condition; so that any tie, or advantage, which they may
have over us, we shall yet reserve means enough to save our selves, if we
have the intent, and design thereto.

SECTION VI. Opinion leaves nothing entire, but its corruption, and pardons
not Virtue her self.
IT is not reasonable to make our Enemy stronger then he is; let us not give
unto things, any other face, nor lend them any other body, but that which
Truth, and Nature have given them; we shall then find, that all that which we
term Good, or Evil, will come and prostitute themselves to our feet, and
yield to our mercy, to receive of us such condition, and quality as we
please. We will convert to our behoof, and profit all that falls into our
hands, and will order, and manage it so, that all that which is round about us,
shall not touch us, but by the best place. Fortune has no power to furnish any
other thing then matter, and it rests in our Judgment, to give it what form
it pleases. All things differ but by that, and if they borrowed not those
displeasing forms of our Opinion, Wisdom would be in reputation, and Glory;
and Fortune would languish, as beaten down to the feet of a triumphant
Virtue; whosoever can manage it to his advantage, it will be the part of a
well-refined, and polished Wit. But let us proceed to that which touches, and
concerns us more nearly; and let us enforce our selves to pull out this
Thorn, which incessantly trauerseth, and troubles our repose, and gives us so
many disturbances. It is that which we call pain, which by the inequality of
her sense, and feeling, sufficiently witnesses, that we foment, and cherish
it beyond her worth, and natural being, and that at the very entrance of our
Evils, and Afflictions, it remains in us to give them what composition we
please.

Some have been more afflicted at the fear of pain, then of pain it self,
and more tormented at its absence, then presence. All things are proportioned;
if the afflictions which assail us be violent, they are not lasting, nor
permanent; and difficultlie can we feel it, because the suddainenesse takes
away the sense thereof: if it be moderate, it is the easier to be supported;
if Poverty, Grief, Death, be such as they are figured, and depainted us, why
then did Socrates laugh at Poverty, mock at Grief, and contemn Death? were
the senses of his body insensible? No, but he judged otherwise thereof then we
do, he lodged them in himself, according to their just esteem, and value,
and not as we do, who know them not, but by the fearful marks, and
countenance of those who have approved, and experienced them; and who had
prepared such faint courages to withstand them, that it was easy enough for
Death, and Grief to make themselves victoriously felt, and feared: The fear
of some who are carried to their execution, has it not made them in a manner,
to meet with death half way; the sight of the preparatiues of death, do as
it were, make death fly into his breast, and deprive him of his sense, and
life, before he have felt any of the torments that are prepared for him: He
who on the Scaffold attended the blow of the Sword to cut off his Head, being
but touched with a wet Table-napkin, his very apprehension, and fear made him
to deuance Death, and so died immediately. And then let us take assurance from
such spies, to know whence it is; but far was that Philosopher, from this
unjust, and base fear, who at the very point, and instant that the Executioner
was to give him the blow of Death, being demanded by one of his friends
whereon he thought, answered, that he employed all the powers of his mind,
to consider how his Soul would separate her self from his body. If many like
him, had been sent to know, and affront Death, it may be they would depaint
him to us not so obscure, as Sleep, and Slumber. Death did not much prejudice
him, he would silently treat, and reason with himself till the end, and till
the very last-gaspe, and period of his life, he would manage the understanding,
which Nature had given him: so we judge of all things, either by the
semblances, or events of things, which of themselves have nothing sure, or
certain. Our Imaginations, thoughts, and manners may well be corrupted; since
this contagion has not excused, nor spared Virtue her self, which could not
comport her self so well, passing through our hands, but that she felt our
corruption. We more willingly embrace her for the glory which she draws
after her, as her shadow, then for her self. The Marks, and Arms, whereby
she makes her self seen, known, yea desired, do they not sufficiently
declare, and testify that they are the fruits of our opinion: whosoever
should see her alone by her self, all naked, and without Artifice, although
indeed, this be her riches^ dress, and attire; I know not if he would
desire, or love her. A Soul must be wonderfully powerful, not to affect, and
cherish her, but because she is amiable, and makes as little esteem of
contempt, as of glory: for if we perform any virtuous action, it is rather
for the content which we hope for, to sow, and spread our name in many
mouths, then for our own satisfaction. So we are pleasing to the World, we
care not what we are within our selves: the World is extremely obliged, and
bound to us, to affect, and cherish her more then we do our selves: some are
seen in the front of a Battle, who feel themselves more animated, and egged
on by their own Vanity, then by their courage in the execution of a generous
exploite; so as it seems, that in these our times, there is nothing so clean,
or pure, but this Vice has thereunto added, and applied her rust: Also it is
very difficult, how so ever we resolve so to unwind, and free our selves from
popular opinions, that we still remain not some where engaged. Ulysses had to
defend himself, but against the charming voice of the Syrenes, but it was not
against the voice of the People. That which we ought to fear, comes not from
one Rock, but from all the corners of the World; A voice nevertheless of so
small importance, and consequence, that it can neither eleuate, nor deiect the
merits of a wise man, no more then shadows being great, or little, do
diminish the true proportion, and greatness of the body: at least, because a
wise man cannot wholly disingage, and exempt himself from this press, and
croude of people; let him leave his body, his goods, his legs among them, for
it matters not much, provided that he retire his mind wholly to himself, and
that as the Sun, (despite his daily motion,) leaves not to observe, and
follow a particular way, and course, contrary to his first mooueable. So a wise
man in the course of worldly affairs, although he be tied to the custom,
and dependence of popular opinions, under the conduct of Reason, yet he
finds, and follows a particular way, whereby to entertain himself, in a
perpetual health, and tranquillity of mind.

The end of the third Discourse.
The fourth Discourse.
Of Passions.
SECTION. I. Storms raise not so many surges on the Sea, as Passions engender
tempests in the hearts of men.
HIppocrates says, There is no worse or more dangerous sickness, then that
which disfigureth a man's face: But I say, that those which at one and the same
time, disfigure the beauty both of his body and soul, are yet by many degrees
far worse. There is no passion which arises in man, that leaves not on his
face some visible sign of his agitation; but the soul within altogether
confused, bears more singular and remarkable marks. She sometimes loses the
knowledge of her self, in misknowing her own proper misery; Or if she flatter
her self so far as to think to know it, she holds it for a good sign, or
sign of health, and so colors her most dangerous sickness, with the title
of a recovery thereof. Choler with her passes for valor, and cowardice for
wisdom,; and th^s she palliates and covers her proper vices with the cloak
of Virtue. This defect proceeds, for that our vices touch us too nearly, and
that the eye of our reason disturbed by the power of our passions, has not the
requisite and necessary distance, for the use of her functions. If the soul
see any thing through so thick a cloud, it is contrary to that which it is,
and chiefly when it is touched with the opinion of evil; because those sorts
and degrees increase, and demonstrate him those things, which threaten him, of
a fearful greatness. Among passions some are framed by a dilation of blood,
and spirits which bend o^e all the body, as choler. Others by the contraction
of the same spirits, which assemble and shut themselves up near to the heart,
as fear; but the place where they are in action, is that which we term
sensitive appetite, which Philosophers divide into irascible and concupiscible;
this contents himself, simply to seek those things which are convenient to
him: but that enforces himself to vanquish the obstacles we meet withal,
which impugn or oppose our inclinations; nevertheless it is very likely, that
that proceeds from one and the same power. And indeed if the concupiscible
find no hinderance* she continues her way toward the object which she
seeks. If she find any let or obstacle, she becomes Irascible, which is to
say, she enforces her self to surmount it, as the water of a fountain, which
glides slowly and softly on the gravel; if it be stopped by any thing it
meets, it then swells and grows great, and in the end ouerfloweth and
vanquisheth her obstacle. All things naturally oppose themselves against their
contraries, not nevertheless that she is any other, when she shields or
defends her self, then she is in her usual countenance. The reason which
they allege to the contrary, is, that nothing beats it self: But these two
powers contradict one the other, at one and the same time; it must then needs
be, that they are two different things. I say that this combat proceeds not
from this party, but from a higher; that is, from imagination, who touched with
a contrary object, contests and fights against this inferior party. But not
that this quarrel arises in the sensitive appetite between these two powers;
For not being able to comprehend the thing in its simplicity, we are
constrained to multiply and divide it, as we do of the mind, which we divide
into Imagination, Understanding, and Memory, or of the sensitive appetite in
Irascible and Concupiscible. It seems that hereby we keep the thing more
strictly shut up; but it is of the Essence of things, as of the definitions: We
cannot cut off any member from this, without vitiating and corrupting it. We
cannot divide that, without ruining the Science which we seek: She is one,
and all simple, but our gross sight (which cannot perceive her so lightly
apparelled) runs to his effects, and stays there as to the first cause: Like
unto those Pagans, who not able to comprehend one only God, divided his
powers, which our Theologians term attributes, into so many different
Diuinities, and stayed to consecrate rivers, and to baptize them according to
their different operations. So we far easier comprehend two contrary powers,
then one which produces two different effects. We difficultly believe that
the Sun hardneth, and softneth at one time, if experience had not taught it
us. I say then, that this power which dwells in the sensitive appetite, is one;
she desires, she seeks her object, thereby to content her self. If she be
hindered, she is bent and incensed against the obstacle to force it: If she
overcome it, she walks after her usual accustomed pace without any violence.
The soul is the principle of life, one in all, and by all: In one part she
sees, in another she imagines, in another she understands, and in another
she retains, according to the disposition of the organ where she agitateth.
But even as the Heavens are not subject to the alterations of sublunary things,
and do not move, but to oblige the body by a perpetual liberality: So the
soul, which of her self is not subject to the alteration of mortal things,
ought to lend her motion as principle of life to all the body, thereby to
oblige it, but not to interest and engage her self so, that she can no longer
retain her self, and that forgetting her self, she suffer her self to be
led and carried away by the violent stream of her passions, which after, by
little and little estrangeth her from her self. False opinion gives them
birth, but we must not so much consider the place from whence they part and
issue, as the soul of him on whom they fall. The winds which raise small
cocklings upon our rivers, and who throw furrows on the serenities of their
christalline faces, can raise whole mountains of waves, and waters on the Sea,
and engender impetuous storms and tempests. The soul of the Philosopher is
tranquile, and quiet in his course; and wisdom who is near him, dissipateth
the waves before they have the power or leisure to lay hold of him, or to
stir up others by their violence: And the soul of the ignorant man, is a Sea
of inconstancy which is shaked,, and tossed with every wind, and is never
surely firm, wherein because he cannot quiet and appease the storms in their
first emotions, they swell and grow infinitely violent and implacable. The
Philosophers are yet doubtful of the nature of the winds, and from whence
they are derived, and proceed: But those who stir up in our soul, such
furious storms and tempests, are but too easy to be known, we feel them
borne within us. They at first embrace, but in the end strangle us. Men are not
only polluted, but poisoned by their vices. That if ciuillity and ceremony
(the bastard daughters of natural wisdom) prevent that they do not commonly
resplend, and appear before people, when they are retired in their family,
they delight to nourish and cherish their passions. They withdraw themselves
from the sight of men, to hide their defects and imperfections, as if their
houses were purposely given them to act and perpetrate sins closely, and with
more liberty and licentiousness then abroad. And it is not by the exterior
face, that you must judge of him with whom you speak in the street, or whom
you see in the midst of his ceremonies. This is nothing but false painting,
and true artificial dissembling: you shall find him clean contrary in his
house: It is no more him, his soul and his face have changed posture, and
countenance. But if they will conceal us the manner of their life, they should
at least diminish and cut off their passions. It may be it is for this reason
that Ariston said: That the winds which are most to be feared, are those which
discover us: they expose them to the eyes of the most ignorant, and only ours
will remain darkened, and much eclipsed in this trouble. Xerxes caused the Sea
to be whipped, and sent a challenge to Mount Athos: and Caligula dared Jupiter
to the combat: and while these their impertinencies and fooleries exposed them
to the laughter of the vulgar people, those generous spirits remained
hoodwinked, and blinded by their own passions. But what; as long as we
languish in our vices, we know them not. None but he that is awaked, can
recount his dreams; for in sleep we perceive not their abuse and deceit. The
evils of the soul are obscured in their thickness: He that is most sick,
feels it least. And although (according to Marsilius Ficinus) that passions
are indifferent to good and evil, to vice and virtue; nevertheless, the
noblest of them accuses us of imperfection, because they never observe rule or
measure. There are other ways and passages to ariue to Virtue. It is too
dangerous to walk or usurp on vice: for it is then to be feared lest we
fall into it: The soul bred in the shadow, which has not as yet tempted
hazards, and repulsed the assaults of fortune, must essay all other ways but
that. For one that Ambition has cast into Virtue, it has precipitated a
million to vice. It is still safer, and better for us, courageously to quarrel
with her, then to trust her, except it be in the same manner, that we would
trust our Enemy. But because all passions are weak and tender in their
beginning, the safest way to secure us from their corruption, is to strangle
them in their cradle, and make that the first point of their birth, do in the
same moment and instant, see their last ruin and destruction, and consequently
the end of their Essence or Being.

SECTION. II. We may say of love, that which the Romans said of an Emperor,
that they knew not whether they received more good or evil of him.
WE are taught, that there is never less found to speak, then when the
subject whereon we will discourse, is better known of himself, then all
which can be alleged, to prove and confirm it. It is the same in the cause
and subject of Love, which of it self gives such clear maxims and
instructions, that all the reasons which we can contribute to the clearing,
does but only serve to the obscuring thereof; and nature within us, has
given us such pertinent lessons, that all words, and discourse will find
themselves confounded, when they undertake to discover the secret of this Art,
and Science. His first flames strike such an excess, or fits, that they cannot
be known by the motion, or beating of our pulse; and his darts fly, and
slide into our heart with so much craft, and subtlety, that reason can neither
observe, nor find out the way, pathe, or steps thereof. She nourishes with
her heat, and gives the first motion to all our interior motions, as the first
principle of humane passions: because all the violent motions, which man can
feel, are either for his defense, and conservation, and this is the love of
himself; or for the increase of his own Content, and this is the Love of
Union, without himself; and these are the two greatest wheels of Nature, who
have the charge to move the rest of our passions, and who obey at the first
command of Love, according to the necessity of the Law, which they have thus
established among them. But we shall know her better, by her effects, then by
her self. If we think to hold her any where, she escapes from us, and
transformes her self into so many shapes, and fashions, that we can observe
nothing in her but mutation, and change. It is reported that Mercury by the
commandment of Jupiter, once undertook to make a Gown for Diana, that she
might be no more dishonored in going naked among the Gods, and especially
against the Laws of her shame-fastnesse, and chastity: but seeing that
incessantly she either increased, or diminished, and that she was never at one,
and the same stay, he despaired of being able to effect it. The inequality of
men's affections, and Inconstancy so natural to Love, may serve for the same
excuse, to him that will undertake to define it, and to prescribe a Roabe, o^
Vestment fit for her humor; what inconvenience will there be to permit her to
go naked? Since none is of a more shame-full face then this Goddess, and that
she is never richer then in her poverty, nor prouder in her apparel, then in
her simple nakedness, at least if we will believe the Poets. For fear
therefore that the fresh, and lovely sight of so many beauties, do not dazell
our eyes, we must put our eyes before them, not behold them fixedly, divert our
sight from their charms, or enforce our selves to cover them, and to hide them
from the rags of any description. Love is a desire of Beauty, (say the
Philosophers,) which by reason dislodgeth the Soul from the body to live
elsewhere, and to agitate in others: a passion which not only alters man's
nature, but wholly reuerseth, and overthrows it; because the Soul of him that
loves, is more in the subject where she loves, then where she animates, and
resides. Judge what order, and measure she can observe in her deportments, and
carriage; since, that bound, and constrained under the authority of others, she
neither mooues nor stirs, but upon credit, and by the leave of others: Man in
his other passions, is not tormented, but with one at a time; but in this of
Love he conuokes, and assembles all the others, who at their very entrance
lose their names, as small Brooks, which ingrosse the breast, and bosom of
greater Rivers: moreover, he yet adds those of others, which he loves, and
weddes with as much, or more affection then his own: I esteem, that it is
therefore for this reason, that some of the Ancients believed that Jupiter
himself could not be enamored, and wise at one time. Agesilaus tells us that
Wisdom, and Love are incompatible, because, that, by the conference of things
past, judges of events to come, and this considers nothing but the present,
and takes no other council, but from his own fury, and blindness: His object
which he terms Beauty, consists in a concurrence, harmony, and decency of
many parts linked, and conjoined in one, and the same subject. That point which
stings, and tickleth our heart, and by his ready, and violent motion inflames
our senses to seek it, is termed desire, the which if it inflame his object
with the like desire, (as one Torch which lightens another,) this concurrence
caused by the resemblance, is called reciprocal Love, Sympathy, or according
to Astrologers, inclination, or participation of the same Planets, and
Influences, as it happens to those, whose very first sight is so fatal, that
at that same instant they lose the one, to the other, and both their hearts,
and liberty, by the meeting and enterchainging of visuall rays, which unite,
confound, and lose themselves in one, and the same end, and concurrence: The
will of the one does diue, and plunge it self into that of the other, and no
longer reserues any thing of his own particular, or proper; we can no more
perceive the threades, or seames whereby they are conjoined, and sowed so close
together. It is not in Love, as it is in Music, which is composed of
different Airs, and Tones: Love is never engendered among different humors,
which have no sympathy. I understand this reciprocal Love, and that which the
Poets said, had need of a brother for the increase thereof. The subtlety,
whereof he serves himself to seduce the noblest hearts, is it at first to
heat, and inflame them with a virtuous desire, thereby the more easily to
engage them* an admirable principle of this natural Art, and Science, which
teaches us not to seek Beauty, but in Virtue, and to borrow no other grace,
and splendour, but from her luster, as if there were nothing amiable, but that
which were fair, and nothing fair but Virtue; because Love is not ingendered,
but by her resemblance. This passion inflames us to Virtue, to give us some
tincture of Beauty, and thereby to make us like unto his object, and worthy
of that which we Love: But as soon as it gets the hand, and advantage of us,
then she throws us into Vice, and makes us descend by by-pathes, and strange
ways unknown to all others, but to her self: This fearful Cyclope of the
Poets, who drank nothing but humane blood, did he not abandone his
slaughtered preyes, as soon as he felt himself touched with the first points,
and darts of Love, by the eyes of his cruel Galatea; and being careful to
apparel, and embelish himself, sought at first, only to please her. But in
the end, the fire of his Love surmounting his patience, the excess of his
passion suggested him more bloody, and furious desires, then his barbarous
nature had formerly taught him. So Love disposes our first designs, and
conductes them toward Virtue, but it falls out, that he still diuertes us in
the midst of our course, and delivering us up to the power of Vice, he draws
us after him by oblique, and uncouth ways, as the violence of an ouerflowing
Torrent, caries us here, and there against shrubs, and thorns, which tear us
to pieces, without that we have any other aid, or assistance, but that of
their merciless rage, and fury. It is reported, that the young men of
Lacedemonia, had always some melodious Instruments to flatter them in War,
and to prevent and hinder, that they threw not themselves on rashness, and
fury. But he who fights under the Ensign of Love, has far more need of
some gracious Lays, and Songs of Philosophy, to restrain, and hinder that he
do not ensnare, and precipitate him in his own loss, and the absolute
mis-knowledge of himself. The wisest counsel herein, is that of the
Philosopher Panetius, not to engage himself in so violent a matter: Many have
changed the heat of their divine Zeal, into unchaste flames; the wisest have
lost themselves; and the Philosopher in the darkness of Paganism, seeming to
have been inspired, and conducted by some raie of the Divinity, has he not
lost him in this passage; when he wished himself to be Heaven, thereby to
have so many eyes, as that had sparkling Stars, to admire; not Truth, nor
Wisdom, but more lasciuiously, to behold and see the sweet Lures, and
Charms of the object of his Love. And the Father of the Philosophical
Academie, who seems to have drawn Wisdom, from her head-spring, or
fountain, and to have made whole Rivers stream thereof, through all the
corners of the World, has he not likewise made Shipwreck of his virtue in
this strait, and has not his own Reason seen her self constrained to yield
to his blindness: not only in the transports, and ecstasies of this
voluptuousness, but after the violent fits of this bitter-sweet fury, when he
addressed Sacrifices to his Concubine, and offered upon her Altar, his Reason,
and Virtue, as Victimes to the feet of this triumphant passion. It is a Rock
or shelue, where the iustest had need apprehend, and fear, not to make
Shipwreck. If we will sound the depth hereof any farther, the course, and
current of the water will bear us down. If a storm threaten us, we must cast
anchour by time before the ariuall of the Tempest: for all emotions are
difficult to calm in their violence, and impetuositie: The waves of the Sea
are merciless, but those of Love far more; those afflict us with the fear
of Death, but these devour, and swallow us up every moment, and yet we can
neither submerge, nor drown. If the many different accidents which stay our
enioyance, sharpened not our amorous desires, then this passion would not prove
so prejudicial, as it is, nor so much feared of Wisdom. His powers, and
forces increase by the length of the way, and time; and its natural sweetness
grows sower in seeking many indecent means, and unbeseeming ways to obtain
it; the more a weight is distant from his center, the more ponderous, and heavy
it is. A Soldiers arm, which is not owner of its extent, strikes not so
violent a blow: So the fury of Love increases by its motion, as his desire is
rebated, and extenuated, in the enjoying of his object; nevertheless, to
condemn it any other way, but by divine wisdom, will testify an excess in
our humane, which in this irregularity, is as near a neighbor to obstinacy,
as to Virtue. To banish it from civil society, is to undertake no less, then
to take and cut off from the year, the fairest, and sweetest season, and
days. This passion of Love, is the daughter of Nature, who cherishes, and
flattereth it, when it is entertained in respect, and modesty; but she will
easily wantonise, and vitiate her self, if we show it not a severe
countenance. The surest way therefore, for those who have any distrust, or
diffidence of their own strength and virtue, is, not to tempt Fortune, or to
run the hazard of a temptation. For he who cannot stop it, before it part
from his hand, must not think to curb, or restrain it in his cariere; I say,
he must choke the seed of this growing evil, and not permit, that it take
so deep root in our hearts, that we cannot afterward be able to expel
them. All sovereign remedies are slow, when the sickness is inueterate; and
unprofitable, when by the length of time, it is become stronger then the Art,
and sufficiency of the Physician. If thou timely call thy reason to thy
assistance, at her arrival, Love will lose all his credit and reputation; his
flames will as soon vanish, his fire will be nothing but ashes, the fountains
of thy tears will stop, thy groans and sighs will be but small winds, and
pleasing Zephirs, which will calm their troubles, and thy sorrows, and
disturbances.

SECTION. III. Ambition has no mediocritie, and fears not his burning, if the
Fire of Heaven, or the Thunderbolt of Jupiter, furnish him the first sparkles.
DEsires issue from the same place, and flow from the same fountain; the
farther they estrange themselves from their birth, the more they swell with
pride, and increase their impetuous violence. The greatest rivers in their
first springs are confined in a small place, but their long course, and
progression makes, that the farther they advance, the larger is their extent,
until being thrown and precipitated into the depth of the Sea, together with
their natural freshness, and sweetness, they loose the sweetness of their
former name. Desires slide away softly, and the wise man himself cannot refuse
them an honest liberty; for they cannot endure to be pent, and shut up. If we
keep them near us, they are small rivers, which enuiron their spring, not
serving but to embelish it, and simply follow that which smiles, and laughes
to our hopes: But those who violently carry and transport themselves beyond us,
do no longer observe rule, or measure; for they swell so much that they burs^
in sunder: and (as Mineral waters always savor of the quality of the soil,
and places where they pass) they are full of sharpness, and bitterness,
until that the covetous hunger of Vanities, and Greatness roles them by
strength of arms in the gulf of some miserable slavery, from whence they can
never more get forth. This irregular motion, this insatiable thirst of Honor,
is termed Ambition; abundance fam^sheth this vice; the more he finds, the
more he deuoures, and yet the less he is satisfied, his designs are hidden,
and concealed. Virtue accompanies his enterprise, Tyranny secondeth the
success, and in the end, Fortune (whom he courts, and cherishe^h,) being
weary of Ambition, is constrained to free her self by the ruin of the
ambitions. Miserable Fortune, who holds her Empire of our wills; who of our
disasters, and misfortunes, raises her Trophies, who buildes her Temple upon
the ruins of our Estates, who entertaineth her peace, by our seditions, and
whose wheel (constant in afflictions, and unconstant in felicities,) has
nothing for axell, but the only proppe, and support of our vain Ambitions.
Why must thy Altars yet smoke with the fire of our Sacrifices? What recompense
is it, which obliges us to tear our selves in pieces with our own proper
hands; to besprinckle, and bathe them with our blood? Thou stranglest none but
thy Favorites, and it seems that to serve thee, is to displease thee; and to
obey thee, is to exasperate and incense thee; and that fear, and respect, is a
sufficient meritorious subject of correction, and punishment.

To shut up this dangerous passage to our desires, were to diminish the credit,
and reputation of Fortune, and in the end to anull and ruin her self. Those
who term this desire to Honor a spur to Virtue, or who take it for virtue
her self, do every way deceive themselves. It is to follow the splendor of a
false light, and of a strange brightness, which easily receives the shadow of
all the objects that appear before her. Ambition and Virtue has as small
sympathy and alliance, as slavery and liberty. Alexander the great held the
liberty of al nations in his hand, and yet miserably consumed and languished in
the slavery of his own ambitions. The limits of the Universe could not bound
the extent, and the enjoying of all that the earth contained, was not capable
to quench this thirst: He will force the bars of the world by the point of
his ambition, and his desire is enraged to find nothing equal to himself.
But he who is peaceable and quiet in his house, and within the extent and
limits of his goods; gives bounds to his desires and ambitions; has he not
far more tranquillity and repose? If we measure this good by content, does
he not as far surpass Alexander in his felicity, as Alexander surpassed him
in the extent of his domination? Natural desires have some measure, but those
which are engendered, and borne of a false opinion, are only limited by
Infinity. This Prince had vanquished the opinion of all men, and yet he
suffered himself to be miserably vanquished by his own. He could not
attract the eyes of a more infinite number of people, to be witnesses of his
valor, and to admire his Trophies. Nevertheless, his blind ambition would
not permit, or suffer that his eyes should participate of the rays, and light
of his greatness. He burnt himself in the Sun of his glory, and so
consumed himself in the flames, which the wings of his desires and ambition
had enkindled. I would not that our condition should tie or wed it self to the
ambition of an Alexander: but it is as easy to drown himself in small
Brooks, as in the midst of the waves and tempests of the Ocean. The highest
Pyne trees and Cedars are beaten with the greatest storms, and the Flowers
which repose at the feet of the Mountains, are dried and withered with the
least wind; or by the feruencie of some excessive heat: small cords hold
weak beasts, as an iron chain does generous Lions. In a word, there is but
one degree of slavery, and to live in that of his Ambitions, is to approve, and
make trial of the most rigorous and seuerest: For if Fortune be at atonement
and peace with thy desires, thou may in the end, bear and endure the yoke
of a foreign slavery; but thou do more entangle thy self in the linckes
and fetters of this foolish passion. Thou resemblest those birds, who being
cousened by the deceit of the Hunter, the more they beat themselves against the
net, the faster they make themselves. Those who love Arts and Learning, and
triumph in their disdain of Ambition, do most commonly resemble those who
preach much of fasting, yet do not observe it: So natural is this vice to
them: For upon the ruins of Ambition they will raise the Trophies of their
glory; But this defect sufficiently gives the lie to their knowledge, and
reproues them of an imperfect knowledge in things whereof they make profession.
They take the shadow for the body, since they content themselves with this
smoke, and to pay their labors with money as light as the wind. But tell me,
the honor which thou seek, does it not depend of the esteem which every
one makes thereof? Does not Estimation follow opinion? and is there a greater
slavery, then to depend on the opinion of the Vulgar? Thou must beg his
favor, and make thy self a slave to his passions, in regard thou have an
intent and desire to please him: and do thou not know, that that which
pleases one, displeases another; and that their understanding is as a sick
eye, which receives not the color of things as they are; but does properly
give and imprint his own? How can it be then effected, that the vulgar, who
cannot agree with himself, should yet accord with others, to be of the same
mind, to praise and esteem all one and the same thing? If thou will measure
estimation by Vanity, it serves but only to make thee beheld and seen: and
know thou not, that Envy, who alone has more eyes then a multitude of
people, will discover thy imperfections, and under a little fault, will hide
and deface the rest of the glory?

Desire and wish for nothing, and thou shall be the happiest man of the world.
Refuse not the favors of Fortune: but do not receive or take them up to
Interest, they oblige nothing but our ingratitude; and it seems of good
offices which she has done us, gives her cause enough to bereave us thereof.
She calls thy ambitions, but if thou give them too much liberty, hope not any
longer to stay or retain them. They are daughters of the mind and
imagination, who embrace more vanity in a moment, then riches or vanity her
self can contain. The falsenesse of things which thou discouerest in enjoying
them, does but only increase the desire, and thy hope to arrive to a more
assured matter, gives new fuel to this fire: So thou languishest miserably
between hope and fear. Thou complainest of thy grief, and yet fauourest the
cause thereof. Thou art often enough incensed and angry against thy ambitions;
but if thou threaten them with one hand, thou do court and flatter them with
the other. Remain and dwell then with thy self: Clip the wings of thy desires
if thou will stop their flight. Their course is precipitated; nothing
opposes their swiftness and leuity, but the insensible weight of misfortunes
which they draw after them. Their promises give thee probabilities, which their
disasterous success accomplish not, but in their fall they enwrap thy
destruction and ruin. Seianus (a prodigious example of an extreme insolency)
served as a prey to his hungry and ambitious desires: And he whose wounds will
for ever bleed in all the corners of France, testifies, that the favors of
Fortune, makes as many threatenings as promises.

SECTION IV. Covetousness, is only just, in that it rigorously punishes
those whom it mastereth and commands.
AS the Fever engendereth a heat contrary to our nature: so ambition having
surprised the noblest part of our soul, commonly heates and enflames it with a
desire of wealth and riches, and fastneth and gleweth this venom to him, which
in the end by a contagious order, consumes the rest of his life purposely, to
lodge a strange and bastardly affection, full of diffidence. The ambitious man,
pricked forwards with the spur of glory and virtue, awakes as from a dream,
and yet half languishing in the error of his slumbers, follows the first
spendour of light, which presents it self to his eyes, until that the false
apparition of this light discover, and bewray him the abuse of his election by
his rash enterprise. But the Covetous man, with his head dejected, and his eyes
fixed on earth, admires the shining of his metal, knows no other light; and
his too weak sight cannot endure the splendour, and rays of any other Sun.
He dives into the Bowels of the earth, and in the end buries himself therein
with his treasures. That comfort his loss with some generous Design; this
perishes in his own blindness, and yet sees not his prejudice and damage;
briefly, that lives in the Esteem of the vulgar, and this in the contempt of
all the world.

To burn, and be passionate after wealth, with an irregular, and boundless
desire; foolishly to change himself, and to consume himself with an enraged
thirst, in the midst of waters, is the true effect of this weak, and foolish
passion of Covetousness, which penetrates into Soul of man by a false
opinion, and so corrupts the purity of his actions, that he does nothing
which is Just for himself, but in finishing, with his life, his hungry and
almost famishing desire of covetousness. Riches have nothing in themselves of
Good, or Evil. It is a seed which receives the quality of the place where it
is. In well dressed, and manured Souls, she produces fair flowers, but in
rude, infertile, and unsound minds, she ingendereth nothing but Thistles, and
Thorns, who are sharp only to prick, and offend those who manure, and
dress them: And as there is nothing which shines without the help of the
light; nor obscure, but by darkness which enuirons it; so riches are fair
and profitable, when they are enlightened with Wisdom; as they are obscure,
and troublesome, being attended on, and conducted by covetousness; This gives
us only Envy, and denies, and defends us pleasure; that tempers our desires,
and leaves us to taste the fruits thereof, in a moderate, and honest freedom.
So the acquisition, and purchase of treasures, receives such a Beauty, as he
that possesses them, is capable to give them. The Covetous man's Soul is all
rustie, by the continual feeling, and familiarity of his coin, and thereby
eclipseth its luster, as the Wiseman gives it a fair, and pleasing
brightness. This is a Sun, who by his rays, gives life to dead things; as
that by his contagious air, gives death to those joys, and pleasures which
enuiron him. Wealth, and Riches, do but incense, and anger him, by their
proud shows; covetous hunger which presses him by her voluntary indigence,
makes it insupportable, and fights against his own satietie. In a word, his
misfortune has so strong wings, that it flies before his wealth which is
coming in, and infects it, as those contagious Harpyes did the meats of
Phineus.

We must not think that our Poverty, or the want of Wealth, by acquiring, or
enjoying it after, be an absolute remedy to this disease. For it proves many
times but a light exchange and alteration. The same Vice which gave distaste to
Poverty, and made it of hard digesture, corrupts the pleasures of Wealth, and
makes Riches seem burthen-some. Vice is in the Mind, and Soul, and not in
Wealth; it takes what countenance we please to give it. The opinion of the
Vulgar, (although most commonly vicious in all things,) seems generally to
blame, and condemn this vice: But in particular, every one dissemblingly,
strives to cover it with the name of thrift, and good husbandry, thereby to
avoid the reproach thereof. The Wiseman who retires himself from the World,
and from Fortune, to live contentedly, and happily in his Soul, shall find
more Wealth in his Poverty, then the Covetous man in the regorging of all his
Treasures, if nature do but never so little agree with his indigence. For can
we esteem him poor, who wants nothing? Which of the two is better, either to
have much, or enough? He that has much desires more, his greedy covetousness
testifies his fault, and defect, and that he has not yet enough; whiles he
which contents himself, is arrived to the point of his desires; where the
Covetous man, despite of his power can never attain: Necessity easily bounds
her self; Nature fixes her limits every where, and in all places presents
wherewith to satisfy her desires: Thirst is as soon quenched with a little
water in an earthen pot; as with delicious Wine in a cup of Gold. But if we
will pass these bounds it is very difficult to temper our motions, and stop
their course, since Riches make us stray from the good way, and if Virtue
reached us not out her hand to reconduct, and support us, we are in imminent
danger; It is a slippery step, and a dangerous precipice, and if there be found
any one, who by other means, then that of Wisdom (in the affluence of goods,
and riches) seems to go firm, and so to enjoy the rest, and tranquillity of
the mind, we must not admire thereat, and so build upon this foundation. For
sometimes it falls out, that the Rock which has split our ship, serves us for
refuge, and sanctuary, and serves us for shelter against storms, and tempests.
Fortune is often met in the company of Reason, so many have found life in the
conflicts of Death, and danger; yea, extreme folly has produced the like
effects, as perfect Wisdom.

I approve not the advice of the Philosopher Crates, who to make sure work,
threw his Riches into the Sea, and dispoiled himself of this dangerous Roabe,
as believing, that they, and Virtue could never Sympathise. There is as much
folly, and weakness, not to endure riches, as there is courage to support
them. To corrupt our selves by their familiarity, or to depart with them so
easily, and simply, argues the likeweaknes of mind. If we contemn them, it
must be yet more for their small vallew, then for their superfluousnesse.
Virtue prohibites us not the enjoying; but rather commands the use thereof;
otherwise, how can thou esteem that to be in the number of thy Wealth, which
thou enioyest not; and why do thou so reigiously oblige thy care, and labor
to conserve, and increase it; Covetousness commands, a strict account every
day to be given of thy actions, and most rigourously condemns thee, which
grieuest to take from thy purse, to give to thy expenses. Thou willingly
stealest thy self from thy Riches, to commit thy self into the custody of
Poverty, and Indigence. Neither Honor, nor Piety can open the locks of thy
coffers, thou art not Master thereof, and therefore it suffices thee to be
the keeper. A true Scythian Griffon, which keeps great heaps of Gold, and
Silver in Caves, and yet enioyes it not: But tell me; the Porter of an
Arsenall, who with his key shuts in far more treasure, then thou can with
thine, cannot he compare, and dispute of Riches with t^ee; in this he is yet
more happy then thy self. For when he sees Gold, and Silver go in, and out,
he joyfully opens, and shuts his door, with an equal affection. His
countenance changes no^; he neither shakes, nor looks pale; troublesome cares
interrupt not his sleeps, and dreams, as perpetual f^are every moment
assailes, and disturbes thee: Th^^ thinke^t that some Theeuish hand steals
away the one half of thy profit, that the for^ress^ of ^hy house is too weak,
against the Eng^^s, and designs of thy enuiers; Mountains, Waters,
Drawbridges, which begirt, and shut up thy Cittadell, cannot secure thee from
this apprehension, and fear. Thou do distrust thy self, in having thy
hands too often in thy bags; for it seems, thy eyes still discover a want of
some pieces; nay shall I say more, for all that which belongs to others, and
which thou can not make thine, thou placest it in the catalogue of thy
losses. So that which thou have thus purchased is not thine, because thou
enioyest it not, and that Nature will one day condemn thee to abandon them,
because she condemns thee to die, if thou will not do as Hermocrates (in
Lucian) who in dying, instituted himself, to be heir to himself, for fear
to lose that which he had purchased with so great labor, and conserved with
infinite care, and which his death (despite his testament,) made him leave
behind him, with a world of sighs and tears. Unfortunate; yea, wretched
Vice, which have so blinded us, that we cannot perceive his imperfection,
which makes us miserable in our chiefest height, and heat of purchasing, and
again, more miserable in the possession of that which we have purchased.

SECTION V. Fortune has not a more charming bayte or lure then our own hope.
ALL the world lives now, and entertaines themselves by the hope of the time
future. No man at hometasts the present good, he will still be beyond it: There
is not a personage, whom every one represents, and acts not worse then his
own. His desire transports him in all places, and he himself is therefore
never in any. It is the greatest advantage which Fortune has of us, for she
still makes use, and serves her self of our hope, as of a golden hook, the
more easily to deceive us. If any disaster or misfortune befall us, whiles our
hope has transported us other where is; She takes possession of the place, and
fortifieth her self with our own proper weapons, and at our return makes us
suffer a thousand sorts of tyrannies in this new slavery. He who is at home,
when some accident o^ fire has cast a sparkle thereof in our own^ firebrands,
he very easily quenches it, and by this means saues his house from the fury
of flames and burning: And if when Fortune darts a spark of some
voluptuousness in our soul, that we were careful to run speedily to
extinguish it, before it had burnt our hopes, which by little and little go to
enkindle them with the bellows of good success; we may then save our selves
from this fire, and so prevent the burning of our passions. The Spring time
produces not so many flowers on the wide bosom of the Earth, as hopes
engender thorns in the hearts of men. The Lover who languisheth in the flames
of his desire, blows the fire thereof, and so enflames himself the more by
the wind of some foolish promise. The hope of Glory, animates the courage of
the ambitious man; and he whom covetousness controules and commands, making
him to pass so many Seas for the obtaining thereof, he finds no more
favorable and pleasing winds, then that of his hope: So Ambition, Love,
Covetousness, are three rivers which issue from this Spring, the which we must
stop, if we resolve to dry up all the displeasures, and discontents which we
receive. Hope is a motion, and passion of the soul, which very easily procures
us the possession of a future good, whereof we have already received the
impression. She enflames us in the difficultest actions. Impossibility has no
bars so strong, which she cannot break in sunder: all things are inferior
to her, and nothing equalizeth her, but her desire. She holds our thoughts
hanging in the air, and our felicity yet more in balance and suspense. She
lifts us up so high, that reason it self finds no surer foundation, or reason
to secure us from the ruin of our enterprises, which commonly bring us more
shame by their imperfection, then glory by their event. The blind desire of
the ambitious, should not be guilty of his fall, without the pernicious
council of his deceitful hope. Icarus had not lost himself by his rash
folly, if he had not believed, that the wings of his hope were stronger, then
those which he had received from his Father. The disobedience of this Son,
prefigureth the ignorance of the common people, as the Fathers command is the
picture of wisdom, which contents it self to have escaped slavery.

We must surcease to hope, thereby more easily to obtain the place whereto we
aspire. We may as soon ariue there by diuerting our face, as by following it
by the eyes of our hope; as well as Rowers, who by turning their backs,
obtain the port of their desires. The greatest good which we can find in the
goods of Fortune, is not to seek or research them. To fly that which is
subject to decei^e our hopes, is the surest means to meet with what we
desire. We must stop and stay our hopes in the very beginning of their
conceptions, since the good which assembles them by the name or form of
greatness, is false, and gratifies none less then those who follow the
glimmering light, and brightness thereof: Yea, it is so far from true good,
as it commonly falls out unto us, as to a child, who gazing at the flame of the
Candle, is so taken and ravished with the sight and beauty thereof, as he
thrusts his hand to it: but having cr^sh'd it in his fingers, he extinguisheth
the light thereof, and so burns himself for wan^ of judgment: So we follow
the rays of Fortune, but being possessed of it, we eclipse the luster thereof
in our own hands, whereof we were formerly enamoured and delighted, which
leaves us a very sharp and sensible burning, to the prejudice of our
reputation: Because if our desire succeed, our hope presently enkindleth a new
one, which nourished by this, becomes far more violent then the form^r, as
fire (if the wood or matter fail not) enkindleth infinite more. We must
therefore stop the flight and current thereof betimes, and if reason give no
end to our hopes, let us not hope that Fortune is capable to do it. For it is
impossible for her to give true content and tranquillity to our soul, because
true tranquillity cannot be meant or expounded, but by the uniformity and
resemblance of the like, or equal thin^s. But as the Circle and the Square of
Geometricians, cannot comprise or contain one and the same space, and that the
figure and superficies of the one, is not entirely filled by the figure and
superficies of the other: So the Soul, which is the Image of God, and
therefore simple, and circular (if we will use the Words of the Cabalists)
agreeing in all, and by all, with it self: it is impossible that she can be
equally comprised among the bounds of other figures, multiplied and composed of
many parts and angels; I mean of worldly pleasures, and favors of Fortune,
which cannot satisfy her, and which by this insacietie, does sufficiently
testify their insufficiency. We must therefore ecclips the wings of our hope,
and if possible we can, stop her as soon as she begins to take her birth,
and flight; or else temperately employ her in the research of Riches, whose
vein is so deeply, and profoundly hidden within us. Nevertheless, because
the wind of this passion seems to appease the fire, and ardor of our
discontents, and that the most violent grief that can be, feels it self
ouer-mastred by the very point, and consideration of hope, we must in this
regard suffer, and endure it, and make use thereof, in those inconveniences
where the constancy of the Soul finds her self, to be very weak, because
too strongly assaulted, and assailed. Misfortunes which threaten us, do not
always befall, and surprise us, but are many times diuerted by other
accidents, and some times by the ruin of their own authors. Such a one has
prepared poison for another, who has been choked therewith himself: And
when this Evil, or Misfortune, should be inevitable, yet, the good which we
have received by the sweet flattery of our hopes, cannot yet be taine away, or
bereaved from us. But when we are not besieged by sharp, and violent
afflictions, and that our Estate, and Condition being far distant from the
great blows of Fortune, makes us to respire the air of a sweet and pleasant
life, what need we then to make our selves blind in the midst of our good
fortune, to forsake, and stray from our selves, by the enraged licentiousness,
which we give to our desires; to fly the good which we possess; to contemn
that which we have obtained, and purchased; and it may be, which heretofore
has inflamed us with the lik desire to enjoy it, as that which now torments
us, through the hope of a new good, and where we may yet find less saciety,
then in the former. And this is the most dangerous blow, wherewith our Enemy
(I mean Fortune) can offend us; for what disturbance, and torment is it, which
surpriseth our hope, when she inforceth her self to break all those lets, and
obstacles which oppose our desire. She changes our good, into evil, so that
which should comfort us in our grief and sorrows, does change the
sweetness, and tranquillity of our lives, and ingendereth afflictions, and
crosses, in the midst of our contentments, and felicities.

SECTION VI. Fear casts her self into the future time, as into a dark and
obscure place, thereby with a small cause, or subject to give us the greater
wonder, and astonishment.
HOpe, and Fear are Sister-germaines, but as that heates our desire, and
inflames our courage to the most generous actions, so this quenches and deads
it, by the Ice of her vain apprehensions. Among those things which we should
apprehend, I find none more worthy of fear, then fear it self; because from
an imaginary evil, she knows how to draw most sharp, and bitter sorrows,
and being ingenious to work our sorrow, she runs before the good which may
befall us; disguiseth them; apparelleth them with her own livery, and by this
means, gives the name of Enemy, to him that comes purposely to assist us. But
what suspicion can we have of him, who under the cloak, and shadow of good
will, comes to counsel us to our prejudice and damage: This Chimaera beats at
our breasts, and aduertiseth it, that his Enemy is at the gate; which is true,
but it is with so great terror, and trembling, that it makes us incapable of
counsel. It is by this art, and subtilty, that she delivers us up to our
Enemy, of whose approaches she had foretold us. So as if we give ear to her
pernicious designs, she makes us distrust our own proper good; and by these
evil courses, changes the tranquillity and sweetness of our life. For what
pleasure does the enjoying of any good bring us; if it be still accompanied
with the fear of losing it: She incessantly tells us of bad events, and
teaches us thereby, that the surest things for our content, are subject to the
inconstancy of Fortune, which with one backe-blow, shakes and overthrows the
strongest foundations of our tranquillity. As our Desire is not inflamed, but
to seek good, so our fear aims only to fly, and eschew evil. Poverty,
Death, and Grief, are the liueli^st coullers, wherewi^h we can depaint the
cause of our fears. We have formerly shown that Poverty is only evil, in
our opinion; whose points are not sharpened, but by the temper of our own
imaginations. But it is in vain to fear that which cannot offend us despite
our selves. Nature has caused us to be all borne equally rich, and esteems so
little of the goods she gives us, which we term riches, as of our passions,
and the fear to lose them. Seneca says, that the Gods were more propitious,
and favorable, when they were but of earth, then since, when they were made of
Gold, or Silver; meaning thereby, that the rest, and tranquillity of the mind,
was more frequently found in the life of our forefathers, who sought no other
riches, then the fruits of their labors, then it has done since, when men
being curious to open the bosom, and rip up the bowels of the earth, have
therein found Mines of Gold, and Silver, which she has dispersed, and sown
among us; as seed of discord and division. The meanest estate and condition,
and those steps which are nearest the earth, are still the firmest and surest,
as the highest are the most dangerous. And if Poverty be any way harsh, or
distasteful, it is only because she can throw us into the arms of Hunger,
Thirst Heat, Cold, or other discommodities. So in Poverty, it is not she
which is to be feared, but rather Grief, and Pain, whereof we will hereafter
speak in its proper place. But some one will say, who is he that apprehends,
and fears not Death. There is no poverty so poor, which finds not wherewith
to live: The body is easily accustomed, and hardened to endure Heat, or Cold;
but what remedy is there against Death? who with his sharp sith, cuts and
reapes away so many pleasures, yea, the very thread of our life, which can
never be regained; for although old men approach Death in despite of
themselves, and that their distaste of worldly pleasures (the forerunner
thereof) should yet give them resolution to advance boldly; nevertheless, they
retire back, they tremble at the ghastly sight, and shadow of Death, yea, they
are affraide, sincke down in their beds, and wrap themselves up in their
couerlets; and to use but one word, they dye every moment, at the only fear,
and thought of Death. And I who am in the Springtime of my age cherished of
the Muses, and beloved of Fortune in the very hight of all pleasures, and
voluptuousness, shall not I yet fear Death. So many Griefs and Sorrows, so
many conuulsions, and gnashing of our teeth, are they not to be apprehended,
and feared; can the linkes of that marriage of the Body, and Soul be
dissolved, and broken, but by some violent effect, and power; those who are
insensible, fear their dissolution. Flowers, and Trees seem to mourn at the
edge of the Knife, and shall not then our sense, and feeling be sensible
thereof, yea, and remarke, and see it in our fear?

I answer, It is true, that of all things which Nature represents unto us
most terrible, there is nothing which she has depainted in such fearful
colors, as the figure and image of Death. Every thing tendes to the
conserua^ion of its being, and generously oppose and fight against those who
seek to destroy it: But the fear which we entermixe with it, is not of the
match o^ party; but is only of our own proper belief and invention. Pain
which seems to be the iustest cause to make us apprehend it, is excluded, and
has nothing to do with it, because the separation of the soul and body, is
done in so sudden a moment and instan^, that our Understanding hardly
perceiving it, it i^ very difficult for our sense to do it. Those ghastly
looks which deuance it, or the rew^rd of good or evil which follows it, are
no appurtenances, ^or dependancies of this instant or moment: But I will say
more; For as there is no time in this instant, so likewise there is no pain;
because the senses cannot operate or agitate (according to the opinion of
Philosophers) but with some certain Interim of time, and which is more, that
those last panges are passed away without any sense or feeling thereof. And
contrariwise, if in this separation, the pain should be either in the body or
soul, or both; First, the body feels it not, because there is nothing but the
senses which can perceive it, who being in disorder and confusion, by the
disturbance of the vital spirits, which they oppress and restrain, their
disposition is thereby vitiated. The function of the senses being interrupted,
they cease to operate; and therefore of feeling the effect of pain, but more
especially when the spirits abandon them, and retire and withdraw themselves
from the heart: The which we perceive, and see in those who fall in a swoone,
whose eyes remain yet open, without seeing, and without operation: which
happens and comes to pass, because the spirits which should make the wheels
of the sight to move and operate, have abandoned their places and functions.
The Soul of her self cannot remedy it, no more then a Fountainer can cause
his water-workes to play, when there is no water; the which by reason thereof,
is then merely out of his power. And as the eye by the defect hereof,
performs not her function; and without perceiving thereof, cease to operate:
so all the other senses by the same rule and reason, do fail us. When our
Soul will take her last farewell of our body, she flies to the regions of the
Liver and Heart, as to her public places, all the spirits being dispierced,
and bending here and there in the body, to take her last farewell of them,
which retire, without that the parts or members farther off, do feel any
pain of this separation: but because henceforth they can no more feel it, for
that they carry away with them the heat and strength of feeling. If therefore
there be any pain, it must be in the noble parts, who profer their last
farewell, and thanks to the Soul for the care, labor, and pain; which she
has had to give them life and motion. The Husband cannot l^aue or go from his
Wife, without a great sense and feeling of sorrow: for his sighs, griefs,
and tears, testify how bitter and displeasing this separation is to him: Can
therefore this separation of the soul from the body, be performed with less
grief and pain? Some will say, that the most remote parts and members shall
be insensible thereof, and endure and suffer nothing in this reluctation and
conflict, which is only because they have given this charge, and conferred
this commission to the noble parts to perform it. As in the separation of one
whom we dearly affect and love, all the whole body which suffers in this
farewell, (to make his grief and sorrows the more apparent) commits the
charge thereof to the eyes by their tears, and to his breast by her sighs, to
express his sense and feeling thereof: I answer, that there is no pain,
because the spirits who withdraw themselves, by the defects and failing of
others in these interior parts, are either in good and perfect order, and
their function is common, and therefore without pain; or else in confusion,
and then the function, and organes of the spirits are changed, and consequently
their effect, which is the sense and feeling thereof: Which is seen by those
who fall into a trance or swooning, They feel nothing less then pain in
those parts, which with far more reason should betide them; because the force
and power of the spirits dispierced throw all the body, is in one instant
assembled, and gathered together in this place: whereas contrariwise Death
happens, and comes to us, by the extinguishing of the spirits, who by their
extreme weakness, cannot furnish power enough, to move the wheels and
organes of our feeling; and as without pain they have abandoned the remotest
parts and members, they fail in them without any perceiving thereof. The body
deprived of Knowledge, and therefore ignorant of his losses, supports it
without any pain or grief: So that if there be any pain or bitterness in
this separation; it should be in the soul, who touched with the remembrance of
fore-past pleasures, which she has enjoyed, and tasted in her commerce and
traffic with the body, she cannot depart or estrange her self without
pain, and lamentation. But I affirm, and say, that pain has no power, but
ore the Body, and that the Soul, being wholly simple, pure, and spiritual, is
exempt of its jurisdiction, and it has no hold, or power over her. That if the
knowledge which she has be capable to give him any sense, or feeling of
pain, it should be for his good. But there is nothing which the Soul
embraces with more passion, nor desires so eagerly, then her rest, and
tranquillity; I mean the enioyance, and possession of her object; for then
chiefly when she is detained in the prison of the body, she finds nothing
pleasing in this strange Country, which can content her appetite. Judge then
if she g^ieue to depart and dislodge from the body, and whether a Prisoner
detained by the Turks, when we take off the chains from his hands, and feet,
pay his Ransom to reconduct him into his native country, and so restore him to
the free possession of his goods, and liberty, have any great cause to afflict
himself for this separation: I confess you will answer me; that I no more
fear Death for its pain, since there is none so sharp, which we will not
willingly endure and suffer; and which is not entermixed with some sweetness;
if we fla^ter our selves with the hope of a remedy. But who is he, who ought
not to apprehend the loss of goods, which are common to the one, and the
other, to the mind, and the body, which being divided, and separated, their
sweet enioyance can no more be recovered; I say, that if this loss be a
grief, or evil: this evil ought to concur, and meet, either in the
enjoying thereof, or then when you possess, and enjoy it, no longer. As for
the present, should you not iniustly complain, because you enjoy it quietly,
and that you attribute the good which they bring us, to the possessing of them:
But it is no evil, no more then when you enjoy them not, because the evil is
the feeling which we have of a thing that afflicts us; but Death depriues us of
all sense and feeling, and therefore of this pain and affliction; that if you
afflict your self, because death depriues you of the remembrance thereof, by
the same reason, every night before you sleep, you ought to bewail and lament
it, and to take your farewell, because you go to lose the memory thereof.

Those who have judged most sollidly, and pertinently of Death, and who have
most curiously depainted it at Nature, and Life, have compared it to sleep.
But, if we will ask the opinion of Trophonius, and Agamedes, they will teach
us, what is the most Sovereign of our Riches and contents; because after they
had built, and consecrated a stately Temple to the honor of Apollo, they
besought him in requital, that he would eternally grant them the best thing,
and it was answered them by the Oracle; that their demand should be satisfied
within three days; but before the expiration thereof, they both died. He who
is in the worst estate and condition, begins to hope when he has no more to
fear, whereof he is not presently afflicted: Man being then so miserable in
his life, has he not reason to aim, and aspire to some better thing. To fear
Death, (says Socrates,) is the part of a Wise man, because all the World
ignores it; in not knowing whether it be our good, or our evil: But what
should we not fear; if we fear that which cowardice her self has sought for
her retraite, and shelter, and for the speediest and most sovereign remedy of
all afflictions and miseries: The Egyptians had still in their Bankets, the
Image of Death; nevertheless, it was not fear who had the charge to represent
them this picture, but it was Constancy, and Virtue, who had that commission,
and who would not permit that in the midst of their Delights and Joys; they
should be interrupted by any unexpected accident: But if Death then befell
them, that he should be of their company, that the ceremony might not be
troubled, in regard they kept him his place, and dish; and briefly, that the
joy of the company might not be disturbed; for because they neither knew the
certain place, or time where they should attend Death, they therefore attended
him in all times, and places. Aristotle tells us, that there is no fear, but
of doubtful things; it is then in vain for us to apprehend it, or that our
fear prepares him such base, and cowardly courages, in regard there is nothing
more ce^taine then Death. How many are there found, who survive their glory,
and whose languishing life has not served, but for a Tomb to bury their
reputation. It was said by a Philosopher, that the sweet pleasures of life,
was but a slavery, if the liberty to die, were to be said so, why then should
we fear that, which the wisest of the World, held the surest harbor, and
sanctuary of our tranquillity. It now rests, that we fight, against the fear
of pain, which serves but to afflict us, with a present grief of that which
it may be, will n^uer befall us, or at least, far otherwise then we fear.
The Painter Parhasius exposed his Slaves to the Rack, thereby, the more
naturally to represent the feigned tortures of Prometheus. We are Slaves to
fear, who of an imaginary evil, delights to cast on us the gall, and
bitterness of a thousand true vexations, and afflictions. For how often have
we shaked, and trembled with fear, at those things which have produced us no
greater damage then the bare apprehension thereof. Have we ever feared, or
expected any thing with extreme impatiency, but that we have still found it
altered, and changed with the belief and hope thereof? Has not pain many
sharp points, and throes of it self, without it be any way needful, for our
fear to edge, or sharpen them; As far distant as they may be, they still
approach us; opens them our breast and heart, and casts them into our very
blood. He who cannot defend the blow which threatens him; at least, let him
defend the fear thereof, whereby he shall diminish, at least the one half of
his grief and pain: Our fears are as easily deceived, as our hopes. If our
grief and pain be violent, it will be short; if we cannot carry it, it will
carry us; but if it be moderate, and supportable, then our constancy can agree,
and sympathise with it; howsoever, it will be high-time to think thereof when
we come to resent and feel it: But above all things we must remember, that
there can nothing befall us, which is not incident, and common to all the
World, and that we entertain, and receive the conditions of this our life,
only at our own perils, and fortunes. There is good, and evil, ease, and
pain, and therefore there will be no particular rule, or law made for us.
Destiny does not unwind for one man the thread of the adventures, and
fortunes of all the World; and that very pain which we endure, depends of a
part of divine power, which must finish its course; has the rising of this
Star been a malign aspect unto us, why, his setting will give us a benign,
and gracious influence: Nothing remains long fixed, or immooueable; in
Tortures, and Torments, there is yet some relaxation, and ease; all Pains, and
Griefs have their Interims, which gives other Forms, and Faces to
voluptuousness, then a dumb, or obscure felicity. Briefly, it is an
inevitable Decree, which has no appeal; it is therefore far better for us
to advance, and follow, then to permit our selves to be dragged, and
constrained, and so by our reluctation, and contradiction to incur the anger
of our great Captain.

SECTION. VII. Of all Passions, there is no greater Enemy to Reason, nor less
capable of council then Choler.
IT is reported that Minerua (on a time) playing on a Flute in the
looking-glass of a fountain, was so extremely angry with her self, to see
the deformity of her Face counterfeited, by reason of the swelling of her
cheeks, that she threw her Flute to the ground and brake it: If Man were so
curious to consider the deformity of his manners, and the indecency which
Choler imprints on his face, I believe, that he would spend all his anger on
this passion; and that Reason would again counsel him once again to be
Choleric, thereby to cut off the root of so pernicious a vice; I know not if
our Soul could be seen of our eyes, in the furious fumes of this passion, who
could endure the sight thereof; for judge what she may be interiourly, since her
exterior Image, is so foul and deformed. The liueliest traces, and the most
delicate Lineaments, which make her most commendable, are those which Reason,
and Virtue pourtray in her. But what can we more see fair in her, as soon as
they are defaced by the dark, and obscure colors of this passion; the
madness thereof, ingendereth such a combustion, and disorder, that Reason is
constrained to retire, as wholly confused, and to abandon the conduction of the
Soul, to the rage and insolency of this fury. She makes us believe that we are
offended, and that there is nothing but revenge, which can diminish our injury;
as if Vice could be corrected by her self, and nevertheless, not being able
to wreake it on others, as soon as she would, she then performs it on her
self, and tears her self in pieces, conditionally, that she may sprinckle
some of her own blood, on the face of her Enemy. Oh Passion! what an Enemy art
thou to man; know thou nothing else, but how to offend him? Thou put
weapons into our hands, to repulse injuries; and then thou make us Enemies to
our selves, to the end that we may have occasion to offend our selves, and
thereby, from one and the same wound, to cause to proceed the injury, and the
revenge; But herein she is the more dangerous in that she aduanceth not little,
and little by degrees, and solicites not the Soul as other passions do, but
contrary-wise she draws, and precipitates her at one blow: After we are fallen
into this frenzy, it matters no more, what has occasioned it, for we still
advance, and pass on to the bottom of this precipice, which the Poets have
well represented to us, who for o^e Apple, reduced Greece, and Asia to fire,
and sword. The same cause which makes a Master of a family to murmur in his
house, animates a Prince against his Subjects; and an injury which puts weapons
into our hands against a particular person, does some times occasion, and
enkindle a war in a whole Kingdom, at least if Fortune have given us
reputation, and power enough to effect it; Choler is easy enough to be curbed
in her beginning, but very difficult to be restrained, when she is escaped our
hands; she takes the snaffle in her teeth, violently carries us away, and
takes no other counsel, but from her own licentious madness. In this passion
we may observe three several motions; The first proceeds from the power of
Nature, as a certain unwilling disposition, and changing of affection, which
we cannot remedy, but by a prescription of long time, and custom, and yet very
difficulty, because Nature has this power in men, to move them despite of
themselves; yea, and to make them remember the very strongest of their
imperfections: The second is voluntary, to wit, then when this passion
consults, and takes council of Reason, and submits to it, but he who
flattereth his Choler, and does not stop it in this point, and behalf, let
him never hope to restrain it in the third, and last motion, because Reason
having once stooped under the command of this passion, she tramples on her
throat; takes the possession of our Judgment, and being shut up, and
fortified in our house, sets fire both without and within it, and then by
little and little, consumes her self in the flames thereof; I am of opinion,
that it was for this cause, and reason, that Seneca said, that it were better
to exclude Virtue from our Souls, then to receive, or admit Choler, because
the end thereof, proves most commonly the beginning of repentance. For Reason
eleuating her self by degrees, and disingaging her self from the tyranny of
this domestical Enemy, she then comes to know the disorder, occasioned by her
own blindness; whereof she is taken as surety, and pledge, because she must
answer, for the force and power which she has committed unto him. Or if our
Reason think to justify her self, for that she seems at his arrival, to
prescribe, and give him Laws, let her know, that Choler forgets them, and that
she never remembers them, except it be then, when they offend her. Those who
are intemperate in their sickness, prohibit, and defend to be obeyed when they
are sick: and since man cannot be temperate in this sickness of the Soul, I
mean Choler, I am of opinion, that by times he defend Reason to obey him. Or
if we believe, that it is some times necessary, because (as a Philosopher
said,) it gives weapons to Valor; I answer, that Vice produces nothing which
is Virtuous, although it seem to shoot forth some false buds, or twigges,
which bears I know not what deceitful image, or representation thereof. It is
no good fat, when through sickness we become puffed up, and corpulent. It is
neither courage, nor valor, when through Choler we rush upon our Enemies:
Virtue never makes use of so weak a Champion as Choler; It is a weapon which
commands us, and which we manage but at his pleasure, and as dangerous toward
our selves, as toward those whom it will offend. It is true, Choler has power
and predominancy over all men; that there are many people who have not yet
approved the stings of ambition, who know not the name of Covetousness, and
yet there are none who have not felt the effect of Choler. All the World is
naturally subject to Love, yea, none can justly deny the truth hereof, and yet
we have not seen a World of people mad wi^h the Love of one Woman, as we have
seen possessed with this passion of Choler; But it follows not that we cannot
avoid it, we go more often, and more swiftly toward Choler, then she does
toward us. We seek the occasions thereof instead of eschewing, and flying
them; in imitation of Caesar, who having recovered all the writings, letters,
and memories of his Enemies, he caused them to be thrown into the fire without
seeing them, thereby to prevent, and shorten the way of Choler, and Revenge;
and it is also reported of him, That he never forgate any thing but injuries
received, a defect and imperfection of memory, worthy of so great a Prince. It
appertains to none, but to those great courages to contemn injuries. In the
highest Region of the air, there is no thunder, Saturn (the greatest of the
Gods) walks so frest, and the more the quality and condition of men are
elevated, the more slow they should be to follow this passion, because they
have more means to offend, and to add, and give to the nourishing of this
enraged fury, the blood, and ruin of those whom they threaten. If a Child, or
a Fool offend thee in the Street with injurious words, thou will avoid him
with disdain; they are too much below thee, to be able to offend thee; So,
know that if the Virtue, and greatness of thy Courage, could as much lift thee
above common people, as above these innocent persons; that thou should find
as little injury from the one, as from the other; the revenge which thou
seek, is a confession of grief for a wrong. If he had not offended thee,
thou had not needed this remedy, a remedy worse then the wrong it self,
because it befalls us; for not being able to endure another folly, we very
often make it our own: None can offend us despite of our selves; an injury
offered us, is either true, or false. If true, why should we be offended to
hear, or understand a thing as it is. If it be false, are we not satisfied,
because the injury then returns, and retortes upon our Enemy, through the vice
of his life? His design is to offend thee; so, he has then need of thee to
execute his resolution, and for what art thou indebted to him, to obey his
will; If the injury offend, and anger thee, it is that which he desires, and
then thou make no more difference of thine Enemy, then of thy Friend: because
thy will is that of either of them. As words are but wind, so know that the
lie, or injury which offends thee in point of Honor, is but vanity, Courage
is to be esteemed and prised, but it is either God, thy Prince, or Country,
which must dispose thereof upon good occasions; injuries receive no sharper
answers then contempt. A Philos^pher demanding of an old Courtier how so rare
a thing as age could ripen, and subsist in Court; made answer, in receiving
injuries, and thanking those who proffer them. The best revenge which we c^n
ta^e of our Enemy, is to reap profit by his in^uries. We have some times
need of Enemies, because, discovering our imperfections by their injuries, we
afterward r^forme and remedy them. Reprehension also, is some times necessary
to prevent, and hinder, that this Vice augment not, but (as one affirms) he
who practices it, must neither be Hungry, nor Thir^ty; let him beware that he
add not Revenge to Choler, for then he shall do nothing, worth any thing, no
more then does that Physician, who being angry with his sick patient, never
administereth him Phisique, but in Choler. But me thinks, the best way to fly
and abandon it, is to consider, that it does more endamage us, then those whom
we would offend. It suckes the greatest part of our own proper gall, and so
poysoneth us, for we cannot expel our breath, but after the proportion we
attract, and draw it in, for we draw it in, before we first breathe, and power
it forth on others; and our Choler vomiteth out nothing on our Enemy, before it
have first corrupted our own stomach, by its too great indigestion.

SECTION VIII. Passions have so deformed a Countenance, that albeit, they are
the Daughters of Nature, yet we cannot love them, and behold them at on^ time.
PAssions are to the mind, as diseases to the body; and as the body is reputed
sick, if any part or member thereof be afflicted, or pained, so the soul
cannot be said to be healthful and sound, as long as she feels the distemper
of any passions; whereof some are suddenly enflamed, and have no mediocrity, as
Choler, and others by little, and little, are nourished in our veins, and
bowels, until the poison thereof being spread, and fortified, is become
strong enough, to engender a universal emotion; as the very thought that we
shall be pained, or afflicted by small degrees, appales* and daunts our
courage, and comes to surprise our Soul, with languishing, grief, and sorrow.
A vice more dangerous then the first, because Choler is a clappe of Thunder,
yea, a Thunderbolt, which with one blow, breaks the branches of a Tree,
whereas Sorrow as a Worm sticks to the root thereof, by little and little
consumes its natural heat, and quite withers, and dries it up: that in an
instant disturbes the tranquillity of our Soul, but is soon appeased; this
pierces to the bottom, remooues the very dregs, and dirt thereof, and
having lifted it up above it self, is not quieted but by a long tract of time.
A base, weak, and effeminate passion, which condemns it self, and forbids
the pleasing familiarity of his dearest friends, who fearing to be surprised,
as an adulterate woman in her vicious Countenance, she constraines her self to
fly, and steal away from her self, as well as from other men's eyes, but yet
in what place soever she thinks to save her self, she still goes augmenting
of her pain, and flattering of her misfortune; and the fairest fruits which
she is capable to produce, are Sighs, Tears, and Groans; the irreproachfull
witnesses of the small courage of those who foment, and cherish them.

But if it violently proceed, from the good which we see others possess, then
we term it Envy. A most infamous passion, which being not able to offend
others, seeks to annoy, and destroy himself; and busking every where, seeks
only his own tortures in other men's contentments. Those who are eminent and
sublime in Virtue, seem to have their reputation exempt from the assaults, and
blows of Envy; because commonly it ingendereth not but among equals, and
those which by the same competition, and concurrence, aim at the same ends.
Iniust in their designs, and only just in that they are sufficient for their
own proper vexation, and to tie themselves to their own torments.

Or if it happen that we are melancholy to see another participate of our
goods; then it is no more Sorrow, but Jealousy which proceeds from the
diffidence of himself, and of his own merits, or from the defect of that
which he loves, as Inconstancy, or Leuitie, whereof our heart secretly
accuses him, or from the virtue, or excellent parts which we see, and observe
in our rival. Among all other passions, it is she alone to whom most things
serve for Phisique, but least for remedy; She screwes, and insinuates her
self under the title of good will and affection, and yet on the foundation
thereof, she buildes her chiefest hatred. And if any one contrariwise pretend
that it is a sign of Love; I say, that like as a f^auer in the body is a sign
of life, but yet of distempered, and corrupted life, that so Jealousy may be a
testimony of Love, but yet it is of an imperfect and def^ctiue Love; for that
which we suspect, either is, or is not; If it be not* we offend that which we
love; if it be, is it not properly to ruin affection: But is there a greater
folly then to be eager in the knowledge of our own shame, and misery, when
there is no Phisique, which does not augment, and inflame it? B^t he who is
curious in his own damage, informs himself thereof, and having discovered
it, finds no remedy, but which is a thousand times worse then his grief and
vexation; me thinks the sight of his passions, is sufficient to make him
detest them; they have deformity enough in them, to exasperate our anger and
hatred against them: They are the seditious, and factious persons of our Soul,
and the professed Enemies of our p^ace, and tranquillity. It is true that we
may throw them to the ground, and trample on them, by the assistance, address,
and subtilty of Virtue, but do what we can, they will seem anew to revive,
and re-enforce themselves as Antaeus the son of the Earth, the blow of their
fall, makes them glance, and rebound against us, and if they cannot wholly
support and raise themselves, they will yet enforce themselves to fight with us
on their knees.

The end of the fourth Discourse.
The fifth Discourse.
Of Felicity.
SECTION. I. Every thing naturally tends to its repose, only Man strayes from
his Felicity, or if he approach it, he stays at the branches, insteede of
embracing the truncke, or body of the tree.
IN interior diseases there is not much less art to know them, then to cure
them; but especially then, when their poison having surprised the most secret
and hidden parts, is stolen from our sight, yea, and from the sense and
feeling of him who harbors it in his breast; the most apparent, and truest
sign of curing such diseases, is to expel the pain, and to awaken in the
patient, his sleepie, or benumbed parts, to the end that the feeling which he
finds thereof, make him assume the strength, and courage to practice the
remedies, the which we have already formerly done. It remains now, that thou
lend a strong hand to the remedies, thereby to pull, and root up these
virulent humors. Think not that these diseases are of the number, and quality
of those who are enchanted, and which are cured with bare words,: The
Physician, and sick patient, do neither advance, nor perform any good by
discourse or words, if they add not effects thereto. If occasion require, we
must use Irons, and fire to extirpe this plant; there is such a distance from
the Estate, wherein this contagion has reduced us, to that point which we
seek and desire, that the changing of one to the other cannot be performed
with less violence. To approve any other way, is to attempt an impossibility;
and herein to want courage, is to despair of the cure, and remedy of his
disease. Nevertheless, we will attempt the most pleasing remedies, and make
use of Irons, and fire but in the greatest extreamities. I conceive and
apprehend, that some one will say to me, thou will make me forsake my hold, and
so abandon a good in effect, although it be some what sharp, and bitter, to
follow this felicity which thou proposest, which it may be is a good in show,
which in its self has no other body but contempt, nor soul, but untruth and
lies. Has any one discovered it out of the Empire of Fortune, and what else is
it but the fullness, and the loade-stone of his favors (which attracts the
eyes of all the World, as the white, and level of our desires, and the center
of our affections.) But that which we term felicity, without which there is
nothing found but is false and imaginary. No, no, I will not snatch out of your
hands, that which you affect, and cherish so dearly, nor bereave your eyes of
these objects, whose luster unites, and ties them to it. I will not cut off
your pensions, nor revenues* and least of all diminish your credit, and
authority. But by the increase, and surplus of a (...) good, I will add to
that heap, this sovereign contentment, which is not of their nature and
grouth, if we will believe (...) disturbance which we meet with in the (...) of
their affluence.

This fair Goddess Virtue, whose (...) is beloved, and honored of all the
World, yea, of her proper Enemies, ought to lead, and conduct us by the hand in
this passage, and to put us in possession of that felicity, whereof we affect
and cherish but the shadows: It is she which bears the key of the Treasury,
which having unshut and opened, we may all thrust in our hands, for it is
inexhaustible. Our affections shall find the inioyance of their desires, and
our insatiable thirst of love, shall find wherewithal to quench this violent
fire, who in enjoying the goods of Fortune, did but the more inflame it. We
shall have so much the more access and familiarity, as our Nature does sweetly
incline us. Do I say that she constraines us with some degree of violence;
The desire which we feel in our heart, is it any other thing but a spark of
felicity, which would join as to his element, and the place of his Origin?
For where the defect is found united, and linked to power, there necessarily is
formed desire: But Man is known to want many things, chiefly Virtue, which is
a perfect habitude. He then desires it; but this desire tendes to something,
which may be truly purchased and obtained, and where being arrived, he finds
his tranquillity, or otherwise this his desire were in vain. So not finding it
in the goods of Fortune, but in Virtue, it follows, that there is another
felicity, besides that which is proposed us by Fortune. Imperfection supposes
the diminution of any perfect thing, because the nature of things has not
derived its power and vigor from a defective and imperfect Nature, but from a
most complete and full one. It follows then that there is a point of Nobility,
from whence they have degenerated, and especially in the act of our sovereign
good, from whence through error and opinion, man has been diuerted as from
his object, to follow a stranger; the which because he of himself cannot
wholly appease our desire, sufficiently demonstates and testifies by this
imperfect beatitude, that he is either the part, the shadow, or the Image of
some accomplished thing, which is felicity: But the part presupposes the
whole, and the shadow or image must necessarily have relation to the body.
Wherefore, of this imperfect happiness, we may draw a necessary consequence
of the sovereign good, and indeed the wit of man, in whatsoever ecstasy he
can be, retains in it self I know not what seed thereof. But as the reeling
Drunkard, although he cannot find the way home, does not for all lose his
desire to return to his own house: So man being drunk with the delights and
pleasures of the world, does not yet omit to desire this felicity, which is
proposed him by nature, although by their enchantments he no more know^s what
way to observe and follow. Men's actions, although they are derived of the
virtues, vices, troubles of the soul, and of other affections, do yet all
tend to felicity, but all m^n are not so happy to obtain it. This felicity is
either active or contemplative. This last ha^h some thing more noble, and yet
more imperfect then the other: His design is more generous and noble, but his
execution is more imperfect; yea, it is more noble in that it seems that by
her, man is made like unto the Divine nature. In the active we shall find some
thing, as strength and wisdom, wherein we have some common resemblance to
beasts, more imperfect in his execution. First, she depends of the active, and
according to the saying of Plato, has need that all the troubles of the soul
be appeased, and dissipated, because they very much disturb con^emplation, and
yet she cannot pass without the goods of the body and of fortune, which ought
to be prepared to her by this; when she wants nothing whereof she ought to be
furnished and assisted, to advance her with more ease and facility. To what
degree can she ascend. Perfection cannot be bought or purchased in this
world, because of the obstacles which befall us by the means of the body and
the senses, who by throwing too dark and thick clouds between the true and
false, hinder the soul that she cannot enjoy a perfect f^licity in the
contemplation of truth. Contrariwise, the active who employes not her self,
but to correct those troubles which fall into the Soul, by animating some when
they withdraw us from our duty, and in stopping others when they make us
pass the bounds of reason, ariues at last to the end of his enterprise, and
makes us enjoy in effect that good* which she proposes her self. She may
easily leave and omit contemplation, which is somewhat less necessary then
the goods of the body. Sciences (or learning) have their vices and defects, as
Pride, Vanity, and Presumption, which cannot be corrected but by the aid of
this. Many have been happy without learning: and Socrates for the regard
thereof, was not by the Oracle reputed the wisest man of the world, but for the
conduction and ordering of his manners. Nevertheless, as one good added to
another, makes it the greater, so the contemplative brings some profit and
advantage to the active felicity, although nevertheless she seem rather to
offend then serve her: For she bears with her a (I know not what) trouble to
enquire and know; which sells us many light and triuiall shows of
contentments, in regard of continual sweat and labor; and in the end
discovers us the vanity of her pretenses. For all Learning, which we can
purchase, is not perfect, but by reason of his object, which is God, or the
Essence of things wherein he is, if rather they be not in him, as in their
Sovereign Head spring and fountain. But by those ways and means which we
possess it, she cannot be but extremely weak and imperfect, being
ore-vayled and obscured with an infinite number of shadows and clouds,
because it is not things and their Essences which conioyne themselves to our
soul, no more then bodies are seen in the Crystal of Looking-glasses; but
only their forms and representations. So in steed of truth she receives
nothing but the resemblances and shadows thereof; as we have formerly
observed in the Tract of the senses: And nevertheless, she wheels and runs
round about objects, and proffereth us her hands, to stop and arrest the
shadows of our visions, in steed of the body, and the thing itself. So that
we must not wonder if Learning cannot content or satisfy our desires, and
therefore serves but to disturb us, because her forms and resemblances give
us no essential nor solid thing, but only fill us with I know not what ayrie,
empty, and superficial, which does rather anger then appease us: Which
absolutely contradicts our active felicity, which is nothing else but a perfect
tranquillity of the mind, in the moderate use of goods which she enjoys.
The vulgar and common sort of men, assign this felicity to be in pleasures
and voluptuousness, imagining that the greatest part of those who are
constituted in authority, live after that manner, believing that all evil is
in grief and affliction: and they are not far wide of the truth herein,
because all our actions still aim at delight and pleasure; which commonly
accompanies felicity as her shadow: But this approaching end is not the last,
so that this imperfection sufficiently gives the lie to their belief and
opinion. The errors of others grow according to the proportion of their
greatness; for it seems that the more Man is elevated in fortune, that
thereby he either augments his faults, or else makes them appear the greater.
The Oeconomicall, or Domestical Man, proposes himself nothing but wealth and
riches: but it is a life too full of trouble and agitation; the Enemy of re^^,
and tranquillity, and therefore of felicity. Those who are dignified above the
people, hold that they are risen to that honor which the politic life seems
to propose for her end; but there is small likelihood or reason, that our good
consists more in others then in our selves, whereby it were to permit that
Fortune should take part, which delights in nothing more, then in crossing and
aff^icting us. It is not with felicity, as it is wit^ fortune. Such have
honors which they merit and deserve not; but none can buy this felicity, but
with the price of merit. Princes think of nothing so much, as how to extend
the bounds of their Empires, to the confines of the world; and to see their
selves only absolute in this Sovereign power. Alexander nevertheless agrees
not hereunto, as whether his design was yet more generous; or that he has
acknowledged his abuse and vanity in this point: But the one and the other
deceive themselves in their opinions, and take a part for the whole. One
Swallow or fair day, makes not a Summer: So the assistance of one of these
contentments being separated, and untied from the huge number thereof, they are
not sufficient to make a man be justly termed happy, no more then a man for
having performed one act of Virtue, ought to be termed virtuous; because it is
an exercise which consists of many actions, and which so often repeated,
composeth a custom or habit. A Captain cannot be styled victorious, who
having defeated a squadron of the contrary side, in the end sees his Army
overthrown by the rest of his Enemies. So repute not him happy, who surmounts
and vanquisheth his Choler, and other ways leaves the better part of his mind
and affections in prey, to Covetousness, Ambition, or some other vice, which
captiuates and torments him.

SECTION II. It is without reason that we complain of Fortune, because hourly
she teaches us, her mutable and variable humor.
AS there is but Fortune and Virtue, who share and divide our passions, it is
they also who communicate us, all that we term goods or riches, yea our
felicity it self: Let us judge of that who has given us the better part; and
let us equally weigh and balance the favors which we receive. It seems to
me, that Fortune aduanceth, and comes forth first to meet us; Decked, and
embellished in her richest attire, and Ornaments to heat and inflame our
affections, and to make us feel the obligations, wherewith she enchaines and
captiuates our wills. It is true, I cannot consent or adhaere with those, who
do not sufficiently feel and acknowledge it, and testify by iniurying her the
vice of their own understanding. I too much esteem, and prife equity not to
confess ingeniously, as well the good as the evil, which we find in our
Enemy. Nothing engages me but Justice; nothing enforces me but reason. But
what reason is there, that thou who have opened her, all thy doors, and who
have issued forth to meet, and salute Fortune, to receive her into thy house,
that thou will quarrel with her when she is there* or because she gives thee
that too late, which pleases thy ambition, or that she too sparingly bestows
her favors and treasures on thee, to satisfy the taste and palate of thy
distempered and irregular appetites: Or because she is weary to reside and
dwell so long under one roof, she retires other where is. That which she has
lent thee, she has departed with out of her pure liberality; and therefore
what reason is there, that thou contest and quarrel with her, because she
withdrawes it. It may be thou have not understood the clauses and conditions
of her bargain: For, for a time she gives us, the use and profit of her goods;
but she never dispossesseth her self of their propriety. And in retiring has
she carried away any thing that was not her own: What shall become of thy
obligation and debt to her for her presents? Shall their absence have the
credit wholly to wipe off and deface it. If any one had reached thee out his
hand to withdraw thee out of a mire, were it reasonable that thou should
quarrel with him, because he would not carry thee home to his house on his
shoulders? Liberality has his limits in his intents, and not in the will of
others, who never say, it is enough. Otherwise, what Monarch by his gifts
could content and satiate the will of the meanest Shepherd, which increasing
by the enioyance of those things which his desire proposes him, raises
himself by little and little to so excessive a degree of pride and arrogancy,
that the possession of the whole world, and of all which it contains* will yet
be found to be inferior to his ambitions. He who lends or gives, does still
oblige when he performs more then he owes. When one lends thee any thing,
has he no more right to ask and demand it of thee? Whereof do thou then
complain? Does it not remain that thou should thank him for the time which
thou has enjoyed it? If she take leave of thee, go and conduct her home to
her door. It is true* she is so good and pleasing a companion that we cannot
suffer her separation without grief; but there is no reason that we should
enforce her against her will and nature, to remain so long time in one place,
because she delights in nothing more then in mutability and change. The law of
ciuility permits us not to quarrel with him who comes to oblige us by visiting
us, if his visit seem too short to us. Where then is the wrong which Fortune
has done thee; what is the grief whereof thou complainest? Do thou not
know her Artifice, who to make her favors more pleasing and desirable,
withdrawes them for a time. Her absence makes our love more violent, and
thereby makes it do homage, which her presence could never draw from our
tongue: the estimation which we make of things being of this nature, that it
never ties it self, but to those things which we have not; and contempt
contrariwise to that which we possess and enjoy. But the same inconstancy
which dislodged her, will it may be cause her return. There is nothing
constant in her, but only her inconstancy, nor so durable as her mutability.
Polycrates knowing very well her humor, to content her vicissitude and
changeableness, without giving her the pain to come home to him, believed
that he had sufficiently satisfied her due and interest, in throwing into the
Sea a jewel of an inestimable value. But to show that she will not that any
one shall act and play her part; but that she will take and choose at her
pleasure, she caused this Jewel again to return to him, found in the belly
of a fish, which was served in to him on his Table. Nothing displeases her but
our resolution, nothing contents her but our weakness and pusillanimity. To
contemn that which she gives us, is the means to enjoy it long, because she
difficultly resolves to withdraw the good which she has done us; if at least
she have not formerly endomaged our virtue, or corrupted us by her
familiarity: In the mean time I perceive not that her weapons fight against
her self; and that the only way to excuse her herein, is to accuse her for
the ruin of our repose and tranquillity, because her inconstant Nature cannot
look or bend to the surest side, and that fear and hope wherewith she
perpetually ballanceth the course and actions of our life, promises us nothing
less then perfect felicity.

SECTION. III. Wealth and Riches are too poor to give us the felicity which
we seek and desire.
But there is no reason so soon to stop her mouth and condemn her; Let us a
little see and observe the great preparatiues, which with so much noise she
draws after her. The Master does not always carry the purse. It may be that
this Felicity may consist and meet in the one or the other of her goods and
benefits of Fortune, that follow her as her chiefest Officers. Let us cursorily
consider, he who defuseth so much pomp and luster, that it seems the eyes
and hearts of all the World should follow this splendant brightness. It is
that which we term Wealth, or Riches. What is your design, promise nothing
which you cannot perform, if it be not that you are constrained thereunto by
the command of your Mistress; Obedience is blind, and it is only that which
excuses you. Do you believe that in curing our Poverty, you cure us of the
rest of our diseases? Do you think because of your abundance, that you want
nothing to add to your content? You do nothing less for all that; you only
a little rub your itch, but presently after it afflicts you far the more; for
then the heat or fire takes it; and the more you continue it, the more it
increases. But what good do you Riches bring us; If we cast up our accounts
together, I believe you remain our debtor; What is there in you which is
worthy to be esteemed by your price and value, but only your exterior luster
and show; and if there be but only that, what is there which we find not
far more admirable, in Stars and Flowers, and which is not common to a
thousand other natural Bodies: You must then confess, that you are in our
debt, by virtue whereof, you must covenant and condition with us, to satisfy
our desires, and so to exempt us of Poverty. And yet notwithstanding you
neither perform the one, or the other. Is it in your power to quench our
thirst when we are extremely pressed and afflicted therewith; You make us
believe that we yet want something, and yet the possession thereof does but
increase its violence. If there be any thing in you that be capable to enrich
us, it must be your presence; and yet notwithstanding you bring us more profit
upon the Exchange then in your Coffers. It is not therefore your presence which
is to be desired, since your absence enricheth us far more: By this we see,
that poverty is found richer then abundance. Whereof then are we healed and
cured? But you will say, that your want does impouerish us! O poor Riches,
since you still carry with and about you some degree of beggary. He who wants
many things, is he not justly held and reputed poor: But when you are arrived
any where, how many servants and guards do you want to secure you from your
Enuiers. How exceedingly you want the aid and assistance of Judges, to punish
those who offend and wrong you. And if he who receives and enioyes you, have
need of all these things, and which is more, has need of himself, because
he is no more himself, (the last and most extreme point of beggary) is not
he then more to be contemned, or rather pitied, then he whom you term
poor, who weighes not his goods by the Goldsmithes Balance, but by the yard
of necessity: and who wants not all these things! O Riches, for what then serve
you: but only to enrich us in wanting far more things then we enjoy. Why
then do you constrain us to carry on our backs your gold and silver, which
oppresses and afflicts us far more in your company, then it did when you
were alone, or absent. A double burden is not the way to ease a Porter! O
Riches, where then is this good which has deceived our hopes? It is not for
you to purchase it; it has cost us too many cares and labors: It is not for
you to conserve it; it has too many fears and apprehensions. Is it in your
loss, I doubt so, if we will believe the Wise man, who rejoiced to study
Philosophy more at his ease, after the Shipwreck and loss of all his goods.
Auant then Riches, for you are professed Enemies of repose and tranquillity,
and therefore of felicity.

SECTION. IV. Glory and Reputation has nothing which is solid but Vanity, we
must therefore elsewhere seek our Sovereign contentment.
THere is more likelihood and semblance, that this Lady clad so slightly and
slenderly, who promises to carry our name on her wings to all parts and
corners of the world, termed Glory, Honor, or Reputation, does carry in her
bosom this precious pearl which we seek, I mean felicity. It is impossible
having travailed, and ran over so many Countries, but that she has met it
either in the East Indies, or some other transmarine part. And indeed, if we
will believe those who have made profession of Learning and Philosophy, we
shall find that they were partly of that opinion, which they sufficiently
testified, by the desire and immortality of their writings, and that our
felicity depended of the favors of this Goddess, who has power, besides the
fruit which we receive thereby in our life, to prolong the enioyance thereof
after our death. She opens Graves and Tombs: She forces Times and Ages;
She snatcheth out of the bowels of Death, and the hands of Oblivion, the life
and name of him, who by the merit of his love, and the assiduity of his
services, has won her heart and affection: But fair Goddess, I am much
deceived, if you are not extremely debased and fallen from your pristine
beauty, and from what you have been. I know not, if it be not the love of some
Narcissus, which has so much blemished, and withered you, and reduced you to
the Estate wherein you now are. What hope remains there for us, to cherish and
comfort our love, by the sweet pressure of your embracings? What is become of
this former health and beauty, of this delicate skin, this rauishing
countenance, and vermilian cheeks? What do you retain nothing thereof, but
only your voice, no more then miserable Echo does: A voice so weak and
imperfect, that she can pronounce nothing but our name. What say I? If as to
an Echo we make her speak what we please, and pronounce with one tone, yea
and no. This triuiall Lady has been taught to praise Vice as Virtue, and to
use the same Language for the one as for the other. He who flatters a Tyrant,
has no other terms to praise a good Prince, and those who know them not but
by this relation: what shall he do to hazard nothing of the esteem, which his
judgment gives him. Among men's inventions, I approve the Artifice which they
have had, to forge this feigned Divinity, to stir up, and incite men's hearts
by the alluring sight thereof, to surmount all difficult things, thereby to
make his way and passage to virtue. But we ought not to expose and abandon it
to all men, nor permit that it should be so cheap and common among us as it
is. We ought not with the same pensill to paint white and black, nor with one
and the same cloak to cover Vice and Virtue. Those who built the Temple of
Virtue and Honor together, so that none could enter into this, before they had
first past that, did yet retain some form and image of this first
Institution. But what law so ever we can make, it degenerates in the end
through the use thereof, either into abuse, or tyranny, which seems to
proceed not so much by the fault of man, as of the nature of the thing it
self, which being engaged in the course, and Vicissitude of mortal things,
runs to the end, and cannot long subsist or remain in one constant and
immutable being. And indeed, in her first years and time, this Lady Glory
followed nothing but Virtue and Merit, but some stupid man (desirous to content
the eyes of his body, as well as those of his mind) would give her some solid
thing, whereunto she might fasten and fix her self, as to him who is the best
timbred, the strongest, and the most courageous, the dignity to march first in
Wars, and to command and conduct others: As the Infidels do at this day (a
thing which savors not of Barbarism) to him which excells in Wit, Judgment,
and Justice, the Office to appease differences, which arise among the people,
as Moses likewise did. These Offices give the first rank and pre-eminence to
those who were established, and by degrees erected in dignities. Nevertheless,
those who were formerly provided, were not yet so much honored for the charge
and office which they possessed; but only by merit, which made them worthy and
capable above all other. But aftertimes have not proceeded by election, but
have believes that the virtue of predecessors, ought to be infused with the
seed, in the person of successors. The which being since maintained, then
Virtue began to withdraw, and retire her self apart, and has not since been
found united to these dignities; but that by hazard and accident some persons
of merit have been found of that number. In the mean time, Honor which was
inseparably united to those dignities, for Virtues sake (which was the soul
thereof) has not ceased to follow this body, although she have been divided
and separated; also the glory, and the estimation, and opinion of people, is
far more capable to unite it self to I know not what gross object, thing,
or person, then to any thing which is more refined and sublime. He cannot
perceive, yea nor conceive Virtue otherwise then painted, blown up, and
swelled by Artifice. Those who slide into Offices and Dignities, by their
natural honesty and simplicity, do easily escape from so gross a sight,
which has need of a greater and stronger body, although they can take no
hold-fast thereof.

We are in a time, where the good opinion and estimation of People is
injurious; why then shall we so much esteem it? He who has a hundred thousand
crowns to bestow on an Office or Dignity, he has very much shortened the
way, which another must make by his virtuous actions, to make himself so well
esteemed and accepted: It matters not much whether he enter in by some false
door, or that it comes not to him by fair play: Howsoever he has performed
more in an hour, then all the virtue of this other can do during his whole
life. Yea, to speak properly, he has herein resembled the Trojan Horse, who
effected that in one night, which a great Army could not do in ten years. If
all the Virtue and Wisdom of the World were assembled in the other, it cannot
exempt, or privilege him from being pushed and abused in the streets, by ever
Porter or Cobbler, in the throng and croude of those who retire to give way and
place to this great new Merchant: And if Honor and Praise be so impertinently
and undeservedly given, what shall he profit who will buy it at the price of
his own virtue and integrity. Glory should be followed, not desired; it is
not purchased but by the greatness and goodness of our courage, which measures
all things by conscience.

We must do for Virtue, that which we do for Glory; But me thinks there
is yet more honor not to be, then to be praised for a thing which d^serues it
not. But the vulgar people, who is the distributer of this praise, and who
keeps the record and register thereof, marks down the payments and receipts:
If he offer it to thee, can thou safely receive this present from so
corrupted a hand? If he deny it thee; for what do thou complain? If none
could worthily praise the Athenians but before the Athenians themselves;
should thou care for any other praise then for that of Wise men? Or if
because thou art a good Musician, that some should praise thee for a good
Pylot, or for an excellent Physician, can thou endure this false praise
without true shame? The Estimation of the vulgar measures all things according
to the outward show and luster, and judges not of a man's sufficiency, but by
the number and liuerie of his footmen. That Philosopher who discoursing
publicly in the Streets, was interrupted by the applause of the people; he
presently turned to one of his friends, to know if there had any thing
impertinently escaped his tongue which had thus given the people occasion to
praise him, as if he were not capable to esteem any thing, but that which is
worthy of contempt. And yet when these defects do not meet and happen, can a
man receive honor, but from at least his equal; to wit, or on the like
terms and condition. If there were not the like interest, he should but
slight him, and say, Its a man that spoke it: There are reproaches enough in
this very word to blemish the luster of his best actions; they issue from sense
as from virtue out of their original Spring, the which we must re-obtaine,
thereby to make a worthy judgment thereof. None can observe or remarke the
difference: The approbation of a virtuous man, is better then that of a
multitude: but the only approbation of a good conscience, is yet far more to
be prized and esteemed. He is happy who lives peaceable and quiet, and who
without design contemplates the course of worldly actions and accidents: As
the Shepherd, who during the heat of the day, reposing himself at the foot
of a tree, looks sloathfully and carelessly upon the stream of a small river,
thereby to employ and recreate his thoughts, until the setting of the Sun,
which then drives him and his little Flock home to his Masters house.

SECTION V. Honors and Dignities, expose to the world, all their splendor and
glory: But contrariwise, Felicity locks up all her best things in her self,
and has no greater enemy then show and ostentation.
Nevertheless, if we yet give any thing to the obstinacy of Fortune, she
will enforce us to proceed, and to seek in dignities the felicity which she
has promised us, although by the precedent reasons, we have partly engaged
their interest in the Combat of glory and honor; and that by the same weapons
we may as easily vanquish as assail them. Their show, their luster and
pomp, seems to be small rays of the Divinity, dispierced here and there
among us: but they do as the rays of the Sun, who if they meet any shining
or polished body, as at the meeting of a looking-glass, then by their
repercussion and reflection they represent the image: So if Honors and
Dignities befall virtuous men, we see there shines in them I know not what
image of the Divinity, which strikes our eyes with admiration and
astonishment, and our hearts with respect and fear. But Dignities and Honors,
be not proud, nor vaunt you of this luster, for it is of Virtue that you borowe
it. Is there any thing more easy to corrupt then you, by the contagion of that
which you receive in your bosom? What serve you for else, but as Torches to
discover and bring to light our defects and imperfections, at least if
therewith you could burn our vices, in steed of enlightening them. But they
live in this flame as the Salamander, and from this fire attract a powerful
nutriment: Is there any thing more dangerous, then to commit power and
authority to offend us, into the hands of our Enemy. But those who are vicious
and wicked, are enemies of all men: or at least of all good men, because the
virtues of the one have still some thing to contest with the vices of the
other; and for this effect does estrange them as much as they may, from
public Offices and Dignities, for fear that virtue, as the true Diamond, do
not by her conference demonstrate the vice of the false one. If it be not, that
Virtue which is commonly in mild and humble courages, be found in the person
of him who has not the assurance, to assail or assault him. Not that it be
therefore the the less; but as a good sword, cuts not so well in the hands of
a man of small courage, as it does in those of a brave and resolute Captain: so
Virtue in a weak and feeble soul, (who fears the assault and brunt)
produces not so many acts and effects of generosity, as that which is
vigorous, who opposes all that contradict him, and so overthrows and
dissipateth the forces of his enemy: So that Dignities deserve not to be
termed good things, because they confer us not this quality and condition.
The white or black color imprints their own in the wall, and the Candor of
these dignities does the more obscure and blemish the Soul of the vicious.
They resemble those fair and rich vestments, which adorn and cloathe a foul
woman, which only serve to make her deformities the more manifest and
apparent: They are still followed with some respect and observance, where they
are authorized, but not of honor. This takes his Spring and Original, from a
pure and free disposition; as led thereto by the estimation we make of a
virtuous man: but that of constraint, chiefly then when obedience is due with
subjection. Add hereunto, that it is a money which is not current, but in our
own Country. I say not, that those Scarlet Roabes, instead of curing our
interior diseases, do make them worse. Ambition, Envy, Revenge, Love, Fear,
and Passions do trauerse and thwart them; and without respect or dignity,
tear their own breasts in a thousand pieces.

SECTION VI. Among all the fair flowers which an extreme favor produces, we
have not yet seen this Felicity to bud forth and flourish.
WHat likelihood, what shadow of Felicity; Fortune, the more thou aduancest,
the more thou do enchaine and fetter thy self: Retire thou upon thy loss,
rather then to lose all; but thou do yet expect some things in the persons
of Princes Favorites. It is true, the name of Favorite makes us believe, that
thou have honored it with some singular present, which cannot be found in any
other: But whatsoever it may be, I do not hold that it is felicity. Tell me,
can thy Favorite defend himself, from all the blows and assaults of Envy.
(Fort.) Why not? Is there any stronger Rampire, then the favor of a Royal
Majesty. At least, he cannot defend himself from suspicions, fears,
distrusts, because there is no Scottish Guard, how faithful or vigilant so
ever they can be, which can defend him from the blows of his Enemies. The same
qualities which are in him, and which have gained and obtained the favor of
the Prince, can they not meet and concur in another, yea in a far greater
number: (Fort.) Its true: But this Favorite will be careful to prevent, that
he approach not the presence of the Prince. For since the way is so strait to
him, that there is no place but for one; he which possesses it, will easily
hinder others for having access. But Fortune thou know, that there is
nothing sought after with so much passion. He must night and day stand upon
his guard. The favor he has gained of his Prince, gives him the jealousy of
great men, the envy of his equals, and the hatred of the common people. If he
be far absent from his Prince, his place will be gotten: If he sleep, he
will be surprised: He must watch the enterprises of one, and the other to
oppose them. Thou will say, that he may fortunately compass his desires,
because humane reason is capable of so many different and contrary forms, that
the iustest enterprises and actions may be interpreted as evil. O Fortune, thy
Favorite must have a wonderful care to conserve himself! What rest is there
in this life, since at every accident he must be armed to defend the blows of
Envy, and to prevent that the very report of ill speeches and calumny (which
pardons not that which is not) come not to his Princes hearing, because it
may engender and stir up some diffidence in him, which distilling and sliding
into his affections, may shortly after make them become tart and sower: But if
the wisest, and happiest in this Art, have been constrained to forsake it,
what then is there more to be hoped for? Should not their fall infinitely
astonish those who follow their steps and traces? How many times has the
image, and remembrance of such a spectacle, yet freshly bleeding, leapt into
their dreams, and troubled their rest by night. Can there be found any one
who has better understood it then Scianus: In whose favor resided the whole
power of the Roman Empire: and for what has his Greatness served for, but
only to make his fall the more fearful and greater. The true fear of such
an event, was it not the fury of the Poet, and which burnt and consumed his
bowels with his black and fatal Torch, and hindered him from tasting any
pure content, in the enjoying of this his favor. It was gall and wormwood
intermixed in his eating and drinking, which his Cook could not take off, nor
banish from the delicacie of his Vyands. There are not many found of the like
flight, and fortune, who have not signed and confirmed this passage with their
blood. Kings can do nothing worthy of themselves, which is not as great as
themselves: But as their favor proceeding from a Royal power, cannot admit of
mediocrity: so their disgrace issuing from one and the same cause, can be no
less, and is difficultly quenched but in their blood. They are armed men, who
mount and fight at a breach, who have nothing to conserve their life, but their
armor and weapons, and yet fear nothing more; for if they are thrown down,
they are killed with the weight thereof. Favor resists against all things, but
against it self. It is a fire which defuseth a shining brightness, he which
moderately approaches it, feels with much content and pleasure, the sweet
heat of this flame: But it is a heavenly fire which is extinguished in a
moment, and burns the mortal that will embrace it. True it is, that Fortune
marks them with some degrees, and lends them her hand to bring them more sure
to the point of this favor: But be it that her inconstancy is accessarie to
their loss; or that with a premeditated design, she particularly prepares
their ruin: She abandons them as soon as they are elevated on this stage,
and breaks and tears down the steps thereof, to make them despair to be
able to descend by any other, but by that of a precipice, or of an inevitable
shipwreck. And yet in this point and event, there must be some more powerful
Genius then that of Fortune; because he who could triumph ore Fortune, could
not triumph ore favor. For was there ever near great Princes, (and in the
heart of abundance) any Favorite more moderate then wise Seneca; He, who never
beheld the favor of his Prince, with an ambitious eye, who induced and led, by
the very contempt of riches, sought poverty, in the bottom of fourscore
thousand pounds (English) of yearly revenues which he possessed. He who
neither thought nor dreamed any thing else, then of his retiring to a private
life, was nevertheless beaten down, under the ruins of his favor. He who
had taught Nero, how he ought to reign with Justice, and unto what point he
should mount and establish the royal power: But notwithstanding all this, the
obligation of this cruel Tyrant, and the virtue of this brave Philosopher,
could not long subsist and dwell together: So dangerous it is to approach this
Colossus, whose anger being kindled and exasperated, without making distinction
of Innocents, falls on the heads of those who enuiron him. It is a clap of
Thunder, whose bolt deuanceth the lightning, and whose blow praecedes the
threatening: Who then can hold himself firmer then the^e Favorites, in a place
so steep and slippery, which bears far more thorns then Roses, and is
only fertile in afflictions; and infertile in repose and tranquillity, and
therefore in felicity.

SECTION VII. Kings and Sovereign Princes, owe us their continual care and
motion as the Stars do, and therefore they have no greater enemy then
repose and tranquillity.
IT will be then in this last point of Royal power, where this felicity may be
found; because being the highest and sublimest, it must necessarily follow,
that herein she takes up her residence and lodging. Indeed she cannot ascend
higher; and we must affirm, that the contentment which may be observed in her
Favorites, is found far more powerful in the person of the Sovereign, being
exempted* and far distant from all likelihood of fear: He who is the lively
Image of God on Earth; why should he not be so of felicity? It is ^^en
Sovereignty which possesses this Sovereign contentment. But how many shall
we find in Histories, who either by foreign or intestine Wars, have been
violently pulled away from this high Throne, as if Fortune had not advanced and
elevated them, but to make their fall the greater. O Power, how thou art weak
and impuissant, in not being able to conserve thy self, and to have no
stronger hinges and axle for thy authority, then the hearts and affections of
those whom Lot and Destiny have cast into (...) hands and government. But some
one will tell me, that that hinders not that Empire be not the true point of
felicity, for in any other place where she may be assigned, that preuents not
that we may lose her: Or if that be so as thou will, it is then the power that
he has to command over many Nations, which makes him happy: therefore
weakness or impotencie should diminish his defective authority herein; and as
his happiness consists to command, so his misfortune should be not to command.
But how far greater a number of Nations are there found without, then within
the compass of his Empire, the which he commands not. It remains then, that
his weakness far exceedes his power; and therefore his vnfortunacie
surpasses his happiness, as much as the rest of the world exceedes the extent
of his domination: so the good which this Felicity preposed unto us, remains
suppressed, and choked by its contrary. True it is, that from the low stages
where we are, the sight of man cannot look higher then their Thrones: but he
who is there seated and inthronized, sees very much farther off. His
neighbors to his Dominions, are his companions. He is not alone as we thought
he had been: His ambition caries his eyes through every place of Sea and
land; and if I dare say it, she again transports his desires much farther.
But is he powerful, who would perform that which he cannot: what then shall
be this power and image of Sovereignty, but the figure of an imperfect
Divinity; and again, of a more imperfect felicity. It is not then there, that
she can be met and found, for (as well) she cannot be enjoyed, but by one. In
that which Nature has not judged reasonable, she uses us more justly.
Fortune, what rests there now to you to make us see* that the sudden change
of the goods, and contentments of those, who abused by the shadow of a vain
felicity, buy it by the engaging of their liberty, the ruin of their goods,
and the loss of themselves. If your head-band hinder you to see the
misfortunes, whereof you are the cause, at least let it not hinder you from
hearing, and understanding the complaints: If it be not that as deaf as
blind, the pity of our griefs and afflictions be equally forbidden, and
prohibited from your breasts; since it cannot enter but by the one or the other
of those passages, which are locked and shut to him.

SECTION. VIII. As the light is inseparable from the Sun, so felicity is an
inseparable accident of virtue.
LEt us then seek our felicity else where, because she is not to be found in
those things which enuiron us: It is not that they enforce not themselves to
contribute all which possible they ca^; but we deuest them of their best
things, to cloathe them with our own vice and corruption, thinking hereby to
adorn them more richly. Poor abused Creatures, we think to enrich them more,
then he who has crea^ed them, and given them as much beauty and perfection, as
they were capable to receive. As a greater Master then he, we will seek to
deface their natural beauty, by the strange luster of our own false colors.
The first man had the right and privilege to impose names to things, but not
their just price and value. The Essence has no community with the Accident:
Let us not foolishly vaunt to be able to enrich his works; for their
lineaments are so delicate, that they are inimitable, and our hand so dull and
heavy, that there is no thing more ridiculous, then our actions and
enterprises. If any Apprentice Boy, beholding and considering Apelles his rich
picture of Venus, should blame the defects thereof, and undertake to correct
and mend it; had we not then reason to mock at the folly of this poor
Ignorant: But if he would yet proceed further, to change the face, and alter
the beauty thereof, to paint his own faults and imperfections, of what
reprehension and crime should he not make himself guilty. Man being an
Apprentice^* in the knowledge of the rich pictures and ^^bles of Nature, having
received of God the pensill, (which was not given him, but to paint out his
name and praises in all places of the world, as we do in Images the name of
the Sculpture: But O insupportable Arrogancy, Man instead of Writing, God has
made this: he has most impudently attributed himself the glory, and engraven
in great Caracters, Man has made this* At least paint it no^ but upon the
frontispeece of thine own works, which are, Vice, Sin, and Corruption: But
contra^iwise, he has proceeded farther, and made himself more guilty, by
employing himself to deface and destroy the rich pictures, and liueliest
colors which were in every work, to paint down the Chymereous dreams and
lies of his own vanities, thinking hereby to perform some complete thing.
Fear no more now to glorify thy works, and to say with a loud voice, Man
has done this: for indeed it sufficiently appears of it self. The abuse of
those who were buried in the darkness of Paganism, following no other light,
but that of their own weak reason was ascended so high as to believe; That
nothing was capable to appease the wrath and anger of God, and to wash off
their impurities, but only the blood and sacrifice of innocent souls: They
believed that the Gods delighted to (...) their own works destroyed, and when
they were satiated and distasted with Nectar and Ambrosie, that they found
nothing so sweet, as the blood of those Victimes an^ Oblations: and with this
their bloody p^^sill they defaced the Art and Masterpiece, the most curious
and liueliest which was in this picture, I would say, the life which we cannot
receive, but from this Sacred and Sovereign hand, as if we obliged the
Architector, who showing us the rarities of his building; we thought to do him
honor, by destroying the fairest pieces thereof, and those which he loved and
esteemed most. A strange stupidity and blindness^: Our abuse is not so gross,
we do not destroy it, but instead of valuing and prizing it, by their lively
beauty, and particular lineaments which resplend and shine in every thing, we
cannot estimate them, but according to the reason of our own defects and
imperfections; or else for those things which are not in them. As he who has
his eyes troubled and perplexed, beholding the painted face of any picture or
Statue, will accuse it to be pale or white, or if another liked it to praise
the excellency of his work, because he was very wise, and temperate, and
could not be perplexed or troubled, or what offense or injury soever was done
to him, he was never angry thereat. Has he not then reason to be contented
and satisfied of this praise. Man's estimation and opinion, commonly bears the
one or the other of these defects with it. To esteem a Diamond more for his
price then for his beauty; is it not more to prize the Art of man, then the
excellency of his Maker? To praise or cherish virtue, more for renown and
glory, then for the satisfaction of a good conscience, is it not an effect of
this corruption? To esteem a man more for his wealth and dignities, then for
his merits and reason, which is the only jewel which enricheth the beauty of
his picture, above all other works of Nature, is it not a blind and rash
judgment? So we shall find that the estimation whereof we have spoken,
proceeding from an imperfect man, cannot give us a perfect contentment. But his
Art being as weak, as his invention is malicious, cannot hinder the eyes of
the clearer sighted; to pierce and penetrate those shadows, although they are
smoakie, and obscured round about the objects by reason of their old age, and
to discover the liueliest colors thereof. It is but a little dust which the
wind, or rather folly has thrown thereon, which hides the dellcates:
lineaments of their faces, the which we may wipe off with our handkercher, I
mean with the use of perfect Reason. Let us permit that virtue chalk us out
the way, tha^ she may now take her turn to entertain us, and that she
unfold and show the treasures which ^he will give us, with so liberal and
boun^^full a hand that to possess them, is only but to desire them. We must
not issue forth of our selves to embrace this felicity: If it be not hot and
enflamed in our breast, let us not imagine that any other heat can give it life
and motion: for what other thing is this, but the accomplishing and
sufficiency of all other goods and goodness. But it is in our power by the
cutting off of these desires to purchase this sufficiency: Who then shall we
accuse of this defect but our selves? Who being friends to all the world,
remain only enemies to our own selves, because to our own good and
tranquillity. The knowledge of Fortune, and of her gifts and presents, makes us
contemn them; and this contempt makes that the favor and estimation which we
have of them, redounds and falls on those good things that this virtue
produces, which carrying this contempt with one hand, bears his own
contentment with the other; and therefore this sufficiency which we term
felicity. He who runs and barks after the goods of Fortune, the greatest
profit and advantage which he can hope thereof, is repose and tranquillity in
enjoying them; and he who inioyeth this tranquillity, it is a vanity for him to
seek it; and this is the effect of our virtue, which yields our desires to our
power, and gives and ordains the^ this felicity, that then is not wanting to
our felicity, since all our defects and wants proceed from an irregular
desire, and which is no longer, when once it submits it self to the obedience
of virtue. The goods of Fortune are by their Nature such, as they cannot fill
the vessels of our desires; but that there will still remain the greatest part
thereof empty and hungry; because it seems that we always see something beyond
it, which we more desire, then that which she has already given us to enjoy.
But Virtue, because by constraint she still reserues her sights in her self,
she sees nothing beyond it, and contemplates all this great extent,
sufficiently filled with her own proper goods, without that there remain in
her any empty or defectuous place. Our Soul must be contained, to be
contented; that which it enjoys, she easily lets go to embrace another.
She does as the first matter of Philosophers, who being extremely in love
with all particular forms seeks them, and having found them, destroys them,
until she meets with some universal form. Our soul (this first matter of
our desires) is hungry of all the goods of Fortune, which she meets as
particular forms; she takes much pain to enjoy any good thing; but as soon
as she does enjoy it, she presently ruins the contentment which she had in
hoping for it, to run to the seeking and embracing of another; which
nevertheless she uses with no more favor, because they cannot satisfy his
universal appetite, until she meet with Virtue. This universal form which
in degrees of excellency and perfection, comprehends all other good things, as
inferior forms do presently fill all the hungry and famished vessels; and
all the universality of the power of his inclination and desire. So Virtue
prepares us a perfect abundance of all things, and establishes no felicity
out of her self: And by the Scepter of reason, which she puts into our hands,
she frees us from the tyranny of our appetites, and in this new Region and
Empire, where she establishes us, she makes us easily to vanquish the revolt
and rebellion of our senses; and there is the point of felicity which Nature
has established, which prouokes and courts our desire, and which man would in
the end embrace, if he were not diuerted by the persuasions and blandices of
Fortune. It is the Butt the which he cannot miss, if he aim and level
right. But as to ariue to a certain place, we turn our back to it without
knowing it, or else take a contrary way: so it is not the fault, neither of him
who has caused it to be buil^* nor yet of our design. So if any one of us
fail to meet with this felicity, let him not say, that it is because there is
none in the world. Let him neither accuse Nature, no^ likewise his desire; but
only the contemp^ which he makes of the rules and instructions* which are
given him for this regard. We are gone astray; we must be replaced in the right
way; we must carefully enquire after it, avoid the advice and the way of those
who are formerly gone astray like our selves. If it be not that Virtue touches
them with the same sense and feeling. Thorns will stand in ou^ way; we shall
have hedges to leap and pass over: yea, we must put our hands to the work
and labor, and although they are all bloody with their prickings, yet either
too much fear or too little courage, must not hinder us from passing forwards;
for else we must not wonder if our desire (although it advance) find no rest
and tranquillity. Two right and equal line; drawn among infinite others upon
the same table, or paper, never meet. Our desire, and our felicity meet yet
less, although they are both on the same table: if not, that the same plant
which produces desire, as his follower, is not obliged by the same law, to
give us felicity as his fruit: we must then boldly search the graft of the one
and the other, and water it with the sweatings of a painful labor, thereby
to reap repose and felicity. It is there where Socrates has exhausted this
sufficiency of all things, I mean this tranquillity of life. It is there
where Cato has found this invincible courage. It is there where Seneca has
made poverty to issue from the bottom of his treasures, to enjoy a permanent
felicity. It appertains to none but to Reason, to point and remarke unto us
all the rarities, as it has made us know the abuse and error wherein they are
enwrap'd and inuelloped; and to hide them from the eyes of our understanding.
This abuse will testify how it is dangerous to want the principles of things;
because after the same rate as we advance, our error does vnmeasurably grow
great and increase. We must ascend to the head fountain, to judge more truly
and safely what it is. The which we cannot do, but in taking the thread of
wise Ariadne, I mean of Reason: who after the combat, reserues the Laurells of
Victory for us in her hands. If thou will essay to pass the bars which
separates this small number of wise men, from the profane multitude of the
vulgar; do a little eleuate the eyes of thy thoughts, and consider here as
from a high Land, wherein dwells Virtue, all that she will show and point
thee with her finger in this plain and raze field, as the Scepters and
Crowns, broken by the Thunderbolts of War, which cannot cover the ambition
of their Masters. Behold this River of gold, which cannot quench the insatiable
thirst of these poor Tantales; they will rather drown themselves, then
appease this burning fire* which they nourish in their entrails and liver.
Consider a little all this great multitude of people upon the banks of this
River, and what seems to thee of those which retain the first place. To see
them so far off, will thou not say, that (by the way of a fair comparison)
they resemble Aesops Frogs: Is there any thing in all that which will not
give thee more pity then envy. Thou will tell me it is true: but more
narrowly to consider their looks, gestures, and countenances, there is nothing
so glorious and maiesticall.

Poor abused Creature, do thou not know, that by seeing a thing too near
thee, it appears greater to us then it is, and indeed otherwise then it is.
There must be a certain distance and proportion between the eye and the
object, to make its operation complete and sound, such as from the place where
thou ar^, there is in comparison of earthly things. Have thou never heard
spoken of those Mountebankes, who undertake to show a Fly drawing a little
beam, or some great piece of wood: and there is none present, but wonders at
it, as at a prodigy. And yet that only proceeds from the fascination of the
eyes, which is abused and deceived, and thinks to see a biller, for a straw:
So opinion makes use of the same Artifice, and whiles the eye of reason is
deceived and betrayed, he cannot not discover the abuse.

Now consider then with a sound and perfect sight, all those things as they
are, to the end, that if thou fall once again into the relapse of this same
error, that the remembrance of that which thou now ^eest, may diminish the
opinion and estimation of that which thou may make hereafter, which will be
no small profit and advantage ^or thee. The less thou esteemest them, the
less passionate thou shall be for them. For the worth and merit which we
believe is in a thing, is that which engendereth our desire and love. What
do thou think hereof now at present? Do thou not feel a tranquillity in
thy self, through (...) contempt, and disdain of those thin^s* And al^hough
thou art voluntarily disp^^y led of all thy delights as thy vain glory,
ambition, and foolish love of riches, yet thou shall nevertheless feel a
perfect co^^nt^^ment. Thou must then confess that (...) true, since the
possession of all these things* has not given thee this perfect content (...)
tranquillity, that thou must accuse (...) weakness, and that it proceeds
(...) some other thing which is in us, which is called reason, and which must
be dressed and pruned by a long exercise and custom, which we term Virtue,
which watering this plant, makes it to produce desire and felicity. As our
good issues from interior man, so also does our evil: For that which
afflicts thee, is the design to possess those things which thou have not. But
those things are within thee, since they touch thee not, and they do thee no
good nor harm. Thou complainest nevertheless to feel so sharp and burning a
grief, that it troubles thy rest by night, and almost dries thee up with
languishing. But herein there is but two things to consider; to wit, desire,
and the thing desired: and because this last is neither criminal, nor guilty
of thy grief, as being far distant from thee; it must therefore needs
follow, that it is desire, since it is lodged in the same place, where thou
feel this burning, this affliction in being removed with too much violence.
He has exceedingly scratched and fetched blood of thee within: he is then the
cause of thy grief and evil; thou must therefore cut it off; and retain it
peaceably, within the compass of those things which are easy and near. If
Fortune diminish any thing, it is but to restrain it the more; and when all
that we have shall vanish, and be taken away, there will yet remain enough in
our breast and mind to rejoice us. The voice being restrained and shut up,
makes more noise; strength being collected and assembled, produces more
effects; and the more our desire is restrained, the more it puffes up, and
swells our contentment, as being nearest to his tranquillity, and next
neighbor of our own felicity. Cease therefore to desire any thing, but that
which thou enioyest. All these things which Fortune gives thee, is but borrowed
apparel from common Brokers, the which because it is common to all men,
belongs not properly to any one who wears them. I counsel thee to clad thy
body with them, but not thy affections, and to load thy back with them, but
not thy mind: Reserve this for Virtue, it is by her which we ought to weigh
and balance all the privileges and good fortunes of man. Reason makes him
very different from beasts: but reason, or perfect reason, makes him to differ
much from other men who are like him in shape, but as then not in quality and
virtue. To measure a man by his exterior goods of Fortune, is to comprehend in
measuring a Statue, the height of his basis or foundation; but to measure him
by his interior virtues, we must then do it by his natural greatness,
whereof neither fetters nor fire can diminish or take away the very least part.
Fortune subiecteth us to all things; but contrariwise, Virtue eleuates us above
all: She dissolues Ice, she enforces and gives a law to grief and pain:
She breaks Irons; yea, she passes through fire and flames, to put us in
possession of this felicity. We say therefore that felicity is the use of a
perfect reason. It is this Philosophers stone which conuerts to gold all that
we touch. She supports all adverse accidents, and misfortunes that befall
her, with a requisite moderation and decency, and performs the best actions,
which can be desired or discovered upon all causes and accidents which betide
her. If we are assieged by many disasters and afflictions, she then makes use
of Constancy, as of some sharp and Physical potion, to cure us in this
extremity; or at least to flatter and sweeten the sense and feeling of our
pain and grief. If they come not to us by whole troops, but by one and one
at a time; then she teaches us how to fight with them, and which is more, how
to vanquish them. And because the goods of Fortune, by their arrival or
departure, do still engender some interior disease in us; therefore she
purifieth and preserues our mind from this contagion. Or if it seem to thee,
that Virtue gives thee not so many sweet and ticklish pleasures in this
felicity, as unchaste and impudent Fortune does in the hug of her embraces;
The pleasure nevertheless is more firm, solid, and permanent. Men dally and
kille their Mistresses, otherwise then they do their children; and yet
notwithstanding in these embraces and kisses their affection is sufficiently
bewrayed and demonstrated to those who see it. Time in the end cuts off the web
of those foolish affections: but what griefs so ever this natural love meets
in the breeding and bringing up of his children; it is yet more tender and
dear, as if their watchings, their care, sweat and labor therein, were as so
many materials, to cyment more firmly and soundly this their affection to
their children. So any difficulties which oppose the design of a virtuous man,
cannot interrupt the course of affection, which he conceiues and bears to his
lawful children, I mean to those fair and glorious actions, who as to make
show and demonstration of their beauties, they seek not an ampler Theater,
then that of a good conscience: So they need no other light or day to
accompany their glory, then that which they cast and dispierce in the company
of wise men, by the luster of their own proper brightness.

The end of the fifth Discourse.
The sixth Discourse.
Of Moral Virtue.
SECTION I. Sick (or distempered minds) are not capable of all sorts of
remedies, but they shall find none more sovereign, then the diuerting thereof.
WE have long enough played the Philosopher, and now in its turn, we must
represent and act that of man: That heroical Virtue, whereof we precedently
discoursed, appertains to none, but to those of the first Class or School,
and who with Socrates can tame Death so well, that they will seek for no
consolation out of it. Life and death seemed to this wise Philosopher, as
natural one as the other. He considered the first point of his birth, as the
first grain of sand which begins the hour, and the last motion of his life,
as the last grain which ended it: and yet both the one and the other with a
regard and look, equally fixed, and constant.

If we rush out of our selves, and that sometimes our Virtue draw and enforce
us to this last point: we are more indebted for this sally to irregularity,
then to the power, constancy, or vigor of our mind, the which likewise
cannot long remain in this high seat, because it as soon feels it self
depressed and beaten down by the weight of the body, to re-integrate it in
this obscure prison, from whence he was, but as it were escaped; and then
coming again to himself, he knows no more the trace or way, whereby he
has performed so fair a Cariere: So that trembling with astonishment, he may
say, that there is nothing more different, or dis-semblable to man, then
himself. If we will give an exact and sound judgment of Virtue, we must as
much consider her defects, in whom it meets and resides, as her proper force
and power. To see her stark naked, it is a ray or spark of the Divinity; but
our weak nature having married and espoused her, does stifle her in the crowd
of her vices and corruptions. Pythagoras affirms, that men assume new souls,
when they approach the Statues of the Gods to receive their Oracles: and I say,
that we do the like, when we resolve to see and consult with Virtue: For it
seems, that then our soul does cleanse and purify her self from the
fil^hines which she has gathered among the crowd and throng of people, and who
discharging her self of this troublesome burden, she richly dressed and clad,
runs to sit down on the sacred seat of this Goddess. But again, after that
we reassume our old custom and vices, which we have forsaken at our first
entrance; as he whom we see in a fools habit, after he has represented the
personage of a King in a Comedy. If Vanities, if the dreams of lies did not
take up and preoccupate our thoughts instead of these Philosophical reasons,
there could be nothing more commendable, noble, or generous, then he who
consulting, and conuersing with reason, passes his time in observing the
familiar conferences which they have together: So that if Fortune apparelled in
all her brauest and richest ornaments, should arrive at the very instant to
offer him all her most precious treasure, to embrace her side and party, I am
sure she should receive nothing from him, but a short refusal and shame; but
if she chance to come to him eight days after, I believe that if she do not
wholly vanquish him, that she will at least make a great breach in his heart and
affections. The mind of man cannot be still extended and prepared. He must
continually have his weapons in his hand, and put himself on his guard to
defend himself from those blows which Fortune still gives us: She but
feignedly fights with us, for she leuels at our head, but strikes us at our
heart. We defend and avoid our selves from Ambition and Covetousness, but yet
we inconsideratly permit our selves to be transported and overthrown by
choler. So the blow is not dangerous or violent, because it struck us with the
butt end; and although it neither reuersed nor overthrew us, yet it made us
recule at least a pace backward. What good countenance so ever our Virtue
shows, she is still subject to many imperfections. If she had but our mind
to govern and conduct, then nothing were impossible to her: But when she must
take up, and load on her shoulders the body wherein this mind is enchained
and imprisoned, she then stoopes and faints under this burden; and all
shaking and trembling she has much a do to support her self by her own
proper strength and vigor: For she is constrained to seek aid and help to
prop her self up, yea and to beg assistance to keep and stay her from
reeling and falling. Where the Lions skin cannot suffice, we must sow on that
of the Fox; and where courage has not power enough to support and defend it
self from the injuries of Fortune, we must in her behalf substitute subtilty
to oppose and divert it. The virtue of Socrates fore-sawe his affliction; he
inured, and tamed himself to it, yea laughed and played with it; and ours
makes us to look a thwart and squint-eyed: yea, to turn and divert our eyes
from the remotest objects thereof, to steal away unseen from the very thought
of it; which otherwise by little and little grows sharp and contentious in
our mind, and so by its gall, corrupts all which seems most sweet and
pleasing to our pallats. We have named that heroical; and this we will term
moral Virtue, or Temperance, which as Plato said, is a mutual consent of the
parts and faculties of the Soul, which makes reason to follow as a rule, and
curb to all licentious and unbridled desires: the which Pythagoras calls, the
light, which chaseth from her all the darkness and obscurity of passions. This
Virtue seems to me to be wonderfully bold and audacious under one, or the
other of these descriptions, and differs nothing from the precedent: For she
caries the Axe to the roots, whereas ours is contented to loppe and prune off
the twigges and smaller branches. That takes away, and cuts off evil humors,
and this diuerts and turns them upon some part or member less dangerous. The
remedies are not so sharp, and bitter, and so they serve not but to palliat
and sweeten the Evil, or Disease: But the other in the mean time without
flattering it, does at first tear it off, and cuts upon the quick, the grief
of a sensible loss by the very edge of his reasons. That is to say; That
complaint according to his precepts, is not an action, either just or
commendable. That a wise man should foresee the blow which threatens him at
the very point of the birth of his affection. That succeeding years, and the
sweetness of the favors of Fortune, should not so bewitch or make him drunk,
as to cast him into a swoone or lethargy, and be able wholly to shut his eyes
to these infallible accidents. There is none but an ignorant person, who finds
any thing new. In a word, that this accident was still present with him, and
that having so often re-chewed this bad meat, he may in the end accustom
himself to it, and so resolve to swallow it down, without any distaste or
bitterness. But as it appertains to none but to the birds of Diomedes, to
separate the Athenians from the Greeks: so it belongs to none but to Socrates,
or spirits which have raised themselves to the height and sublimity of the same
flight, to select and make choice of vigorous and masculine reasons, in
comparison of those which we commonly use and employ for our consolation,
which are as weak, lame, and feeble, as our courage. It some times falls out,
that the same reasons issuing* from our mouth or pen, as from theirs, but not
from our hearts, and from the very bottom of our breasts. We present them all
raw, and as the boiling or bubling of a Fountain, renders his water without
tasting or digesting it, so we only prefer these words without knowing
their price or value. Our too raw and indigested stomach cannot consume this
meat, and draw its nutriment thence. We discourse in the same manner,
language, and terms as they do, but yet we think differently: Our words
are but as the rinds and barks of our conceptions; it is not enough that the
report thereof come to our ears, but the sense must also pass to our
understanding: we must cleave them in sunder to gather the juice and Sugar of
them, and to discover that which they have in them of secret and hidden. But
our Moral virtue diminishes that which is of the honor of her dignity: she
has sooner done to stoop and descend down to us, then to lift our selves up
to her. And then familiarizing, and accommodating her self with our
imperfections, she per^mits us to shed some tears: She weeps with us, and
favors our plaints and mournings, in their first and most furious violence,
until by little and little, she can divert the eyes of our thoughts, upon
some other remote object, and so exhale and dissipate in the contemplation of
contrary things, the power of the spirits of our blood, which were assembled
and conspired together about our heart, to surmount and vanquish all sorts of
consolations, and so to permit only the entrance of griefs, torments, bitter
thoughts, sharp and cruel remembrings, and other Officers of comfortless
sorrow and affliction. So this power being divided, is thereby so weakened,
that the first object being capable to inflame, and touch our thoughts to the
quick; he easily takes possession of the place, and banisheth this
importunate Tyrant from the seat and Empire which he had violently usurped.
This remedy as the most sweet and pleasing, is the most general and universal
physic which she employes in the cure of violent'st passions. All diseases
of the mind are not cured, but either by diuersion, or by the equal sharing
and division of our imagination, in whose power resides all that they
participate of, sharp, or bitter; because she assembles, and linkes together
all the spirits of the soul, which are perfectly purified and refined, in the
admirable nets which lie under the ventricle or posteriour part of the brain,
to mark him out the greatness of his evil or disease, which it augments, and
increases by this labor and pain; as fire does by the abundance and
affluence of wood: And if this imagination can be divided by the force and
strength of a contrary object, she thereby makes her self weak and feeble in
her functions, and contrariwise in the ease or pain, the good or evil which
we may feel. The mind is a power which communicates her self wholly to the
subject to which she is fixed and tied: From whence it comes, that we many
times see her equally tormented at objects of small value, as at those things
of far greater consequence. The good which enuironeth us, is not considerable
to him, in comparison of a little evil, which at present presses and
afflicts him. And not being able to surprise this sorrowful matter, before
he have let gone all the others, he then unites and fastens, yea glewes
himself thereunto, until he become drunk with this grief: And as the
Horseleach still suckes out all the bad blood until he burst: So the mind
suckes and draws hence all that is bitter, until this poison having engendered
a kind of an Impostume in our heart, does in the end burst therewith, and
frees her self thereof by our tears, which distill and descend from our eyes.
If the rays of the Sun are fully received in the bottom of a burning
Looking-glass, they there unite in their center, and their power straying and
defusing before they are recollected, and assembled in this point, do so link
and fortify themselves, that they burn and destroy that which so sweetly they
had formerly cherished and nourished: Right so, if the mind assemble all her
powers, and her intellectual rays in the force and strength of imagination,
as in the Crystal of a Looking-glass, it destroys the tranquillity, which
it revived before by her benign and gracious influences, the which she
generally owes to all the members of the body, and whereof she cannot wholly
dispose to the service of the one without the damage and prejudice of the
others. As it visibly befalls those who newly feel some grief or anxiety, or
to those who dispose and addict themselves to things which require a strong
imagination, as Poesy, Painting, or Perspectiue. We must then without giving
time or leisure to our mind, to taste the poison of this passion, dispierce
the rays of this imagination, by the alluring Charms of a contrary object.
He who dies in the heat of a Combat with his weapons in his hands, has
apprehended and feared nothing less then death, for glory is the point of
honor; choler, and revenge, do equally preoccupate his thoughts, and surpass
his imaginations, so as there remains in him no place to fear death. And
those who have attempted to plant the Cross among Infidells, and cyment and
water it with their blood, thereby to make Christianity to increase and
fructify, they being possessed of this holy zeal, has not the force and
power of their love surmounted in them the fear of death? Shall I say, that
the power of so lively and so ardent an imagination, by his extreme violence
can likewise destroy the common function of the senses, and hereby pull away
the weapons out of the hands of grief and pain, because the senses make not
their operations, but by the help of the spirits; which are dispierced in the
muscles and arteries, and generally throughout all the body, which may be
attracted by a sudden motion, to this superior part and place of
imagination, so that the members remain without this interior operation, and
therefore without grief or pain: the which Celsus reports of a Priest (but
how truly I know not) whose soul being ravished in an ecstasy, left his body
for a certain time without respiration, or any sense or feeling. But as our
letting blood and phlebotomizing, is the only remedy in these, and the like
sudden accidents, because hereby they attract the spirits to their region and
duty: So in strong imaginations, be it that they proceed from extreme grief
or pain, which takes up all our senses in the contemplation of his misery; or
the deformity of his object, which makes us shake and tremble, and stupifies,
and dulls our feeling thereof; as the Poets fiction made miserable Niobe to
approve and feel; who afflicted her self with the murder of her children,
although they departed out of most extreme sorrow and melancholy.

We must divert and attract the spirits to Hearing, as the most subtle and
industrious sense for this cure and remedy; especially those who are preualent,
and delicate in this sense. So David by the sweet melody of his Harp, charmed
and expelled the devil out of Saul: So Orpheus, having enchanted his sorrow,
and lulled a sleep his grief, for the remembrance of his loss, by the sweet
tunes and harmony of his Lute: He thought he had again drawn his dear
Euridice from her Tomb, having for a small time calmed the storms and
tempests in his soul, of his violent griefs and sorrows: And if we may
believe the Masters of this Art and Mystery of Love, they have practiced no
more assured remedy, to cut off, and appease the violence of their passion,
then by the diuerting and dividing of their hearts and thoughts, as it were
into two rivers, which they leave to stream and slide away, to the discretion
and service of their Mistresses: Or if they yet feel them selves too much
oppressed and afflicted, with this half divided Empire; they can then enlarge
themselves, and breathe more at their ease under the government of many, by
changing (if they can so please) the Monarchy of Love into an Aristocratie, or
Democratie: And time which we see, proves the sweetest Physician of afflicted
hearts and souls; what herbs does it not employ in their cure, which the use
and practice of diverse jests, and replies that manage, and surprise our
imagination, do in their turns thereby cast into a slumbering Lethargy, or
oblivion, the remembrance of these our afflictions, as some sweet, and
sense-pleasing Nepenthe, or drink of oblivion: Yea, the change of air
contributes something to the cure of our spiritual afflictions and diseases,
And briefly, as poisons are profitably used and employed in our Physic: So
passions (the true poisons of the soul) serve to the cure of her troubles and
perturbations, which cannot be so speedily or easily appeased, as by applying
the power of some different and contrary passion. And these are the weapons and
armor wherwi^h our Virtue covers her self, having not any other sufficient
force and courage, to appear in the face of her Enemy unarmed, and uncovered.

SECTION. II. The life of a Wise man is a circle, whereof Temporance is the
center, whereunto all the lines, I mean, all his actions should conduce and
aim.
Storms do not much hurt, or endomage Ships which are in harbors; and the
tempest of humane actions, does not much disturb the tranquillity of that
mind, which rides at an anchor in the harbor of Temperance; If man in his
infirmities, will yet prevail over any perdurable felicity, he mu^t with full
sails, and top and top gallant strive to ariue there, although the rocks and
shelues are so frequent in his way, that he can difficultly secure himself
from shipwreck. And yet he is likewise happy, who saving himself upon the
broken ribs or plankes of his Ship, can yet steare and conduct the rest of
his life to this place of secu^rity and safety. Some wise men have approved the
excess of intemperancie, and the distaste of an extreme satiety, before they
could resolve to contain themselves within the bounds, and limits of this
Virtue: imagining that her gravity contained some hard and anxious thing,
until experience had taught them, that Temperance is the seasoning and
ordering of pleasure, as intemperancie is the only plague and scourge thereof.
Or if you will term intemperancie to be the daughter of pleasure and
voluptuousnes: say then withal that she is cruel, and a Parricide, because
by her life she gives us death, and does hug and embrace us so fast, that
she strangles us: Contrariwise, Temperance sharpens her desire, and caries us
into the very bosom of true pleasure, yet not to engage our soul there, but
to please her, and not to lose her, but to find her. Considering this virtue,
me thinks it may be said of her, as of Bacchus, that she is twice borne. Her
first birth she deriues from Vice, as he does his from a simple woman; because
to ariue to this point, and this mid way where she is situated, she must
necessarily proceed from the one or other of these vicious extremes, which are
neighbors to this Virtue: For he which is not yet liberal, or bountiful,
before he be, he must either be a niggard or a prodigal; But afterward, she
ripeneth and perfecteth his being in the power and vigor of the Wise man's
mind and opinion, as the Son of Semele in the thighs of Jupiter. Strange
effects of a corrupted nature, which from the infected womb of Vice snatcheth
Virtue, and from that of Virtue likewise draws Vice. Choler gives weapons to
valor, valor lends them to rashness, and yet all three nevertheless hold
themselves so close together, and are united with so natural a cyment; that it
is extremely difficult to observe their bounds; so much they are intermixed
and confounded on their confines. We must have wonderful strong reins to
keep our temperance firm in this passage; for if she pass or slide never so
little beyond these fixed and appointed limits, she shall presently find her
self to be in the way and tracke of vice. Two enemies are still at her sides
and elbowes, who watch for her ruin and destruction. If she recoyle or
advance never so little, she is instantly endomaged either by the one or the
other, either by excess or defectuosity: But as to strike the white, there is
but one way; but many, yea, an infinite number to miss it: So for us to walk
to this perfect felicity, there is but this only way; whereas to miss it, and
to fall into the one or the other of these vicious extremes, we may do it by
infinite ways and courses. This tranquillity of the Soul which Philosophy
represents unto us, is it any other thing then the obedience of the inferior
part, (which we call sensual appetite) to the superior, which we term
reasonable. But how can they remain of one mind and accord, if we grant and
pass not some thing to the desire and will of the law which we feel in our
members, wholly opposite and contrary to that of our reason. This perpetual
War, and ascending tyranny, which we will maintain between them: Does it
not approve and testify unto us, how far distant we are from this
tranquillity. There is no peace, but is to be preferred to War, provided that
it can maintain it self. Man's life on earth, is nothing but a perpetual
war, and it suffices that it be a foreign one, without that we should
again foment a civil and intestine one. A Soldier holds himself
unfortunate, who in time of peace, cannot safely enjoy the spoils and pillage
which he has won in war: and yet far more, he who having fought with,
and vanquished the vice of a corrupt Nature: does not manage his profit so,
that the remainder of his life, be to him as the Theater of his triumph, in the
quiet and delicious enioyance of this his victory. I say, that the Law of
honor permits us to fight with our enemy, in giving him place by our
retiring; and that the Scythians ever fought bes^ in flying: But I esteem and
prise not these stolen victories, no more then did brave Alexander; at least,
those which owe their chiefest advantage, to subtilty and flight, in comparison
of him, who with Ensign displayed, and Drum beating, having by his generous
carriage awakened and stirred up courage in the hearts of his enemies, knows
courageously and generously, both how to animate and vanquish them. If the name
and virtue of the vanquisher, do somewhat rejoice and comfort the loss of the
vanquished; and afford him some degree and thought of glory, by a far
stronger reason, the power and courage of the vanquished should augment the
renown and glory of the victorious. As many Combats as continency fights,
they are to her so many stolen victories, which she gains by her grief and
flight: As this Atalanta more cruel yet to her self then to her followers and
lovers. But contrariwise, Temperance fights with a bold and firm foot, and
with a cheerful and joyful countenance in the heat of the Combat; and having
vanquished her Enemy, takes pleasure to vanquish and surmount her self. She
is masculine and vigorous, and cannot lodge but in the heart of a Philosopher:
where as the other is cowardly weak and effeminate in comparison of her: As
also, she is not in the throne of her state and honor, but when she is in the
breast and bosom of a woman, where beauty, desire, and chastity, do every
moment send her a thousand temptations and challenges. Honor, fear, and
respect, who with weapons in her hand, establishes this virtue in the hearts
of a Virgin, and opposing and bending her courage against all assaults, are
commonly the most faithful guards and surest guardians: But were the eyes of
their care and vigilancie, more in number then those of Argus, or more subtle
and piercing then those of Linceus: yet they cannot conserve their virginity
from the assaults of vice, if the purity of the soul, and of a free will,
advanced not forth to repel and defend their injuries. A place of hard and
difficult keeping, because it is in the power of the least desire to think to
betray it, and to deliver it up into the hands of her enemy. Desire, if I dare
say it, equally innocent and guilty at one and the same time, which deriuing
its birth from so fair a flower, does at that very instant fade and wither it,
by the excess of an untimely and abortiue heat, and so dries up her roots,
that it is never more in her power again, to grow green and flourish, nor to
produce any other flowers, but such as shame and modesty chalkes out, and
depainteth on her face. If Montaigne (that excellent Judge of humane actions)
had approved and tried the nature of either sex, as Tiresias did, he would
decide this difference to their disadvantage, when he said, that it is not in
the power of a Woman, no, nor of Chastity her self, to prevent and hinder her
from desires. But desires notwithstanding may very well violate their chastity
without infringing, or making a breach in their continency, which hardneth and
fortifies it self the more, at their abord and meeting. It is true, that this
virtue of chastity, besides the delicacie of their diet, the sweetness of
their sex, the charms of idleness, the liberty and freedom wherein they are
bred and brought up; as also their beauty, and the affections, services, vows,
and prayers of those Lovers who research and solicit them, should make the
base insatiablenesse, and courage of men, to blush for shame, who abandon
themselves to all sorts of beastly voluptuousness and sensuality, and only
attend and expect, that snow-white age; give them a lesson of coldness and
temperancie. Not that it needs that this bridle so much curb and restrain
them; that the shadows of voluptuousness strike terror to his heart and
mind. Of a Philosopher I intend not to become a woman, to prescribe him such
severe and rigorous Laws: For so far forth as he forget not himself, and
fall a sleep in the breast and lap of voluptuousness; he as a generous
Ulysses, may gather the palms of Victory in the same field, where the
intemperancie of his companions have buried their glory and reputation. I have
less labor to consider the virtue of Xenocrates, in his refuse and flight,
from the embraces of that fair Curtizan, then in the bosom of the enioyance
of this pleasure and voluptuousness: and I much doubt, if with an indifferent
eye, he could behold the rich Cabinet of beauty and voluptuousness: in no
other manner then he did the fair front of his house. We cannot easily stay
our selves, when we are allured or moved. The force of a Horse is best known,
when he makes a round and neat stop, or stay. To avoid passion, there needs
but a little constraint: but after we are embarked therein, then every cord
draws. Continency has nothing to revenge her self, but of the eyes, and of
some weak desires: but temperance finds our thoughts, heart, and all the
sinews of the mind, bent to serve Voluptuousness, and by the show of this
maiesticall power, separates the two Chiefetaines which were in contestation
and difference, sending the one and the other peaceably to their homes, without
any other obstinate desire of revenge or quarrel. Continency performs nothing
but despite her self, she draws concupiscence after her with grief and
vexation, and aduanceth not, but with blows and bastinadoes: all her beauty is
but in show and exterior appearance; for within she is only a painted and a
feigned beauty: Let us see her interiourly; She entertaines and nourishes a
thousand contrarieties: There is in her, hatred, love, and repentance. She
tears her self in pieces and morsells, and makes her self bloody with her
own hands. It is a Saturn, who eats and deuoures his own children; for she
nourishes her self of her own blood, and feeds only on her own proper
bowels and entrails. The continent man is forsaken of Virtue, and possessed of
Vice: I mean, of the troubles and passions of the soul, which he cannot
appease. The temperate man contrariwise being assaulted by Voluptuousness and
Concupiscence, is possessed of Virtue, which opens all the gates to her enemies
without, thereby to triumph more gloriously ore her spoils. It seems that
continency is the most usual and common punishment, which Love rigorously
ordaines, for those who disdain her flames, who outrage and offend her; and
never requite or repay her services, but with ingratitude. Witness the
prodigious change of Scilla, whose severity found yet more cruel torments;
then those whom she made her Lover to feel. Her inferior members were
changed into Monsters, and barking dogs who seemed desirous to devour her,
and which indeed are no other but desires, proceeding from the sensual
appetite (which Plato says, is one of the Horses that draws the Chariot of
the soul) which fights against this reason; whose obstinate insensibility so
hardened and obdurated it self, that she exchanged her heart into a rock,
which could not be mollified by the tears of her unfortunate Servant and
Lover. It is for none but for Temperance, to enter into the Temple of pleasure
and voluptuousness: Ulysses upon the assurance of this flower which he had
received from heaven; and which he carried not in his hand, but in his heart,
entered into the Palace of Circe, awakened his sleeping Companions, and being
drunk with those enchantments, past on to the most secret Cabinets of
Voluptuousness and Pleasure; contented his amorous desires, received those
sweet daliances, courtings, and embraces; and without forgetting himself, he
considered the charming snares of her eyes; which seemed to lull him a sleep
in the rauishing ecstasies of an amorous passion; and invited him to repose and
rest himself in the lap of so many sweet delights and pleasures. But his
courage having loosed and slacked the reins to his affection, upon the
prostitution of so many delicious and amorous dainties, he then made a short
stay and stand; returned to his former mind and resolution, takes his leave of
her without reluctation or sorrow, and by his pleasing, and yet generous
carriage constraines the courtesy of this fair Princess, to accompany him
forth to the gate of her own Palace. But how much easier is it not to enter,
then to come forth, and depart in this manner: The Vice is not to enter, but
not to be able to come forth, said Aristippus, going into a Curtizan. With a
very small force and constraint, we may at first stop the motions of these
emotions; but when they are once begun, we are but too too naturally subject
to follow them. Most commonly it are they which draw us, and there is but this
virtue of Temperance, which can again take up the reins, and stop them in the
very mids of their course and cariere. We must cut off the head and tail
thereof; whereof the first withers our heart; and the second incessantly
scratcheth and wounds it. Intemperancie gives death to voluptuousness:
Continency denies and refuses it life; and Temperance gives and conserues it
to her, and by a certain grief which she intermixeth in all her actions, she
agrees so well in all things, and every where with her self, that she much
obliges us, and makes us her debtors, for the felicity which we may pretend
and hope for from her.

SECTION. III. To think that Virtue can indifferently cure all sorts of evils
or afflictions, is a testimony of Vanity, or else of our being Apprentices
and Nouices in Philosophy.
Felicity, how comes it to pass that we can surprise and hold thee, but with
one hand; If it be true that thou reposest thy self in the bosom of
Philosophy, as he made us believe who first caused it to descend from heaven,
to live among us here in earth. But why should there be so many Philosophers,
and yet so few wisemnn? If these promises be true: if these remedies are
certain and infallible, where is the effect? And yet there is no reason, so
much to tax our condition, as to think to make it guilty of that, whereof it
may be innocent. It is good sometimes to avoid, and leave off anger and
violence, where fair means may suffice, and prevail of it self: I much
doubt, if Philosophy, who puts weapons into our hands, to correct and chastise
Vice, could defend the blows, if we turned them against her self. For
wherein does she employ her self, but to afflict us in thinking to heal and
cure us. When we are in perfect health, she does so often again assail and
touch us, that in the end she changes our good disposition and welfare. Her
false Councels turns into true afflictions, which she afterward fights not
against, but only feignedly. If she raise us up a degree above others; we
thereby see evils and afflictions farther off then they do: and at the very
instant and moment, that we foresee them; we have need to remedy them,
because they wound us as much by their sight, as by their assaults. And when
with the same lance she can cure this wound, is the Physician to be commended,
who wounds and offends the health of his sick Patient, thereby to make show
of his skill and sufficiency? But yet so far is he from curing us, that our
mind is easily shaken, and can afterward very difficultly resolve, with firm
footing to support this fantastical enemy, and imaginary evil and
affliction. But if any simple, or earthly man (who has no other object in his
thoughts, then that which he has before his eyes) runs the same fortune
which we do to the disasters, which we have foreseen and predicted, then
this his stupidity has no need of remedy, but at the very blow and occasion.
He lives as joyful and contented, as the Philosopher Pyrrhons Hog, without
any fear of storms or tempests, whiles Philosophy enuironeth us purposely to
rectify and comfor^ us with her sweetest consolations. She tells us, That it
is but a cloud; That the least wind can beat off this storm and tempest,
before it fall on our heads: That the inconstancy of Fortune, as often
deceiues our fears as our hopes. But who is he, who in the expectation of an
evil or affliction, can purely relish and taste the sweetness of comfort and
joy which enuiron him. This sharp remembrance, has it not bitterness enough
in it, to make it seem sower and distasteful. This affliction holds us fast
by the collar of our doublets, and he therewith stoopes the Philosopher as
well as the Clown. The Gout, and Stone do equally afflict and offend them:
All our reasons are left behind the door, and there is but only our sense
and feeling, which is of this scot and company. But yet I will pay the
Philosopher more soundly and severely then the Clown: For that considers
nothing else, but that which he feels. His appetite is colder, and
therewithal more subject to grief and pain. And this, having the spirits of
his blood more refined, and subtilized, by the labor of his meditation, as
also his sense and feeling more tender and delicate, the lively image of pain
works as much, yea a greater power and effect in him by his imaginary
impression, as by his point and reality. So this foresight serves for nothing,
but to draw those miseries near us, which are farthest from us; and then very
difficultly can she cure, our other present and natural discommodities,
because she cannot well ease and comfort her own. If she undertake to appease
the burning fire of the pain which afflicts her, she then employes, and
applies no other Physic, but only the remembrance of fore-past pleasures. A
weak and feeble Remedy, which by this disioynted and lame comparison, instead
of diminishing; does exceedingly increase and augment our pain: As a great
fire increases, by throwing a little water in it; so our pain is the more
incensed and exasperated, by the image and remembrance of pleasure, which
presents it self to oppose it. This gross and stupid Ignorance, which gives I
know not what manner of patience to present evils and afflictions, and
carelessness to future sinister accidents, is far more aduantagious to humane
Nature. What need is there, that under the show and color of good, she
should come to discover us so tyrannical a countenance, and waited and
attended on by so many true evils and vexations; and by her vain and rash
enterprise, exposing to our sight the miserable estate of our condition. We
can never truly know our just weight, but in lifting our selves up above the
ground. He who is well, remoues not (says the Italian proverb.) Nature had
placed us in a very firm and sure degree, where we ought to have stayed. We
could not have fallen from thence, because it was the lowest step. Man thinking
to raise and eleuate himself higher, has prepared the danger of his own
fall: She has more lively imprinted in our fancies their weight and
greatness; then the reasons and means to vanquish them. I grant that this
Knowledge is the sweetest food of the mind, and that man's chiefest felicity,
proceeds from meditation. But was it not far better to have exhausted and
dried up the head spring: since from thence is flowne the torrent of our
miseries and afflictions. The wisest and subtillest Philosophy is but folly to
God, and because we are upon reprehensions and reproaches, we may also accuse
it to be guilty, for the defect of those who have separated and withdrawn
themselves from the bosom of the Church: It had been better to have failed to
do well, for fear of some small evil which might ariue; because we far
more sensibly feel grief then pleasure. To man there is nothing more visible
then good, nor more sensible then evil. We shall as little feel a long health,
as the sweetness of a quiet and profound sleep, without dreams or
interruption. If we are troubled and tormented with an Ague, that day which it
arrived to us, shall of all the year be marked, either with capital or rubric
letters. Our thoughts fix and tie themselves thereunto, and they disdainfully
steal over all the rest without seeing them, and stop at nothing, but at this
displeasing remembrance. In his health and possession, he is peaceable of all
other good things, as those great rivers, who in their beds and course,
commonly make small noise; and of his grief, it is as of those impetuous
torrents and inundations, which commonly by their precipitated motions,
astonish with their noise and violence, all those who dwell near them. Man
knows not his own good, but by the absence and want thereof. He cannot
soundly judge, or esteem of health, but in his sickness: Contrariwise, the
point of grief and pain, by reason of the fear we have thereof, which is as
the shadow (yea the true shadow, which follows and deuanceth our body) does by
her presence and his absence still afflict us. Our senses fall into a swoon and
slumber of joy, and are never awakened, but by afflictions and sorrow. Also
she is more moveable and inconstant then pleasure. And if any extreme
pleasure or voluptuousness will awaken us, and pinch us with the sense and
feeling thereof, it must borrow I know not what point of grief and pain,
which by a pleasing constraint, will draw from our tongue some tone of weeping
and bewailing. A peaceable life, full of security and assurance, and exempt,
and free from the storms and tempests of Fortune, resembles a dead Sea,
without trouble or agitation, as Demetrius affirmed. But because in the estate
whereunto the world is reduced, As one said well, It is easier to make a new,
then to reform it. Let us leave the Physician to be calumniated, and
scandalized by him that is in health: Bu^ for we who languish in the assaults
of evil and misery, let us shut our eyes to his imperfections. If instead of
lancing our Impostume, he has pricked us near it, or hurted us in any other
delicate and sensible part of our body: let us not quarrel with him, for fear
lest he forsake and abandon us, and that thereby we be doubly grieved and
offended. It may be that he will cure one, or the other of our wounds: but to
believe that these remedies are so sovereign, that all sorts of griefs and
afflictions should, and may hope for their entire cure thereof, it is that
which we cannot, and therefore must not promise our selves. Truth still gives
the lie to flattery. Great Alexander feeling himself wounded of an Arrow, all
the world (said he) swore that I was the son of Jupiter: but yet the blood
which streams from this my wound, cries out wi^h a loud voice, that I am a
man. Let us not think that Mineruas son, and his dearest Favorites, have any
more dignified privilege. The blows of Fortune make them well remember, that
they are dull and stupid men, because our body, and the one half of our
selves, is a thing which we possess not, but at his courtesy and mercy, and
whereof she has far more right and propriety then we. The best Philosophy
does not indifferently cure all sorts of diseases and afflictions; but without
cherishing or diminishing the favor which we receive thereof: let us endeavor
not to esteem it by its just price and value. Me thinks, that in this
pilgrimage of our life, she resembles the tree which the Traveler met in his
way, who if the weather be fair and clear, in beholding and considering it;
he admires the beauty thereof, and the sweetness and pleasantness of its
fruit. But if there happen any storm and shower of rain, then he flies under
the branches thereof, thereby to defend and shelter him from the injury of the
weather, although he can difficultly so well save and cover himself; that he
do not yet feel many discommodities thereby: But yet far less (by
comparison) then him, who disdaining and contemning this shelter, still
continues on his way, and without any fence or defense whatsoever, exposes
himself to the merciless mercy of the tempest. When we are at peace with
Fortune, there is no thing so sweet and pleasing as this Philosophy. Does
Fortune regard us with a bad eye? Will she dart upon us the Arrows of her
choler? then we run and arange our selves under this tree, which as soon
extends his branches over us: yea, he weds our quarrel, and strives to defend
the blows, or to quell and dead the violence thereof: And yet we cannot so
well avoid it, but yet there remains many parts and places above us, whereby
we are exposed to the mercy of our enemy, and to the point and fury of his
choler. The branches and shel^er of this tree, may defend the Traveler from
rain, hayle, wind, and lightning: but if the thunder come to fall thereon, it
then tears its branches, and thunderclaps our traveling Pilgrim. So
Philosophy arms us against contempt, poverty, banishment, and the other
defects and vices of opinion, and defends, and sheltereth us from the violent
winds of passions: But if sickness and pain, (which is the thunder of Fortune)
fall upon us; it tears all that it meets withal, breaks down our weak
baricadoes and defenses, and makes us feel the points and edges of his
indignation. And yet the Thunder of heaven spared the sacred tree of Apollo:
but that of fortune without any respect to virtue (that ever sacred and
sovereign tree of the Gods) insolently breaks and tears it in pieces, as
triumphing in the loss and ruin thereof. So that if the virtue of man could
divert and turn away this thunder from his head, as she does other injuries of
fortune: I believe with reason, that she might pretend the name and title of
perfect and complete felicity. But likewise we must not indifferently term
all that to be grief and pain which afflicts us: Let us therefore endeavor,
yea enforce our selves to restrain and keep it within the surest bounds and
limits that we can. Let us see what it is, and if man's felicity, may agree and
sympathize with it, according to the opinion of the Stoics, which for my part,
I believe not.

SECTION. IV. As it belongs to none but to the mind, to judge of true or
false: so our sense ought to be the only Judge either of pleasure, or pain.
ALL things should be considered absolutely, and simply in their proper Essence
and Being; or relatiuely as regarding our selves. Absolutely in their Being, as
the Earth, the Sea, the Sun, and the Stars: which Essence or Being is
equally spread and diffused every where. It is this truth which is not known
in his Essence, but only of God: and therefore where the point of humane
wisdom in vain strives to assail it: Or relatiuely in regard of our selves,
and then this reflection engages either our body or our mind. If the body, it
is termed good or evil; and there is none but our senses, which have right to
judge of a Knowledge which is infused to them: and so much, and so long
conjoined, that the harmony of the temperaments, is not molested or troubled by
any false agreement. If the mind, then it is termed true or false, whereof
the one caries the figure of good, and the other of evil, which is that which
we term ratiocination, which from universal propositions, inferres and
draws particular consequences, and composeth of this collection, reduced in
order by judgment, the Science or Knowledge of things. But the mind and the
body joining together in a community, in those things which they had of each
other in particular, The mind secures the body, and promises to provide him a
Sentinel, to conserve and watch against the surprises of his Enemy, which is
pain, or affliction, by the mean of her care and foresight, conditionally
that she may participate of the enioyance of those profits and pleasures,
which proceed from her. But this agreement and harmony lasts not long; for
the mind abuses her self; and this abuse is converted into tyranny: for of
a companion that formerly she was, she now becomes Master, and violating the
laws of society, she usurps upon the jurisdiction of the senses, believing,
that this usurpation, gives her an absolute right, and full power to judge of
the quality of good or bad, without consulting, or taking counsel of the
senses; and then as she will judge that to be either good or bad which is not:
so will she do of grief or pleasure, which was not of the same nature: and in
the end disposing soueraignly of all, she is arrived to this height and point,
to believe that those pleasures which were fallen to the lot and share of the
senses, were obliged to content and satisfy her insatiable appetite, without
informing her self, if they had worthily acquitted themselves of their charge
and functions, which was to appease the hunger and desire of our senses. The
which desire, because it is limited within the extent of its object, is easily
exchanged, and converted into tranquillity, and a peaceable enjoying thereof.
In the mean time, the mind plays the auerse and difficult; still murmures
and repines against it, and entertaines man in this perturbation and
perplexity which you see. He is become more amorous and affectionate to other
men's children then to his own: and this bastard affection of his, serves him
as a pair of stairs, whereby by little and little he descends to the
misunderstanding of himself, and then being buried in the darkness of
oblivion, he leaves in prey the inheritance which he had promised to give to
this community, and renounced his own which was lawful, which is the
meditation or knowledge of true or false, for as much as in the body of man,
the soul may be capable to foment and cherish the goods or pleasures of her
companion. And farther, if their profits or pleasures were of the same quality
and nature, when by any misfortune the portion of the one or other were ruined,
there would yet in the other lot and portion, remain enough, to nourish and
content them both; As the Philosopher, who living by the sweat and labor of
his own hands, vaunted that thereby he was yet able to maintain and nourish
another like himself. But the food and nutriment of the one, is not that of
the other, for all that which they have truly in Commons betwixt them, is the
harmony which should make this music to be composed of spiritual and
corporal things, wherein if either the one, or the other mutiny or rebel,
then expect no farther harmony or agreement, for it is nothing else but
confusion. But the senses being conducted by the infused and cleare-sighted
light of nature, are better governed in their Commonwealth. The one has
enterprised nothing against the other. It never happens, that the eye
undertakes to hear, or the ear to see, if it be not abusiuely spoken: But
since they have elected this inconstant mind, to govern them as their head or
Chieftain: they have reaped and received nothing but shame and confusion. The
eye finds nothing to be absolutely fair, but that which raritie or opinion,
pleases to recommend to us to be so. So the Rose and Gilliflower, are nothing
in comparison of a flower which grows in the Indies, or foreign Countries.
But this Tyrant aduanceth yet farther, for he puts them to the rack, and makes
them pay dearly for the error of this their foolish indiscretion: For the
senses dare not embrace that which they prise and affect dearest, without her
free consent and permission. If any ticklish desire give them a contrary motion
to that of reason, then the mind lifts up her hand and staff, and uses them
so unkindly and unworthily, that there is no servitude or slavery so rigorous.
They may well pass without her, and without the fruit of this meditation,
which makes it so commendable. A precious Jewel indeed it is, but far more
necessary to this little Commonweal for ornament and decency, then for
absolute necessity. For that which is in this manner necessary, is universal
and equal, as the heart is necessary to the life of man; Reason is a faculty,
which although it have her root in the soul: yet she cannot perfect her self
without the assistance and concurrence of well disposed organes; for the most
accomplished is but error: judge therefore what the most imperfect are, it is
but an accident, whose defect changes nothing the substance of Man. Plato was
no more a man, then a common Porter was. An inequality which sufficiently
testifies, that of absolute necessity it is not necessary to man. But at last,
The Senses grow rebellious and mutinous, and will proclaim their triumphs,
or Holliday in that which concerns their charge or duty of the mind, because
the mind so powerfully and soueraignly, usurps upon their jurisdiction; and
from this sedition, as from the head spring or fountain of all evils, flows
the disorder and confusion, which we find in all things. Arts and Learning are
endomaged and damnified by the corruption of the senses, which having no more
right to judge of good or evil, will yet intermeddle to know true, or false;
as is seen in those who deny Infinity, because their gross senses, who would
intrude themselves to be parties in this difference, can never agree with that
which they cannot comprehend: Or as those who deny the life or immortality of
the Soul, because they have demanded counsel of the senses, which cannot
approve of things so difficult and hard of disgestion, and so seldom
controuerted or proposed: For the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard spoken
of these discourses: neither can Taste, Smelling, or Feeling, give any
testimonies thereof. To make them therefore know this Soul, it must be (as
Cicero speaks of the Gods to the Epicurians) not a body, but as a body that it
had not veins, Arteries or blood; but as it were veins, arteries, and blood,
that she was, and that she was not, that it had not a humane figure, but as a
humane figure, not being able to represent the soul unto us; no more then
Painters, who represent Angels under humane shapes and figures. If Beasts could
figure themselves out a God, they would make him of their own form and shape,
not believing (as an ancient Philosopher affirmed) that there is any fairer, or
better shaped then their own: And these men do the same of the Soul^, which
they cannot otherwise comprehend or conceive then under that of a body, whose
members possess some place, having her dimensions, length, breadth, and depth,
under the very image and figure of man, then which they believe there is no
nobler: or else they otherwise believe there is none at all* or at least, that
it must be corporal: So if it be corporal, it must needs be corruptible, as
indeed they themselves are wholly composed both of body and corruption: And
this is the prejudice which the Senses bring to those who have caused it to be
believed in the judgment, which they should make of true or false: But as the
mind being far more busy in motion, and of a larger latitude and extent
then the Senses, has caused a more apparent, sensible, and universal
disorder: so she will not allow for good, but only that which is pleasing
and delightful to her. She has put new guards over all the goods of Nature,
and will not without her permission and consent, that it should be lawful for
us to enjoy any of them: And yet nevertheless, among those things which we
hold and term good, we may easily observe and remarke those that she has
charged and corrupted. Those goods which carry the mark and seal of Nature
imprinted on their foreheads, do content us, and satisfy and appease by
their enioyance, the burning desire which has so violently caused us to
re-search and seek them. And contrariwise, the others do but increase this
fervent desire or thirst, which the opinion and vice of our mind has
enkindled in us: The goods which are of his own invention, do neither
appertain to the mind, or the body; For they are neuters and indifferent. The
mind (as it were) commit^ing adultery with the body, has engendered them as
so many Monsters, which participate some thing both of the one and the other.
Of the mind, the estimation, price, and value: Of the body, that which they
contain in them of material and terrestrial. That which they have in them of
more natural, or of special and individual difference, does not properly
belong either to the one or the other. It is reported, That Mules (who are a
third different sort of beasts, which two former have propagated) are incapable
to engender. So those goods or privileges of Nature, which derive their Being
from such different Natures, do never of themselves engender any good either
to the mind, or the body. They are instruments, whereof we indifferently make
use either to good or evil: and which for the most part serve only to foment
our vices and passions. But as these good things are neuters and indifferent;
so the evil which likewise proceeds of his Artifice, ought not to have
greater privileges, and therefore the effect which they produce in us, which
we term grief or pain, cannot be termed so, but very wrongfully and
abusiuely: As imprisonment, banishment, loss of honors: Poverty offends
neither the body, nor the mind, but is the chain which only presses either
the one or the other. If the mind complain, it is too blame, for it belongs to
him only to know true or false: If he say that riches are good, and poverty
evil, the senses will give him the lie thereto, for they complain not, at
least if they do, they do it unjustly. If our mind had made this
proposition, to wit; That the oar, or matter of gold, resembles that of earth;
or that the difference proceeds not from the mixture of qualities and
accidents, we must not appeal therein to our senses. Or if the Eye would
contradict this proposition, because the color of earth differs from that of
gold, he should not be received or believed as Judge. If our feeling would
add in his own behalf, that he finds the one hard, the other soft; the one
smooth, and the other harsh and impollished, yet it were false, and it may be
showed them, that it belongs only to them, to judge of good or evil, and not
of true or false. We must not then by the same reason term that good or
evil, but which only the Senses will so please to do, or as true or false,
that which it shall please the mind to ordain: So then there is nothing which
will bear the name and quality of pain, but the contrary object to the
inclination of our feeling thereof, as long as it is present with him, and does
still sensibly and extremely afflict him therewith: So that which is
mediocrity, can be supported and endured by the constancy of our virtue,
without astonishing or moving her, and yet nevertheless not without offering
some outrage and violence to our felicity. But since she exceedes the powers of
patience, there is no courage so ambitious, but will be stricken and beaten
down to the ground by the thunder of Fortune; whereof I no way fear the
threatenings, but the blows, and happy is he that can prevent and hinder, that
his fear deuance not the effect thereof.

SECTION. V. Although we grant that Man's felicity consists in Virtue, (which
is not absolutely true) yet I affirm against the Stoickes, that felicity is
incompatible with grief and pain.
THe noise of weapons (as one reports) hinders the voice of Laws; but I
believe with Zenos Scholar, that the noise of weapons, and assaults of pain,
should more justly hinder us from understanding the precepts of Philosophy.
This Philosopher being besieged by the sharp points of grief and pain,
seeing that it was more perswasiue to make him confess, that it was evil,
then the power of all his Stoicall reasons were to the contrary. He ingeniously
confessed, that it was an evil, because all his long study, and time which he
had employed in Philosophy, could not secure him from the torment, and less
again, from the trouble and impatiencie which grief and pain brought him. A
Sect so rigorous, that as one of them said* It will neither rebate nor diminish
any thing of the felicity of a Wise man, although he were in Phalaris his Bull:
For felicity consists in virtue, and this virtue is the use of perfect reason,
which we carry to goodness. This reason conserues it self whole and found in
the mids of rackes, torments, and afflictions, and consequently this
felicity. I contrariwise say, that so perfect a felicity is imaginary; and
although it were true and real, that necessarily it is changed by grief and
pain; For the first head hereof, I say, That nature has imprinted in all
creatures a desire to compass their own ends, whereunto being arrived, they
seem to feel the true perfection of their being, from which being estranged
and separated, they suffer (if we may say so) some pain in their
insensibility. The simple bodies ariue more easily hereunto, having nothing in
them which contradicts this desire. The compounded, as they enclose and shut up
many contrary qualities, they cannot attain to this perfection, because their
desires and objects being different and contrary, one cannot enjoy his
tranquillity, but with the prejudice of the others: but if it fall out that
they are dissolved, and divided by the fire, then every one retires to that
part, where his desire calls him. But among the compounded, there is none more
multiplied then man, because it seems that nature would assemble in him, as in
a small compendium or Epitome: all that which is generally defused in all
sublunarie bodies; and far^e the more, because the soul being conjoined with
it, she has brought her desire with her, which tending to an infinite object,
gives her self but small rest, and yet less to him of whom she has the
government and conduction. Therefore man being composed of so many contrary
things, he nourishes a discord, and perpetual civil war within him: and
it is (as it were) impossible for him to appease it, because the remedy of the
one, is the poison of the other. Heaven is the center of light things, and
Earth of those which are ponderous and heavy; that as the compound of these
two still obayes the predominate quality, in such sort, that he cannot ariue
to his center, without offering violence to the least: So besides the contrary
inclination of all the compounds, which slide into the structure and fabrique
of man; we must chiefly observe and remarke these two. Of the party Inferior
and Superior; Sensitive, and Reasonable, who incessan^ly oppose and contradict
each other; and whereof the one cannot be in hi^ perfect peace and
tranquillity, except the other be far remote and distant from his; because
their objects being contrary, and distant one from the other, at one time they
cannot be in diverse places, nor much less in one and the same place, without
quarrels and dissension; for which cause and reason, man cannot hope for perfect
felicity in his life, since it ought to be termed of an universal repose and
tranquillity. If an Enemy set fire to all the four corners of a City, and
batter it with an intent to ruin and take it: can we believe it is in peace,
because the Governor thereof is in a place of assurance and security: So the
mind being far distant from the assaults and blows of Fortune, is not a
good consequence of tranquillity and perfect felicity; it will remain then
imperfect, as man himself remains imperfect* and he should not be man, if he
had but one of these parties and privileges: wherefore we may affirm, that
the use of this perfect reason, should not be this perfect felicity, if it
join not with her the repose and tranquillity of her companion the body, which
should have the better part in felicity, because it is he true touchstone of
good and evil, as we have formerly showed.

In the second place I say, That put the cause that felicity consists in the
use of perfect reason; and that she cannot long sympathize and agree with
pain, because all the faculties of the Soul in general, suffer according to
the motions and alterations of the body: So Reason is a material and corporal
effect, which has her root in the soul, and which cannot perfect her self:
but by the benefit of the organes, and the temperate concurrence of the refined
spirits of the blood, which if they are of too great a number or quantity, then
they subvert, embroyle, yea confound themselves, and become brutish and
beastly, as you see they do by excess of wine or sleep. And if there be any
defect, they degenerate into capriciousnes, or weakness of brain and
ratiocination: But above all, she depends of the good disposition of the
organes, the mind being more lively and active in health then sickness. A sweet
and clear air, and a fair day does clear and consolidate the judgment,
sharpens our wit, dispelleth melancholy, makes our reason more masculine and
vigorous, and in a word, makes us ciuiller and honester men. Reason is
engendered, and grows with our body, their powers are brought up together, and
we know that its infancy, vigor, maturity, age, and decrepitude, do
commonly follow the age and temper of the body: And what then if this body be
afflicted with grief or pain, shall she not feel it? What shall we say of
those whose excess and violence of pain, caries them to swooning and
convulsions, which proceeds and happens, because the spirits of blood being
changed by this violence, do divert themselves from their ordinary course, and
put themselves into disorder and confusion in the organ; so that they hinder
their regular function. There is no point of wisdom so pure, which can hinder
this trouble, or secure it self from it, because it cannot resist the power of
sleep. But perfect reason subsisteth nor but by this well-gouerned function of
the spirits, for that ceasing she also cease. But O ye Stoickes, what will
be your felicity in torments! If your reason forsake you, and play false
company with you; what will then become of this Virtue, which no longer knows
her self: is this it which she had promised you? Whiles the Enemy sackes you,
and Fortune tears and dragges you by the hair, she will abandon you at
need, and dares not show her self, but when your Enemies are retired and
vanished. And yet then she returns so weak and trembling, that it seems
she has felt the very same blows which our body has. What shall we say of
those from whom she having been but once absent, she never had the assurance
to return again? Lucretius a great Poet and Philosopher, by a love potion,
too sharp for the palate of Virtue, gave him occasion to dislodge, and to
abandon the place to folly. Fair Felicity, how your favors are difficult to
purchase, and easy to lose. Will you so permit, that leuity command, and
dispose you to the prejudice of that fortitude and constancy, whereof you make
profession: you say that you are a daughter of Heaven; and can you therefore
suffer the affront and disgrace of this daughter of Earth, I mean Fortune,
that she dragge you Captive, and proudly triumph of your spoils: At least, if
this Stoicall Virtue could engender a degree of leaprosie in our sense and
feeling: she hereby might make head, and oppose against Fortune: but she is
so far from it, as she sharpens it, and makes it more sensible to the Arrows
that she shoots at us: And to show more clearly and apparently how this
poison of pain and grief runs into the superior party, which we term
reasonable, and so infects it with its contagion: we must know that the
contrary qualities, which concur and meet in the compound, would never
subsist together, if they were not attoned and agreed by a third party; who
participating both of the one and the other, does thereby entertain them, and
appease their enmity and contention. And Nature could never have sowed or tied
to man, two such contrary pieces, without the aid and assistance of a third,
which are the purest and most subtillest spirits of the blood; which hold fast,
and tie themselves to the abundance and affluence thereof, by the grossest part
which is in them, and to the soul by that which is purest in it, and which
holds fast, and stays in this prison of the body: So that provided that this
third be not offended; Man still maintains himself. He can live without
reason, as the Sun can do toward us, and in our Hemispheare, without
enlightening us with his rays and beams, whiles he is eclipsed with so
black, and thick a cloud, that it cannot pierce forth to our eyes; because
reason is as the eye of the soul, which shines not forth openly and brightly
to us, if it meet with any obstacle or interposition. If the legs or arms
of a man be wounded, or cut off, he may yet support himself, and live: But
when this third is excessiuely endomaged, and that he has forsaken the match;
then the body being too corpulent and massiue, having no more hold-fast of the
soul, is constrained to forsake and abandon her. This third therefore serves
as an Interpreter both to the one and the other. He gives the body to
understand the will of the soul, and to the Soul, the appetites and desires
of the senses. All that generally befalls man, is divided by this third, which
sends to the one and the other their part and portion. If pain afflict the
body, it spreads and runs through all the spirits to the very soul; as by a
sulphurous match, lighted at both ends; and at the same instant sets fire every
where, as well in the superior as the inferior part, where she offends and
outrageth both the senses, and reason. Thus pain having then past and entered
into reason, it there troubles the repose, and changes the felicity of the
Stoic. So that the voice of that Philosopher, who cried out, O Pain, I will
not say that thou art sharp or evil: is not a sufficient testimony of his
victory over it. It is a Soldier which he has taken in the midst of the
conflict and combat: but yet he dragges our Philosopher as his prisoner after
him. A Captive who spets injuries in her Masters face, is yet no less his
Slave: He who willingly obeyes not, is more rigorously handled, and the Wise
man who arms himself against a violent pain or grief, has not so cheap a
bargain as our selves, because it is still ill done of us to incense an
enemy, who has in his hands the power and means to offend us. To put this
Constancy as she is depainted by them into a man's hands, to oppose and fight
against this strong Enemy, it is to put Hercules his Club into the hands of a
Pigmee. The Weapons and Armor wherewith they load our weak shoulders, do
beat us down, and kill us with their weight. It belongs to none but to
Socrates, to wear this Corslet; or to manage or play with the weapons of
Achilles, and to accustom our selves to it, we must vigorously assail and
assault Fortune, never to make truce with her; to provoke and dare her to the
Combat, with a firm footing and resolution, with the sweat on our front, to
sup dust into our mouth, to make us drunk with her wounds; by little and
little to fortify our stomach, as another Pill of Methridatum, against the
poison of unlooked for accidents, which may corrupt our health. I mean the
peace and tranquillity of our felicity.

SECTION VI. Man's life is a harmony, composed of so many different tones, that
it is very difficult for Virtue to hold, and keep them still in tune.
I Find that the Poets do exceedingly sing, and paint forth the praises and
beauty of Venus: That commonly they lend Arrows to this young Cupid, which are
sharper then those he caries about him in his quiver; and that their true
natural beauty is nothing in comparison of those they borrow from this strange
painting and false decoration: But it seems to me, that Philosophers do no
less by their wisdom, for she ha^h not so much beauty or excellency naked,
as by those ornaments and attires wherewith the Stoikes embellish and adorn
her: and I know not if the Gods envy not the condition of men, for the price
of the like recompense. This Virtue, as it is painted out by Seneca, ha^h such
enchanted lures and graces, that if this Image could heat it self in our
breast, and receive life in our arms by the favor of Minerua, as heretofore
the Statue of Pigmalion, did by the (...) of Venus: I believe that the felicity
and sweetness thereof, would tire our hopes and desires. The b^yers and
thorns which they place on the approaches and aduenewes thereof, and those
extreme difficulties which they put before it; to ariue to this last point, is
the only means which they use to cover their secrets, and consequently to
conceal the vanity of their Art. Let us not be so ambitious to advance and
eleuate our selves so high, for those who see and perceive it, will easily
judge, that their wings are by far too weak to second and make good so
audacious a flight. To promise more then we can perform, is the part of an
Ignorant; and to hope for less then we ought, is that of a Nouice or
Apprentice. But to hope, and not to promise our selves, but that which we can,
is the act of an experienced and wise man. Let us not therefore think that the
point of felicity, whereunto this moral Virtue can raise us, is above the
storms and tempests of Fortune. All which she can do, is to cast anchor in
the midst of the tempest: in the mean time, the vessel notwithstanding will
still be tossed with the waves and billows thereof. If affliction, of pain
assault us not, we shall then remain invincible and victorious: but if
Fortune assail and board us there, she then beats down, and ruineth all our
defenses. For reason is wonderfully tender and courteous to pain: She knows
not how to fight with her, but with words: She is a woman who has no other
offensive weapons, but injuries and obstinacy. And yet if we enforced our
selves to ariue to the degree of this Virtue as she is, we should then very
often be in repose and tranquillity, and might enjoy felicity, whereof we are
capable. At least, knowing her imperfection, we should do as the Painter, who
hides his grossest and obscurest colors under his fairest, and most liueliest.
We should compel our selves to cover the misery of our misfortunes, by the
happiness of those which second our desires: For to promise our selves so
perfect and complete a contentment, that the approaches and aduenewes thereof,
be not crossed by some affliction or displeasure* we should therein counterfeit
a true Mountebanke, who pretends and affirms, that he can draw a tooth from
us without feeling or pain. Voluptuousn^sse has some thing in her, I know not
how bitter and inevitable, both in her beginning and end. I commend and highly
praise that Philosopher, who proceeds in the purity of his soul, and not he
who purposely shows his conceptions: but who strikes home, arangeth his
reasons orderly, and speaks freely what he thinks. Let his life be
conformable to his writings, and if it be possible, let his effects teach his
own rules and instructions; for he cannot easily cure others, who is not able
or capable to comfort himself, except he pass for a hired Sophister, Orator,
or Philosopher: For wisdom must exhaust from the profundity of our soul, (as
from the Well of Democritus,) all that which is truth, or at least which seems
so to us. For if abuse or flattery prevail, or penetrate so far with us,
there will nothing then remain either sound or entire in us. To promise a
complete and perfect felicity without the favor of Fortune, is tha^ which I
cannot do; and to think, or pretend to do it any other way then by virtue,
is a design too defective and ridiculous To receive the favors of Fortune, by
the door of Virtue, and not to let them depart from you, but by the same
passage, is in my opinion the only means to give entrance to repose and
tranquillity: but here our courage must not fail us at need. Let us follow
the point of this natural desire, which we feel in us, as a small and weak
spark, which may be enkindled and enflamed, till it grow to a greater and
purer light, and then serve us as a guide in so generous an enterprise. There
is none but in some sort feels; and cherishes Virtue; with a hope to obtain
and enjoy her: But we may say of her as Isocrates of the City of Athens, that
she was pleasant and delightful in the same nature and manner, as fair
Strumpets or Curtizans, with whom men only love to pass their time with, but
not to wed them, or reside with them: Right so, Virtue is beloved and courted
of all the world, to pass our time with, and only for show and ostentation.
But no man takes her to his wife, and espouseth her. We b^are her on our lips,
but not in our hearts, and in our speeches and writings, but not in our
actions: For we must water and color our soul therewith. If we think, or
hope to feel the effects of true felicity, which must not be as we suppose, a
Joy conceived through the opinion of a false good, governed without rule or
discretion; but a constant and settled pleasure, agreeing in all things, and in
all places with her self. And this is the most sublimest and eminent'st place;
where the wisdom of man endeavors and strives to ariue: Wisdom which yet
can never eleuate him so high, but that he shall still feel and know
himself to be man. He cannot take himself from himself, nor escape those
his natural defects and qualities, but that he shall still receive some
mortal, or at least some sensible blows and assaults thereof. The winds
beat and assail the highest Towers and Turrets, Vanity pardons not the
highest, brauest, or most solid wits and Judgments: but contrariwise, as
she meets with a barren and empty wit, discharged of passions; which seemed
formerly to provoke and animate her, she thereby then thinks, she has the
more right to possess and enjoy its place: As a Pipe or Butt is emptied, so
the wind and air succeedes in place of the wine: And by the same measure that
we make the greatest and grossest imperfections to distill and stream away
from the nature of man: Vanity ariues in the place thereof, where she ex^ends
her self every way at large, and resides and dwells with far more ease. And
to conclude, what privilege or advantage so ever we can give to man, who is
like our selves, or what Honors we can render or yield either to him, or to
our selves.

Man is nothing but a dream,
Who feeds, and gnawes on lies extreme:
In his best state constant never:
A shadow which the morn dispelleth,
A lightning that a cloud refelleth,
Whose being, and not being, a moment sever.
FINIS.

