A pleasant new Ballad of the Miller of Mansfield, in Sherwood and of King
Henry the second, and how he was lodged in the Millers house, and of their
pleasant communication.
To the Tune of, The French Lavolta.
HEnry our royal King would ride a hunting,
To the green forest so pleasant and fair,
To have the heart chased and dainty Does tripping,
Unto mercy Sherwood his Nobles repair:
Hawk and hound was unbound, all things prepared
for the same to the game, with good regard.
All a long Summers day, rod the King plesantly,
With all his Princes and Nobles each one,
Chasing the Heart and Hind, and the Buck gallantly,
Till the dark evening enforcst them turn home:
then at last, riding fast, he had lost quite,
all his Lords in the wood, late in dark night,
Wandering thus wearily all alone up and down,
With a rude Miller he met at the last,
Asking the ready way unto fair Nottingham,
Sir (quoth the Miller) your way you have lost,
yet I think, what I think, truth for to say,
you do not likely ride out of your way,
Why what do thou think of me, quoth. our King merrily
Passing thy judgment upon me so brief?
Good faith (quoth the Miller) I mean not to flatter thee,
I guess thee to be but some Gentleman thief:
stand thee back in the dark light thee not down,
lest that I presently crack thy knaves crown.
Thou do abuse me much (quoth our King) saying thus
I am a Gentleman, and lodging I lack:
Thou have not (quoth the Miller) one groat in thy purse,
All thy inheritance hangs on thy back:
I have gold to discharge all that I call,
if it be forty pence I will pay all.
If thou be a true man, then (said the Miller)
I swear by my tole-dish I Will lodge thee all night,
Here Is my hand (quoth our King) that was I ever,
Nay soft (quoth the Miller) thou may be a spright:
better I Will know thee ere hands I do shake,
with none but honest men hands will I take.
Thus they went all along unto the Millers house,
Where they were seething of Puddings and Souse,
The Miller first entered in, then after him the King,
Never came he in so smoaky a house:
now (quoth he) let me see, here what you are,
quoth our King look your fill and do not spare.
I like well thy countenance* thou have an honest face,
With my son Richard this night thou shall lie,
Quoth his wife, by my troth, it is a handsome youth,
Yet it is best (quoth his wife) for to deal warily,
art not a run away I pray thee youth tell,
show me thy Pasport and all shall be well.
Then our King presently making low courtesy,
With his hat in his hand, thus he did say,
I have no Pasport, nor never was servitour,
But a poor Courtier rode out of my way.
and for your kindness here offered to me,
I will requite it in every degree.
Then to the Miller his wife whispered secretly,
Saying it seems this youth's of good kin,
Both by his apparel, and eke by his manners,
To turn him out certainly it were a great sin:
ye (quoth he) you may see he has some grace,
when he does speak to his betters in place.
Well quoth. (the Millers wife) young man welcome here*
And though I say it, well lodged thou shall be
Fresh straw I will have laid on your bed so bra^e,
Good brown hempen sheets likewise (quoth she)
I (quoth the goodman) and when that is done,
you shall lie with no worse than our own son.
Nay first (quoth Richard) good fellow tell me tr^^,
Have any creepers within thy gay hose?
Or art thou not troubled with the Scabado?
I pray you (quoth the King) what things are those?
art thou not lousy* nor scabby (quoth he)
if thou be surely thou lie not with me.
This caused the King suddenly to laugh most heartily
Till the tears trickled down from his eyes.
Then to their supper were they set orderly,
With a hot bag-pudding and good apple-pies:
nappy ale, good and stale, in a brown bowl:
which did about the board merrily trowle.
Here (quoth the Miller) good fellow I drink to the,
And to all the Courtnols that courteous be.
I pledge (quoth our King) and thank you heartily,
For your good welcome in every degree:
and here in like manner I Will drink to your son,
do so (quoth Richard) but quick let it come.
Wife (quoth the Miller) fetch me forth light-foot.
That we of his sweetness a little may taste,
A fair Venison pasty then brought she forth (...),
Eat (quoth the Miller) but sir make no waste:
here is dainty Light-foot in faith then said our King,
I never before eat so dainty a thing.
I wis (said Richard) no dainty at all it is,
For we do eat of it every day,
In what place (said our King) may be bought like this,
We never pay penny for it by my fay:
from merry Sherwood we fet it home here,
now and then we make bold with our Kings Dear.
Then I think (said our King) that it is Venison,
Each fool, said Richard, full well may see that,
Never are we without two or three in the (...),
Very well fleshed and excellent fat:
but pray thee say nothing, where ere thou do go,
we would not for two pence the King should it know*
Doubt not then, said our King, my promised secrecy,
The King shall never know more on it for me,
A cup of Lambs-wooll, they drank unto him then,
And then to bed they passed presently:
the Nobles next morning went all up and down,
for to seek out the King in every Town.
At last at the Millers house soon they espied him (...)
As he was mounting upon his fair steed,
To whom they came presently, falling down in (...)
Which made the Millers heart woefully bleed:
shaking and quaking before him he stood,
thinking he should have bin hanged by the rood.
The King perceiving him fearful and trembling,
Drew forth his sword but nothing he said,
The Miller down did fall, crying before them all.
Doubting the King would have cut off his head:
but his kind courtesy there to requite,
gave him a great living, and made him a Knight.
The second part of the Miller and the King: Showing how he came to the Court
with his wife and Son: and what merry conceits passed between the King and
him.
WHen as our Noble King came home from Nottingham,
And with his Nobles in Westminster lay,
Recounting the sports and pastimes they had taken,
In this late progres^e along by the way:
of them all, great and small, this did he protest,
the Miller of Mansfields sport liked him best.
And now my Lords quoth the King I am determined
Against Saint Geoges next sumptuous feast,
That this old Miller our last confirmed knight,
With his son Richard shall both be my guest,
for in this merriment it is my desire,
to talk with the jolly Knight and the brave Squire.
When as the Noblemen saw the Kings pleasantnes,
They were right joyful and glad in their hearts,
A Pursevent their was s^nt straight on the business,
The which had many times been in those parts,
when he came to the place where he did dwell,
his message orderly then he did tell.
God save your worship then said the Messenger,
And grant your Lady her hearts desire:
And to your son Richhrd good fortune and happiness,
That sweet young Gentleman and gallant young Squire
our King greets you all and thus he does say,
you must come to the Court on S. Georges day.
Therefore in any case, fail not to be in place,
I wis (quoth the Miller) this is one odd jest,
What should he do there he said, faith I am half afraid,
I doubt quoth Richard be hanged at the least:
nay quoth the Messenger you do mistake,
our King prepares a great feast for your sake.
Then said the Miller now by my troth Messenger,
Thou have contented my worshipful well,
Hold here is three farthings to quit thy great gentleness
For these happy tidings which thou do me tell:
let me see hear'st thou the, tell to our King,
we will wait on his mastership in every thing.
The Pursevant smiled at their simplicity,
And making many legs took their reward,
And taking then his leave with great humility,
To the Kings Court, again he repaired,
showing unto his Grace in each degree,
the Knights most liberal gift and bounty.
When as he was gone away, thus did the Miller say,
Here comes expenses and charges indeed,
Now we must needs be brave, though we spend all we have,
For of new garments we have great need,
of horses and servingmen we must have store,
with bridles and saddles and twenty things more,
Tush sir ( John quoth. his wife) neither do fret nor frown
You shall be at no more charges for me:
For I will turn and trim up my old Russet gown,
With every thing as fine as may be:
and on our Mil horses full swift we will ride,
with pillowes and pannels as we shall provide,
In this most stately sort, rode they unto the Court,
Their lusty son Richard foremost of all:
Who set up by good hap, a Cocks feather in his Cap,
And so they fetted down toward the Kings Hall,
the merry old Miller with his hand on his side,
his wife like Maid marrian did mince at that tide,
The King and his Nobles, that heard of their coming
Meeting this gallant Knight with his brave train,
Welcome sir Knight (quoth he) with this your gay Lady,
Good sir John Cockle, once welcome again:
and so is this Squire of courage so free,
quoth Dicke abots on you, do you know me?
Quoth our King gently, how should I forget thee,
Thou wast mine own bedfellow well that I wot,
But I do think on a trick tell me that prithee Dicke
How we with farting did make the bed hot,
thou whoreson happy knave, then quoth the Knight,
speak cleanely to our King, or else go shite.
The King and his Counselors heartily laughed at this,
While the King took them both by the hand,
With Ladies and their maids, like to the Queen of spades,
The Millers wife did so orderly stand,
a milke-maids courtesy at every word,
and down the folks were set at the side board,
Where the King Royally, in princely Majesty,
Sat at his dinner with joy and delight:
When he had eaten well, to jesting then they fell,
Taking a bowl of wine drank to the Knight,
here is to you both he said, in wine ale, and beer,
thanking you all for your Country cheer.
Quoth sir John Cockle I Will pledge you a pottle,
Were it the best ale in Nottingham-shire,
But then said our King, I think of a thing,
Some of your Light-foot I would we had here:
ho, ho, quoth Richard, full well I may say it,
it is knavery to eat it and then to bewray it.
Why art thou angry quoth our King merrily?
In faith I take it very unkind,
I thought thou would pledge me in ale and wine heartily
You Are like to stay, quoth Dicke, till I have dinde:
you feed us with twatling dishes so small,
Zounds a black pudding is better than all.
I marry, quoth our King, that were a dainty thing,
If a man could get one here for to eat,
With that Dicke straight arose, and plucked one out of his hose
Which with heat of his breech began to sweat:
the King made procter to snatch it away,
it is meat for your Master, good sir you must stay.
Thus with great merriment, was the time wholly spent
And then the Ladies prepared to dance,
Old sir John Cockle and Richard incontinent,
Unto this practice the King did advance:
here with the Ladies, such sport they did make,
the Nobles with laughing did make their heart ache
Many thanks for their pains did the K. give them then,
Asking young Richard if he would wed,
Amongst these Ladies free, tell me which likes thee,
Quoth he, Jugge Grumball with the red head:
she is my Love, she is my life, she will I wed,
she has sworn I shall have her Maidenhead.
Then sir John Cockle, the King called unto him,
And of merry Sherwood made him Overseer,
And gave him out of hand, three hundred pound yearly,
But now take heed you steel no more of my Dear,
and once a quarter let us here have your view,
and thus sir John Cockle I bid you adieu.
FINIS.
Printed at London for E. Wright, dwelling at Christ-Church Gate.


