A BREFE COLLECTION of the Laws of the Forest: Collected and gathered
together, as well out of the Statutes and Common Laws of this Realm, as also
out of sundry ancient Presidents and Records, concerning matters of the
Forest.

With an Abridgement of all the principal Cases, Judgments, and Entres,
contained in the Assizes of the Forestes of Pickering, and of Lancaster.

By John Manwood of Lyncolnes Inn, Studient in the Laws of this Realm.

The Preface to the matter.
THE ancient Laws of this Realm having always had a special regard, unto
the continual study and care that Kings and Princes have in great and
weighty affairs of matters of Common weal, for the good of their Subjects:
whereby they are often times wearyed with the toil of the same: and in respect
thereof, the same laws have given unto them diverse royal prerogatives of most
noble and princely pleasures to recreate themselves withal, to put away from
them the remembrance of their laboursome toil. Amongst which prerogatives, the
royal prerogative of the liberty of a Forest is not the least: For, a Forest
both is and has been always accounted a franchese of such noble and Princely
pleasure, that it is not incident unto any subject of this Ralme to have the
same, but only unto the Crown and royal dignity of a Prince. And therefore
there have been always certain particular laws differing from the Common
Laws of this Realm, that were only proper unto a Forest, belonging to the
same for the continuance of it.

And it does seem that Forestes have been of long time, and that they are
very ancient things, although, peradventure, not in that nature that they are
now used here in this Realm of England. For it does appear, that there were
Forestes, yea, even in the very time of king David: King David in his 50.
Psalm. ver. 10.
For he says in his 50. Psalm these words, O Lord, I need not to offer unto
thee burnt Sacrifices of beasts: for all the wild beasts of the Forest are
thine, and so are the Cattle upon a thousand Hills: Then Ergo there were
Forestes of wild beasts in his time. And it does also appear by sundry
ancient Histories, as in Concordantia Historiarum and others, Concordantia
Historiar.
that Forestes have been always in this Realm, from the first time that the
same was inhabited. Gurguntius.
And also you may read there that Gurguntius the son of Belyn being a king of
this land, did make certain Forestes for his delight and pleasure in
Wilshire: and so have diverse other kings also since his time in other places
meet for that purpose: Which Forestes the Kings and Princes of this Realm
have always mayntained and preserved, (with diverse Privileges and Laws
appertaining to the same,) for places of pleasure and delight for their
recreation.

And if it did happen that any offenders did enter into those priuileged pla^,
and that they did any trespass therein, then they were punished with very ^^rp
Laws and punishments according to the laws that then were in force, which
were sharply executed, and which laws were then altogether uncertain: and the
offenders were punished at the Kings will and pleasure, and not by any law
certain: and those laws and punishments were duly executed and continued by
the Kings of this Realm, Canutus, a Dane, was king here in England, in Anno
Domini 1016.
until that Canutus a Dane came to be king of this land, which was about the
year of our Lord 1016. who taking as great delight and felicity in Forestes
as other most noble Princes of this Realm had done before his time: He for the
better preservation and maintening of those priuileged places of pleasure did
establish certain Laws and Canons only concerning Forests, which Laws I
have here placed first of all in this hook: for although that they have been
raked up a long time in the Embers of oblivion, yet they are worthy to be
remembered again. And because that they are the most auncientest laws that I
can find concerning Forestes, therefore I have placed them first of all before
any others, to thend that those that shall read this book, may both see and
know what laws there were in the beginning, concerning Forestes, and how they
have altered and changed from time to time: and to that end I have here set
down all the Statuts concerning Forestes that have been made since the time
of the making of the said laws, because that it may thereby appear the more
plainly how any one of them has abrogated another, or any part thereof: by
reason whereof, that which is law and in force at this day may the more easier
be decerned and known.

It appears by the Laws of Canutus the Dane king in his Canon the 30. that
before his time, all wild beasts and birds were only the kings: and that no
other person might kill or hurt them. Canutus Canon. 30.
For the king by his royal Prerogative, his right and privilege was such in
England, that all such things that none of his subjects could challenge any
property in, they were then said to be the Kings: as wild beasts, byrds, and
such like, in whose lands or woods soever they were found. Wherefore the same
king made this law, Volo vt omnis liber homo pro libito suo habeat venerem sieve
viridem in planis suis super terras suas sine Chacea tamen, et deuitent omnes
meam vbicunque eam habere voluero, which is: that from henceforth, I will
(says the king) that every free man may take his own Vert and Venerie or
hunting that he can get upon his own ground, or in his own feelds, being out
of my Chase. And let all men refrain from my Venery in every place where I
will have the same. The book of the Laws of Saint Edward the Confessor.
And also it appears in the book of S. Edward the confessor, which book is
the very root and original ground of all the ancient Laws of England, that
the same king Edward the confessor did confirm the same Law in these vordes:
Volo vt omnis homo sit venatione sua dignus in nemora campo and dominico suo
and abstineat omnis homo a venarijs meis vbicunque pacem eos habere volo super
penam vitae. And so it appears, that both the said kings did grant and make
this Law, that after that time it should be lawful for every subject to enjoy
the benefit of his own hunting that he could any way take in his own land
or in his own woods or feeldes, so that every man should refrain from hunting
the kings wild beasts in his own Forests and priuileged places for them:
upon pain of the loss of life of such an offender. William the Conqueror.
Which Laws William the Conqueror did afterward in his time confirm, as it
does appear in the said book of the said Laws, chap. 47. And also he did
continue the samae all his life time. William Rufus.
And after his death William Rufus his son in like sort continued those Laws
during his life, until he was slain in new Forest as he was in hunting. And
after the death of the said William Rufus without issue of his body king Henry
the first his brother succeeded him as next heir unto the Crown of this
Realm, Henry the first.
by his Charter did confirm all the said Laws of the Forest of Saint Edward
the Confessor, as it does appear in the redd book in the Excheker called
Liber Rubus, cap. 1. Liber Rubrus cap. 1.
Legum suarum, and also in the second Charter of the said book of the Laws of
the Forest in these words, Forestas vero Communi assensu omnium Baronum meorum
in manu mea sic retinuo sicut pater meus eas retinuit. And then afterward in
the 18 Chapter of the said Book, the plees of the Forest are there specified
and rehearsed in these words, Placita quoque Forestarum satis sunt in
commoditat' valliat' sicut de assertis de Cessione de venatione de cumbustione
etc. Which Laws of the Forest afterward did more and more increase, and so
did continue during all the life of the said king Henry the first. And after
his decease, King Steven.
king Steven by his Charter did confirm all the said Privileges, Laws, and
Customs made and granted by Saint Edward the Confessor, and also by king
Henry the first his uncle, as it appears in the book of the said Laws. All
which said Laws and Customs the said king Stenen did continue all his life.
And after his decase king Henry the second succeeding him as next king of this
Realm, King Henry the second.
by his general Charter did confirm the said Laws of the Forest in most
things, and principally concerning the beginning of Carta de Foresta.

For in the first book of his Laws made in the 19. year of his reign, Chap.
16. he rehearses and declares the Law of the Forest, and the very nature of
that, and does farther show there, how that the Laws of the Forest do vary
and differ from the Common Law of this Realm, as it does appear in the said
redd Book in the Excheker in these words, Sane Forestarum, lex, ratio pena
quoque vel absolutio delinquentium sieve pecuniaria fuerit sieve corporalis
scorsum ab aliis regni ludicijs secernuntur and folius regis arbitrio seu
cuiuslibet familiaris ad haec specialiter deputati subijcitur, legibus quidem
proprijs subsistit, quas non lure communi sed voluntaria principum Institutione
subnixasse debent, adeo vt per legem eius factum fuerit non Iustum absolute,
sed Iustum secundum legem Forestae dicatur, quia in Forestis penetralia regum
sunt and little maximae deliciae ad has quidem venandi causa Curis quandoque
accedunt, vt modica quiet recreentur. And afterward in the twelfth Chapter of
the same book, there does follow another sentence concerning the laws of the
Forest in these words, In singulis Comitatibus Foresta regis non est, sed in
nemorosis vbi ferarum latibula sunt and vberior pastura, nec interest cuius
sunt nemora sieve enim regis sieve regni proceru^ liberos tamen and indemnes
habeat ferae Circumque discursus: So that by those texts before rehearsed, it
does appear how the Laws of the Forest were taken and used in times past, and
by those words, Nec interest, cuius sunt nemora etc. It is plainly showed that
the king then might and yet may also make a Forest in every place where he
pleases, as well in the lands and inheritance of any of his subjects as in
his own demeasne lands and inheritance, which was a great loss and hinderance
to those that were owners of those lands that were so afforested. For after the
same was so afforested, their pastures and profits of their lands was deuowred
by the wild beasts of the king without any recompense for the same to be made
unto them. And this law of afforesting of the lands and inheritance of other
men did then daily so increase, that the same was thought a very extreme heavy
burden, as well unto noble men and gentlemen, as also unto the poor comminaltie
of this Realm to bear: for that they might not enclose their land, nor
improve the same to their best profit that was so afforested by the king. But
they were forced to suffer their said lands aforested to lie open and not
enclosed. And if any of them did chance to offend against the Assizes or Laws
of the Forest, the punishment was sometimes very great for a small offense:
and the forfeitures for the same, according to the will and pleasure of the
king, and not according to the quantity of the trespass, nor yet according to
the course of the Common law of this Realm. And this law did continue during
the life of king Henry the second. And after his decease, the same continued
likewise during the reign of king Richard the first. And then after his
desease, likewise during the reign of king John. Richard the first. King John
And every one of the said kings did daily increase and make more new
Forestes and more in the lands of their subjects, to the great hinderance and
impouerishing of their subjects.

And this mischief was not at all remedied until the making of the Charter of
the liberties of the Forest, Henry the third.
which was made by king Henry the third. And afterward the same Charter was
confirmed and enlarged by king Edward the first his son: which Charter was
made for the pacifying of the Comminaltie of this Realm that then were much
agreeued at this mischief. Edward the first.
And therefore the same Charter called Carta de Foresta even in the very first
Article of the same did provide a remedy in that behalf in these words,
Omnes Forestae quas Henricus auus noster aforestauit videantur per bonos and
legales homines et si boscum aliquem alium quam suum dominicum afforestauerit
ad damnum illius cuius boscus ille fuerit statim deaforestentur etc. By which
branch of the said Charter, you do see, that all Forestes that king Henry the
third had made of the lands of any of his subjects, which were not the kings
own demean lands, are here appointed to be disaforested again.

And again, in the third Article of the said Charter of the Forest, there is
the very like remedy and provision, that all such Forestes which king Richard
the first and also king John had aforested and made of the lands or woods of
any of his subjects, being not the demeasne lands of the Crown, that then
all those lands and woods should be disaforested again: For these three
kings, that is to say, king Richard the first, king John, and Henry the third
had then newly aforested so much of the lands of their subjects, that the
greatest part of this Realm was then become Forest.

And because the mischiefs, inconveniences, and burdens that were then laid
upon the Comminaltie of this Realm, were very great and heavy, by the means
of the Laws of the Forest: therefore the said Charter of the Liberties of the
Forest, has now moderated the extremenesse of those Laws in a more mylder
order, as you may perceive by the same.

For he that does attentively read and examine the whole Charter of the Forest,
and every Article therein, may thereby partly perceive how hard and sharp the
laws of the Forest were in times past before the granting of the same
Charter: And also what inconveniences the inhabitants in Forestes did then
endure and suffer, by reason of the Forest laws: all which are now provided
for, and in a measurable manner remedied, as you may perceive by the examination
of every Article of the said Charter. And whereas the same Charter did allow or
suffer any thing that has since that time been thought to be over hard or
sharp: the same has since again been moderated, as you may here perceive by
those Statutes that have been made since that time: So gracious and merciful
have the Noble Princes of this Realm been toward their loving Subjects: So
that now at this day, although that the laws of the Forest are of themselves
very mylde, gentle and merciful laws toward the Subjects of this Realm,
over that they have been in times past. Yet notwithstanding, we do at this
present live under the government of so gracious and merciful a Queen, that
her clemency in the execution of those laws, is much more greater than the
favor and clemency of the Laws themselves: Whose long life, prosperous
reign, and most happy days, GOD of his merciful goodness grant long to
continue, to the great comfort of all good Christian Subjects. Amen.

Carta de Foresta, of king Canutus a Dane and a King of this Realm, granted
at a Parliament holden at Winchester in the year of our Lord 1016. as
follows.
Incipiunt constitutiones Canuti Regis de Foresta.
HAE sunt sanctiones de Forresta, quas ego Canutus Rex cum consilio primariorum
hominum meorum Condo and facio, vt cunctis regni nostri Angliae Ecclesijs and
pax and Iustitia fiat, and vt omnis delinquens secundum modum delicti, and
delinquentis fortunam patiatur.

1 Sint iam deinceps quatuor ex liberalioribus hominibus qui habent saluas suas
debitas consuetudines, [Quos Angli Paegened appellant] in qualibet regni mei
prouincia constituti, Pegened. These four chief men are those that now are
called the Verder^rs. For they are four chief men of the Forest as they we^e
then: and they do execute the same place: and they have the same authority in
most things that these chief men had then.
ad Iustitiam distribuendam vna cum pena merita and materijs Forrestae cuncto
populo meo, tam Anglis quam Danis per totum regnum meum Angliae, quos quatuor
primarios Forrestae appellandos Censemus.

2 Sint sub quolibet horum, Lespegend. These seem to be these men that now are
called the Regarders: for they have the same office and authority that they
had. Ealdermen.
quatuor ex mediocribus hominibus [quos Angli Lespegend nuncupant, Dani vero
young men vocant] locati, qui curam et onus tum viridis tum veneris suscipiant.

3 In administranda autem Iusticia nullatenus volo vt tales se intromittant:
mediocresque tales post ferarum curam susceptam, pro liberalibus semper
habeantur, quos Dani Ealdermen appellant.

4 Sub horum iterum quolibet sunt duo minutorum hominum quos Tineman Angli
dicunt, Tine man. These are they that now are called Forresters or keepers.
Here you may note both their Office, authority, and beginning.
hi nocturnam curam and veneris and viridis tum seruilia opera subibunt.

5 Si talis minutus seruus fuerit, tam cito quam in Forresta nostra locabitur,
liber esto, omnesque hos ex sumptibus nostris manutenebimus.

Michni. Here you may see what allowance a Verderor had by the year of the
King for his fee.
6 Habeat etiam quilibet primaliorum quolibet Anno de nostra warda quam Michni
Angli appellant, duos equos, vnum cum sella allerum sine sella, vnum gladium,
quinque lanceas, vnum Cuspidem, vnum scutum et ducentos solidos argenti.

A Regarders fee by the year.
7 Mediocrium quilibet vnum equum, vnum lanceam, vnum scutum et, 60 solidos
argenti.

A Forester his fee by the year.
8 Minutorum quilibet, vnam lanceam, vnam arcubalistam and 15. solidos argenti.

9 Sint omnes tam primarij, quam mediocres, and menuti, immunes, liberi, et
quieti ab omnibus prouincialibus summonitionibus, Hundred Law. All the
officers of the Forestate to be acquitted of paying of any tribute or tax, and
of all Summons and foreign plees.
et popularibus, placitis, quae Hundred Laghe Angli dicunt, et ab omnibus
armorum oneribus quod Warscot Angli dicunt et Forincesis querelis.

All the officers of the Forest are to be corrected and punished by the
Verderors the Forest.
10 Sint mediocrium et minutorum causae et earum correctiones tam criminalium
quam ciuilium per prouidam sapientiam et rationem primariorum Iudicatae et
decise: Primariorum vero enormia si quae fuerint [ne scelus aliquod remaneat
multum] nosmet in ita nostra regali puniemus.

11 Habeant hi quatuor vnam regalem potestatem [salua nobis nostra presentia]
quaterque in Anno generales forestae demonstrationes et viridis et veneris
forisfactiones quas Muchehunt dicunt, Muchhunt. The Verderors have regalem
potestatem.
Gang fordel.
vbi teneant omnes calumniam de materia aliqua tangente Forestam, They may
proceed to a threefold Judgment. Purgatio ignis. Triplex ordelia.
eantque ad triplex Iudicium quod Angli of Gangfordel dicunt. Ita aute^
acquiratur illud triplex Iudicium. Accipiat secum qumque et sit ipse sextus et
sic iurando acquirat triplex Iudicium, aut triplex Iuramentum Sed Purgatio
ignis nullatenus admittatur nisi vbi nuda veritas nequit aliter in vestigari.

12 Liberalis autem homo.i. Pegen, Pegen. A freeman may have another to swear
for him. Forathe.
modo crimen suum non sit inter mariota, habeat fidelem hominem qui possit pro
eo iurare iuramentum.i. Forathe: si autem non habet ipsemet iuret, nec
pardonetur ei aliquod iuramentum.

13 Si Aduena vel Peregrinus qui de longinquo venerit sit calumpniatus de
Foresta, How a stranger shall be dealt with all.
et talis est sua inopia vt non possit habere plegium ad primam calumniam
qualem * nullus Anglus iudicare potest: tunc subeat captionem regis et ibi
expectet quousque vadat ad iudicium ferri et aquae: attamen si quis extraneo
aut Peregrino de long venienti. If a staaunger being an offender shall be hurt,
he that does hurt him shall have his Judgment executed upon him.
* sibi ipsi nocet si aliquod iudicium iudicauerint.

14 Quicunque coram primarios homines meos Forestae in falso testimonio
steterit et victus fuerit, He that does bear false witness before a Verderor,
is disabled to be a witness any more, and he shall pay to the King ten
shillinges.
non sit dignus imposterum stare aut portare testimonium, quia legalitatem suam
perdidit, et pro culpa soluat Regi december solidos quos Dani vocant Halfe-hang
alias Half-hang.

15 Si quis vim aliquam primarijs forestae meae intulerit, If any man do offer
force to a Verderor, if he be a freeman, he shall lose his freedom, and all
that he has. And if he be a villeine, he shall lose his right hand.
si liberalis sit amittat libertatem et omnia sua, si villanus abscindatur
dextra.

If such an offender do offend so again, he shall lose his life.
16 Si alteruter iterum peccauerit reus sit mortis.

Pere and pite. If any man do contend with a Verderor in suite, he shall
forfeit to the King as much as he is worth, and to the Verderor 40. shillings.
17 Si quis contra autem cum primario pugnauerit in plito, emendet secundum
pretium sui ipsius quod Angli Pere and Pite dicunt, et soluat primario
quadraginta solidos.

Gethbrech. He that does break the peace before a Regarder, shall pay to the
King 10. shillings.
18 Si pacem quis fregerit ante mediocres Forestae quod dicunt Geth-brech
emendet Regi december solidis.

If a Regarder do strike one in his anger, he shall forfait as if he had killed
a Royal beast.
19 Si quis mediocrium aliquem cum ira percusserit, emendetur prout interfectio
ferae regalis mihi emendari solet.

He that is taken offending in the Forest, shall be punished according to his
offense.
20 Si quis delinquens in Foresta nostra capietur penas li^et secundum modum et
genus delicti.

Ealderman. The punishment of him that is a freeman, and of him that is not a
freeman. The punishment of a Master, and of a Servant: of a man known, and of
a man not known: of criminal causes, and civil causes: Of beasts of the
Forest, and of real beasts, shall not be all one. Hunting is one of the
greatest offenses in the Forest The offense in Vert is but small in this time:
But yet it is an offense, for it is a breach of the free chase.
21 Pena et forisfactio non vna eademque erit liberalis [quem Dani Ealderman
vocant] et illiberalis: Domini et serui: noti et ignoti: nec vna eademque erit
causarum tum ciuilium tum criminalium, ferarum forestae, et ferarum regalium:
viridis et veneris tractatio: nam crimen veneris ab antiquo inter maiora et non
inmerito numirabatur: viridis vero (fractione chaceae nostrae regalis excepta)
ita pusillum et exiguum est, quod vix ea respicit nostra constitutio: qui in
hoc tamen delinquerit, sit criminis Forestae reus.

22 Si liberaliquis feram forestae fugerit, sieve casu, sieve prehabita
voluntate, ita vt cursu celeri cogatur fera anhelare, He that does hunt a wild
beast, and does make him paunt, shall pay 10. shillings. If he be not a
freeman, then he shall pay double. If he be a bond man, he shall lose his skin.
december solidis Regi emendet, si illiberalis dupliciter emendet, si seruus
careat corio.

23 Si vero horum aliquot interfecerit, The punishment for killing a dear
Staggon. The punishment for hunting a Staggon Frendlesma^. The punishment of
him that does kill a wild beast which is a royal beast.
soluat dupliciter et per soluat, sit que pretij sui reus contra Regem.

24 Sed si Regalem feram quam Anglia Staggon appellant alter vter coegerit
Anhelare, alter per vnum Annum, alter per duos Careat liberate naturali: si
vero Seruus, pro vt legato habeatur quem Angli Frendlesmam vocant.

25 Si vero occiderit, a mittat liber scutum libertatis, si sit illiberalis
careat liberate, si seruus vita.

26 Episcopi, Bishops, Abbots, and Barons may hunt all beasts of the Forest
that are not royal beasts.
Abbates et Barons mei non calumnibuntur pro venatione, si non regales feras
occiderint, and si regales restabunt rei Regi pro libito suo, sine certa
emendatione.

27 Sunt aliae (preter feras forestae) Bestiae que dum inter septa et sepes
Forestae continentur, emendationi subiacent: There be some wild beasts
(besides the wild beasts that are properly beasts of the Forest:) that so
long as they are remaining with in the bounds of the Forest, the hurting of
them is punishable by the Laws of the Forest, such are wild Goats, Hares,
and Connies. And there be diverse other beasts which although they do live
within the Forest, and they be under the charge of the Regarders, yet they
cannot be accounted beasts of the Forest: Such are wild Horses, Bugalles,
Kine, and such like Foxes and Wolves are not accounted beasts of the Forest,
nor of Venerie, and therefore the killing of them shall not yield any
recompense.
quales sunt capreoli Lepores, et Cuniculi. Sunt et alia quam plurima animalia
que quanquam infra septa Forestae viuunt, et oneri et curae mediocriu^
subiacent, Forestae tamen nequaquam censeri possunt, qualia sunt equi, Bubali,
Vaccae et similia. Vulpes et Lupi, nec Forestae nec veneris habentur, et
proinde eorum interfectio nulli emendationi subiacet.

Si tamen infra limits occiduntur, fractio sit regalis chaceae, et mitius
emendetur. Bubali olim in Anglia. Yet notwithstanding, the killing of them
within the bounds of the Forest is a breach of the Kings Royal free chase,
and therefore the offender shall for the same yield a recompense.

A wild Bear, althought he be a beast of the Forest, yet he is in no wise
accounted a beast of Venerie.


Aper vero quanquam Forestae sit nullatenus tamen Animal veneris haberi est
assuetus.

Vert in the Kings Wood.
Bosco nec subbosco nostro sine licentia primariorum Forestae nemo manum
apponat, quod si quis fecerit reus sit fractionis regalis chaceae No man may
lay his hands upon the Kings demeasne Woods without license of the verderor:
for if he do, he shall be aiudged gilty of the breach of the Kings free chase
Roial: every tree in the Kings Woods is Vert.


Vert in an other manns Wood.
29 Si quis vero I licem aut arborem aliquam qui victum feris suppeditat
sciderit, preter fractione^ Regalis chaceae, emendet Regi viginti solidis. If
any man do cut down a Holly Tree, of any other Tree in the Forest which does
bear Fruit for food for the wild: Beasts: besides the breach of the free
chase Royal, he shall pay twenty shillinges to to the King for a recompense.


30 Volo vt omnis liber homo pro libito suo habeat venerem sieve viridem in
planis suis super terras suas, By this Law it does appear, that before that
time, all wild beasts were the Kings, wheresoever they were out of the Forest.
And therefore the King made this Law, that every man might take his Venery in
his own ground: so that they did refrain from the Venery of the King in his
Forest.
sine chacea tame^. Et devitent omnes meam, vbicunque eam habere voluero.

31 Nullus mediocris habebit nec custodiet Canes quos Angli Grey-hunds
appellant. Greyhound.
Liberali vero dum genuiscissio eorum facta fuerit coram primario Forestae
licebit, No mean person, or Regarder, may keep any grehou^ds, but freemen may
keep Greyhounds so that their knees be cut before the Verderors of the Forest
and without cutting of their knees also, if they do abide ten miles from the
bounds of the Forest. But if they do come any nearer to the Forest, they
shall pay twel^e pence for every mile: but if the Greyhounds be found within
the Forest, the master or owner of the Dog, shall forfeit the Dog, and the
same dog and ten shillings shall be forfeited to the King.
aut sine genuiscissione dum remoti sunt a limitibus Forestae per december
Milliaria: quando vero proprius venerint, emendet quodlibet Miliare vno solido.
Si vero infra septa Forestae reperiatur, dominus canis forisfaciet et canemet
december solidos Regi.

32 Velteres vero quos langeran appellant quia manifest constat in ijs nihil
este periculi, Velter langeran.
cuilibet licebit sine genuiscissione eos custodire. Idem de canibus quos
Ramhundt vocant. Ramhundt. What Dogs a man may keep in the Forest. These
little Dogs called Velteres, and such as are called Ram-hundt, all which
Dogs are to sit in ones lap, they may be kept in the Forest, because in them
there is no danger, and therefore they shall not behoxed, or have their knees
cut: but althought they be lawful Dogs, they must be lawfully used and kept
as it does appear by the next Canon.


33 Quod si casu inauspicato huiusmodi canes rabidi fiant et vbique vagantur
negligentia dominorum, redduntur illiciti, The price of a mean man.
If by misfortune such a kind of Dogs do become so madd and sauag and do
run up and down every where, by the negligence of their master, and so do
become unlawful, then the owner must yield a recompense to the King for their
unlawfulness If they be found within the circuit of the Forest: then the master
of such Dogs must be sought out, and he shall yield recompense according to
the estimation of a mean man, which according to the ancient Law is ten
pounds.
et emendetur Regi pro illicitis etc. Quod si intra septa Forestae reperiantur
talis exquiratur herus, et emendet secundum precium hominis mediocris, quod
secundum legem merimorum est ducentorum solidorum.

34 Si Canis rabidus momorderit feram, The price of a freeman.
tunc emendet secundum precium hominis liberalis quod est Duodecies solidis
Centum. Si vero fera regalis moi sa fuerit, If a greedy ravening Dog do bite
a wild beast in the Forest, then the owner shall yield recompense for the
same, according to the price of a freeman, which is twelue-times a hundred
shillings. But if he do byte a Royal beast, then he shall be guilty of the
greatest offense.
reus sit maximi criminis.

And these are the Constitutions of Canutus, concerning the Forest: very
barbarously translated out of the Danish tongue into Lattin, by those that took
the same in hand. Howbeit, as I find it, so I set it down, without any
alteration of my Copy, in any jot or title: which for the more ease,
pleasure, and better understanding of them that shall read these ancient
Laws of King Canutus, I have here translated them out of Latin into English
verbatim, as near as in sense the same may be made to agree together, as
heareafter follows.

Here begins the Laws of the Forest, of King Canutus.
THese are the Laws of the Forest, which I King Canutus with the Counsel of
my chief men do make and establish, to that end that Peace and Justice might
be ministered to all congregations of our Realm of England: and that every man
that does offend, may be punished according to the manner of the offense, and
of him that does offend,

1 Now from hence forth, let there be four men of the best account, which
have their free customs and duties served (which Englishmen do call Pegened,
appointed throughout the Province of my realm to administer Justice to al my
people throughout all my Realm of England, as well to Englishmen as to Danes,
together with condign punishment for the offenses of the Forest: which four
men of the Forest, we have determined to call them Primarios, that is to say,
the chief men.

2 Let there be under every one of those four chief men of the Forest, four
mean men placed, which Englishmen call Lespegend, but Danes do call them young
men: which shall take upon them the charge and burden, both of Vert and
Venison.

3 But in the execution of Justice, I will that in no wise such four chief
men, do let in or suffer such mean men to join with them therein. For after
that they have taken upon them the charge of the wild beasts, they shall
always be accounted for freemen, which the Danes do call Eldermen.

4 Again, under every one of these mean men, let there be two of the least
men of account of the Forest, (which Englismen do call Tyne-men,) these
persons shall undertake the servile labor, and also the night charge of Vert
and Venison.

5 If such a servile officer shall fortune to be a bondsman, so soon as he
shall be placed in our Forest, let him be made Free of his bondage: and all
these persons we will maintain of our own costs.

6 And also, every one of the said four cheefemen, shall have for every year
of our allowance, (which the Danes do call Michni,) two Horses: one of them
with a Saddell: an other of them without a Saddell: One Sword.5. Iauelins, one
spear, one shilde, and x.li. in money.

7 And every one of our said mean men, shall have for every year one Horse.
one Iaueline, one shilde and iii.li. in Money.

8 And every one of the said servile persons, shall have for every year, one
Iaueline, one Crosbowe, and xv. shillings of money.

9 Let as well all the said four chief men, as also the said mean men, and
the foresaid servile officers be exempted and discharged from paying of any
tribute, and also freed and aquited from al prouincial sommons, and popular
plees, which Englishmen do call Hundred laghe: and also from all charges of
Armoure, which Englishmen do call Warscot, and also from foreign suits.

10 The causes and offenses of these mean men and servile persons: and the
correction of them, as well such causes and offenses as are Criminal, as those
that are Civil, shall be adjudged and decided by the provident wisdom and
discretion of those four chief men: but the offenses of those four chief
men, if any shall fortune to be, lest that any heinous offense should remain
unrevenged, We our own selfs shall punish the same in our Royal displeasure.

11 These four chief men, shall have one Roial authority (saving unto us our
own Roial presence:) and four times in the year they shall keep their
general Sessions or Plees of the Forest, and all forfeitures, as well of Vert,
as of Venison: (which Englishmen do call Much-hunt,) where they shall hold Plee
of any matter concerning the Forest. And they shall proceed to a three fold
Judgment, which Englishmen do call of Gangfardell: and this threefolde
Judgment is thus to be had. He that is accused, must take with him self five
other persons, and himself must be the sixth person: and so in swearing he shall
have a threefold Judgment, or threefolde oath. But for any person to have his
trial or purgation by Fire, is in no wise to be allowed or admitted, except it
be where the manifest truth cannot otherwise be found out.

12 But a freeman, which Englishmen (call Pegen) having his offense depending:
although he be not within the compass of the Seas, yet he may have a trusty
or faithful friend that may swear his oath for him: (which Englishmen call
Foreath,) but if he have not such a trusty man to swear for him, he him self
shall swear the oath, neither shall he be pardoned for any oath.

13 If a stranger, or pilgrim, which has come from a far Country, be accused
of the offense of the Forest: and his poverty is such that he cannot have a
Pledge, such as he ought to have: at the first accusation no Englishman may
adiudge him thereof: then he must endure the Kings imprisonment, and there
remain until he may proceed forward to judgment of the Iron, and Water. And
yet notwithstanding, if any person do hurt unto him that is such a stranger or
pilgrim, coming from a far Country: if those four chief men shall determine
any judgment against the same stranger, the same Judgment shall be unto him
that did hurt the same stranger.

14 Whosoever shall bear false witness before my said four chief men of the
Forest, and shall be convicted thereof, afterward he is not worthy any more to
be allowed a witness, or to bear any witness, for because he has lost his
ability therein, and for that offense he shall pay unto the King ten shillinges:
which the Danes do call Halfeshang, alias Halshang.

15 If any man shall offer any force to my said chief men of my Forest, if he
be a freeman that shall so offend, he shall lose his liberty or freedom, and
all that he has: but if he be a bondsman, then his right hand shall be cut.

16 But if either of them shall offend again, then he shall be adjudged gilty
of death for the same.

17 But if any man shall contend in suit with any one of our chief men
aforesaid against him, then he shall make recompense for the same to the King,
according to the worth of him self, which Englishmen do call Pere et Pite: and
also shall pay unto our chief man for the same forty shillinges.

18 If any man shall break the peace of the King, in the presence of our mean
men of the Forest aforesaid, (which Englishmen do call Geth-brech: he shall
yield recompense to the King for the same, ten shillinges.

19 If any of our mean men aforesaid with his wrath shall strike any man, let
him make such recompense to the King for the same, as was acustomed to be made
to me for the killing of a roial wild beast.

20 If any man be taken offending in our Forest, it is convenient for him to be
punished, according to the manner and kind of his offense.

21. The punishment of a freeman (whom the Danes do call Eldermen, shall not be
one and the self same punishment of a man that is servile, or not free: Of a
servant and a master: Of a man that is known, and of him that is not known:
Nor the punishment of Criminal causes, and of Civil causes shall be one, and the
self same: Nor of wild beasts of the Forest, and royal wild beasts: nor the
destroying of Vert and of Venison. For the offense of Venison or hunting, not
unworthily have been accounted amongst the greatest offenses of the Forest,
even of ancient time. But the offense of Vert (except it be for the breach of
our Royal free chase,) it is so little, and of so small an account, that this
our Constitution or Law, does scantly respect the same. Yet notwithstanding, he
that shall offend in this offense, let him be accounted gilty of an offense of
the Forest.

22 If any freeman shall chase away a Dear, or a wild beast out of the Forest:
whether the same were done by chance, or of a set purpose, so that thereby the
wild beast is forced by swift running to lyll out the tongue, or to breath with
his tongue out of his mouth: he shall pay to the King ten shillings for amends
for the same offense: but if he be a servile person, then he shall double the
same recompense: but if he be a bondsman, then he shall lose his Skin.

23 But if any of these men shall kill a wild beast of the Forest, let him
pay double recompense for the same: and also let him pay besides, even to the
uttermost value that he is worth: and he shall be accounted as an offender
against the King.

24 But if either of them shall chase a Royal wild beast of the Forest
(which Englishmen do call a Stagon:) and thereby shall force him to hang out
the tongue with swifte running, then the one of them which is a freeman, shall
lose his natural liberty for one whole year: and the other of them that is
not a freeman shall lose his natural liberty for two whole years. But if he
be a bondsman, then afterward he shall be taken for an outlaw, (which
Englishmen do call Frendlesman.)

25 But if a freeman shall slay a wild beast, he shall lose the defense of
his liberty, but if he be not a Freeman, then he shall be imprisoned: but if he
be a bondsman, then he shall lose his life.

26 My Bishops, Abbottes, and Barons, shall not be accused for hunting, if they
do not kill wild beasts that be Roial beasts: but if they do kill Royal
beasts of the Forest, then they shall depend upon the King for his
determination of that matter, without any certain fine.

27 Besides the wild beasts of the Forest, there are other wild beasts,
which so long as they are remaining within the bands and limittes of the
Forest, they are subject to the punishment of the Laws of the Forest, such are
wild Gotes, Hares, and Conies. And there are also diverse other wild beasts,
which although they do live and remain within the bounds and limits of the
Forest, and are subject to the charge and burden of the Regarders of the
Forest, yet they cannot be accounted or taken to be of the Forest: such are
wild Horses, Bugalls, wild Kine, and such like. Foxes and Wolfes, are not
accounted beasts of the Forest, nor of Venerie, and therefore the killing of
them is not subject to any recompense for the same: yet notwithstanding, if
they be killed within the bounds of the Forest, it is a breach of the Kings
Royal free chase, and for that cause the offender must make a recompense: but
a wild Bear, although he be of the Forest, yet he is not accustomed to be
accounted a beast of Venerie.

28 No man shall lay his hand to our great Wood, or underwood, within our
demeanes, without license of our verderors, or cheefemen of the Forest, the
which if any man shall do the contrary, he shall be gilty of the breach of the
Kings Roial free chase.

29 But if any man shall cut down a Holly Tree, within the Forest, or any
other Tree which does bear fruit or food for the wild beasts of the Forest,
he shall pay unto the King twenty shillings for amends or recompense, over
and besides the breach of the Kings Roial free chase.

30 I will that every freeman may take Vert and Venison at his own pleasure,
upon his own ground in his own Plains, or Fildes, being without my free
chase: but every man must refrain from my Venery, wheresoever I will have the
same.

31 None of the mean men shall have or keep any Dogs (which Englishmen do
call Greyhounds: but it is Lawful for a freeman to have and keep Greyhounds
when they are hoxed, that is to say, that they shall have their knees cut
before a Verderor of the Forest. And it is Lawful for freemen to keep
Greyhounds without cutting of their knees when they do dwell without the
Forest, and from the bounds of the Forest ten miles distant, but when they do
come nearer to the Forest then ten miles, they must pay a recompense unto the
King, for every mile a shilling. But when those Greyhounds be found within
the bounds of the Forest, the owner of the Dog shall forfeit both the same
Dog, and also ten shillings to the King.

32 But it shall be lawful for every body to keep little Dogs called Velters
(that is to say little hounds, which Englishmen do call Langeran,) without
cutting of their knees, because it does manifestly appear that there is no
danger of them: and the same is of little dogs called Spanels, which
Englishmen do call Ramhundt: but this is meant of those that are so little,
that they may sit in a man's lapp.

33 If that such dogs by misfortune do become madd or wild, and do run
about every where by the negligence of their master, and do become unlawful:
then the owner of the same dogs shall pay a recompense to the King for their
unlawfulness. If that they be found within the bounds of the Forest, such a
master must be sought out, and he must pay a recompense to the King for the
same according to the valewe of a mean man, which according to the ancient
Law, is ten pounds.

34 If a greedy ravening dog shall bite a wild beast, then the owner of the
same dog shall yield a recompense to the King for the same, according to the
value of a freeman, which is twelve times a hundred shillings. If a Roial beast
shall be bitten, then the owner of the dog shall be gilty of the greatest
offense.

And note that in the aforesaid Canon the Eleventh: there is mention made of
Purgatio ignis: which manner of trial by Fire, I think is very dark to many,
that almost have never heard of it: for that it is now long since the same was
in any great use in this Land of England: and yet it does seem by diverse
Ancient writers, Holanshed, in his description of Britain, fol. 98.
that in times past, it was a commen usage to try men whether they were gilty
of any offense or not, by the Ordalian Laws, as it does appear by Holanshed
his Chronacle in the description of Britain Fo 98. in (a) side Columb the
first in fine ibidem where it is written thus as it follows.

THE Ordalian Law (says the aforesaid Author) was a certain manner of
Purgation used two ways, Vide Grafton. page 180 That Emma the mother of King
Edward the Confessor was accused of the death of her son, for which she was
adjudged by Robert Bishop of Caunterburie, to her trial, by the Ordalyan
Laws, and so she was ledd blyndfold between two men, to pass over 9.
Plough-shares which were glowing redd hot: and (as Chronicles do report) she
did pass over them barefooted without hurt, before she thought she had been
come to them.
Whereof the one was by Fire, the other by Water. In the Execution of that
which was done by Fire, the party accused should go a certain number of
paces with an hot piece of Iron in his hand, or else bare footed upon
certain Plough-shares redd here according to the manner. This Iron was some
time of one pound weight, and then was it called Single ordalium: some times of
three, and then was it named Treble ordalium. And whosoever did bear or tread
on the same without hurt of his body, he was adjudged giltlesse, otherwise if
his skin were scorched, he was forthwith condemned as guilty of the trespass
whereof he was accused.

There were in like sort two kinds of trial by the Water, Note that these
Laws were long before the Conquest, and did continue until the time of King
John, and then he did banish them, as Polidor Virgil, Holanshed, and
Supplimentum Cronicorum do witness.
that is to say, either by hott or cold: and in this trial, the party thought
culpable, was either tombled into some Pond or huge vessel of cold water,
wherein if he continued for a season without wrestling or struggling for life,
he was forthwith aquited as giltlesse of the fact whereof he was accused: but
if he began to plunge and labor once for breath, immediately upon his falling
into that liquor, he was by and by condemned as guilty of the crime. Or else he
did thrust his arm up to the shoulder into a lead, Copper, or Caldren of
seething water, from whence if he withdrew the same without any manner of
damage, he was discharged of farther molestation: otherwise he was taken for a
trespasser, and punished accordingly. The Fiery manner of purgation belonged
only to noble men and women, and such as were free borne: but the husbandmen
and Villains were tried by water. The prayers, ceremonies, holy vestures,
masses, and all things that were used in the execution thereof, you may see at
large in Hollandshed his description of Britain. fol. 98. 99. and 100.

In what time Canutus made these Lawee.
THis Canutus was King of England in the year of our Lord 1018. and William
the Conqueror was King of England in the year of our Lord 1067. which is by
computation just 49. years before the Conquest that these Laws were made: The
antiquity of Forest Laws.
which also is now in this year of our Lord 1592. just 574 years since the
making of these Laws of King Canutus, which is very ancient: and yet it does
seem that Forestes themselves are much more auncienter than these Laws are.
For it does appear that Forestes were long before Christ his time, as the
Scripture does testify in the second book of Kings Cap. 19. The antiquity
of Forestes.
ver. 23. in these words: I will go into the lodgings of his borders, and into
the Forest of his Carmell. And also in the second book of Kings, Cap. 2. verse.
24. in these words: Two Bears came out of the Forest and tare in pieces 42
children that mocked Elisha, by which words of the Scripture it does not only
appear that there were Forests then, but also it does manifest unto us what
manner of wild beasts were in those Forests at that time, as Bears and such
like. And in the 104 Psalm of David, verse. 20 in these words: Thou make
darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of the Forest creep forth.
And in the 131 Psalm verse. 6. in these words: Lo, we heard of it at
Euphrates, and found it in the Fields of the Forest: so that you may see that
there were places of refuge for wild beasts to abide in, The signification of
this word Forest.
even at that time: which places of Refuge for wild beasts were and yet are
called Forests, that is co say where wild beasts of Venery may have a place of
firm peace for rest.

OMnes forestae, quas H. auus nr' afforestauit: videantur per bonos and leg.
homines, and si boscum aliquem aliud quam suum dominicum afforestauerit ad
damnum illius, cuius boscus ille fuerit statim deafforestetur. Et si boscum
suum proprium afforestauerit: remaneat foresta salua communia de herbagio and
alijs in eadem foresta illis, qui prius eam habere consueuerunt. Carta de
foresta. ca. 2.

2 Homines vero qui manent extra forestam non veniant de cetero coram Justice.
nostris de foresta per communes summonitiones, nisi sint implacitat' vel plegij
alicuius vel aliquorum, qui attachiati sunt propter forestam. Carta de foresta.
ca. 3.

3 Omnes autem bosci qui fuerunt afforestati per regem Richardum auunculum
nostrum, vel per regem Iohannem patrem nostrum, vsque ad primam coronationem
nostram, statim deafforestantur nisi sit dominicus boscus noster. Carta de
foresta. cap. 4.

4 Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, comites, Barons, milites, and
libere, tenentes, qui habent boscos suos in Forestis, habeant boscos suossicut
eos habuerunt tempore primae coronationis regis Hen. aui nostri: ita quod
quieti sunt imperpetuu^ de omnibus purpresturis, vastis and assertis factis in
illis boscis, post illud tempus vsque ad principium secundi anni coronationis
nostrae. Et qui de cetero vastum purpresturam vel assertam sine licentia nostra
in illis fecerint, de vastis purprestur. and assertis nobis respondeant. Carta
de foresta. cap. 5.

5 Regardatores nostri eiant per forestam ad faciend'regardum sicut fieri
consueuit tempore prime coronationis regis H. aui nostri, and non aliter. Carta
de foresta. cap. 6.

6 Inquisitio vel visus de expeditatione canum existentium in foresta nostra de
cetero fiat quando fieri debet regardum, scilicet de tertio anno in tertium
annum, and tunc fiat per visum and testimoniu^ leg. hominu^: et non aliter. Et
ille cuius canis inuentus fuerit tunc non expeditatus, det pro mi^a tres
solidos: et de cetero nullus bos capiatur pro expeditione canum. Talis autem
expeditatio fiat per assisam comuniter vsitatam, vz, quod tres ortelli
abcindantur sine pellota de pede anteriori. Nec expeditent' canes de cetero
nisi in locis vbi consueuerunt expeditari tempore primo coronationis p^dicti
reges Henrici aui nostri. Car. de Fo. cap. 7.

7 Nullus forestarius vel bedellus de cetero faciat scotalas vel eolligat
herbas, vel auenam, vel bladum aliquod vel agnos vel porcellos, nec aliqua^
collectam faciat, nifi per visum et sacru^ xij. regardatoru^ quando facient
regardu^. Tot Forestarij ponantur ad forestas custodiend quot ad illas
custodiend. rationabiliter viderint sufficere. Carta de Foresta cap. 8.

8 Nullum Swanimotum de cetero teneat' in regno nostro, nisi ter in anno, vz,
in principio xv. dierum ante festum sancte Michaelis and qn'agistatores nostri
conueniuntad agist^nd. dominicos boscos nostros, and circa festum sancti
Martini in hyeme, qn' agistatores nostri debent recepere pannagium nostru^. Et
ad ista duo swanimota conueniant forestarij, viridarij, et agistatores, et
nulli alij per districtionem. Et tertium swanimotum teneatur initio.xv. dierum
ante festum sancti Iohannis Baptiste, quando agistatoris nostri conueniunt pro
venatione bestiaru^ nostrar'. Et ad illud swanimotum tenend. convenient
forestarij viridarij and non alij per districtionem Preterea singulis xl diebus
per totum annum conueniant forestar' and viridarij ad vidend. attachiamenta de
foresta tam de viridi quam de venatione per presentationem ipsorum
forestariorum et coram ipsis attachiat'. Predcta autem swanimota non teneantur
nisi in com^, in quibus teneri consueuerunt. Carta de Foresta ca. 6.

9 Vnusquisque liber homo agistet boscum suum in Foresta oro voluntate sua, and
habeat pannagium suum. Concedimus Etiam quod vnusquisque liber homo ducere
possit porcos suos per dominicu^ boscu^ nostru^ libere et sine impedimento ad
agistand. eos in boscis suis proprijs vel alibi vbi voluer'. Et si porci
alicuius liberi hominis vna noct. per noctauerint in Foresta nostra no^ inde
occasionet'. vnde aliquid de suo perdat. Carta de Foresta. cap. 10

10 Nullus de cetero amittat vitam vel membra pro venatione nostra sed si quis
captus fuerit and conuictus de captione venationis nostre, grauiter redimater,
si habeat vnde redimi possit. Si autem non habeat vnde redimi possit, iaceat
imprisona nostra per vnum annum et vnum diem. Et si post vnum annum et vnum
diem plegeos inuenire possit, exeat de prisona, sin autem abiuret regnum
Anglie. Carta de Foresta cap. 11

11 Quicunque archiepiscopus, episcopus, com^. vel baro, veniens ad nos ad
mandatum nostrum, transierit per foresta^ nostram liceat ei capere vna^bestiam
vel duas per visum forestarij si prese^s fuerit, sin autem faciat coronare, ne
videat hoc furtum facere. Item liceat eis redeundo facere sicut predictum est.
Cartads Foresta cap. 12.

12 Vnusqnisque liber homo de cetero sinc occasion faciat in bosco suo vel in
terra sua sieve in aqua, quam habet in foresta nostra, molend. viuar., stagn',
marleram fossat. vel terram arrabilem: extra coopart in terra arabili: ita quod
non sit ad nocument. alicuius vicini. Carta de Foresta. cap. 13.

13 Vnusquisque liber homo habeat inboscis suis areas, accipitrum esperuar',
falconum, aquilarum, et hieronum, habeat similiter mel quod inuent' fuerint in
boscis suis. Carta de Foresta capt. 14.

12 Nullus forestarius de cetero qui non sit forestarius de feod.: reddens
nobis firmam pro balliua sua, capiat chymmagium aliquod in belliua sua.
Forestarius autem de feodo fyrmam nobis reddens pro balliua sua, capiat
chimmagium videlicet pro carecta per dimid. annum duos denarios, et per alium
dimidium annum duos denarios and pro equo qui portat sumagium per dimidium
annum obolum, et par alium dimidium annum obolum, and non nisi de illis qui
extra balliuam suam tanqam mercatores veniunt per licentiam suam in balliua^
suam ad buscam maremium corticem vel carbonem emend et alibi ducend. ad
ve^dend. vbi voluerint. Et de nulla alia carecta vel de su^magio aliquo alio
chimagium capiatur. Et non capiatur chimagiu^ nisi in locis in quibus
antiquitus capisolebat et debuit: illi autem qui portant supra dorsum suu^
buscam corticem vel carbone^ ad vendendum quamuis in de viua^t nullu^ de cetero
dent' chimmagium forestarijs nostris, preterquam in dominicis boscis nostris.
Carta de foresta. ca. 15.

15 Omnes vtlagati pro foresta tm^ a tempore regis H. aui nostri vsque ad
primam coronationem nostram veniat ad pacem nostram sine impedimento, and
saluos pleg. nobis inueniant, quod de cetero nonforisfacent nobis in foresta
nostra. Carta de foresta. ca. 16.

16 Nullus constabularius, castellanus, vel balliuus teneat placita de foresta
sieve de viridi, sieve de venatione: sed quilibet forestarius de feodo attachiet
placita de foresta: tam de viridi quam de venatione, and ea presentet
viridarijs prouinciarum and cum irrotulata fuerint, and sub sigillis
viridariorum inclusa: presententur capitalibus Justice. nostris de foresta, cum
in parts illas venerint ad tenend'placita de foresta, and coram eis
terminantur. carta de foresta. ca. 17.

17 De malefactoribus in parcis and viuarijs nondum est discussum, quia
magnates petierunt propriam prisonam de illis quos caperent in parcis and
vivarijs suis quod quidem dominus rex contradixit, and ideo differt'. Mar. cap.
11.

18 Purueu est enfement de misfesours en parkes et en viu^s que si null de ceo
soit atteint per le suite del pleintife, soint agards bones et hautes amends
solonque le manner de trespass, et eyt la prisonment de trois ans, et dillonques
soit reint a la volunte le roy sil ad de quoy poet estr. reint, and lors troua
bon suertie qui ianimaies ne misface. Et sil neit dount poet estre issint reint
apres la prisonment de troys ans: troua mesme la suertie. Et sil ne puis trouer
la suertie foriur' le Royalme. Et si null de ceo rette soit futiue et neit terre
ne tenement suffisant per quoy il poet estre justice si toste come le roy auera
ceo troue per bon inquest, soit demand de county en county. Et sil ne
veigne, soit vtlage. Purueu est ensement et accord, que si null ne suist
dedeins lan and le iour pur le trespass fait, le roy auera le suit, et ceux que
trouera de ceo rettes per bon inquest, serront punis per mesme se manner en
toutz points, sicome de suis est dit. Et si null tiel mesfesor soit atteint, qui
il eit prys en ses parkes bestes domestes, ou anter chose en le manner de
robbery, en veuaunt, en demurrent, ou en returnant, soit fait de luy commune
ley, qui affiert a celuy qui est attaint de appert robbery and larceny
auxibien la suite le Roy come dautre. W. 1. cap. 21.

19 Si quis forestarius parcarius aut warennarius in balliua sua malefactores
aliquos inuenerit vagantes ad damnum ibidem faciend'. Et qui se forestarius aut
warennarijs illis post clamorem and hutesium leuat' ad pacem regis ad
stand'recte reddere noluerint immo ad maliciam suam exequend'and continuandu^,
et pacem regis diffugiend'fugam fecerint, et viet armis se defenderint, licet
forestarij, et parcarij and warrennarij illi, aut alij quicunque, ad pacem
domini regis existantes in communitatiua forestariorum, parcariorum aut
warrennar' illorum venientes ad tales malefactores sic inuentos arrestand'seu
capiend'aliquem seu aliquos huiusmodi malefactorum interfecerit non propter hoc
occasionentur coram domino rege and justice. quibuscunque aut alijs balliuis
domini regis seu aliorum quoruncunque infra libertatem aut extra. Nec propter
hoc amittant vitam aut membrum, aut aliam penam subeant, imo firmam pacem
domino regis inde habeant, sed been caueant forestarij, parcarij warennarij and
alijquicunque ne occasion contentionis discordi contumely aut alicuius
maleuolentie seu odij prehabit' aliquibus per balliuas suas transeuntur
maliciose imponant, quod occasion male faciendi in balliuis suis intrant cum
hoc non fecerint, nec ipsos vagant' vt malefacient' nec malefacientes
inuenerint, nec causam malefaciendi querentes sic eos occidant. Quod si
fecerint, and de hoc fuerint conuicti, fiat de morte sic interfectorum prout
aliorum ad pacem domini regis existentium, and prout de iure and secundum
consuetudinem regni fuerit faciend. Sta. de malefactoribus in parcis edit. An.
21. E. 1.

20 Come ascuns gents, queux sont myses horse de forest per le purlieus, et par
les grands homes, queux a nostre sire le roy eient requise a del parliament, que
ils soyent quites de la porture et des chooses que les forestres lour demaundent
si come ils solent auaunt fair. Nostre sire le roy respond primes, que il ad
grant la purlieu, que luy pleist bien que il estoise auxi come il ad grant,
iasoyt ceo, qui la besogne estoit sewe et demand en malueis point, mes a meins
entend il, et voet que touts ses demeins terres, quel party que ils sont,
queux ont este de la corone, soint retornes per voye deschete, ou en auter
manner eyent eschete de frank chase, et d^ frank garreine et en tiel manner
soient tenus et gaides a son depes pour toutes manners dischetes, and pur tout
manner dedeins, qui ly plera. Et en droit de ceux queux ont terres and
tenementes de sa forest par la did purlieu, et queux demaundont dauer comine
deins les bonds des forestes: entencion et volunte nostre sire le Roy est puis
que la ou le purlieu est ilz claimont estre quits de porture des forestes, and
come le bests le roy ne poient aver te haunt ne lour repair sur les terres
desaforestes sycome ils auoient tanquez come mesmes estoient dedeins forestes,
qui cells gents ne deuoient au^ comen nautre esement dedeins ies bounds des
boys ne des terres queux demurgent en forestes mes si ascun de ceux queux sont
dissaforesta par la purlieu, voillent meux este dedeins forest come auaunt
fuerent de horse sicome ils sont ore, il pleyst bien au roy, que ils soent a ceo
resceu issint que ils puissent demurrer en lour estate, auxi et comyne et auter
casement aver dedeyns cestes forestes auxi come ils aucient auant. Per que
nostre sire le Roy voet et command qui ses justices de les forestes de ceo a
Trent, and de la Trent ensement teignent et gardent et tener et garder facent
fermement les dyts points en lour bailiez en la form auantdyt. Ordinatio de
foresta edit. Anno. 33. Edwardi. 1.

21 Si quis forestarius inuenerit aliquem attachiabil'. proviridi in foresta
primo debet ipsum attachiare, per duos pleg. siunt presents, sin a utem duci
debet ad proximam villam, vbi inueniantur. Et si idem inueniatur alias debet
ipsum attachiare per quatuor pleg. and si tercio, coram viridarijs debet
presentare and poni per octo pleg. Postea, post tertium attachiamentum corpus
dehet attachiari and retenere, vt memoriam habeat' quid viridi sit.

Sciendum, quod omnes arbores fructu^ non portantes, and hae quae fructum
portant per totum annum, and fraxinus si antiquitus fuerint in foresta and
arabil'quia dominus rex est in seisma.

Si quis inuentus fuerit extra dominicum, boscum, and infra rewardum
prosternens quercum sine visu aut liberatione forestarij aut viridarij debet
attachiari per quatuor pleg. et per visum viridar', debet quercus appreciari,
and en rotulo forestar, and viridar nomina pleg. inbreuiari.

Si quis inuentus fuerit in dominico domini regis assertando, vel purpresturam
faciendo corpus debet protinus retineri. Si autem extra dominicum infra
rewardum, debet poni per vi. pleg. Et si alias inueniat' debet duplicari eius
pleg. Si tertio corpus debet retinere.

Si quis attachiabilis fuerint, contra vad. and pleg. debet distringi per
catalla sua infra metas forestae inuenta. Si autem defecerint, corpus eius
detineatur, quousque fecerit, quod debuerit. Et si extra metas forestae fuerit
manens, nomen eius and villa vnde sit irrotuletur.

Liberatio autem housebote and haibote fiat, prout boscus pati potest in statu
quo est, and non ad exigentiam petentis, nec potest aliquid dare, nec vendere
de bosco sine waranto domini Regis.

Si aliqua fera inueniat' mortua, vel vulnerata, debet fieri inquisitione^ per
quatuor villatas propinquiores foreste, quae notent. in rotulo. Inuentor
ponatur per vi. pleg. and caro mittatur ad domu^ leprosi, si qua prope fuerit
per testim. viridar. and patrie. Si autem nulla talis domus prope sit, caro
debet dari infirmis and pauperibus. Caput and pellis tradantur liberis proximae
villae. Et sagitta, si qua inuentus suerit presentetur viridar. and in rotulo
suo irr.

Si leporarij inuenti fuerint currentes ad aliquod nocumentu^, forestar. debet
eos retenere and presentare in presentia viridariorum, and mittere eos domino
regi, vel capitali Justice. forestae.

Si quis mastiuus inuentus fuerit super aliquam feram, and mutilatus fuerit:
ipse cuius erat quietus erit de illo fact'. Si non fuerit mutilatus, ipse,
cuius fuer' mastiuus, erit culpabilis tanquamde manupasto. Et debet poni per
sex pleg. quorum nomina b^bet inbr', and etiam qualis fuerit canis.

Si quis ceperit feram sine waranto in Foresta, corpus suum arrestetur,
vbicunque inueniat' infra metas Forestae. Et quando capius fuerit non
deliberetur sine speciali precepto domini regis, vel capital'^ustic. forest.

Si quis viderit aliquos malefactor' infra metas forestae aliqua^ feram capere
vel asportare debet illos capere secundum posse suum. Et si non possit, debet
leuare hutesium and cry: Et si non fecerit, remaneat in misericordia domini
regis.

Si quis wodward'viderit malefactores in sua custodia, vel feram bestiam,
viderit mortuam: debet monstrare capitali forestario, vel viridario. Et si no^
fecerit, and forestarius domini regis tale delictum in bosco suo infra rewardum
inuenerit: ille boscus capiend'est in manum domini regis per preceptum regis,
vel capital. Justice. sui: et woodwardus attachiabilis est per quatuor pleg.

Si quis habuerit boscum iuxta dominicum boscum domini regis, licitum est ei
post quam dominice haie agistate sunt, habere tempore pannagij, tot porcos,
quot boscus per visum forestar' viridar', regardatorum agistatorum and aliorum
proborum hominum possit pati, and hoc fiat de exitu porcorum.

Sciendum quod tempore pannagij quando agistamentum debet fieri debent
forestarij, viridarij, and agistatores assensum intimare Justice. forestae
domini regis, and inquirere voluntatem and fiat agistamentum tam in dominicis
hais, and boscis, quam in forinsecis: et secundum mandatum suum and tenorem
literarum debet fieri agistamentum quas literas debet habere coram Justice. de
foresta prox' itinerantibus. Et preceptum est quod deinceps capiatur pro
quolibet porco quantum potest ad opus domini regis pro pannagio, vibelicet vnus
vel duo denarij. De porcellis aut fiat, sicut presolutum est.

Si quis in alio com^ posuerint, vel voluntary permiserit aueria sua ire infra
metas foreste forestar' retineat aueria per vad and sal. pleg. Quod si non
poterit per testimon' viridar' debet vic. illius com^ intimare, vt ipse
districtionem faciat, quousque plegios inuenerit. Si vic. non fecerit, debet
forestar' hoc intimar' Justice.

Nullus messarius ducat secum mastiuum magnum, ad fuga^d'feras domini regis,
sed paruos catul'ad expectand'extra coopertum.

De his qui clamant habere libertates sicut canes in expeditatos and
leporarios, infra metas forestae, nihil eis faciend'sine waranto domini regis,
vel Justice. suorum.

Boscus remanens in manu domini regis per vnum annum and vnum diem, in
voluntate regis est nisi recuperetur per iudicium Justice.

Omnes mete forestae integre sunt domino regi.

Licitum est abbati de Burgo sancti Petri venari and capere lepores, vulpes and
mureleges infra metas forestae, and haber' canes inexpeditatos, quia
sufficientem inde habet warantum.

Quando viridarij ceperunt inquisitionem vnns apponat sigillum, and alius
rotulum teneat, et sic de fortuna in fortuna^ vsque ad aduentum justice. tunc
primo die ipse and omnes ministri presentabunt rotulum, aut amercientur, and
manucapti pro foresta eo die proferantur aut manucaptio incurratur.

Homo tachiatus pro ramis cesis, placitum illud pertinet ad Swanimotum coram
senescallo: and attachiatus pro quercu prostrata in dominica regis vel
alterius, pertinet coram Justice. Et si noctantur alicubi fecerit, iacet
imprisonamentum.

Attachiat' ad Swanimotum pro viridi non presentate ad proximum ad aliud
presentatio non preiudicet, sed capiatur forestar' pro concelamento, et eat
attachiatus quietus per assisam.

Si forestarius in dominico bosco regis consenseat delicto capiat Rex suo
superiori and sibi, si superstes sit Boscus vastatus ad quodlibet iter' justice.
dabit domino regi dimidiam marcam. Consuetudines and assisa forestae.

22 In primis ordinauimus pro nobis and hered'nostris quod de transgr' in
forestis nostris de viridi and deuenatione de cetero fac farestarij infra
quorum balliuus huiusmodi transgress. fieri contigerint, Present. Swanimote
presentent easde^ ad proximum Swanemotum coram forestarijs, viridarijs
regardatoribas, agistatoribus, and alijs earundem forestarum ministris, and
super presentationibus huiusmodi ibide^ coram forestarijs, viridarijs, and
omnibus alijs ministris supradictis per sacrum tam milit' quam alioram proborum
and legalium hominum de partibus vicinioribus, Ooth.
vbi transgressiones sic presentate fact fuerint, non suspectoru^ per quos rei
veritas plemus inquiratur, et sic inquisita veritate, presentationes ille, per
communem concordiam and assensum omnium ministrorum praedictorum solemniter
roborentur, and sigillis suis sigillentur.

Et si alio modo fiat indict', pro nullo penitus habeatur. Et si aliquem
forestariorum praedictorum regardatorum, Indictment. Void.
aut alioru^ ministrorum ipsarum forestarum abir' contingit, seu per
egritudinem vel alio modo impedire, Ministers. Dye. Absent. Swanimote
quo minus interesse valeat huiusmodi Swanemotis, incontinent' Justice. foreste,
seu locum eius tenens, ponat alium loco suo ita videlicet quod indictamentum
fiat per omnes in forma praedicta. Quodque ministri que ponendi sunt, ponantur,
sicut hactenus fieri consueuit, exceptis viridarijs, qui per electionem, et per
breue nostrum deputabuntur.

Verderors. Election.
Et volumus, quod nullus ministrorum praedictorum in assisis iuratis, seu
inquisitionibus capiend'extra forestam de cetero ponatur. Et si super oneratio
forestariorum aut aliorum, qui segerant vt ministri foreste, Iurrour. Surcharge
of Foresters Impris. fol. 185.
inueniatur, amoueantur huiusmodi superonerantes, and imprisonentur secundum
discretionem Justice. forestae, vel eius locum tenent'. Nec non and illi, per
quos positi fuerant ad voluntatem nostram similiter puniantur. Et ad quod libet
Swainem' inquiratur de superoneratione forestariorum et aliorum ministrorum
foreste et de eorum oppressionibus populo nostro illatis, Punishment Swanimote
Surcharge.
et fiant inde emende et punitiones, prout superius est expressum.

Quo ad illos vero, qui tempore, quo foresta deofforestata fuit,
transgressiones de viridi aut venatione in foresta fecerint de affor' eandem,
et vt sententia excomunicationis incontrouenientes fulminetur quanquam de
nostra bona voluntate mineme processisset, quamquidem sententiam dominus papa
post modum reuocauit. Et quas concessiones, Excommunication.
et de afor' certis causis reuocamus and adnullamus. Volumus enim, quod
transgr' huiusmodi perdonentur, transgr' illis acceptis, que in ea part,
Perdon. Herbs Diches.
que foresta remansit, comminisse fuerunt. Ita tn' qd'haie and fossata fact'
medio tempore prosternant', et penitus amoueant' adnihilentur. Saluis
arentationibus nostris, quas secundum assisam fo rest volumus rem'.

Boscus autem cesus and prostatus amoueatur, Wood.
and boscus stans remaneat in foresta. Et si forte aliquis talis boscus ad huc
stans, sit venditus, in foresta remaneat, and venditor satisfaciat emptori,
iuxta quantitatem portionis bosci stantis inforesta, et aliter medio tempore
venditi, et prout ceperit de eodem. Just. de forest.


Volumus etiam quod Iusticiar' forestae nostrae, vel eius locum tenens in
presentia, Thessaur nostri, Fynes. Indictment
et per assensum eiusdem habeat potestatem capiendi siues and redemptiones
illorum qui sunt indictati de transgress. vsque nunc in foresta commissis
itinere Justice. minime expectato.

Volumus insuper quod illi, Common.
qui communem pasturam inforesta ante perambulationem factam habeant, and qui
sunt postea repositi in foresta, quique de dicta comunia per perambulationem
praedictam fuerant impediti, habeant communiam pasturam de cetero inforesta
adeo large and libere, sicut ante perambulat' praedictam habere solebant.
Saluis arent' nostris in forma praedicta. In cuius rei testimonium, etc. Test
etc. apud Westmonasterium xxviii. die Maij. Anno xxxiiij. Edwardi primi,
Ordinatio foresta.

23 Le graund chrater des franchises et le charter de la Forest soient gardes
en touts points, Purley.
et que la ponerel que estoit chiuach en temps le roy Edw. ayel le roy qui ore
est se reign en la form que estoit chiuache and bond and que sur ceo soit
charter-fait a chescun count ou fait mye chiuache le roy voet que en chiuacha
per bonds et lieux et charter sur ceo fait come de fuis est dit. An. 1. E. 3.
cap. 1.

24 Pur ceo que plusours gents sont disherits rettes and distruits per les
souereignes gardeines des forestes de sa trent and de la per les auters
ministers encounter lestatute de la graunde chartre de la Forest et encounter
la declaration que le Roy E. fits le Roy Hen. iii. fist en la form que
ensuit. s. Nous volons and grantons pur nous and pur nous heirs que le trespass
fait en Forest de vert and de venison que les Foresters des queux baylifes
tiels trespasses serto^t faits presente^t mesmes les trespasses au procheins
swanimots deua^t foresters, verdors, regarders, agistours et autres ministers
de mesme le forest que sur tyel presentment deuaunt las forestes, verdors,
regardours, agistours, et auters ministers suisdits per surement sibien des
charters come dauters prodes homes et loyalx, et nemy suspiciouses de party
vesinables and plus procheine en tielx trespasses serront issint presents et en
la verity plus mielur et plus pleinment purra estre enquis et tiel verity
ensy enquis soient tielx presentiments per commen assent and accord de touts les
ministres auantdits solemnement enforces, et de touts seal cuscales et si en
auter manner soit fait null enditements soit desore pur null tenus. Et pur ceo que
les chief gardeines des forests nont my la did form tenus iesque en ceo
accord est et ordeigne que desore null ne soit pris nemprison pur vert ne pur
veneson sil ne vsoit, ou sil ne soit troue oue may nor en le form auantdit
endite, and adonques luy less le sovereign gard'del forest a mainprise iesque
al heir del forest sans riens prendre pur le deliverance, et si le guard. fair
ne voloit, eit brief en le Chauncery que auncientment fuit ordeigne pur ceux
endites destre a mainprise sans rien prendre adonques eit le pl. brief en le
Chauncerie al viscount dattach. le dit guard, destr. deuaunt le Roy au certain
iour a responder pur quoy il and repleuy celuy quest ensy pris per bon mainpris
en presence des verdours and nouns des mainpernours face deliverer as mesmes
verdours a respond. en air deuaunt les Justices. Et si le chief gardeine de
ceo soit attaint soyent agardes as pleintifes lour damages al treble et les
gard'a la prison et reints al volunte le roy. Et desormes soyt escript as eux
come as les chief guard del Forest pur ceo que justices ne deiuent ils estre en
record. forsque en eire Anno. 1. E. 3. cap. 8. 34. E. 1.

25 Null forester ne gardeine de foreste ou de chase, ne null auter minister ne
face ne coille puter. nauter coillet des vitailes ne null autre chose per color
de lour office country nulluy volunte dedeins lour bail ne de horse forsque ceo
que est due dauncien droit. Anno. 25. Ed. 3. cap. 7.

26 Null manner de Iure soit desore art per ascun minister de la Forest nautre
person quicunque de trauailer de lieu en lieu horse des lieux ou lour charge
lour est done enconter lour gree ne per malice ou per manace ou auter duresse
constreint de dyre lour verdit de trespass fait en foreste auterment que lour
conscience ne lour ent vorra clerement enformer eins dient ils lour verdyts sur
lour charges lieux ou celle charge lour est don come desuis est dit. Anno. 7.
R. 2. cap. 3.

27 Null home soit pris nemprison per ministre de foreste sans due enditement ou
per mainoeuere ou trespassant en la forest, ou aillours, ne soit constreint de
fair obligation ou redemption a ascun ministre de forest per quicu^que manner
encounter-lour gree et assise de forest, et si ascun face enconter cest
ordinance en ascun point. et de ceo soit attaint pay as parties endammage
lour double damage, and fine et raunceon au roy pur son mal fait. Anno 7. R.
2. cap. 4.

The Laws of the Forest.
AL Forestes which King Henry our graundfather afforested and made, shall be
viewed by good and lawful men, and if he have made forest of any other wood
more then of his own demesne, whereby the owner of the wood has hurt. We
will that forthwith it be disaforested. And if he have made forest of no men's
wood but of his own, then we will that it remain forest still: Saving the
common of herbage, and of other things in the same forest, to them which before
were accustomed to have the same. Carta de Foresta. cap. 1.

Common summons, Suertie.
2 Men that dwell out of the Forest from hence forth shall not come before the
Iusticers of our forest by no common summons, unless they be impleded there,
or be suerties for some other that were attached for the forest. Carta de
Foresta cap. 1.

Disaforest. Demesne. Wood.
3 All woods which have been made forests by K. Richard our uncle, or by King
John our father, unto our first coronation, shall be forthwith disaforested,
unless it be our demesne wood. Charta de foresta. cap. 3.

Archbishop Bishop. Freeholder. Woods.
4 All Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights, and other
our free holders, which have their woods in forestes, shall have their woods as
they had them at the time of the first coronation of King H. our graundfather,
so that they shall be quite for evermore of all purprestures, Purpresture
Wastes.
wastes, and assert es made in those woods after that time, until the
beginning of the second year of our Coronation. And those that from henceforth
do make purpresture without our special license, or wast or assert in the
same, Licenses. Wast.
shall answer unto us for the same wastes, purprestures, and asserts. Carta
de Foresta cap. 4.

Regarders.
5 Our Regarders shall go through the Forest to make their Regard, as it has
bin accostomed at the time of the first coronation of King H. our graundfather,
and none other wise. Carta de Foresta. cap. 5.

6 The inquiry or view forlawing of dogs being within our forest, Lawing of
dogs. View.
shall be made from henceforth, when the Regard is made, that is to say, every
iii. year, and then it shall be done hy the view and testimony of honest men,
and not otherwise. And he whose dog is not then found expeditated, shall be
amerced, and shall pay for the same iii. s. And from henceforth no ox shall be
taken for lawin-of dogs. A merce. Ox. Assise. iij. Claws cut off.
And such lawing shall be done by the assise commonly used: that is to say,
that iii. claws of the forefoote shall be cut off by the skin. But from
henceforth such lawings of dogs shall not be done, but in places where it
has bin accustomed from the time of the first coronation of the aforesaid king
H. our grandfather. Carta de Foresta cap 6.

Forester.
7 No Forester or Bedle from henceforth shall make scotal, or gather garb or
otes, or any corn, or lamb, or pige, nor shall make no gathering, but by the
sight, and upon the oath of the xii. Regarders when they shall make their
regard. So many Foresters shall be assigned to the keeping of the forests, as
reasonably shall seem sufficient for the keeping of the same. Car. de Forest.
ca. 7.

8 No Swanimote from henceforth shall be kept within this our Realm but thrice
in the year. Swanimot.
First the xv. day before Michaelmas, when that our gistakers, of our woods come
together to take agistment in our demesne woods, Agistment.
and about the feast of s. Martin in winter when that our gistakers shall
receive our pawnage. And to these ii. swanimotes shall come our foresters,
verderors gistakers, Pawnage. Foresters.
and none other by distres. The iii. swanimote shall be kept in the beginning of
xv. days before the feast of S. John Baptist, when that our gistakers do meet
to hunt our Dear. And at this Swanimote shall meet our foresters, verderors
and none other by distres. Moreover every xl. days thorough the year, View.
Attachments Green hugh Hunting.
our foresters and verderors shall meet to see the attachments of the forest,
as well for green hugh as for hunting by the presentment of our foresters, and
before them attached. And the said swannimotes shall not be kept but within the
Counties, in which they have bin used to be kept. Carta de Foresta cap. 8.

9 Every freeman may take agistment in his own wood within our forest at his
pleasure, and shall take his pawnage. Freemen. Agistment. Pawnage. Drive swine.
Also we do grant, that every freeman may drive his swine freely and without
impediment thorough our demesne woods, for to agist them in their own wods, or
else where they will. And if their swine tarry one night and lie within our
forest, there shall be no occasion taken there of whereby he may leese any of his
own Carta de foresta cap. 9

10 No man from henceforh shall lose neither life nor member for killing of our
dear, but if any man be taken therewith, Killing, of dear. Convict. Fine.
Impris.
and convict for taking of our Venison, he shall make a grievous fine, if he
have any thing whereof to make fine, and if he have nothing to leese he shall be
imprisoned a year and a day, and after the year and a day expired (if he can
find sufficient suerties) he shall be delivered. And if not, he shall abjure the
Realm. Carta de foresta cap. ^0. Abjure.


11 Whatsoever Archbishop, Bishop, Earl or Baron, coming to us at our
commandment, and passing by our forest, it shall be lawful for him to take
and kill one or two of our dear, by the view of the forester if he be present,
or else he shall cause one to blow an horn for him, that he seem not to steal
our dear. And likewise they shall do returning home from us. Car. de For. ca.
11.

12 Every freema^ from henceforth without danger, shall make in his own wood,
or in his land, or in his water, which he has within our forest milles,
springs, pooles, marlepits, dikes, or errable ground, being without the covert
into errable ground again, so that it be not to the annoyance of his
neighbors. Carta de Foresta cap. 12.

13 Every freeman shall have within his own woods, ayries of hawks, sparrow
hawks, fawcons, egles, and herons, and shall have also the honey that is found
within his woods. Carta de Forest cap. 13.

14 No forester from henceforth, which is not a forester in fee, paying to us
farm for his Bailiwike, shall take any chiminage within his bailiwike. But a
forester in fee paying us farm for his bailiwike, shall take chiminage, that is
to say, for carriage by cart, the half year ii.d. and for another half year
ii.d. for a horse that bears loads, for half a year an halfe-penie, and for
another half year a halfepenie: And but of those only that come as Merchants
through his bailywike by his license to buy bushes, timber, bark, coal, and
in another place to sell it again where they will at their pleasure: But for
none other carriage by cart, chiminage or tol shall be taken. Nor chiminage
shall not be taken but in such places only where it has bin used to be taken.
Those which bear upon their backs brush, bark or coal to sell, though it be
their living, shall pay no chiminage to our foresters, except they take it
within our demesne woods. Carta de Foresta cap. 14.

15 All that be outlawed of trespass within our forest, since the time of King
H. our graundfather, unto the first year of our coronation, shall come to our
peace without let, and shall find to us suerties that from henceforth they
shall not trespass unto us within our forest. Carta de Foresta. ca. 15.

16 No Constable, Castellaine, or bailife, shall hold plea of forest, neither
for green hugh, nor hunting, but every forester in fee shall make attachments
for plea of the forest, as well for green hugh as hunting, Justices of the
Forest shall determine those plees.
and shall present them to the Verderors of the provinces. And when they be
enrolled, and enclosed under the seals of the Verderors, they shall be presented
to our chief Justices of our forest, when they shall come thither to hold plea
of forest, and before them they shall be determined. Carta de Forest. cap. 16.

17 Concerning trespassers in parkes and pondes, it is not yet discussed, for
the Lords demanded the proper imprisonment of such as they should take in
their parks and ponds, which the king denied. Wherefore it was deferred.
Merton. cap. 11. Anno. 20. H. 3.

18 It is provided also for trespassers in parkes and pondes, that if any be
thereof attainted at the suit of the party, great and large amends shall be
awarded according to the trespass, and three years imprisonment, and after
shall make fine at the kings pleasure (if he have whereof) and then shall find
good surety that after he shall not commit like trespass. And if he have not
whereof to make fine, after three years imprisonment, he shall find like
suertie, and if he cannot find like surety, he shall abjure the Realm. And
if any guilty thereof be fugitive, and have no land nor tenement sufficient
(whereby he may be justified) so soon as the king shall find it by Enquest,
he shall be proclaimed from County to County, and if he come not, he shall be
outlawed. It is provided also and agreed, that if none do sue within a year
and day for the trespass donc, the king shall have the suit. And such as be
found guilty thereof by lawful inquest, shall be punished in like manner in all
points, as above is said, and if any such trespassor be attainted, that he
has taken tame beasts or other thing in his parkes by manner of robbery, in
coming, tarying, or returning, let the common law be executed upon him as upon
him that is attainted of open theft and robbery, as well at the suit of the King
as of the party. West. 1. ca. 20. An. 3. E. 1.

19 If any Forester, parker, or warrenor, do find any trespassor wandering
within his liberty, intending to do damage therein, and that after hue and
cry made to him to stand unto the peace, will not yield himself, but does
continue and execute his malice, and disobeying the kings peace, does fly or
defend himself with force and arms, although such foresters, parkers and
warrenors, or any other coming in their company, and ayding such foresters,
parkers, and warrenors, in the kings peace, do kill any offender or offenders,
being so found, either in arresting or taking them, or any of them, they shall
not be arraigned upon the same before the king and his Justices, or before any
other the king his Bailifes or any other within any franchise or without, nor
shall leese for so doing either life or limme, or suffer any other punishment,
but shall enjoy the kings peace, as they did before: Notwithstanding, let all
such foresters, parkers, warrenors, and all other beware, that by reason of any
malice, discord, debate, or other evil will had before time, they do not lie,
nor maliciously pretend, against any person passing through their liberties,
that they came thither for to trespass or misdoe, when of truth they did
nothing, nor were not found as trespassors, and so kill them, for if they do
and be convict thereupon, the death of such persons shall be inquired, and
execution shall be done in like manner, as is done for other of the kings
subjects standing in his peace, and like as it ought to be done of right, and
according to the law and custom of the Realm. Statute of Trespassors in
Parkes. An. 21. E. 1.

20 Whereas certain people that be put out of the forest for the purliew, and
by the great men have made request to our sovereign Lord the king at his
parliament, that they might be acquitted of their charge, and of things that the
foresters demand of them, as they were wont to be: Our sovereign Lord the
king answered: First, that where he had granted purliew, that he was pleased
that it should stand in like manner as it was granted, albeit that the thing
were sued and demanded in an evil point. Nevertheless, he wills and
intends that al his demesne lands wheresoever they be, that have bin of the
Crown, being returned by way of escheat, or otherwise, shall have estate of
free chase and free warren, and in such manner shall be saved and kept to his use
for all manner of escheates, and for all manner of things that pleases him. And
in right of them that have lands and tenements disaforested for the said
purliew, and such as demand to have common within the bounds of forests: The
intent and will of our sovereign Lord the king is, that from henceforth (where
purliew is) they may claim to be quite of charge of the forestes. And whereas
the kings beasts cannot have their haunt and repair upon the forest ground, as
they had so long as they were within the forests, that such folk shall not
have common, nor other easement within the bounds of the woods, nor of the
lands, the which remain in forest, but if any of them that be disaforested by
the purliew, would rather be within the forest as they were before, then to be
out of the forest as they be now: It pleases the king very well, that they
shall be received thereunto, so that they shall remain in their ancient estate,
and shall have common and other easement as well as they had before. Whereupon
our Sovereign Lord the king wills and commands, that his Justices of the
forestes on this side Trent, and beyond Trent, in like manner shall keep and
hold, and cause to be kept and holden straightly the foresaid points within
their liberties, in the form above mentioned. Anno. 33. E. 1. Stat. 5.

Assisa et consuetudines Eorestae.
21 If any Forester shall find any man attachable for vert in the forest, first
he shall attach him by ii. pledges, if they be to be found, if not, he shall be
brought to the next town where they may be found. And if they be afterward
found, he shall attach him by iiii. pledges, and if the third time, he shall be
presented before the Verderors, and be put by viii. pledges, afterward after
the third attachment his body shall be attached and retained that he may
remember what thing Vert is.

It is to be known that all trees not bearing fruit, and these which bear
fruit at any time in the whole year, and an Ash if he be old shall remain in
the forest, and in the errable land they be all Vert, because our Lord the king
is in possession of them.

If any man shall be found felling an Oak without the demesne wood, and within
the regard of the forest, without the view or delivery of the forester or
verderor, he shall be attached by iiii. pledges, and by the view of the verderor,
the Oak shall be praized, and the names of the pledges shall be written in the roll
of the foresters and verderors.

If any man shall be found in the kings demesnes asserting or doing purpresture,
his body shall be forthwith retained, but if without the demesnes within the
regard, he shall be put by vi. pledges, and if he be afterward found, he shall
double his pledges, if the third time, he shall retain his body.

A man attatable conra vadios and plegios, is he that is bound to be of good
behavior toward the Forest, and then after that bond, is found offending in
the Forest again, as it appears in Carta Foresta, Articulo. 15.
If any man shall be found attacheable contrary to his suerties and pledges, he
shall be distrained by his cattels found within the bounds of the forest, but if
he have none, his body shall be detayned until he have don that which he ought:
and if his abode be without the bounds of the forest, his name and the name of
the town whence he is shall be enrolled.

But delivery of housebote and haybote shall be made as the wood may suffer the
same to remain in the state in which it is, and not at the request of the
demaundant, neither may he give nor fell any thing of the wood without the
kings warrant.

This is meant of those Dear that are not sweet, nor meet to be eaten of the
best sort of the people: for if a principal beast be found dead and newly
killed: that is not meant by this statute to be given to the Lazar house. And
if such Dear be found dead, there is no doubt but the same Dear is the kings,
for he was the kings beast being alive, and the killing of him has not altered
the property: and then the fame being the kings, his Justice of the Forest may
dispose of it at his pleasure, and that disposition good in Law by plee of
justification.
If any Dear be found dead, or wounded, there shall be an inquisition made by
four of the next villages to the forest, which shall be written in the roll, the
finder shall be put by vi. pledges, and the flesh shall be sent to a Spittle house,
if by testimony of the verderors and the Country, there be any nigh: But if
there be noe such house near, the flesh shall be given to the poor and lame,
the head and skin shall be given to the poor of the next Town, and the Arrow
(if there be any found) shall be presented to the Verderors and enrolled in his
roll.

If there be any Greyhoundes found running to do any hurt, the forester shall
retain them, and present them in the presence of the Verderors, and send them
to the king of chief Justice of the Forest.

If any Mastiue be found upon any Dear and shall be expeditated, he whose
Mastiue he is shall be quite of the deed, but if he be not expeditated, the
owner of such Mastiue shall be guilty, as if he had given it with his own hand,
and he shall be put by vi. pledges. whose names shall be written, and also what
kind of dog it was.

If any man take a Dear in the forest without warrent, his body shall be
arrested where soever he be found within the bounds of the forest, and when he
is taken, he shall not be delivered without special commandment of the king,
or of th chief Justice of the forest.

If any see any misdoers within the bounds of the forest, to take or carry away
any Dear, he shall do what he may to take them, and if he cannot, he shall
levy hue and cry, and if he do not so, he shall remain in the kings mercy.

If any woodward shall see misdoers within his wardship, or shall see a dead
wild beast, he shall show him to the chief forester or verderor, and if he do
not, and the forester of our Lord the king find such a fault in his wood within
the precinct of the regard, that wood shall be taken into the kings hands by the
kings commandment, or of his chief Justice, and the woodward is to be
attached by iiii. pledges.

If any man shall have a wood near unto the demesne wood of our Lord the king,
it is lawful for him after that the demesne hedges are agisted, to have in the
time of pawnage, so many swine as the wood may suffer, by the view of the
foresters, verderors regardors, Agistors, and other lawful men, and this shall be
done of the profit of Swine.

Know ye that in time of pawnage, when the agistment ought to be made, the
foresters verderors, and agistors, ought to crave the assent of the Justices of
our Lord the kings forest, and seek their good will, and the agistiment
shall be made as well within the demesne hedges and woods as without, and the
agistment shall be made according to their commandment, and tenor of their
letters, which letters he shall have before the Justices of the forest in the
next circuit. And it is commanded, that hereafter be taken for every hog as
much as may be, to the use of our Lord the king for pawnage, that is to say,
one penie or ii.d. but of little pigges there shall be no more paid then was
before.

If any man of another County put, or willingly suffer his cattle to go
within the bounds of the forest, the forester may retain the cattle by
suerties and safe pledges, which if he cannot do, by the testimony of the
Verderors, he shall show the Shirife of the County thereof, that he may make
distres until he find pledges. If the Shirife do it not, the forester shall
show the same to the Justices.

No Mower shall bring with him a great Mastiue, to drive away the dear of our
Lord the king, but little dogs to look to things without the covert.

Of these which claim to have privileges, as dogs without claws and
greyhoundes, within the bounds of the forest, they shall have nothing to do
with them without our Lord the king his warrant or his Justices.

A wood remaining in the hands of our Lord the king by one year and one day,
it is in the kings pleasure, except it be recovered by the judgment of the
Justices.

All the bounds of the forest are wholly the kings. It is lawful to the Abbot
of ye Borough of S. Peter, to hunt, and to take hares, Foxes and Martrons
within ye bounds of the forest, and to have vnlawed dogs, because he has
sufficient warrant thereunto. When Verderors have taken an Enquest, one shall
set to his seal, and the other shall keep the roll, and so from time to time
until the coming of the Justice: then the first day he and all his ministers
shall present the roll, or else they shall be amerced, and mainpernors that day
shall be proffered for the forest, or else they shall incur a seizure.

A man attached for cutting of boughs, that plee appertains to the Swanimot
before ye Steward. And a man attached for selling an Oak in the demesne of the
king, or of any other man's, it belongs to be tried before the Justice, and if
he do it to any man in the night time, he shall be imprisoned.

A man attached to the Swanimote for green hugh, and not presented at the next
Swanimote, at an other time the presentment shall not hurt him, but shall be
taken as a fault in the forester, for the concealment, and he that is attached
shall go quite by Assise.

If a forester do agree unto an offense in the demesne woods of the king, the
king shall take from him his chief office if the keeper be living: and because
the kings wood is wasted, at every Iter of the Justice of the Forest, they
shall pay to the king half a Mark.

Ordinatio Forestae.
22 First we have decreede for us and our heirs, that of trespasses hereafter
to be done in our Forestes of green hugh, and of hunting, the Foresters within
whose Bailiwikes such trespasses shall happen to be committed, shall present
the same at the next Swannimote, before the Foresters, verderors, regardors,
agistors, and other ministers of the same forest, and upon such presentiments
there before the Foresters, verderors, and all other ministers aforesaid, by
the oath as well of knights, as of other honest and lawful men of the nearest
parts, where the trespass (so presented) shall be done not suspected, by whom
the truth of the matter may be fully inquired of, and the truth so inquired of,
the presentiments shall be solempnely affirmed, and sealed with their seals by
the common agreement and assent of all the ministers aforesaid, and if the
indictment be made otherwise it shall be utterly void.

And if it happen any of the foresaid Foresters, regardors, or other ministers
of the same forests to die, or by sickness, or by any other means to be
hindered, by reason whereof he cannot be present to such swanimotes: immediately
the Justice of the Forest or his lieutenant shall put another in his place, so
that the enditement may be made by all, Verderors by election. They are called
veredictors because they are Judges, and do give judgment of Forest matters.
in form aforesaid, and that the officers which are to be placed, be placed,
as hitherto it has been accustomed to be done: Saving the Verderors which
shall be appointed by election, and by our writ. And we will that none of the
foresaid ministers hereafter, be put in any assizes, Iuries or inquestes, to be
taken without the Forest.

And if any surcharge be found of the Foresters, or other, which have to do as
ministers of the Forest, such surchargers shall be amoued, and shall be imprisoned
according to the discretion of the Justice of the Forest, or his lieutenant.
And they also by whom they were placed there shall be punished likewise at our
pleasure. And at every Swanimote, it shall be inquired of the surcharge of the
Foresters, and other ministers of the forest, and of their oppressions brought
upon our people, and they shall make thereof amends, and be punished as is
above express^ And as concerning those persons, which since the time that (...)
Forest was disaforested, have committed offenses in Verte and Venison within
the forest to disaforest the same, and that sentence of Excommunication was
published against the same offenders, although the same by our good will should
not have proceeded, which sentence the Pope himself afterward revoked, and
which graunts and disaforesting for certain causes we do revoke and make
void. For we will that those offenders be pardoned: Except those offenses
which were committed in that part which does remain forest still, so that the
hedges and dyches that were made in the mean time shall be thrown down,
removed, and utterly avoided. Saving unto us our rents, which we will have to
remain according to the assizes of the Forest.

The wood which is cut and felled shall be removed, and the wood standing shall
remain in the forest, and if by chance any such wood yet standing to be sold,
it shall remain in the forest, and the seller shall satisfy the buyer,
according to the quantity of the portion of the wood standing in the forest,
and so of wood sold in the mean time, and even as he shall take of the same
buyer.

We will also, that the Justice of our Forest, or his lieutenant, in the
presence of our Treasorer, and by his assent, have power to take fines and
redemptions of them which are indicted of trespasses, committed in the forest
before this time not inquired of in the Justices circuit.

We will more over, that they which have had common of pasture in the forest,
before perambulation made, and they which afterward were denied in the forest,
and they which have bin letten of the said common by the perambulation
aforesaid shall have their common, of pasture from henceforth in the forest, as
largely and freely as they were wont to have before the perambulation
aforesaid: saving our re^tes in form aforesaid etc. Test etc. Westminster
xxviii. day of May. An. 34. E. 1.

32 That the great Charter of the liberties, and the charter of the forest be
observed and kept in every article. And that the old perambulations of the
forest, in time of king Edward graundfather to the king that now is, be from
henceforth holden inlike form, as it was then riden and bounden. And thereupon
a charter to be made to every shire, where it was ridden and bounden, And in
such places where it was not bonden, the king will that it shall be bonden by
goodmen and lawful, and that a Charter be thereupon made, as is aforesaid. An.
1. E. 3. cap. 1. Stat. 2.

24 Whereas diverse people be disherited, raunsomed and undone by the chief
keepers of the forest on this side Trent and beyond, and by other ministers,
against the form of the statute of the great Charter of the forest, and
against the declaration made by king Edward, son of king H. in form
following, that is to say: We will and grant for us and our heirs, that for
any trespass done in the forest of Vert and Venison: That the foresters in whose
bailiwike such trespass shall be committed, shall present the same trespasses at
the next swanimote, before the foresters, verderors, regardors, agistors and
other ministers of the same forest. And that such presentme^t be made before
the said foresters, verderors, regardors, agistors and other ministers
aforesaid, as well by the oaths of knights, as by other discreet and lawful
men and not suspicious, of the parties joining near where such offenses shall be
presented, and where the truth may best and most clearly be known. And the
truth perfectly known, then such presentiments by the common assent and consent
of all the said ministers, shall be solempnely written, and with their seals
ensealed. And if any indictment be in any other manner made, the same shall be
void. And therefore because the chief wardens of the forest have not observed
the same hitherto: It is agreed and ordained, that from hence forth no man
shall be taken nor imprisoned for Vert nor Venison, unless he be taken with the
manner, or else indicted after the form before specified. Taken with the manner,
is commonly said to be in four sorts, vz, Staple stand, Dog draw, Backbeate,
and Bloody hand. For Venison and for Vert, in two sorts, vz, cutting of it,
and carrying of it away.
And then the chief Warden of the forest shall let him to mainprise, til the
Eire of the forest, without any thing taking for his deliverance. And if the
said Warden will not so do, he shall have a writ out of the Chau^cery, which has
bin in old time ordained for such persons indicted to be at mainprise, till the
eire. And if such Warden after he has received the writ, do not incontinently
deliver such persons indicted to mainprise, without taking any thing: then the
plaintiff shall have a writ out of the Chauncery to the shirife, to attach the
said warden to be before the king at a certain day, to aunswerer wherefore he
has not repleuied him that is so taken. And the Shirife (the verderors being
claled to him) shall deliver him that is so taken by good mainprise, in the
presence of the verderors, and shall deliver the names of the mainpernors to
the same Verderors, to answer in the eire of the Justices. And if the chief
warden be thereof attainted, the plaintiff shall recover his treble damages,
and the said Warden to be committed to prison, and raunsomed at the kings will.
And from henceforth it shall be written to them as to the chief Wardens of the
forest, because they may not be Justices, nor to have any Record. Anno 1. E. 3.
cap. 8. Stat. 1.

25 No forester nor keeper of forest or chase, nor none other minister, shall
make or gather sustenance, nor none other gathering of vitailes nor other
thing, by color of their office, against any man's will within their bailiwike
nor without, but that that is due of ancient right. Anno. 25. E. 3. cap. 7.
Stat. 5.

26 No manner of Jury shall be from henceforth compelled by any minister of the
forest to travel from place to place out of the places where their charge is
given to them against their gree, nor by malice, nor by manace, The verdict to
be given up where the charge is given them.
or other duresse constrained to say their verdict of a trespass done in the
Forest, otherwise than their conscience will clearly inform them, but they
shall say their verdicts upon their charge, in the places where the charge is
given them, as above is said. Anno. 7. R. 2. cap. 3.

27 That no man be taken nor prisoned by any minister of the forest, without
due indictment, or by manouerie, or trespassing in the forest, or else where, nor
shall not be constrained to make any obligation or ransom, to any minister of
the forest by any manner, against their gree and the assise of the forest. And
if any do against this ordinance in any point, and thereof be attainted, he
shall pay to the party damnified their double damages, and fine and ransom
to the king for his offense. Anno. 7. R. 2. cap. 4.

28 From henceforth all and every the Justice and Justices of the kings
forestes, parkes and chases within this realm, Note that by the common law the
Justice of the forest is a Judicial office, and therefore he could not make a
deputy to execute the same office before this statute.
which now be, or hereafter shall be, by their writing sealed with the seal of
their office, shall make, assign, depute and appoint as many deputy or
deputies for the exercising of the same office of the Justice or Justices of
the forests, as to such Justice or Justices from time to time shall be thought
convenient, which deputy and deputies so appointed shall have like power and
authority to do and execute all things concerning the kings forestes, parkes
and chases, and all other things concerning the office and offices of the
Justice of the forests, to all intents and purposes, But it seems that the
office of the chief warden of the forest is no Judicial office, because the
writ of Homine replegiando, is by the Statute of (An. 1. E. 3. ca. 8. before
here 24.) to be directed to him. And further, if his office were a Judicial
place, he could not make deputies as he does to execute the same.
and in as large and ample manner and form, as the same Justice or Justices
might, or may lawfully do or execute by ye laws of this realm, and as though
the same Justice or Justices were there personally present in his or their own
person or persons. Anno. 32. H. 8. cap. 35.

27 Every man that has wood within the Forest, may take the same wood without
being attached by any officer of the Forest, Anno. 1. E. cap. 2.
so that he do it by the view of the Foresters. Anno. 1. Ed. 3. cap. 2. Statut.
2.

A man may hedge in, or fence his wood, and maintain and keep the same in the
Forest by this statute.

Nota per cest statute que un auter person que le royne poit aver un Forest per
la common ley.

Nota que cest statute fuit in le negative del comen ley ergo le comen ley fuit
contrary deuant ceo.


If any of the Queens Subjects having woods of his own growing in his own
ground within any Forest, Chase, or Purliew of the same, within this Realm of
England, shall cut or cause to be cut the same wood, or part thereof, by
license of the Queen, or of her heirs in her Forestes, Chases, or Purlewes,
or without license in the Forest, Chase, or Purliewes of any other person, or
make any sale of the same wood: it shall be lawful to the same Subject, owner of
the same ground whereupon the wood so cut did grow, and to other such persons
to whom such wood shall be sold, Imediately after the wood so cut, to coppie,
and enclose the same ground with sufficient hedges able to keep out all manner
beasts, and cattle out of the same ground, for the preserving of their young
springs: and the said hedges so made, the said Subjects may keep them
continually by the space of seven years next after the same enclosing, and
repair and sustain the same as often as it shall need within the same seven
years, without sewing of any other license of the Queen, or of her heirs, or
other persons, or any of their officers of the same Forestes, Chases, and
Purliewes. Anno. 22. E. 4. cap. 7.

The Statute for the drift of the Forestes, and what beasts are not to be
suffered to common in the wast soil of the Forest.
NO commons or commoners within any forest, chase, more, marish, hethe, common
or wast ground, nor any officer or officers of or within any of the said
forestes or chases, nor any other person or persons whatsoever he or they be at
any time after the last day of March, which shall be in the year of our Lord God
a thousond five hundred and three and forty, shall have or put to pasture into
or upon any such ground, forest, chase, more, marish, heth, common, or wast
ground, any stoned horse or horses, being above the age of two year, and not
being of the altitude and height of fiftene handfulles, to be measured from the
lowest part of the houe of the forefoote unto the highest part of the wither,
and every handful to contain iiii. inches of the standerd, to pasture feed
or be in or upon any of the said forestes, chases, commons, moors, marshes,
hethes, or wast grounds within any of the shiers and territories of Norff.
Suff. Cambridge, Buck. Huntington, Essex, Rent, Southampshyre, Northwilshyre,
Oxford, Bark. Worcester, Gloucester, Somerset, Northwales, Southwales, Bedford,
Warwyke, Northampton, Yorkshire Cheshire, Staffordshire, the county of the
city of York, the town and liberties of Gloucester, the county of the town
of kingstone upon Hul, the county Palantine of Lancaster, the county of Salop.
Leicester, Hereford, and Lincoln, or within any of them, nor shall put to feed
or pasture any stoned horse or horses, being above the said age of two years,
and not being of the altitude and height of fourteen handful to be measured,
as is above said within or upon any like ground or grounds as ben above
written, liyng or being within any other shier of this Realm, nor within any
of them, upon pain of forfeiture of the said horse or horses, which shall be
found in or upon any such ground, forest, chase, moore, marish, hethe, common
or wast ground, It shall be lawful for the finder of such to seize them.
at any time after the said last day of March which shall be in the said year of
our Lord God, a thousand five hundred and three and forty, contrary to the
form of this estatute. And it shall be lawful to every person and persons that
shall find any such horse or horses contrary to the form of this estatute,
to seize the same in manner and form following, that is to say, the said person
or persons so finding any horse or horses, contrary to this act in any forest,
chase, common, moore, marish, Keeper or other officers of the Forest, to help
the finds
hethe, or wast ground within the said shires, or other limittes aforesaid, or
in any of the^ shall first go unto ye keeper or keepers of the same forest or
chase, or to his deputy or deputis, or to the constable, bailif, hedborough,
bursholder, or tithing man of any towneship next adjoining unto the said place
where the said horse or horses shall be. Such Horses or Mares to be driven to the
Pound, and there to be measured, in the presence of three honest persons.
And shall command, or require him or them, or any of them in the kings
behalf, to go with him or them to bring every such horse or horses, as he or
they shall think to be there feeding and going, contrary to this estatute, to
the next pound, and there the said horse and horses to be measured by any of
the same officer or officers, in the presence of three other honest men to be
named and appointed by the said officer, and if it so be found that the same
horse or horses be contrary to this act, It shall be lawful to retain them to
his own use.
that then it shall be lawful to every such person and persons that shall so
challenge and cease the said horse or horses as before is said, to take and
retain the same horse or horses, and every of them, to his own use, as his
own proper goods and cattells for ever, without let interupcion, vexation,
suite, or trouble of the owner or owners of them, or any of them, or of any
other person or persons.

The said keepers, nor other officers shall not refuse to measure them.
And it is further enacted by the authority above said, that if any of the
said kepers, their deputy or deputies, Baylyfs, Constables, Hedborough,
Bursholders, or Tythyng men, or any of the said three other honest men, which
shall be required to be at the measuring of the said horse or horses, as is
before said, do refuse to do, as is aforesaid, or else do not truly measure
such horse and horses, that then every such bayliffe, keeper, deputy or
deputies, constable, hedborough, bursholder, and tithingman and the said three
honest persons to be named, as is aforesaid, and every of them not doing, and
refusing to do his or their duty in the premises, shall forfait and lose.
xl.s. for every time so refusing to do, or not doing as is a foresaid, the one
half thereof to be to the king, and the other half thereof, to be to the party
that will sue etc. in which accion none essoygne etc.

Provided always that this act shall not extend to any stoned horse or horses,
that shall happen once in any year after the said last day of March, to
break, escape, or go out of any several pasture or ground, against the will
and mind of the owner, or possessour of such horse or horses, into any of the
said foresters, chaces, moors, marshes, hethes, commons, or wast grounds,
so that the said horse or horses, so breaking, escaping, or going out, do not
remain or abide in the said forest, chaces, moors, marshes, heathes commons
or waste grounds, or any of them, by the space of four days next after
sufficient and open notice and knowledge given at the dwelling house of the
owner of the said horse or horses, or after open publication thereof made upon
a Sunday, The manner and form, how the forest shall be driven, and that is
yearly at the feast of S. Michael.
or other festiual day in the parish church where the owner or possessour of
such horse do dwell. And be it etc. that all forestes, chaces, commons, moors,
marshes, heathes, and wast grounds within this realm of England and Wales,
and the marches of the same and every of them shall be driven at the feast of S.
Michael tharchangell next coming, or within xv. days than next after, and so
yearly to be driven by the Lords owners or possessours of the said forestes,
chaces, or by the officers of the same, and by the constables, hedboroughes,
bailiffes, bursholders, and tything men, within whose offices and precincts and
limittes, Forf. for not driving of the forest.
the commons, moors, marshes, hethes, and wast grounds, being out of the
forestes and chaces be or lie, upon pain of xl.s. to be forfaited to our said
sovereign Lord the king, by every of the said officers, baylifes co^stables,
hedboroughes burshelders, and tythingmen as often and at every time as the said
drift shall be omitted or left undone, or not effctually done within, xv. days
after the said feast of S. Michaell tharchangell, as is a foresaid. And it
shall also be lawful to the said Lords owners and possessioners of the said
forestes and chaces, by their officers of the same, and by the constables,
bailifes, hedhoroughs, bursholders and tithing men, The drift of the forest is
to be made as often as the officers shall think me
and every of them within the limits of their offices, to make like drift of
the said forests, chaces, commons, moors, marshes, hethes, and wast ground,
at any other season and time of the year whansoeuer and as often as they shall
think meet and convenient.

And furthermore be it enacted, that if in any of the said drifts there shall be
found any Mare, fili fool, or gelding, that the^ shall be thought not to be able
nor like to grow to be able to bear foles of reasonable stature, or not able
nor like to grow to be able to do profitable labors by the discrecions of the
driuers aforesaid, or of the more number of them, Unprofitable beasts to be
killed.
than the same driuer or driuers shall cause the same unprofitable beasts and
every of them to be killed, and the bodies of them to be buried in the ground,
or otherwise bestowed, as no noyance thereby shall com or grow to the people
there near inhabiting or thither resorting. And it is etc. that the Justices
of peace in every shire, ridyng, and other place in their quarter sessions to
be kept and holden by virtue of the kings commission of the peace to them
directed, and al stewardes of letes and lawdaies in the same letes and lawdaies
shall have authority by this act to enquire of all defaultes, contempts,
omissions and offenses, contrary to the effects above written, and every of
them. And all presentiments thereof to be found in any of the said letes and
lawdayes shall be certified by the steward or deputy, steward or courtholder
of the same let or lawdaye in the next general sessions of the peace to be
holden in the County where such presentment shall be found or had, or unto the
Custos Rotulorum of the same Shire within forty days next after that
presentment made, which Justices of peace in their quarter Sessions of the
pear, shall have power and authority by this act to hear and determine
every such presentment before themselves found, or in any of the said letes or
lawdaies to be presented and certified, as is aforesaid, as well by
examination as otherwise, and if any such steward deputy, steward or
courtholder aforesaid, inbesyl or conceal any such presentment, or do not
certify the same as is before written, every of them, so offending, shall
forfait and lose for every such offense xl.s. the one half of every such
forfeiture, and of every other of the forfeytures before written, to be to the
king, and the other half to the person or persons that will sue for the same,
before the said justices of peace in their said quarter sessions by byl or
information, which Justices shall have full power and authority by virtue of
this act to hear and determine every such offense as well by examinacion as
otherwise as is before mentioned. And be it further enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that no person or persons, after the feast of saint Michael the
archangell next coming, shall have or put to pasture any horse, gelding, or
mare, infected, with scabbe or maunge, in, to or upon any of the said
forestschases, moors, marshes, hethes, commons, wast grounds, or common
fields, upon pain to forfait for every horse, gelding, or mare so infect,
pasturing in any of the said grounds, ten shillings, which offense shall be
inquirable and presentable before the steward in every let, as other common
annoysance be. And the forfeiture therefore to be to the Lord of the same let,
where the said offenses shall be presented. Provided always, that this act or
any thing therein contained, shall not extend nor be preiudicall to any person
or persons, having any stoned horse or horses, under the heightes and altitudes
above mentioned, for or concerning the having or putting any of the said
horses to feeding in or upon any common or other waste grounds, where any
mares, or fillies be not used nor suffered to be fed, pastured or kept An. 32.
H. 8. cap. 13.

Assia de Woodstock.
ANd note that by the Laws and statutes of the forest, called the statutes of
Woodstocke: no forester shall walk or make any attachment for matters of the
forest, except he be a forester sworn, for the words are these: Nec aliquis
aliqem attachiat nisi sit forestarius Iuratus, that is to say, neither shall
any forester attache another man but he that is a forester swarne. And also it
appears by some statutes, that no man ought to remain and abide within the
forest being of the age of xii. years and upwards: but he ought also to be
sworn to be true unto the Queens Majesty's game of the forest, for the
words are these: Omnes etatis duodecem annorum manens in foresta pacem
venationis sue Iurent. Et clerici, laicum feodum tenentes pacem eius Iurent,
which is that every man of the age of xii. years shall swear the peace of
hunting of the beasts of the forest, and also Clergimen having Lay fee, shall
likewise swear the peace of the Queens Majesty's wild beasts of the forest.

And now for as much as it appears by those Laws that the Inhabitants and
dwellers within the forestes ought to be sworn to be of good behauior
toward her Majesty's game: much more then ought those that are officers of
the forest, as verderors, Foresters, Woodwardes, and Raungers, which have
charge of her Majesty's game especially to be sworn, for otherwise by color
of their office, they might spoil her Majesty's game and destroy the same:
wherefore to the end that those oaths may the better be administered unto such
officers, by those that have authority thereunto, and likewise observed and
kept by them that are compellable by the Laws of the forest to take the same.
I have collected their several oaths, out of the ancient presidence of forest
Laws, and set them down as hereafter follows.

The oaths of the several officers of the Forest.
The oath of a Woodward.
You shall trewly Execute the office of a Woodward of B. Woods, within the
forest of W. so long as you shall be woodwarde their, you shall not conceal any
offense, either in Vert or Venison, that shall be committed or don within your
charge, but you shall trewly present the same without any favor affection or
reward: And if you do see or know any malefactors, or do find any Dear
killed or hurt, you shall fourthwith do the Verderors to understand thereof.
And you shall present the same at the next Court of the forest: be it Swanimote
or Court of attachments, so help you God.

The oath of a Raunger of the Forest.
You shall trewly Execute the office of a Raunger in the purliewes of B. upon
the Borders of the kings forest of W. You shall rechase, and with your hound
drive back again the wild beasts of the forest, as often as they shall
raunge out of the same forest into your Purliewes. You shall trewly present al
unlawful hunting, and hunters of wild beasts of venerie, as well within the
purliewes, as within the forest. And those and all other offenses, you shall
present at the kings next Court of Attachementes or Swanimote which shall first
happen, so help you God

The oath of a Forester, or vnderkeeper in the Forest.
You shall trewly Execute the office of a forester, or keeper of the kings
wild beasts, in the walk called P. within this forest of W. Yon shall be of
good behauior your self toward his Majesty's wild beasts, and the vert of
the same forest. You shall not conceal the offense of any other person, either
in Vert or Venison that shall be done within your charge: but as well the same
offense, as also all attachments you shall present at the next Court of
attachmentes or Swanimote which shall first happen to be holden for the same
forest, and you shall to the uttermost of your power maynteine and keep the
assizes of the forest, and in all things the kings right defend concerning
the same, so long as you shall be keeper there, so help you God.

The oath of a Verderor, alias a Veredictor.
YOu shall trewlie serve our sovereign Lord the king, in the office af a
verderor in the forest of W. you shall to the uttermost of your power and
knowledge do for the profit of the king, so far as it does apertaine unto you
to do. You shall preserve and maintain the ancient rights and franchecies of
his Crown: you shall not conceal from his Majesty any rightes or privileges,
nor any offense either in Vert or Venison, nor any other thing. You shall not
withdraw nor abridge any defaultes, but shall endeavor your self to manifest
and redress the same: and if you cannot do that of your self, you shall give
knowledge thereof unto the king, or unto his Justice of the forest: you shall
deal indeferently with all the kings liege people: you shall execute the Laws
of the forest, and do equal right and Justice, as well unto the yoore as unto
the rich, in that appertains unto your office: you shall not oppress any
person by color thereof, for any reward favor or malice: all these things
you shall to the uttermost of your power observe and keep. so help you God.

The oath of the Inhabitants of the Forest, being of the age of twelve years,
as the same has been accustomed and used in ancient time.
YOu shall true liege man be, unto the kings Majesty.
You shall no hurt do, unto his beasts of the forest,
Nor unto any thing that does belong thereto:
The offenses of other, you shall not conceal,
But to the uttermost of your power, you shall them reveal:
Unto the officers of the forest, or unto them that,
May see the same redrest.
All these things you shall see done,
So help you God at the holy dome.
I have here set down the several oaths of these officers aforesaid, to the
end that they being co^pellable by the Law to take an oath, may know what
their oath is, and so by their oath, their office also: for it is a learning at
the common Law, that such officers as do execute offices, in which they shall
be forced to take an oath, their oath does either at large or brefely
comprehend the whole effect of their office, as you may perceive by examininge
of those oaths aforesaid.

It seems, that where a Verderor or other officer of the Forest, has a right
or interest, to have yearly for his see one Buck, or one Do, by reason of his
office, or otherwise in any Forest. Park, or Chase, that then the same
verderor or other officer that has such right or interest to have such a Buck
or Do, as before said, may enter into the same Forest, Park, or Chase, and
there kill and take the same at his will and pleasure, and may justify the
same taking and killing of them both by the rules of the common Law, and also
by the rules of the Forest laws, as it shall appear by these cases hereafter
following.

ANno. 2. R. 2. En trespass il est tenus come un maxim, que si ascun home ad
interest a ascu^ chose per le grant ou assent dune auter, Fitzh. titulo Bar.
237. Parkins. fo. 28
et le party que ad tiel interest ne poit aver le principal chose sans fair
auter chose, que il poit fair le dit auter chose, et ceo iustifier eo quod il
est le means a vener a son profit. Car la est tenus que si un grant a moy
touts ses arbes cressants in son boys, ieo poy eux succider and carier per tout
son terre and mesque son herb soit defoule oue le carrage, il nauera brief de
Transgr^ de ceo. Car les arbres soint tiels chooses que sils ne deuissent este
caries oue carects, il ne puit aver eux ^e fair son profit de eux. Et le case
fuit la Auxsi adiudge que si un vend touts ses pessons en son stanke, et le
vendee, fowa un trench, issint que le ewe poet currer horse, and per tiel
means il puissoit prender les pessons. Et le vendor port brief de trespass
verse luy pur le four, et la agard fuit que il recoueroit, pur ceo que il puit
prender les pessons per rethes; ou auters engines: Mes si nust este ascuns auter
means a prender eux: Auter vst este Come est la tenus. Et pur le vener al
banks a pischer, il poit bien iustifier, Per la forest ley. M. 13. H. 7. fo.
10. a nota. 9
car sans ceo il ne poit eux prender per ascun means. Issint que home touts
faits, Iustifiera la necessary circumstance, lou il ad title al principal
chose. Et M. 13 H. 7. fo. 10. et nota 9. le case fuit tiel. En br' de trespass
sur le statute de mistesors in parkes le defendant dit que le pleintife done un
dame male a un B. and il come servant a le dit. B. vient oue luy a le dit park
et per son commandment luy aid de tuer le dit dame per force de quel il
vient et enter in le dit Park, et chase le dit dame et luy tua, de quel chase
le pleintif ad conceive cest accion: Et loppinion de touts les Justices fuer
clereme^t, que ceo fuit bon justification. Car ils diont que si un home ad un
garrant pur un dame male ou female il est congeable a luy de amesuer sez
seruantz oue luy de prender le dit dame, car auterme^t il serra chase de
prender le dame luy mesme, le quel nest reasonable per que ils semble le
justification bon quel case bien prove que lou un home ad intrest al un dame
come un verderer ad il poit justify le prisans de ceo oue son servants. Car
auterment si le forester ne voile occider son dame pur luy, il ne poit aver son
dame. Car il and ascun means in la ley a compeller le forester a occider le
dame pur luy, et donques si le forester ne voile occider le dame, ne il mesme
puit iustifier al occider son dame demean. Donques la ley ne ad provide ascun
remedy pur luy auener a son dame demean en que il ad interest, et pur ceo la
ley nest issint unreasonable. Car la ley ad provide un remedy pur chescun home
auener a ceo en que il ad ascun interest, and ceo auxibien en tielx chooses de
pleasure lou il ad interest en eux come in son proper biens. Come il est bien
prove per un case que fuit adiudge Termino Hillarij. Anno. 13. Hill. 13. H. 7.
fo. 13. a. nota. 2
Henrici septimi. fo. 13. nota ibidem. 2. Et le case fuit tiel le Duches de
Northfolke port accion pur chaser en son Park apud Lopham in Comitatu
Northfolk verse Wiseman and alios. Ils diont que le Duches licens le Comes de
Suffolk pur chaser a son pleasure in le dit Park, and ils monstront que al
temps de trespass, le dit Comes vient in le dit Park. Nota le difference inter
chooses de pleasure, and chooses de profit, car lou home ad license de pleasure
il ne poit iustifier mes pur luy mesme. Et lou home ad license de profit il
poit iustifier pur auters sicome son servants et issint lou home ad interest in
un dame a aver ceo cest est un chose de profit and nemy de pleasure, nota le
difference.
Et les defendants oue luy chase etc. Et fuit monstre que cest ple ne fuit
bone, car per le licens don al Comes, que est forsque pleasure, ceo extend
forsque a luy, et null auter iustifier per cest licens, car si ieo done licens a
un home pur manger ouesque moy, null de ses servants iustifier lentre en ma
meason per reason de cest license, car est license de pleasure. Et issint si
ieo done licens a un pur aler a son pleasure in mon Orchard null de ses servants
iustifier per son license. Mes si soit licens que est profit et nemy pur
pleasure, auterment est. Car si home done license a moy de carier ouster son
terre ou mon charue meys servants iustifier per son licens. Et issint si home
licens moy dauer un arber in son boys: Mes servants iustifier le scier del
arbor and lentre. Car ieo auera profit pur ceo. Et issint fuit lopinion de
court and puis les defendants diont que le duches done license a le Comes pur
chaser, occider and amesner oue luy les dames a son pleasure, Et donquos ils
diont, que le dit Comes vient la, et ils oue luy et per son commandment
enchaseront et asportaueront etc. Et ceo fuit tenus bon. Et le licens fuit
allege in Suffolk, etc. Et le Duches reioynder de lour tort demesne sans tiel
cause. Per quel case est fort dure prove que lou home ad interest in un dame
issint que il est aver ceo donques il est a aver profit per ceo. Et le verderer
ad intrest al un dame in la forest pur son fee dame et il est aver ceo et
donques il est aver profit per ceo. Issint que il poit auxibien iustifier pur
luy et pur son servant a occider le dit dame in le forest come le dit Comes
de Suthfolk poit iustifier per vnam and eadem rationem que il est aver profit
perceo. Et pur ceo que il ad un intrest et droit aver le dit dame et il and
auter means aver ceo si le forester ne voile occider le dit dame pur luy. Et
si le forester complain de dit verderor al Justice del Eyer pur occider de un
dame il poit bien justify le occider del dit dame deuant le dit Justice de
Eire, pur ceo que il est aver ceo et il est a aver profit per ceo pur quel
cause il ceo prist ceo come un chose que il de droit doit aver et cest prisans
nest enconter lassises and ordinance del forest que sont in ceux parolx,
Ordinatio Forestae. fo. 30. cap. 10.
si quis ceperit feram sine waranto in foresta issint vne nest punishable que
prist feram oue un warrant et le intrest del verderer ou officer dauer un dame
est bon warrant, quod nota.

Certain Cases queux concernant matters del Forestes, Parkes, et Chases, que
sont adiudge et escrie in nostre livers de la comen ley come ensuit.
Misusans del officer de Forest in son office, est cause de forfeiture de son
office.
ANnuitie per Brian Justice, si home ad Parker qui guard son Park, M. 15. E.
4. fo. 3 b. Br. Forfeiture. 17.
and il occist ses Dames cest est bon cause de luy metter horse doffice quere
si seneschal, Auditor, vel huiusmodi, ingrosse lour livers fauxment, et fo^nt
faux discharges et huiusmodi, si ils ne sont in mesme le degree del officers et
issint un forester qui occist son dames sans garrant il est forfeiture del son
office. 15. E. 4 fol. 3. Et cest case est bien prove per un plee, que est plede
en auoidance de un assise port sur un grant de un office de un Parkership oue
le rent de xx.s. per an, et le redd'vij. quarter frumenti and de officio
parcarij parcij de B. habend'and percipiend'pro eodem officio quamlibet arborem
and ramos arborum per ventum prostratum in eodem Parco necnon pro quolibet
Porco in eodem parco ad pannagium posit' pro eodem pannagio vnum quadrat',
Libro intraconis. fo. 75. in assise in office. 1. and ibidem in office. 2.
et le defendant in le dit assise dit que il ad tiel grant et tielx fees a
pertener a ceo. Mes le plaintiff in la dit assise ad occid les dames en le dit
Park sauns garrant. Issint que il ad forfeit son office per ceo, et le dit
plaintiff reioynd que il ad tua la dames per le commandment del pleintif, et
issint al issue. quel case prove que est clear ley que pur parker occider dames
sans garrant est forfeiture de son office, et issint est pur forrester, car il
est officer agarder les dames et nient a occider et destroyer eux sans special
garrant a ceo fair, 5. E. 4. fo. 26. Br. Forfeiture 54.
et en Anno. 5. Ed. 4. fo. 26. Le case fuit tiel Annuitie est demand pur
office del Parkership grant a luy pur term de son vie, le defendant dit que
loffice fuit grant al plaintiff, vt supra, et que tiel office este de temps
don't etc. et que le keepers ont guard le dear, et le boys per idem tempus. Et
que del second iour de Iulii tanque le xiiii. iour de mesme le mois 22. savages
fueront tues per persons disconus in negligence le pleintife. Et hoc etc.
(Young) Per negligence del officer lannuitie, et loffice est extinct. Et per
Choke Justice, si Seneschall ne tient les courts, ou ne eux tient pur le profit
del seignior cest forfeiture de son office. Newton Justice, Parker ne^ tenus de
guard le park chescun iour, ne demaine iour ne festival iours, mes serra al
divine service ne in le nuit, ne degarder ceo contra vi. ou viii. ho^es, car
vltra posse: Et garden de prison que permit wilful escape cest est forfeiture
de son office, mes escape in le nuite nest que negligence del officer, quere
inde. Arderne, plus est in le plee que ne besoigne.s. adire que les keepers ont
guard le dear and le boys in le park. Car ceo est intend en le ley. Et
tenetur quod neglexit custodire, nest bon issue, Car neglexit est adinier.
Young, il non custodiuit parcum per 12 dies, vt supra. Danby, cest est le
meliour pleading, Et nota que est communiment dit quod quel ley est de Parker
mesme le ley est de forester del un forest.

Et in Anno quinto, Edwardi quarti. fol. 5. Anno 5. E 4. fo. 5. Br. forfecture.
55.
Le case fuit aiudge que si Parker ne guard le park tali die, per que le dear
sont occise per persons disconus, ceo est forfeiture de son office, pur ceo
fuit le negligence del keeper del park. Et semble mesme le ley del forester
del forest, car il ad mesme le charge del dames come parker ad in son park.

Et in Anno 11. H. 4. fol. 1. fuit tenus per Vauisour, An. 11. E 4. fo. 1. Br.
forfecture. 61.
non attendance sur office per lofficer est forfeiture. Et idem de fesans
contrary a son office. Et idem de misfesans de son office que il ne fait droit
al parties. Et idem sil foit demand pur vener de fair son office, et ne
vient, et vide tiel matter. 20. E 4. fol. 6. 20. E. 4. fo. 6. Br. Forfecture
115.
que officer que ne voit vener a fair son office forfeitera son office.

The Lord chief Justice of the Forest, has an absolute authority appointed
unto him, to determine of offenses that are committed and done within the
Queen Majesty's Forestes, either in Vert, or Venison: And the same offenses
are to be determined before him, and not before any other Justices, except
those that are appointed by her Majesty's Commission under the great Seal of
England to aid and assist the said Lord chief Justice in that place, as it
does appear by the Statute of Carta de Foresta, Cap. 16. in these words, as
follows.

Charta de Foresta. ca. 16.
NVllus Constabularius, Castellanus vel balliuus teneat placita de Foresta,
sieve de viridi, sieve de venatione, sed quilibet forestarius de feodo. Attachiat
placita de foresta tam de viridi quam de venatione, et ea presentet viridarijs
prouinciaru^, et cum irotulata fuerint, et sub sigillis viridariorum inclusa
presententur capitalibus Iusticiarijs nostris de foresta cum in parts illas
venerint ad tenendum placita de foresta and coram eis terminentur. Has autem
libertates de forestis concessimus omnibus, etc. By which words of the statute
coram eis terminentur, does exclude any other Justices to hear and determine
the said offenses of the Forestes, but only the Lord chief Justice of the
Forest, and those that are in Commission appointed with him to aid and assist
him: For the statute is in the negative of the common Law, and does restrain
all other Justices, and says coram eis terminentur: and in that sense the
Statute is taken by the learned Judges of the common Law: For in Anno. 21. H.
7. fo. 22. the case was such. Anno. 21. H. 7. fo. 22. nota. 8.
En trespass de malefactoribus in parcis et Count que le defendant intrauit in
quandam Forestam, et loppinion del court fuit que cest accion ne gist mye, si
non sit, pur misfesans in parcis, Car le statute de West. 1. cap. 20. est
cantsolement en Parkes, et ceo serra pris stricte. Issint le punishment que est
done pur male fesans in forestes est punishable per lestatute de Charta de
Foresta et nemy en auter manner, etc. By which case there are two things to be
noted, that is to say, First, that the statute de malefactoribus in parcis
does not extend to a Forest, Stat. Westminster. 1 cap. 20. de malefactor' in Parcis.
for that a Forest and a Park are two distinct things at the common law, and
therefore that statute that was made to reform injuries done in the one does
not extend to any hurtes done in the other. The second is, that by the said
case it does appear, Charta de Foresta. ca. 16.
that by the construction of the statute of Charta de Foresta made for
offenders in the Forests, they are to be punished according to the same
statute, and not in any other manner, as it does there more plainly appear.

And in Anno. 21. H. 7. fol. 30. nota 7. 21. H. 7. fo. 30. nota. 7.
the case was as follows: Endictment de occiser de un Heart proclaim troue
deuaunt Justices de peace, et lenditement fuit challenge pur ceo que il ne
monstre en lendictment en quel lieu le proclamation fuit fait. Et auxi il ne
monstre en quel lieu il fuit occise, car si fuit occise horse del bounds del
forest, il est loyal a luy de luy occiser, fuit dit per seigniour Fineux que il
puit pleder cest matter al jurisdiction del court, pur ceo que les Justices del
forest determiner cest matter, etc. By which case there are six things
especially to be noted.

1 First, that every Indictment against any offender, for offenses done in the
forest, must be certain concerning the thing it self, for which the offender
is Indicted, as to show that it was for killing of a Heart, and also to show
where he was proclaimed a Heart.

2 Secondly, that it must be certain, concerning the place where the offense
was done, for that the killing of the Heart within the forest, or without the
forest, does make the same killing an offense, or no offense, and therefore it
must be showed in the Indictement certain, Et vide le case 12 H. 8. fo 10. que
prove qui si ceruus est extra forestam vagrans est loyal a chescu^ subject a
occider and aprender ceo.
in what place of the forest the same Heart was killed, for otherwise it does
not appear that it was any offense by the Laws of the forest.

3 Thirdly, it is to be noted that a Heart proclaimed, (which is called in
Canutus Laws, fera Regalis a Royal beast, being a beast of the most
estimation of any wild beast in the forest,) yet if he be wandering out of the
forest, it is lawful for any of the kings Subjects to kill him, without any
offense in the forest Laws.

4 Fourthly, it is therefore especially to be noted, that a forest must have
his limits and bounds, within the which the wild beasts of the forest are to
have a place of firm peace for them to abide in: in the safe protection of the
king, from the hurt of his subjects: whereof the same does receive the name of
Forest, that is to say, a place for the wild beasts to abide in for rest:
which by shortness of speech, is called Forest.

5 Fifthly, that such offenses which were committed by any offenders within the
forest, are to be tried before the Justices of the forest only, and to be
punished there by the forest Laws: for as much as there are Laws appointed
for that purpose, differing from all other Laws.

6 Sixthly, that if any man be indicted or called in question for any such
offenses that are done or committed within any forest, either in Vert or
Venison, in any other place then before the Justices of the forest, that then
every such offender may plaed that matter to the iuridiction of the court where
he shall so be called in question, and show unto them that the offense for the
which he was called in question was done in such a forest, and that the
Justices of the forest are to determine that matter only, and that no other
person have power nor authority to determine that offense.

Ordinatio Forestae, in which is in secund^ pars veterum Statutor. fo. 67
And further it is manifest, that by the Statuit of Ordinatio Forestae, it is
ordained and appointed, that all offenses that are done, or committed within
the forest, either in Vert or Venison, shall be presented at the next Swanimote:
and the statuit does set down there in what order, and before whom it must be
done, that is to say: cora^ forestarijs, viridarijs, regardatoribus,
agistatoribus, et alijs eorundem forestarum ministris etc. et si in alio modo
fiat Indict' pro nullo penitus habeatur: which does not only show that all
offenses committed and done within the forest, either in Vert or venison, are
only to be presented before the officers of the forest, but it does perfectly
set down the manner how the same shall be done, and if it be done in any other
manner then there is set down, the same shall be void: by which Statute, it is
to be gathered, that all the procedings against offenses committed in the
forest, in any other place then before the Justices of the Forest, shall be void:
and that none other have power and authority to proceed against offenders in
the forest, but the Justices of the forest only.

Certain cases and especial notes, meet to be learned of all men that will
know the nature of wild beasts, and who has, or ought to have any interest
or property in them: All which are things very nesesarie for foresters, and
officers that do belong to the forest to know.
ANno 43. Edwardi. 3. fo. 24. in an accion of trespass, it was holden that the
writ shall not say, damamsuam cepit: 43. E. 3 fo. 24. Br. Property 10.
if he do not say that it was taken in his park or warren: or else say, that
he was damam domitam, which does prove that if the beast that was taken a way
be not a tame beast, the plaintiff has not any property in him when he is out
of his ground, for so long as he is in his park or warren, he has then
property in him, ratione soli. 22 (...) Br. Property 19.


And in Anno 22. Henrici 6. fol. 95. It is holden by Newton that in an accion
of trespass brought, quare clausum suum fregit et damas cepit, that there he
may well say damas suas: and so you may see, that where wild beasts of nature
be taken out of my soil, I have property in them so long as they are in my
soil, and then I may say Damas suas, and when that they are out of my soil,
I have no property in them, and therefore he cannot say Damas suas. 7. H. 6.
fo. 38. Br. Property 20


And in 7. H. 6. fo. 38. it is there holden, that when savage beasts of the
kings go out of the forest, the property is out of the king, and so you may
see that the king has property in them when they are in the forest: for it is
said there, that the land makes the property of such wild beasts, quod nota:
for if they be out of the forest of the king, or out of the owners park or
warren, then capienti conceditur.

And in. 18. E. 4. 14. it is holden there that the dear in a park which are
wild of nature, a gift of them is void, 18. E. 4. fo. 14 Br. Property 31
if he to whom the gift is made, do not take and kill them while they are in
the park: for the owner has property in them, but ratione soli, so that if
they be out of the park, the owner of the park has no interest or property
in them.

43. E. 3. fo. 24. Br. Property 37.
And in Anno 43. E. 3. fo. 24. it is holden that an accion of trespass quare
damam suam cepit does not lie, except the Dear were taken out of his soil, for
otherwise he cannot say damam sua^ because he has no property nisi ratione
soli, but it is contrary, if it be damam sua^ domita^ cepit, for in tame dear
the owner has property, quod nota diuersitatem: for in Bees, Fowls or Fishes
savage, Natura breuium. fo. 87.
there is not any property nisi ratione soli. Vide Natura breuium fo. 87. de
Esperuers Cunicles et Feris.

An. 12. H. 8. fo. 10. Br. Property. 45.
And in An. 12. H. 8. fo 10, the case was as follows: a foster of the forest,
does pursue and follow a hunter, that had chased a Heart out of the forest into
his own proper land, and there killed him, and the Foster of the Forest did
pursue him, and did take the Heart again: and the other that had killed the
Heart, brought an Accion of Trespass, de ceruo mortuo capto et asportato, and
he was barred of his accion: for so long as a savage beast, Fish, or Foul is
in my land, I have possession of them, and also property ratione soli, and so
he that does chase them out of my land, and does kill them in his own proper
land, he shall lose his labor therein, and not gain any property: And I
shall have the thing killed, if I do freshly pursue it: for that it may be
known by the skin, horns, and such like. If the same do go out of my land of
his own will, then is it lawful for every man to kill him, for capienti
conceditur, and so note a diversity, where a man of his own wrong, does
constrain him to go out, and then kill him, (and where contrary) and it is
holden there by Brook a Justice, that if a man suffer his Faucon to fly at a
Fesant, and kill him in an another man's land, he may pursew his Fawcon, and take
the Fesant, and he shall not be punished, but for his entry into his ground:
for the taking of the Fesant, by my Faulcon, is a possession in me: and so
where my hound does take a wild beast: contrary of the taking of an Otter, Fox
or Graye, for those are vermin, and against the common wealth, and they are
carrin: and because they are enemies to the commonwealth: men may justify the
entry into other men's land to destroy them: But Dear, Fesants, and such like
are pleasures and good meat, and men have property in them, nisi ratione soli.

And in An. 12. H. 8. fo. 4. it is there holden, 12. H. 8. fo. 4. Br.
Property. 44.
that a man may have property in hounds, hawks, thrusshes, popiniayes, and
such like, which are wild beasts of nature if they be made tame: and then the
owner shall recover damages in an accion of trespass for the taking of the^.
And yet if he do give omnia bona et ca^talla sua, those do not pass by that
gift, and by Eliot a Justice, no Repleuin does lie of them. And Justice Brudnel
does show the reason thereof: for (says he) the property is not properly
known: and yet an accion of trespass does lie of the taking of them, and
likewise for a Mastiffe: and it is there said, that there is no Tithes paid
for such wild Beasts.

Certain cases collected and gathered out of the books of the years and
Terms of the Common Law, Grant.
concerning Forestes, Parkes, and Chases, as follows.
IN Termino Michaelis, Anno. 1. and 2. Elizabeth Regina: M. 1. 2. Reginae
Elizabethe, Dier, fo. 169. nota ibidem 1.
The case was as follows: Rex Henricus 8. per litteras patentes datas Anno
regni sui 33. ex certa scientia et mero motu suis dedit concessit, et ad firmam
tradidit Richardo Crumwell militi Forestas suas de Waybridge and Sapley in com^
Hunt. habend. sibi cum suis partibus, membris, porcellis, and pertinentijs
vniuersis, ad terminum lxxx. Annorum, reddend. vi.li.xiii. s. iiii. d. per
Annum etc. oue cest clause, scilicet, and praedictus R C. executores and
assignati custodient, habebunt, and manutenebunt in forestis, de tempore in
tempus, durante termino praedicto, centum damas, and eosdem seu alios
consimiles in numero in praedictis Forestis, in fine termini praedicti
dimittent praefato Regi haeredibus and successoribus suis, Le parol Forest
include le game and touts auters chooses in le forest.
sans ascun auter reservation del game. Et ore le seignior North que ad le fee
simple, voil prender de la game ou donor garrant la. Et come semble a plus part
de les Justices and Sariants dambidenx measons, et al Attorney la Roigne, que
il ne poit, car tout le game fuit include en le parol et nosme de Forest, et
les 100. dames ne sont reserues destre occide ne ascun de eux, Car donques nest
possible pur le less a performer son covenant supra, mes il est reserve tantum
pur la maintenance del game and forest.

Purpresture Anno. 7. Elizabeth, Dier, fo. 240. b. nota. 45.
Anno septimo Elizabeth, the case was as follows: Fuit resolve per le plus
part de les Justices, et le Counsel del Roigne cest term a Sariants Inn, In
presentia Comitis Sussex Iustic' Forestar' citra trentam, que le building de un
nouel mease in le several soil ou in west dascun home deins un Forest, est un
Purpresture et noyance al forest et game, and finable ou rentable pur le
tolleration ou permission de ceo destoyer, al arbitrament et discretion del
Justice; Grannt de herbage del Forost.

Anno. 11. Reginae Elizabeth Dier, fo. 285. nota. 40

Per grant de herbagio Forestae, The Patentee may enclose the Forest.

Malefactoribus in parcis.

Anno. 15. 16 Elizabeth, Dier, fo. 326. nota. 3.

Purlieu del Chase.


ou raceable et desire deserve al pleasure, etc.

Anno. 11. Elizabeth, the case was as follows: Le grauntee ou Patentee del
Roy de herbagio forestiae auera trespass verse ascun que consume ou descroy les
herbs, mes nemy larbres, ne del fruit de ceo, et auxi prendra beasts la
damage fesant, et le brief de Trespass, quare clausum fregit, sibien il fuit de
terre, et per le oppinion de iii. Justices in Banco Regis Termino Trinitatis.
2. H. 8. Le patente poic incloser le Forest per tiel grant.

In Anno 15. and 16, Elizabeth, the case was as follows: Le Chase de Whaddon
est le inheritance del Corone, et le seignior Gxey lieutenant de ceo in fee, et
il et ses ancestors and lour keepers per prescription ont use de hunter in
auxi bien per nute come per iour, les dames vagrants in le manner dun Fortescue
de S. adioignant al dit Chase, come in le purlieu del Chase, mes divided oue un
hay and dych. Et Fortescue ad per le grant del Roigne auxibien le dit Manner,
come le frank warren in les demesne terres de ceo. Auxi bien per sa grant
demesne come per confirmation dauncient former Charters, oue les parols. Ita
quod nullus intret in Warrennam illam ad fugand'sine licentia and voluntate. F.
Les keepers del Seignior Greye in August darreine, fueront disturb et
nauffrees pur vsant cest liberty in hunting en les dits demeanes, oue graund
violence et damage fait per les servants de F. de guels ils estoyent indicted,
et per mandatum de lour master, puis quel temps un servant del seigniour Gray
esteant in le company del keeper and naufre al dit affray, est mort des
strokes etc. cest matter esteant primes oye deuaunt le Counsel fuit commit al
examination pur les ley matters, a les deux chief Justices et latturney
general, queux ayant oyes les parties and lour Counsailours, pensent le ley
destre, que le prescription esteant prove voyer, (quel F. denia) nient obstant
le unite de possession del Chase et manner de S. in la Roigne, et nient obstant
le grant del Roygne mesme, et sa confirmation del garren, oue les general
parols de prohibition auaundits, queux extend tantum a le Subject. Le liberty
del Purlieu remeina vnextincted, and donques le tuer supra nient justifiable
per le statute de Malefactoribus in Parcis, and Warrennis, etc. Grant dol
herbage del park. Hillar. 6. 7. E. 6. Dier, fo. 80. nota. 59


An. 6. Ed. 6. fo. 80. The case was as follows: Item, le herbage, Agistement,
et Panage de Stowe Park est grant, et il surcharge le Park oue ses auers.
Issint que les dames nont pasture: Quere quel remedy pur le graunter, pur ceo
que il ne reserve ascun pasture pur le game.

Item le office del parkership del dit Park fuit grant oue un fee de 3. li.
de les rents: Anno 6. E. 6. fo. 80. nota. 90 ibidem
issues et profits del manor de Stowe per les mines del receauer del dit
manor. Quere si cest grant doit charger le manor, etc. et semble al
seigniour Mountagewe and master Halles, Justice, que cy. Et postea concord',
et dominus Willowby dedit 600. li. pro omnibus dimissis, and concessis.

In Anno. 33. H. 8. Report per mon seigniour Dier: It is there holden, that if
a man do hunt in Forest, Park, or Chase, 33. H. 8. Dier, fo. 50 (...)
so that the same is felony by the Statute, yet the party may make it trespass
or felony at his pleasure whether he will (says he:) and so these collections
and notes I have gathered out of the Reports of Sir James Dier knight, late
chief Justice of the Court of Common plees, which notes, if you list to search
the book for them you may see in the Margent of every several case, the folio
and note in the which the same matter is contained, and because that they are
necessary matters for the knowledge of Forest Laws, I have added them unto
this Treatise.

Concerning the cutting down of Woods in the Forest.
M. 9. 10. Elizabeth, in les Comentaries, fo. 332. b. per Wray chief Justice.
ANno. 9. and 10. Elizabeth: I do find one very especial case, concerning the
felling of woods within the Forest of Waltham, and the case is as follows in
these words. Wray dit, que si Manor que est deins un Forest del Roy Come del
Waltham Escheat al Roy, et le Roy done ceo Manor a un auter in Fee, il and in
le done del manner done a luy le liberty que il auoit en le manner touchant le
Forest, Car Ialemains il est deins le Forest, et subject al pasture de dames et
feres del forest, Note that a man can not fell his wood in his own ground
without license.
et il ne poit scier son boys la deins sans license del Justice del Forest,
Car ceo est chose collateral al soil. Et issint en le done del soil chose
collateral al soil come sont chooses de Prerogative, ou liberty ne passeront
point. By which case you may note, that no man can have any manors or lands
within the Forest, but they must be subject to the Laws and bondage of the
Forest, that is, that the King (in respect of the wild beasts that are there
to be maintained for his princely pleasure and delight, which cannot be there
kept and preserved without Covert and secret places for them to rest and abide
in:) has such a prerogative over the woods of every man within the same
Forest, that no man may fell or destroy his own woods without license of the
Justice of the Forest: Consuetudines and assisa foresta, fo. 29.
and so it does also appear by the statute called Consuetudines and assisa
Foresta, cap. 6. in these words, Liberatio autem housebote and haybote fiat
pro vt boscus pati potest, in statu quo est and non ad exigentiam petentis: nec
potest aliquid dare nec vendere, de bosco sine warranto domini Regis, which in
English is thus: But delivery of housebote and haybote shall be made as the wood
may suffer the same, to remain in the state in which it is, and not at the
request of the demaundant, neither may he give or sell anything of the wood
without the kings warrant, by which law it does appear that a man may not
take housebote nor haybote, but by delivery of the Forester, or warrant of the
King.

And by the Statute of Anno primo of Edward the third, ca. 2 It is plain, that
no wan in the Forest may take or cut down any wood without the view of the
Foresters, Anno. 1 E. 3. cap. 2. Vide Pulron in his Abridgement, in titulo
Woods. 23
or license of the Justice of the Forest, although it be in his own ground:
for the words are these, Every man that has woods within Forests may take the
said wood without being attached by any officer of the Forest, so that he do
it by the view of the Foresters: then Ergo, without the view of the Foresters
he cannot do it. And so to conclude, it seems that no man can cut down any
woods within the Forest, without the view of the Foresters, or license of the
Justice of the Forest.

Et nota icy sont diverse prescriprions que soint bone enconter le Roy, et quel
prescriptions home poit bien prescriber in Forests del Roy encounter luy come
icy ensuit.
HOme poit prescriber que il et touts ceux que estate il ad en le manner de D.
ount ewe park in mesme le manner come append etc. et bon Itinere North. 3. Ed.
3. Itinere North. An. 3. E. 3. Br. Prescription. 57
Br. Tit. Prescription 57 et issint note que home poit aver un Park per
Prescription appendant al son manner.

Et in An. 5. E. 4. dictum fuit pro lege, 5. E. 4. fo. 118. Br. Prescriptio^, 64
que home poit prescriber destre discharge de Corodie, et idem in Leete, ou
dauer park, mes Econtra in bonis and cattallis felone ou incognitione placit'.
Car le Roy mesme ne poit ceo aver nisi per matter de record: et ideo common
person ne poit estre de meliour condition.

Et in An. 11. H. 6. En un accion de Trespass, An. 11. H. 6. fo. 2. Br.
Prescription 95.
le defendant prescribe in luy et son auncester, et en eux que estate il ad in
tiel meas. and terre in D. desse garden del bois de D. preignant Annuatim de
chescun communer la xii. d. et le pl. ple de grant a luy pur certain temps
expire, and trauers le prescription and bien and uncore in transgr. etc. le
prescription admit in luy and son ancester et in ceux que estate et issint un
poit prescriber destre garden de boys.

Et in An. 2. R. 2. An. 2. R. 2. fo. 15. Br. Prescription. 100.
Le case fuit tiel que la il fuit adiudge bon custom de prescribe que ou Swan
vient sur terre de ascun adioyne al Ewe de Tames, et eira la, and ad 3.
Signets, que le owner del Swan auera 2. des meliours and lowner del terre le 3.
Car auterment le owner del terre poit eux enchase quod nota: et hic in
particul' Com. Regula, hic Nota quel privilege le royal gamedel swan ad sur le
terre de auter in co^siderac. del dit land bitd per la custom.

An. 13 H. 7. fo 16. Br. Prescripcion. 107.

Nota que ho^c poit prescriber al hunt in terr de un auter al rechaser les
savage beasts al Forest le roy. Br. Prescriptio^ 108


Car dictu^ fuit pro lege 2. Mariae, que custom poit estre allege ou est null
person que poit prescriber. Come inhabitants ne point prescriber, mes ils poit
allege custo^e que les inahbitants point cominer in Dale que lun va ou le lieu
et lauter ou le person quel person doit estre able de prescribe, car aliter nil
valet.

Et in An. 13. H. 7. in Transg. de close debruse le def. dit que le lieu ou
etc. gist adioynant al forest de Windsor, don't il est Foster de fee, et il et
ses ancestors de tempore etc. ount use mesme le lieu ou etc. Denchase les
savages del Forest oue ses chiens, and de eux rechaser al Forest, and que 4.
dames viende extra Forestam la per que il eux rechase etc. al Forest etc. et
bon prescripe. per Mordant, Frowike, Vauisour and Brian, car ceo poit aver
loyal comenceme^t.

Et vide Brook in tit. Prescrtption, 108. que home poit prescriber que il and
ses ancestors de tempore etc. et ceux que estate il ad in le manner de C. ont
Ewe Park la come appendant de tempore etc. et bou clame.

Et nota ceo come un maxim in touts prescriptions and clames auxibien al comen
ley, sicome in le Forest ley que un poit bien prescriber tiels chooses que point
aver loyal comenceme^t, mes de tiels chooses que ne point aver loyal
commencement null poit prescriber sans monstre del Charter inde ante temps de
memory, ou de allowance de ceo in Eire puis temps de memory. An. 1. H. 7. fo.
23. Br. Prescription. 56
ET approuer ceo, vide le case in An. 1. H. 7. fo. 23. Que home ne poit
prescriber in Sanctuary nisi monstrat Chartam Regis ante temps memory, et
allowance in Eire puis te^ps de memory, mes home poit prescriber in waife,
straye, et wrecke, mes nemy in cattalla felone vtlagate, ne dauer conusans des
plees extra Curia Regis sans monstre Charter ante temps memory and allowance
in Eire puis temps memory.

An. 11. H. 4. fo. 16. Br. Prescription. 83
Et An. 11. H. 4. f. 16. fuit tenus in Transg. que home poit prescribe que il et
ceux que estate in le manner de B. ont ewe wreke de tempore etc. in B. et been
sans allowance in Eire. Tamen per Hanke il doit aver Charter inde vel allowance
in Eire puis te^ps de memory, et issint nota que null claim de ascun
Privilege ou liberty in ascun Forest que ne point aver loal comencement al
primes sans Charter ou grant del Roy doit ester allow sans monster del
charter ante temps de memory, et allowance puis temps de memory.

Certain principal notes, taken out of the records of the plees of the
Forest of Pickering and Lancaster as follows.
FIrst it appears by the assizes and plees of the forest, If the Foresters,
verderors or other ministers of the Forest that have the custody of any of the
rolls of the Forest, and they do nor bring in the same rolls at the Justice
seat of the Forest before the same Justice, then their lands shall be seized
until that such officers shall bring in the rolls of the forest, as they ought
to do.
that if any Forester, Verderor, or any other minister of the forest, that has
the custody of any roles of the forest, at such time as the Justice of the
forest, or his debutie shall at a Justice seat hold the plees of the forest,
that if any such forester, verderor, or other minister, having the custody of
any such roles of the forest, their heir, executores or assigns, or the
Tenantes of their lands, in what shire so ever the lands be, do not bring in
the roles, presentmentes and inditements of the forest: That then there shall
go forth a precept to the shirife of the county where such lands do lie,
commanding him: Quod expulsis vxore et liberis sesire faciat omnes terras, et
tenementa que fuerunt, ipsius in Balliua sua: Ita quod de valor earundem per
annum respondeat prefat' Iustic' etc. nisi tenentes terrae et tenemeut', ipsius
primis venerint ad rotulos suos et alia memoranda predicti dictum Iter
tangentia reddendos. And if it happen that such roles of the forest. or
memoranda be lost, then by the assizes of the forest, the said officers or
their heirs executores and tenementes, may require the Justice of the forest,
that they may make their fine with the king for the same, and then the form of
the same entry is this: Et admittuntur per finem dimi marce etc. And if it
should happen, that such roles or inditments of the forest be burnt or
destroyed by the Scotts, or other enemies of the Realm: The laws and assizes
of the Forest does not admit any excuse.
yet is not this any excuse by the assizes of the forest, although the same
were indede a very good excuse by the common laws of this realm: quia
Iudicia forestae et assisarum eiusdem seorsum ab alijs regni Iudicijs
secernuntur et solius regis arbitrio vel cuiusda^ familiaris ad hoc specialiter
deputati subijciuntur: and therefore in this case the said officer shall make
his fine for the same, or else his land shall be seysed: and the like law is of
the agistors, if they do fail of their rolls and accountes.

And as concerning the form of Indictments taken in the Swanimotes, An
Indictme^t in the Swanimote is not trauersable.
I have written sufficieintly hereafter in the title of Swanimotes. And as
touching that matter it is to be noted, that whosoever is indicted in the
Swanimote, according to the due course of Law in that behalf provided, he
stands by the same indictment convicted, and shall not per assisas forestae
trauers any such indictment: The form of an indictment in the Swanimote.

Note the words of a presentment in the Swanimot are, Presentatum est per
forestarios et duodecem iuratores, et co^uictum per viridarios.

And the words of a presentme^t in the court of attachmentes are, Presentum
est per forestarium, tantum.

Assisa Foresta de Lancaster. fo. 11. Vide the statuit called Ordinatio
Forestae anno 34. E. primi. In what manner offenders shall be indicted in the
Swanimote.


for the entrees of the records there are thus: presentatu^ est per
forestarios et duodecem iura ward predict' et conuictum per viridarios quod A.
B tale die et Anno intrauit forestam de P. cum arcubus et sagit is et ibm^
versauit vnam Damam ad mortem et carnes cepit et inde fecit voluntatem suam. Et
testatum est per vicecom^ quod pr^dicta A B. non est inuentus, nec aliquid
habet in Balliua sua per quod attachiari potest, nec prius se reddidit nec
scitur quo deuenitur, ideo exigatur de comitatum com^ quosque etc. vtlagetur si
non comparuerit et si comparuerit tunc vicecomes eum capiat et saluo etc. ad
satisfaciendu^ domino regi de tra^sgressione predicta vnde per forestarios
viridarios et alios ministros co^uictus est: by which form of presentmentes
you may perceive that the offenses in Swanimotes are presented there by the
foresters, and the twelve sworn men, and the offenders thereof are co^uicted by
the verderors: so that an indictme^t against an offe^dor in the forest, for any
offense there being taken and found against him in the swanimote, the same is a
co^uiction in law against him that is such an offe^dor: so that he shall not by
the laws of the forest trauerse any such indictment.

But it is to be noted, that all inditements or presentiments, which shall be made
by the foresters and the Jury, or twelve sworn men, against any offender for
any offense done in the forest, in Vert or Venison before the Lord Justice in
Air of the forest, at his seat or sessions of the forest, are trauersable per
assisas forestae as it was adjudged by the whole bench at the Justice seat
holden at Waltham holy Cross, in the county of Essex, Anno. Elizabethe 24.
before the good Earl of Bedford, then Lord Justice in Air, of all her
Majesty's forestes on this side Trent, in July Anno Regni Elizabethe the
xxiiii. where cercaine indictments were presented there by the foresters, and
the Jury against John West, William Fiswike, and others, and they were all
trauersed, because they were not presented at a Swanimote.

Furthermore it is to be understand, A trespasser in the forest shall be outlawed
for his offense, as master Hesket in his reading of the Forest, does affirm.
fo. 19.
that there is also a manner of proceeding against offenders in forests, by way
of outlawrie: as if any man be indicted for an offense in the forest, and the
offender do dwell in an other county out of the forest, so that he cannot be
attached for ye same offense by the foresters: then the same offender may be
outlawed for his trespass, and the proceeding therein against such an offender
is in the very same manner, as it is at the common law: for as at the common
law, he that is outlawed for any manner of trespass, the order is, that he
must at five several counties be exacted or proclaimed, and then after that he
is quinque exactus, or five times proclaimed, Master Fleetwood in his
collection of the forest laws fo. 8. Master Hesket, in his reading. fo. 16.
then the coroner for his contempt in not appearing, does give judgment that
he that is quinque exactus in that manner, shall be out of the Queens Majesty's
peace, and so taken as an outlawe, and then such a person is fully outlawed.
Eue^ so is it per assisa^ forestae: for he that is to be outlawed for any
offense in the forest, must after the very same manner be proclaimed as it is
used at the common law, and then when such an offender is quinque exactus, he
is fully outlawry, An outlawed person, shall forfect his goods and cattelles,
and the profits of his lands.
and by that outlawry the Queens Majesty shall have the forfecture of his
goods and cattailes, and also the profits of his lands that is so outlawed,
by inquisition of the sherif and the coroners, and also al they that are
indicted in the Swanimote by these words: Quod sunt comunes malefactores de
venatione domini regis in foresta etc. shall be pursued according to the foresaid
president.

And furthermore it is to be understand, that if the Verderors at the Justice
seat do make default, then they shall be amerced for the same default, and
distrained by their lands, to bring in their rolls, Assisa foresta de
Pickring fo. 8. note that by the statute of Carta de Foresta, articulo 16 and
articulo 10. it does appear that every offender in the forest, after that he
is acquit of the offense, yet he must be bound to the good behavior of the
forest ever afterward.

Itinere Lancast. fo. 6.


indictmentes, and other munimentes that do concern the forest: and he that
is indicted either for Vert or venison, and has put himself for the same into
the kings mercy, and has paid his fine and rawnsome for it, then the same
offender per Assisas forestae, shall put in mainprise by four sewerties, that
he shall be ever after of good abearing in the kings forest.

And it is to be noted that although by the forest laws, and also by the
statuit of Anno 34. Edwardi 1. it does appear puodque ministri qui ponendi
sunt ponantur sicut hactenus fieri consuevit (exceptis viridarijs) qui per
electionem et per breue nostrum deputabuntur: yet notwithstanding, if it so do
chance during the Justice seat of the forest, either the verderor is so sick
that he cannot attend at the Justice seat at that time, or that he is dead:
Then there may be a new verderor chosen without any writ in that case, in the
presence of the Justice of the forest, by the ministers of the same forest, and
by others of the freeholders there, and this kind of election is good in law,
as it does appear in the assise of the Forest of Lancaster. fo. 6.

Touching purprestures made in the Forest.
In Assisa Lancastri. fo. 6. Hedges of iiii. foot high, are contrary to the
assise of the Forest. Itinere Lancastri. fo. 6
THe assizes of the forest are, that no man may enclose any ground within the
forest, ad nocumentum ferarum: and although a man have license to enclose his
ground, yet may he not enclose the same, cum alta haia, et forsata, nec cum
alto palatio contra assisam forestae.

It is purpresture for a man to build any house in the forest, although it be
within his own free land. The judgment of purpresture is thus: Ideo ipse in
misericordia et clausus predictus prosternatur. A high hedge of 4. foot high
is contrari assisam forestae. If he that do make purpresture, do grant over
his lands where the purpresture is made, No man may enter the Forest in the
night.
both he and the grauntee shall be amerced. If any man have a horse pasturing in
the forest, by license or without license: if in the night time he enter into
the forest and take out his horse, he shall be imprisoned, raunsomed and bound to
good abearing which proves, that by the assizes of the forest: no man may in
the night time enter into the kings forest, and if he do he shall be punished.
The like punishment and order shall be taken for him that with Bows and Arrows
does enter into the kings forest, with intent to offend there, although he do
no act, Itinere Pickering. fo. 3. b. voluntas reputabitur profacto.

He that does cut down ligna virida, is a trespasser in Vert.


yet he is to be punished for the same, Quia per assisam forestaevoluntatem
reputabitur pro facto.

To cut down within the Forest ligna virida or Ramos virides is finable per
assisam Forestae. He that cutteth down underwoods, Thorns, Elder trees,
boughs, lignum siccum, ficcos ramos, et huiusmodi, is a trespassor in Vert.

If Estouers be allowed to any man for making of his hedge, and after one year
he burns up the same hedge, Itinete Pickering. fo. 3.
where otherwise they would have continued two years: in this case per Assisas
forestae he shall not be allowed any new Estouers. And if he take more Estouers
at any one time then he ought to do, the Estouers shall be seized, and he shall
make his fine therefore.

If any man cut down busshes or thorns within the Forest, and carry the same
away in his cart out of the Forest: In this case the Cart and horses shall be
seized to the King, and he shall fine to the value of the wood, etc. If he
that has Estouers in the Forest do make thereof Hurdels and do sell them, he
is punishable. If any cut down green hugh within the Forest, and does convey
the same upon horse, he shall forfeit the price of the Vert and his horse.

Item, If the people of a whole township do make wast in the green Hugh of the
Forest, the whole township shall be fined, vz, de villata de C. xx. s.

If any man do set any dry Oaks on fire within the Forest, he is punishable
per Assisas Forestae.

If any Swine be found in the Forest tempore vetito, Itinere Lanc. fo 7.
they shall be forfeited to the King. The same law is of Sheep, and Goats found
in the forest in Mensae vetito and Warda facta.

If any man do suffer any Bridges or High ways to be vnrepayred, then
whosoever ought to repair the same, he shall make five, and shall be distrained
to amend the same per assisam forestae or else their land shall be seized.

The Forester must be sworn Itinere Lanc. fo. 7.
Item, that no Forresters may make any attachements upon any person within the
Forest before that they be sworn as they ought to be, Quia est contra assisam
forestae.

If any subject have any wood within the Forest, if his Woodward make default
at the Justice seat, his wood shall be seized into the kings hand, and so it
shall remain until he have repleuyed the same, and made his fine.

Ibidem.
Item, if any Forester take any money for Bark, his lands shall be seized for
the money.

Ibidem.
Item, if any white Tawyer do dwell in the Forest, he shall be removed, and make
fine: for they are the common dressers of the Skins of stolen Dear.

Item, if any take Hawks, or destroy Eyries of Hawks in the Kings woods,
they shall make a fine for the same.

Hew and Cry. Assisa forestae articulo. 11. Itinere Lanc. fo. 7.
Item, according to the Articles of Hew and Cry, the orders of the Assise of
the Forest are: that if Hew and Cry be made by the ministers of the Forest, if
it be not pursued and followed with effect: then shall the township that are
faulty therein be well fined.

Item, that at every Justice seat of the Forest, the number of Dear, Itinere
Lanc. fo. 8.
and the number of Trees that have been given away by good warrant or
otherwise: and such Dear as have dyed, or have been killed or otherwise, and
the windfalles must be presented. Nouae Assisae Forestae per Basset and
Hungerford. 11. E. 3.

Item Pickering, fo. 2 b. Custos Forestae is mentioned in the statute of Anno
1. E. 3. cap.


Likewise the profit of pawnage, Russhes, Fearne, Gorse, Segges, and such like
must be presented there also.

It appears in the new Assizes, precepts and ordinances of the Forest, made
and set forth in Anno 11. Ed. 3. by Basset and Hungerford, that a man maybe a
Forester in fee, in iure vxoris suae, and may appear by Attorney at the
Justice seat ad facienda omnia quae forestario incumbunt durante Itinere
Praedicto.

I find that besides all the officers and ministers of the Forest the was also
one man that was Custos totius Forestae, and another Superuisor forestariorum,
quod nota.

By the Forest Law Roger Bigot Earl of Norff. did forfeit his Fostership in
fee in the Forest of Pickering. Whereby it is to be noted, That an officer in
fee may forfeit his office. Itinere Pickering. fo. 20.

Itinere Pickering. fo. 3.

Offenders in the Forest, bound to the good abearing Ibidem, fo. 3 Radulphus
Hastings, and Hugo Hastings.

Itinere Pickering. fo. 5.

Itinere Pickering. fo. 3

In trespass in the Forest there are no accessaries, but they are all principals.

Ibidem. fo. 3 The horse of a stranger shall not be forfeited.

Itinere Pickekering, fo. 5. Lending of a Bow and Arrows to kill the Decre is
finable.




Item, Nicholas Meuill and diverse offenders were indicted for that they with
Bows and Arrows and dogs had killed xliii. Staggs and Hindes within the
Forest, and in despite had cut off their heads, and set them up upon stakes:
And for this heinous offense they were first committed to prison and grievously
fined: and after according to the Charter of the Forest, they were bound to
their good abearing. And he who is indicted for Forest causes, if he be after
pardoned by the King, his pardon is allowed: but he shall put in suerties to be
of good abearing to the Forest.

Item, he that receives venison of such as have trespassed in the Forest,
shall be as well punished as the principal. And he that steals Venison in the
Forest, and does carry the same away upon his horse back, the horse shall be
forfeited per Assisam Forestae. But if they take the horse of a stranger which
is ignorant of the fact, the horse shall not be forfeited, Quia ignorantia
facti excusat, ignorantia Legis non excusat.

This has been taken for a very good form of Indictment, Quod A. B. est
communis malefactor' Venationis vbique in foresta, and malefactoribus
venationis consentiens. It is a good Indictement, Quod I.S. consuetus est
ponere Acutas Catheas in berkis haiarum ad feras capiendas: And upon this
Indictement was the offender outlawed.

Item, an Abbot that lent a bow and arrows to another man to thentent to kill
the Kings Dear, was fined and raunsomed. A.B. venit in parco de S. ad
malefaciendum de venatione. And this was taken to be a good Indictme^t. A
keeper was indicted for receiving a bribe to the intent to conceal an offender.
If a man find a trespasser in the Forest, killing or breaking up any Dear and
finds him with the manner and does receive a reward to keep his counsel, he
shall be imprisoned, fined and raunsomed. Pickering, f. 5. Casu Bulmer.
Pickerrng, 13. A Hare is Venison.

Assisa de foresta. art. 8.




Two men were indicted for striking an Hare in her form, and for taking of
another within the Forest: the one of them was committed to prison and made
fine and ransom for the same offense, and was bound to the good abearing of
the forest. And the other was outlawed: whereby it is to be noted that Hares are
Beasts of ye forest.

Assisa de soresta. art. 8.
By the Assise of the Forest, Si Leporarij inuenti fuerint currentes ad aliquod
nocumentum ferarum Forestarius debet retinere eos and presentare in presentia
viridariorum, and mittere eos domini Regi vel capitali Iusticiario forestae.

Itinere Pickering fo. 6. and 41 in le case de Johannes Barlar and Johannes
Augustye.
Item, if a Forester do take an offender with the manner, he may carry him to
prison.

The Abbot of Whitby did kill a Heart within the River of Deruent which was the
metes of the Forest of Pickering: The Abbot and his company were Indicted for
the same, Quia seperunt vnum Ceruum in aqua de Deruent quae est Marchia
Forestae, The like presidentis, fo. 6. W. Moyfon. Ibidem fo. 6. b. affearors.
and venationem illam se cum asportauit: And for this he made his fine and
ransom, and was bound to good a bearing.

It is to be noted that all the Freeholders within the Forest as well
Spiritual as Temporal, must in any wise appear before the Justice seat,
primo die Itineris. And of every town the Reave and iiii. men also with him,
which is called prepositus and quatuor homines, etc. And if they make default,
they shall be amerced, and their amercement shall be affeared by affearers there.

Item Pickering, fo. 6. b.
It is directly against the Assise of the Forest, that any Baker or Brewer
should bake or brewe in the Forest.

Item, that the principal Foster at the Justice seat shall make an account of
all the Dear that has been killed by warrant within the Forest. Killing of
dear by warrant.
And in the same place shall judgment be given which be good warrants, and
which are not. And for those that are not, Assisa Lanc. fo. 3. Pickering, fo.
18.7.
the Forester shall be punished.

Item, per Assisas Forestae, it appears that Tithe was paid of Venison.
Likewise for trees, the chief Forester must make an account of them, by what
warrant they were cut down. And for those which he cannot show good warrant,
he shall be amerced.

Assisa de Pickering, fo. 7. b.
Item, if the Foster do give a noble man a course, and his dogs do kill: this
must be presented at the Justice seat.

Assarts. Assisa foresta de Pickaring, fo. 7,
And as touching Assarts per Assisam Forestae: He that is presented to have
Assarted or enclosed any land within the Forest out of the Kings demeasnes in
his own fee, or in the fee of any other man, he shall make fine for this
offense. And if he will after compound with the Justice, he may continue the
same, paying to the King a yearly rent which must be entered of Record at the
time of the arrenting thereof.

And as concerning Agistors of the Kings woods: every Agister within the Forest
must bring before the Justice seat a just account what money he has received
for pawnage. And the form of the entry thereof is thus, Rogerus M.
respondebat de iiii. s. de pannagio porcorum de Estwood, etc.

Item, Assisa forestae Pickering fo. 8.
if any man take off the Skin of any wild Beast that dies of the Moreyne
within the Forest, if the same be presented he shall be punished for the same:
and if he come in, he shall pay the price of the Skin, and be amerced for
the offense.

Item, it is finable to permit a strangers beasts to pasture in the Forest,
and the form of the entree of the Record is thus:

Item presentant quod A.B. agistat omnia aueria sua in mora de F. infra
foresta^ ad dampnum domini Regis et ad nocumentu^ ferarum, Et nesciunt quo
warranto, Agistments Assisa de Pickering, fo. 10. Alicia Gower.
Ideo preceptum est vicecom^ quod venire faciat eum. Et postea testatum est per
ministros forestae quod ipse nihil habet infra forestam. Ideo pro agistamento
praedicto in misericordia and remaneat agistamentum in manu domini Regis.

If any owner of any woods in the Forest do appoint a Woodward in his woods
where there was never any before, Ibidem.
it is finable per As^isas forestae.

Item, Ibidem.
he that without warrant of the King pulls down his ancient house in the
Forest, and sets it up in another place without the Forest, this is finable.

Item, Ibidem.
if the Foresters do disturb the cattle of any person or township to have
common within the Forest, whereby they have wrong, or do take any money of them
by extortion: this is finable by the Justice Seat.

And because such like matter may chance hereafter at a Justice Seat, I have
here put down a presidene to be followed: vz, Item present' Quod Prior
Hospitalis Sancti Iohannis agistat aueria extraneorum apud F. infra limits
Forestae quod est Agistments.
ad nocumentum ferarum and ad damnum domini Regis. Et nesciunt quo warranto. A
claim the first day.
Ideo preceptum est vicecom^ quod venire faciat cum, postea venit praedictus
prior and dicit quod ipse virtute cartarum progenitorum Regis nunc factar'
predecessoribus suis debent agistare in loco praedicto. Et petit quod possit
admitti ad finem faciend'cum domino Rege pro clameo suo faciendo licet primo
die Itineris non fecit. Et admittitur ad finem xiij. s. iiij. d. per plegios.
A. and B.

Item, if a man do make Charecoales of Brouse wood within the Forest,
Pickering, f. 10 In casu Melsa.
it is finable. And if he will make title so to do by prescription, and do not
make his claim thereunto the first day of the Justice seat, he shall then
answer for the value of the Coals to the king.

Item, it belongs to the Justice seat to inquire who ought to repair bridges
decayed within the Forest, and to punish the offenders.

Item, a Parson of a Church was indicted, for that his dogs were not
expeditated or lawed. The Priour of Bridlington Parson of Skalby pleaded,
Ibidem. The Parson of Skalbies case, fo. 11. Magna Charta, cap. 1.
that by the great Charter of England, he was not bound to expeditate his
dogs: For there was one Article therein, Quod Ecclesia Anglicana sit libera,
and habeat omnes libertates suas integras and illesas, etc. And by this plee he
was discharged of the Indictment, Eborum, fo. 37.

Item, there may no man fish in any River that is aboundarie of a Forest,
unless he have warrant.

Item, they are to be indicted that ouerchargeth the Common within the Forest.
Ibidem, fo. 11 The Prior of Bridlington. fo. 12.


Item, there may no subject without warrant have a Vaccarie within the Forest.

Item, a ryding Foster was presented and fined for that he was negligent in
his office, and did oppress diverse people in taking of Otes and such like.

Item, if any man do interupt the Verderor or Regarder of the Forest, he shall
make fine.

Item, it is also fynable to digg Turffes within the Forest.

And likewise, to take Fesants, Partridgess, Fowls of Warren.
or other Birds within the Forest.

Item, if any man do offend in cutting down of Vert, and after dies before
presentment made thereof: yet in this case the King shall be answered for the
Trespass by his heirs or land tenants, per Assisam Forestae.

Placita Forestae de Pickering coram Iusticiar' itinerantibus Anno viij. domini
Regis Edwardi. iij.
BErnardus de Berghe viridar' venit et reddidit rotulos suos tam de viride quam
de venatione tangent' istam Forestam etc. Guillielmus Ward viridar' non venit
ad Rotulos suos reddideo preceptum est vicecom^ seisire omnes terras and
tenementa eius etc. Postea venit predictus Guilliellimus et petit admitti ad
finem faciendum cum domino Rege pro defalta primi diei: et admittitur ad finem
dij Marcij, et quoad Rotulos suos dicit quod furati fuerunt ab eo per quosdam
malefactores, et petit quod possit admitti ad sinem faciend'cum domino Rege in
hac part et admittitur pro fine 100. s.

Presentatum est per Forestarios et conuictum per viridarios quod Nich' Meuil
and alij etc. venerunt in forestam istam etc. cum arcubus sagittis et leporar'
et ibi ceperunt iij. Ceruos etc.

Item quod Guillielmus Fishborne est communis malefactor venationis domini
vbique in Foresta ista et malefactoribus consentiens. etc.

Compartum est per viridarium Rotulos istius Forestae quod Edmundus Hastings
postquam transgressus est de venatione in Foresta ista dimissus fuit coram eis
per manucaptor' etc. qui manu ceperunt hadendi eum hic etc. primo die itineris
qui modo eum non habent etc. ideo etc.

Johannes Kilmington nuper Custos istius forestae dicit quod praedictae ferae
acciderunt in Morina quorum corpora putrida fuerunt suspense super quercos, et
de hoc vocat recordum Rotulorum Viridariorum etc.

Ministri Forestae dicunt quod consuetum est ante haec tempora praesentare
quolibet tertio anno de canibus non expeditatis.

Item, presentant quod Johannes de Aslaby cepit infra dominicum quatuor quercus
precij iiii.d. Et dimissus fuit per viridat' manucaptor' vsque ad istam
Assisam, Qui modo non venit etc. Ideo ad iudicium de manucaptoribus. Et
praedictus Johannes respondeat domino Rege de pretio praedicto. Et pro
Forisfactur' eiusdem iiii.s. etc.

Et quod Humfridus Tober cepit xi quercos virides infra dominicum pretij
cuiuslibet j.d. et carriauit illos cum vno plaustro and vi. Bobis quae
appretionetur, viz, plaustrum ad vj.d. Et Boues ad xvj.s. pretij cuiuslibet
ij.s. viij d. vnde tenent' terrae and tenementorum Richardi de S. viridar'
istius Forestae ad cuius manus pertin' praedictum deuenit respondeant. Et
similiter pro Forisfactura eiusdem. xj.s.

Item presentant quod Prior de Maldon cepit ix. plaustra spineti in A. infra
dominicum pretij ix.d. Et per viridar' dimissus fuit per manucaptor' vsquam ad
assisam istam etc. Qui modo venit etc. et super hoc conuictus oneratur erga
dominu^ Rege^ de pretio praedicto. Et pro forisfactur' eiusdem ix.s.

Item, quod Rogerus Scalby cepit vnum viride^ quercum etc. pretij i.d. vnde
tenent' viridar' respond'de pretio predicto. Et pro forisfactur' vi.d. ad
quorum manus pretium and forisfactur' predict' de venerunt.

Item present' quod x. Stirkes qui fuerunt Iohannis Rouseby inuenti fuerunt in
haia de D. per wardam factam and non agistati, Qui capti fuerunt tanquam
forisfacti per assisam forestae et appretiantur ad xx.s. Et retraditi per
viridarios eidem Iohanui per plegios etc. ad dictos Stirkes habendos ad istam
assisam, Quimodo non venit. Ideo ipse in misericordia. Et nihil omninus idem
Johannes oneretur de pretio praedicto.

Ministri Forestae dicunt etc. Quod a tempore quo non extat memoriam hominum,
etc. presentatum fuit per Forestarios ad attachiamenta istius forestae de
canibus praedictis Abbatis de Rival etc in maner' suis praedictis non
expeditatis, fo. 16.

Ministri Forestae dicu^t. etc. quod cum contigerit quod woodwardus praedict'
Prioris Sancti Iohannis Jerusalem non venet ad attachiament' Forestae prout
alij Woodwardi diuersorum dominorum in foresta veniant, Tunc ipse Woodwardus
semper consuetus est ibidem Amerciati. Et amerciamentum inde ad opus domini
Regis leuare sicut and de alijs Woodwardis qui non veniunt and fuerunt
amerciati.

Ministri Forestae dicunt etc. Quod Tho. Wake and omnes a tempore quo non extat
memoria hominum habuerunt etc. liberatione Boscu^ in communibus boscis suis pro
se etc. ad quodlibet attachiamentum and hoc ad sufficientiam bosci.

Item dicunt quod escapia, vz, Emende de forincecis auerijs infra metas
Forestae invent per forestarios escapium inde presentatum est and fuit a
tempore quo non etc. Ad attachiamenta Forestae praedictae and ibidem dominus
Forestae habuit emendas.

In clameo Burgens. de Scargeburgh coram domino Wihelmo Vefeye Iusticiar'
Forestae.
ET quia viridarij praedicti nihil responderunt de transgress. venationis
factis in Foresta praedicta hocanno. Ideo committuntur prisonae. Et educti
venerunt and fecerunt finem per iij.li. etc.

Abbas de Whitbie clamat habere viridarios suos proprios de liberate sua de
Whitby eligend'de cetero in pleno Commitatu Eborum pro vt moris est ad
responsiones et presentationes faciend'de transgress. quas a modo fieri
contingent de viride and venatione infra metas forestae de Whitby coram
Iusticiarijs domini Regis Itinerant. ad placita Forestae in partibus illis et
non alibi, Sicut viridarij Forestae domini Regis huiusmodi Responsiones et
presentationes facere debent et consueuerunt.

In Itinere Lancastriae.
FOrestarij venerunt et dicunt pro se ipsis et omnibus alijs forestar istius
Forestae, Quod ipsi forestarij nunquam fuerunt onerati de aliquibus Rotulis,
seu Indictament. tangentibus forestam. Et quod omnes Rotuli et Indictament.
remanent penes viridar. etc. Et hoc parati sunt verificare per ministros etc.
Qui quidem ministri ad hoc Jurat hoc idem testantur, etc. Ideo, etc.

Presentatum est quod Johannes Lancastriae cepit tres quercos in Foresta ista.
Qui venit et dicit quod eos habuit ex liberatione foresta. pro estouerijs suis
etc. Et quia hoc testatum est per Rotulos viridar. esse verum. Ideo dictus
Johannes inde eat, etc.

Et quia inspectis Rotulis viridar' istius forestae nihil compertum est de
praetio corticum xl. Quercum praedictor. Ideo ipsi liberantur prisone. Et
educti fine^ fecerunt cum domino in hac part per dimi marc.

Nomina Ministrorum forestae de Lancastra.

Wilhelmus Blount, Custos totius Forestae et Seneschallus, Roberto de Ratcliue
magister forestarius eiusdem forestae, Wilhelmus de Holland Supervisor
forestariorum totius forestae, Johannes Balridge Forestarius de feodo in warda
de Lousdale.

Robertus Fowcher nunc Custos istius forestae venit, etc. Et illo amoto
Wilhelmus de Clapham Iuratus est et efficitur Custos eiusdem forestae.

Certain judgments and principal notes, taken out of the Records of the
Forest, digested into Tytles
THe Priour of Lancaster had by Charter, every day two cart lode of morte Boys
to be burnt in his Priory: Lancaster, f. 3. and 64. Abuser.
And because he took viridem Boscum pro mortuo Bosco, contrary to his charter
the benefit and profit of his estouers was seysid into the hands of the Lords
of the Forest: For the which, the Priour made his fine: pro estouerijs
rehabe^dis ad iij.li.vj.s.viij.d. et rehabuit estoueria sua Itiner' Lancastr'
Anno 10. Ed. 3. fo. 65. a. Abuser. Assisa Lancaster, fo. 3. and 66 Assisa
Lancaster, fo. 4.
And here you may note that for abuser there growth good cause of seiser. See
the like, in the case of the Burgeses of Lanc. ibide^ fo. 66. Note if a man
have Estouers by grant, as appurtinaunt out of a Forest, unto a certain
message: In this case if the same Estouers be spent in any other house, this
is a good cause of seiser of the same Estouers, for this is an abuser, the
which is a cause of forfeiture. Itiner' Lanc. Anno 10. E. 3. fo. 67. b. The
same law is of a Common of pasture.

No man may agist within his own lands within the regard of the forest,
except he have special license so to do. Agistments. Pickering, f. 16
In clameo Abbatis de Rival. Itiner' Pick. 10. E. 3. fo. 166. quere de hoc,
for the words of the Statuit of Carra de forest are these: vnusquisque liber
homo agistit boscum suum in Foresta pro voluntate etc.

If the Justice of the forest do any thing stick at the allowing of any man's
liberties claimed before the^, Allowances.
then may the party grieved have a write of allowance, or a write to proceed to
allowance. Itiner' Pic. fo. 182. a. Where the Justice of a Forest, does stay
over long in allowing of a liberty that is claimed: Itinere Pickering, fo. 16
Abbas de Rival, and fo. 23 Abbas de Whitbe. Ibidem. fo. 16. Abbot de Rival.
then may the party grieved, purchase the kings write of allowance directed
to the Justice of the forest, commanding him to allow the same. The tenor of
which write, does appear: Anno 10. E. 3. Itiner' Lan. fo. 9. fo. 65. In the
claim of the Abbot of Furneaux. If at one Justice seat, certain liberties be
allowed: at another time the same allowance may be pleaded quod nota: And the
record of the allowance shall be sent down by writ unto the Justices.

It was admitted and adjudged in the claim of one Lambeson that to be quited
of Pannage, intempore pannagij, Appurtenance.
might be appurtenaunt unto a man's free hold. An office of a woodwarde and
the bark of timber Trees felled, was claimed to be pertaining unto a manor,
and adjudged accordingly. To be quite and discharged of Pawnage: and Pawnage of
Swine within a forest may be by precription appurtenaunt unto lands. And to
claim that he and his ancestors a tempore quo etc. is a good title without
saying that he and his ancestors, and all they whose estate he has in
certain lands etc. a tempore etc.

Asserts. Pickering. f. 15
No man may assert or excolor, but by the kings warrant: in casu prioris sanc^i
^ohannis Jerusalem in assisa Foresta de Pick. fo. 18. b.

Note that the Priour of S. John's, did make his claim by one of his confriers,
whom he made his attorney, being a dead person in law. quod nota. Attorney.


The Lord of a Forest, may enter by his officers into any man's Wood, Brusewood.
Assisa de Pickering. f. 19
the which is growing within the regard of the forest, and cut down bruise
Wood, for the Dear in Winter.

Note that it appears by the claim of the Abbot of Meriuall, that within the
regard of any Forest, Buildings. Lancaster, fo. 5
no man may build either houses or barcaries: quod nota. It appears that
within the Forest, no man may build any new houses or barcaries, or use
tillage in any new grounds, without especial license. It appears by a
claim made by the Abbot and Covent of Meriuall, that none may make any new
buildings within the Forest, except he have good warrant from the Lords of the
Forest: for the Abbot made claim by grant that he might make omnimodum
comodum suum sine assertand'sine edificand'modis omnibus etc. And if he might
do it without warrant, it had been in vain to have had license, Assisa Lane.
fo, 9. Cablicia. Common of pasture. Lanc. fo. 13. Sheep, Swine, nor Goats are
allowed to have common in the Forest. Default. Itinere Lanc. fo. 5.
and also to have made his claim for the same. And that the assizes of the
Forest are so, it appears by a presentment made in a case of the Priour of
Lancaster

Cablicia is properly Bruise Wood: Itiner' Lanc. 10 E. 3. fo. 172. a. Itiner'
Pick.

A claim made for ^^^on of pasture is good. It is to be noted that neither
Sheep nor Swine are allowed to have Common within the Forest: quia bidentes et
porci non sunt animalia ad comunicandum in Foresta, sed prebent exilium ferarum
in eadem in clameo Burgens. Lan. fo. 30. the same law is of Goats In clameo
Burgens. de Preston. fo. 5.

Nota, that if any do make a claim and do after make default, their liberty
shall be seized into the Lords hands: for default is a cause of seizure: in the
case de domino de Gersingham, and others. A woman tenant for term of life of a
Park, within the Forest of Lancaster made her claim for that being called
Knoghsley Park, and also for a free warren, and after made default: where upon
one Latham being tenant in reuercion was received, and made claim both for the
Park and also for the free warren: Ibidem.
and because he did not show forth any good matter to warrant his title:
therefore was it adjudged, quod clausus predict' prosternatur et remaneat
Foresta vt prius, et quod warrennia predicta capiatur in manus domini etc.
Demurrer. Pickering, f. 21


If it chance a demurrer in law do fall out between the king and his
subjects, upon a claim before the Justice of the Forest: they may adiourne the
same into the kings Bench, there to be determined. Nota, the president is
excelent.

If a Justice seat be discontinuid, Discontinuance and Resomons. Pickering, f.
15
by the not coming of the Justice: In this case, the king by his writ, may
revive the same again. It is to be noted, that in case the plees of the
forests be discontinued, by the not coming of the Justices: that in that case
the plees may be revived again by the kings writ of resommons whereby all
things shall be and remain in Pristino statu. See the president thereof Itiner'
Pic. fo. 15.

Patet that secundum assisas Forestae expeditatio canum, Expeditatio canum.
Pickering f. 16 Exposition by usage. Pickering, f. 17 Lancaster, f, 9.
must and may be every third year.

William the Earl of Warren, Boheme and Marton, granted by his deed, unto the
Abbot of Furneaux, that he and his successors, might take within his Forest of
Lancaster maremiu^ etc. que ad vsus suos sunt necessaria, et nominatim ad
piscariam suam de Lanc. faciend'quicquid eis ad hoc opus fuerit. And in his
claim the Abbot claimed sufficient timber both for his Manner of B. and also
for his Piscarie, and for all other things necessary etc. And that, by that
word Maremiu^, he had used and enjoyed the same ever since the making of the
said grant without the view of the Foresters. And the usage being thus
found by the jury, his title of claim was allowed. Here it is to be noted,
that many times dark and obscure words are expounded by usage: as appears
in this president quod nota: for this word Maremium is expounded by the mean
of usage, Maremium.
for timber to build with all. And this word Maremium, is also in this place
expounded for Mesuagium.

To be acquit of escapes within a Forest, does signify that where after the
assizes of the forest, Escapium. Pickering, f. 15 Ibidem, 17. Ibidem, 19.
If any man's Beasts be found within the lands forbidden, or in the fence time
within the forest: then the law is, that the owner of the same beasts shall be
amercied for every foot i.d. And if the second time the beasts be found
again, then to be amerced in like manner. And if the third time they be taken
offending, vt supra: then shall the same beasts be forfited unto the Lord of
the foreste: of all which amercementes, he that is quietus de escapio, is
clearly discharded. ibidem.

Footegeld. Pickering, fol. 17 Ibidem. Chiminage.
To be quit of foot geld, is to keep dogs within the forest vnluwed, without
any mercementes, fine or forfecture ibidem.

To be quite of chiminage, is a discharge of chiminag silver paid for passage
through the Forest, with carriage of any thing upon Horse back. ibidem.

Ibidem.
Note that the Lord of a Forest, has this prerogative over all men that dwell
in his forest: that at such time as he is disposed to chase within his forest:
every man must be ready to hold a Greyhound, for the taking of wild beasts
in such places as they shall be appointed: Tristis.
or else the defaulters to be amerced. And he that has the benefit or
discharge of this word Tristis, is not bound by the assizes of the forest to
give any such attendance. ibibem.

By reason of Charter, the Priour of Lancaster had the tenth of all the
Venison: Faux claim. Lancaster, f. 3 fol. 64. Pickering. f. 15
viz. In carne tantum sed non in corio. And because he made a false claim, and
said that he ought to have the tenth of all the Venison within the forest of
Lancaster, as well in carne as in corio: therefore the Priour was in
misericordia de decima venationis sue in corio non percipiendo etc. The fence
Month. Fense month. Pickering, f. 20
Thus ye set that for the offense of a false claim, the punishment is to make
fine, and not to sease the same.

The fence Month is always xv. days before Midsomer, and xv. days after
Midsomer. Quod nota, every common Month is but xxviii days, but the fence
Month is xxxi. Fine. Pickering. f 10 15. Johannes de Melsa. In Clameo Abbatis
de Myriuall, f. 69


Nota that such as ought to make claim etc. by the assizes of the Forest: they
ought to put in their claim the first day of the Justice seat: or else, at
any day after, their claim shall not be received without fine. And when the
claim is once put in, if the claim be in any point faulty, if they will amend
their claim they must make fine. quod nota. ibidem.

No man may common with Goats within the forest, Goats. Pickering. f. 67
without especial warrant. Nota that Capriolus non est bestia venationis
Forestae, quod nota.

Nota that all the inhabitants within the Forest of Lancaster being
freeholders, A grant made to a comminaltie. Lancaster, f, 4. Pickering. f. 22
did make claim to be acquitted of all manner of Vert, and of Regard, and of
diverse other things: and this claim was allowed of in Eire, by reason that
John Therle of Marton, being Lord of the Forest of Lancaster, did by his
Charter grant the same by these words: Sciatis me concessisse omnibus
vilitibus et omnibus thengis, et omnibusliberis tene^tibus qui manent in
Foresta mea de honere de Lanc. qd'possunt etc. Pickering. f. 10 19. Hawks
Gilbert de Acton, f. 148
By this president ye see that a grant was made unto a cominaltie and good
etc. There ye see that a subject is and may be Lord, and owner of a forest.

Belsa claimed within his Woods, to have the airie of Fawcones, Marlens and
Sparohaukes. And not withstanding the letter of the great Charter of the
forest: Heath, Whenes, and Turns. Pickering. f, 19 Non vser. Pickering. f. 15
17. 18 fol 166
it was enquired by the Ministers of the Forestes, whether he had used to have
the same.

It appears that no man may cut down Heth and Whenes, or digg turns within
the Forest, without good warrant.

If a liberty to make a Park be granted by the king, and is not after used:
this non vser shall be inquired of. It may be gathered as well within the claim
of the Abbot of Rival, as in diverse other claims, that after that a liberty
is granted, if the grauntee do not use the same continually: that the non vser
shall be inquired of: the which non vser is a good cause of seiser.

It appears that none may gather Nuttes within the Forest without warrant,
Nuttes. Pickering, f. 19 Park.


Nota that a license to emparke and enclose a Park, must contain a certain
quantity of ground: and it must be the (...) soil of the grauntee, or else
upon inquisition had in dew form of law, ^^^^paus Dacres
the Park is to be seized etc.

That a Subject being Lord and owner of a Forest, may give license unto another
to make and enclose a Park within the meets of the same Forest ^o have and to
held the same Park enclosed with all such Venisons as the grauntee shall put
therein to him and to his heirs for ever. Assisa de Pickering. fo. 64
And this was adjudged and admitted for a good license in a claim made in Air.
It is to be noted that if such a Park be so slenderly fenced and enclosed, that
the wild beasts of ye forest do enter into the Park: then may the Lord of the
Forest enter into the said Park at his pleasure: and there hunt at his
pleasure.

It is to be noted, that if any man have a Manor, whereunto does belong a
certain Wood, Extra regardu^ Forestae, Hares, Foxes, etc. Pickering, fol. 11
the which Wood is within the compass of the Forest or environed with the
Forest, the which wood is notwithstanding without the Regard of the Forest: In
this case by the assizes of the Forest, he must make his claim by these
words: viz. Gilbertus de Acton clamat tenere boscum suum de Trouersdale
pertinent. ad manerium suum de B. extra regardum forestae viz. illum boscum qui
est exparte borial'etc.

And so on with all the limitts of the same etc.

Item the same man made claim to hunt the Hare, the Fox, the wild Cat,
Lancaster, f 5. Abbas de Miriuall.
the Martron in B.

Item, the same man claimed to have liberty to pluck up the Heathe in B. by
the roots, and to dig turues in the More of A. and the same to sell at his
pleasure, and to carry them out of the Forest.

Pickering f, 14
Item to Agiste, and to take the agistment to his own use etc. All which
claims, being found to be true by the Ministers of the Forest were allowed,
by judgment by these words: Eat habeat et gaudeat saluo iure etc.

Pickering, f. 16 Reuiner post mortem. Abbas de Rival. fo. 166
An Abbot made his claim: and hanging his claim dies. A new Abbot being made,
declared this plee: and being tried to be true by the Fosters, Verderors, and
Regardors: the new Abbot was permitted, but in a new claim.

Nota in the claim of the Abbot of Riual: it is apparent, that within the
Regard of the forest, no man may turn any land into tillage, without good
warrant.

Henry the second, Tillage. Pickering, f. 16 fo. 18.
granted unto the Abbot of York the tenth of all his Venison in York shire by
his Charter. By this it appears, that for wild beasts there was no tithe
due: for then might not the king have granted other persons tithes. Tithe
venison.

Pickering, f. 19 No tything venison by the Law, but in some places by usage.

Lancaster, fo. 3 Trial, by Verderors, Regardors, and Agistors.

Pickering, f. 15




The Priour of Lancaster, did claim the tithe of Venison, and the tithe of
Pawnage, viz. decimam bestiam in carne et corio per manus minister' de foresta:
And the tenth penny of the Pawnage, when the Pawnage of the Forest was
collected. And he made his title by virtue of a grant made by the Lord of
the Forest unto one of his predecessors, and his claim was allowed for good.

In case one do claim by prescription, by tenure, or by grant, to be Foster
of fee, and prays that it may be enquired of by the ministers of the Forest:
In this case the Verderors, Regardors and Agistors shall try the title. But if
a man do claim by inheritance or otherwise any profit apprendre within the
Forest, as a common of Estouers, or of pasture, or such like. In this case the
trial shall be by the Fosters, Verderors, and Regardors: But not by the
Agistors, provt patet etc. In case the matter of the claim do require a trial
by the Country: Pickering in omnibus inquisitionibus.
there the conclusion of the pleder shall be, Et hoc paratus est verificare prout
Cur' etc. I deo inquiratur inde veritas per ministros eiusdem forestae. And in
this case the Verderors, Regardors, and Agistors shall only try the title. But
yet notwithstanding, you shall see very many presidents: that when the entry
has been, et hoc petit quod inquiratur per ministros eiusdem forestae etc. that
this has imediatly ensued, Lancaster, fo. 3 Lancaster, f. 2. Lancaster, f. 4.
In clameo Johannes Acres.
viz. et quia videtur cur' hic quod expeditus est et necesse ad inqui rendu^
tam per ministros forestae predictae quam per alios probos et legales homines
etc. And thus you may see it is in the election of the Justices, whether the
ministers with others may be impanelled qd'nota, to enquire if there be any
president, that the Country has tried any title of claim without the
Ministers of the Forest etc.

Woodwardes may not walk with Bow and Shaftes: Woodwards. Pickering, f. ^^
but with Forest bills, quod nota.

The Courts of the Forest.
FIrst, it is to be understood, that there be three principal and chief
Courts usually kept for matters of the Forest, that is to say: the Court of
Attachementes: the Court of Swanimote: and the high Court of the Lord
Justice in Air of the Forest, commonly called the Justice seat. And these
three several Courts are of three several natures as at large hereafter it
shall appear: wherefore to the intent that the said Courts may the better be
known every one in his own proper nature, I have here set them down, and
placed each one of them in his own place and degree as they are, together with
their several authorities and procedings, as you may see hereafter. And
because the said court of Attachmentes is the meanest and lowest Court of them
all; For that, that in the said Court of Attachments the officers there do
nothing but receive the Attachments of the Foresters, and inroll them in the
rolls of the verderors, to have them in a readiness against the time of the
keeping of the Court of Swanimote. And for that the said Court of
Attachmentes cannot determine any offense or trespasses of the Forest, The
Court of Attachmentes first.
If the value of the same trespass be above the value of iiii. pence: but that
the same offense and trespass, if the vaue be more then four pence must be by
the said Verderors enrolled in their roll, and so to be sent from thence to
the Swanimote to have an orderly trial of the same there according to the
Laws of the Forest: Therefore I have placed the same Court first of all,
because that the greatest part of all the presentme^ts do first begin there:
and also because that when offenses and trespasses of the Forest are presented
by the Foresters in the said Court of Attachmentes before the verderors of
the Forest, and that they have entered them in the rolls and records of the
Forest, then the same Court cannot there proceed any further therein, neither
is that proceeding by them as yet any conviction against the offender in those
offenses: but that he that is such a trespasser may yet trauerse the same
presentment that is against him, until that the same have passed the Swanimote
Court of the Forest: so that such trespasses as are presented at the Court of
Attachmentes, must of necessity proceed from thence to the Court of Swanimote
before that the offenders and trespassers may be punished or stand convicted as
guilty in law of their offenses. The Court of Swanimote next unto it.
Therefore I have placed the Court of Swanimote next unto the said Court of
Attachmentes, as a Court that is higher then the Court of Attachmentes, and yet
more lower or inferior then the high Court of the seat of the Lord Justice in
Air of the Forest. For when the presentmentes of the Courts of Attachmentes,
as before said, and also all other presentmentes of the Swanimote Court, have
had their procedings in the same Court, according to the assizes and
ordinances of the forest; and that all the trespasses of the forest are there
presentat' per Forestarios et duodecem Iuratores et conuict' per viridarios, as
they must be of necessity by the law: yet cannot the same Court of Swanimote
then determine the same trespasses or assesse any fine for any such offense, or
give judgment thereof (any other, then that the said offenders are convicted
thereof, as is aforesaid.) But the same presentmentes, Indictmentes, and
conuictions, must be delivered to the Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest
at the Justice seat the first day of the same seat, when they are called for,
according to the ordinance of the Forest made in Anno Tricessimo quarto Edwardi
primi orticulo 1. And according to the assizes and customs of the Forest, made
in Anno 6. Ordinatio Foresta articulo. 1 Assisa and consuetudines Forestae,
artic. 19. Charta de Foresta, artic. 16.
Edwardi primi articulo 19. And according to the form of Carta de Foresta
articulo 16. In these words, Et ea presentet viridarijs prouinciarum, et cum
irrotulata fuerint, et sub siggillis viridarior' inclusa presententur
capitalibus Iusticiar' nostris de Foresta cum in parts illas venerint ad
tenend'placita de Foresta, et coram eis terminentur: so that it does appertain
only unto the Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest at the high Court of
Justice seat or general Sessions of the Forest to give judgment of all
offenses, and to assesse the fines, and to punish the offenders. And because
that all the procedings of the two other Courts are as nothing before that
they do come to the Justice seat of the Forest to receive their Judgment. The
seat of the Lord Justice in oyer of the Forest, is the highest Court.

The Courts of Attachements and Swanimote, are but hands to the same.


Therefore I have placed that Court last of all, as the principal head, and
the most highest Court of the Forest: unto the which Court, the Courts of
Attachmentes and Swanimotes, are but as it were two hands to deliver matters
unto it, to receive Judgment thereof from thence.

The Court of Attachements of the Forest.
IT seems that in times past, before the making of the great Charter of the
Forest, the Courts of Swanimotes were holden and kept more oftener then they
be now, And also oftener then three times in the year, at the will and
pleasure of the chief officers of the Forest, Carta de Foresta, cap. 8.
and not at any certain time known. And therefore the Statuit of Carta de
foresta caput 8. in these words, Nullum Swanimotum de cetero teneatur in regno
nostro, nisi ter in Anno, does prohibit that no Swanimote Court shall be holden
or kept after that time any oftener then thrice in the year: And that Statuit
does there set down farther, what officers shall be compelled of necessity to
be there at every one of the said Swanimotes: and also at what days and
times of the year the same shall be kept, In what place the Swanimot shall be kept.
and in what place, viz. predicta autem Swanimota non teneantur nisi in com' in
quibus teneri consueuerunt: And then last of al, after yt the same statuit has
so prohibited, that the said Court of Swanimot shall not after that time be kept
any oftener then three times in the year, as is a fore said: and has there
set down the days when they shall be kept: It does also there set down the time
of the year when the Court of Attachments shall be kept, and the officers that
shall be there, and what every officer shall do there in the execution of his
office, as it does appear by the same Statute, the words being as follows:
Preterea singulis quadraginta diebus per totum Annum conueniant Forestarij,
Carta de Foresta, cap. 8.
et viridarij. In these words before said it is plainly set down there, when
the Court of Attachmentes shall be holden, and how often: that is to say, every
forty days, throughout the whole year the same Court of Attachmentes shall be
kept, and there must not be any longer distance or time then forty days, from
the keeping of one Court of attachmentes, unto the keeping of another Court of
Attachmentes: For if there be, then the same Court is not kept nor holden,
according to the same Statuit every forty days throughout the whole year.
Why the court of Attachements is called the xl. day court.
And because the same Court is kept every forty days, it is called, the
forty day court: nether is the same court to be kept in any shorter time then
every forty days: for if it be, the same is not then kept according to the
direction and authority given by the same Statuit for the keeping of the same.
The words of the same Statuit are further as follows: Ad videndum
attachiamenta de Foresta tam de viridi quam de venatione; In which words, there
are two principal things to be noted, that is to say, the first is the
office and duty of the Verderors, and what they ought to do at this Court of
Attachmentes: which is, ad videndum Attachiamenta de Foresta: that is to say,
to see the Attachmentes of the Forest: so that the office of the Verderors at
this Court of Attachmentes is here as it were even pointed out with the finger
what they are there to do: which is, to sit there to see the Attachmentes of
the Forest, and to receive the same attachmentes of the Foresters and
Woodwardes that do present them there, and then to enter those Attachmentes in
the rolls of the Verderors. And it seems that because this Court is most
chiefly a Court for the Foresters, to bring in their Attachmentes of the
Forest, and for the Verderors to receive the same Attachmentes, Why this Court
is called the court of attachements.
therefore the same Court is called the Court of Attachment, receiving his
name of the effect of the thing which is (as is said before) ad videndum
attachiamenta, to see the attachements of the Forest. Then the second thing
that is here in this word aforesaid to be noted is, of what matters they are
to see attachements of, and to receive attachements of, which lest that happily
they should herein exceed their authority, the said Statute does plainly set
down, of what matters those attachements ought to be which they shall so see
and receive at the said Court of attachements in the words aforesaid: viz. de
viridi et de venatione, which is of Vert and of Venison. So that all
attachmentes that this Court has here by this Statuit any authority to deal
with all, the same must concern the hurt or injury that is done, Of what
things the Court of Attachements has authority to deal in.
or that is to be done to the Vert or Venison of the Forest, or else this Court
is not to meddle with the same, for their authority is but tam de viridi quam
de venatione: So that you may see by this Statuit that every forty days
through out the whole year it is appointed that the Foresters and Verderors
shall assemble themselves together, to see the attachmentes of the Forest, as
well of Vert as of Venison: wherein is showed how often this Court shall be kept
and holden: The office of a Verderor at the same Court: and for what things the
attachmentes there ought to be made. Now the words of the Statuit there are
further as follows: per presentationem ipsorum Forestariorum, et coram ipsis
attachiatis: In these words here is set down the office of the Foresters or
keepers, and wherefore they ought to come to this Court of attachmentes, which
is to present offenders, and offenses, or trespasses there, and to bring in the
attachments there that they have made of offenders, which they have attached
for doing of such trespasses in the Forest. For it appears by this Statute,
that the office of the Verderors is to view the attachements there, and to
receive them, per presentationem ipsorum forestariorum. And the office of the
foresters or keepers at this Court is to present the attachmentes of the Forest
before the Verderors, so that the difference between the office of a Verderor,
and the office of a Forester at this Court of attachmentes is this: that a
Verderors office is, ad videndum attachiamenta de Foresta: and a Foresters
office is ad presentandum attachiamenta de Foresta: and these words, et coram
ipsis attachiatis, must be understood in this manner, as if the words had
been: Et coram ipsis viridarijs attachiatis presentatis: that is to say,
presented before the Verderors as things attached, or persons that are
attached for some trespasses done in the Forest in Verte or Venison. And it
does seem that before the making of this grant of the liberties of the
Forest, the Court of Swanimote, and also the said Court of attachmentes then
called the Woodmote Court, were holden very often, and yet not at any certain
time neither, but at the will and pleasure of the chief officers of the
Forest, which was a great trouble and vexation to the inhabitants in Forestes.
For the avoiding of which mischiefs, this branch of this Statuit or grant was
made. First to set down how often in every year the Swanimote shall be kept.
Secondly at what days and times in the year the same shall be kept. And thirdly
that the court of attachmentes shall be kept every forty days throughout the
whole year. And because that offenses and trespasses in Forests did daily
increase and grow to be more and more: and for that the said Court of
Swanimote is by this statute restrained to be kept any oftener then thrice in
the year: therefore this statute has specially provided that the Court of
attachmentes shall be holden and kept every forty days throughout the whole
year: and that is a very precise limited authority, appoyntid by this
Charter for the keeping and holding of the same Court of attachmentes: He that
has an authority to do a thing, must follow his authority in doing of the
same.
so that the same may not be kept or holden in any other manner then by this
lymitted authority is appointed. And it is held for good law at this day,
that if the court of attachments for the Forests be holden or kept in any other
order then every xl. days, that is to say, in longer or shorter time then
every xl. days, that then the keeping of the same Court is void and without
authority so to do: for that the same is not kept according to the limmited
time appointed by this Statuit. And yet I do not think that all the procedings
in the same Court so holden are therefore void in Law by that not holding of
the Court according to the time appointed: for if such a Court of attachments be
holden sooner than every forty days, which is contrary to the limited time
appointed by the Statute, and at that Court so holden, there be diverse
presentiments and attachements presented against offenders in the Forest, and
afterward those presentiments do proceed to the Swanimote: and at the
Swanimote Court the same trespassor or offender does there take exceptions to
the same presentment presented against him, for that the same was presented at
a Court of attachements that was not holden as the same ought to be by the
limited authority given by the said statute: yet that Exception shall not
avoid the same attachment or presentment, for as much as the Court of
attachmentes did not proceed in the same Iudicially, but only to receive the
same presentment or attachment, to Enroll the same in their roll, and to
deliver it to the next Court of Swanimote: and such a receiving of a
presentment, or attachment at such a Court so holden, cannot by any reason make
the same void, for as much as the same presentment or attachment had been
still good in Law if the same had not at all been presented until the next
Court of Swanimote and then presented there, and not before. But if a Court of
attachmentes be holden contrary to this Statuit: and a forester having
attached an offender in the Forest, to appear at such a Court of attachment
before the Verderors, by an Ox, or a Horse, and the man so attached does not
there appear at that Court, Vide Master Hesket, in his reading of the Forest.
fo. 13.
wherefore the same court of attachme^tes does give judgment that his beast is
forfeted by his default, in not a pearing: and yt the same beast shall be sold
and the price thereof to be levied to the use of the king, This proceeding now in
this case is void in law: for in this case the said Court of attachmentes does
proceed herein Iudicially: but it is otherwise in the case before. Note the
difference. And yet for all this, it is to be noted, that some times this court
of attachmentes may be kept a day or two more then forty days after the
Court of attachmentes that was kept last before it, and yet the same Court is
not kept any otherwise then according to the meaning of the same Statuit: but
that is but in certain cases of necessity, which cannot otherwise be avoided:
as if the just fortieth day next ensuing the former Court day, do fall to be
upon a Sundaie, or upon Christmas day: then the same Court day that so does
fall upon a Sunday or upon Christmas day, may be deferred a day longer, but
that is because of the necessity that cannot be avoided in that case: for it
is to be thought, that it was not the meaning of this Charter of the Forest at
the first, that this Court of attachmentes should be kept upon any such day as
Sundaie or Christmas day which are provided for the service of God only: for
such days are not accounted any days in Law to hold any Courts in: and so
necessity here has no Law in this case. And this Court of attachements does
differ from all other Courts, in that the same is to be kept every forty
days throughout the whole year by the Verderors etc. and therefore this Court
is called of some men, the Verderors Courts, The Verderors Court.
because that the Verderors do keep the same Court: and yet at this Court of
attachements, all the Foresters of the Forest ought to appear there also, by
this Charter. Master Hesket fo. 44.
And as Master Hesket affirms in his learned reading of the Laws of the
Forest, fo. 44. all other officers and ministers of the Forest ought to appear
at this Court of attachmentes, although that the letter of this Satute does not
specify so far by special words: for the Statute does speak but of
Foresters and not of any other officers. And at this Court every Forester
must by his oath present all offenders in Vert and Venison within their several
walks and charge: and also al Attachements that they have made. Woodwardes,
must likewise present at this court all offenses done within their charge: but
they cannot make any Attachment, nor Attach any offender within their charge,
Co^suetudines Forestae Articulo 12.
for the words of assisa et consuetudines forestae articulo, 12. are these: si
Woodwardus viderit malefact' in custodia sua, vel bestiam mortuam, debet
monstrare capitali Forestario vel viridario: So that you may perceive by this
Statute, that a Woodward may monstrare, but not attachiare, that is to say, he
may present offenders, but not attache offenders. The usual form of a
presentment in the fourtidaye Court or Court of Attachment, according to the
course of Law is in this manner, viz. ad istam curiam attachiamenti dominae
Riginae Forestae suae de Waltham in com^ Essex tenent' apud Chigwell in eodem
com^ nono die Iulij Anno regni domine nostre Elizabethe dei gratia Angliae, The
title of the Court of Attachementes.
Franciae et Hibernae Regina fidei defensor etc. vicesimo primo.

Iohanes Matthowes forestarius iuratus de warda de Woodford infra Forestam
istam presentat quod Johannes West de Chinkford in Com' Essex yeoman nono die
Iulij Anno Regni dominae nostrae Elizabethae dei gratia Angliae, Franciae et
Hiberniae Reginae fidei defensor' etc. vicesimo primo intrauit Forestam istam
cum arcubus et sagitt' et ibidem in quodam loco vocat' Woodford Meade infra
forestam predictam versauit vnam damam ad mortem et carnes cepit et fecit inde
voluntatem suam: The form of a presentment in the fourtidaie Court.
and it is to be noted, that every presentment that shall be made against any
such offender, for any offense done in the Forest, in Vert or Venison, must be
certain concerning the same offense, and that in these five things hereafter
following.

1 The person of the offe^der
First, the same must be certain concerning the person of the offender, as to
show the name and surname of the offender, and the place where he does dwell.

2 Concerning the place where the offense was done.
The second is, that the same must be certain concerning the place where the
offense was done, as to show in the presentment that the offense was done in
such a place, which is within the Forest: so that thereby it may appear
whether the same offense were done within the Forest or not: 5 Concerning the
thing in the which the offense was done.
for thereby it may be decerned whether the same offense be any offense or no
offense.

Thirdly, the same presentment must be certain concerning the thing it self,
in which the offense was committed or done, as to say, that the offender
killed a Buck or a Do, or as the cause in truth was.

4 Concerning the Instruments.
Fourthly, the same must be certain concerning the instruments, with the which
the offense was done: and that ought to be showed certainly: for the
instruments with the which the offense was done are forefected to the king: as
if an offender do enter into the Forest with a Crosebowe or a long bow, and
there do kill a Dear, the Crosebow is forfected to the king, and so is the
long Bow likewise.

The fiift is, that the same presentment must be certain concerning the manner
of the doing of the same offense, 5 concerning the manner of the act.
for the manner and form of the doing of the same offense may make the
punishment thereof greater or lesser, as the case does require: It may make the
same offense to be a voluntary offense in the offender or a negligent offense
in the offender: as if a man riding through the Forest having a Greyhound fast
in a slip by his side and the Greyhound passing this through the Forest does
espy the Dear, Voluntary offense, negligent offense.
and with the force and strengh of the Greyhound, he does slip the collar, and
so against the will of the owner the same Greyhound does kill a wild beast of
the Forest: this is but a necgligent offense in the owner of the Greyhound, in
which case the manner of the same offe^e must be crtainly showed.

And as concerning Attachementes of the Forest: it is to be noted that there be
three manner of Attachementes of the Forest, that is to say.
To attache 1 By goods and cattels. 2 By body, Pledges, and Mainprise. 3 By the
body only without pledges or Mainprise


THe first manner of Attachement is, The first manner of attachement.
to Attache a man by his goods and Cattels: and that is to Attache a man in
the same manner as the Sheriff does make an Attachment at the common Law by the
goods of any person in an Accion of debt or trespass in the County Court, to
cause the party attached to appear there and to answer the said Accion. Even
so it is if an offender within the Forest have committed any offense in any
manner of nether Verte, and afterward when the Forester has knowledge
thereof, then the Forester may attache his Cow or his horse or any other beast
or goods that he has within the Forest, and then after such Attachement made,
to declare unto the owner of the same goods or Cattels, the cause why he is so
Attached, and to will him to appear at the next Court of attachementes, and
to find Pledges there to answer the same offense, and then such a Forester in
the mean time, to keep such goods or Cattle or Cattells so attached in his
own Custody, until the next Court of attachementes to be holden for the same
Forest: and then the same Forester, at the said next Court to bring in the same
attachement before the Verderors, and there to present as well the offense for
the which he was so attached, as also the attachement it self, to thend that
the Verderors may view the same: and then if the same offender do not make his
appearance at the said next Court, according as he was attached to be, to
answer his said offense, but there does make default, then by his default for
not appearing, his goods that were so attached are forfected to the Queens
Majesty: and then by the order of the same Court, the same attachement shall be
sold and the value thereof shall be answered to the Queen: and the same
offender shall be attached again by other goods, and the like shall be still
done against him until such an offender do appear at the said Court of
attachementes, and there do put in suerties or pledges to answer the said
offense at the next Justice seat of the Forest. But if such an offender do
appear at the said Court of attachementes, and do there find pledges to
answer the offense aforesaid at the next Justice seat of the Forest: then he
is to have his goods that were attached delivered unto him again. But it
seems by the ancient Presidentes of Forest Laws, that in every presentment
of offenses done in the Forest in Vert that is presented before the Verderors,
In a presentment of Vert the valewe of the Vert must be set down.
the value of the Vert must be set down in the same presentment and delivered
to the Verderors upon the oath of the Forester, and if by the presentment of
the Forester upon his oath, it does appear that the value of the same Vert is
under the sum of four pence, so that the same offense does seem to be so
small an offense that it is not worthy to be heard before the Lord Justice in
Eyer of the Forest: then the Verderors may determine the same offense before
them in the said Court of attachementes and assesse the fine, and also cause
the same to be levied to the use of the Queens Majesty, and all this to be
entered in their roll accordingly. And the like manner of attachementes by goods
and Cattels may be made and used for all manner of small offenses in the
Forest, and for any manner of trespass in Vert or Venison, where the offender
is not taken with the manner doing of the same trespass, (saving only in
certain cases which shall be showed hereafter:) for that by that means the
forester may compel the offender in the end to come before the Verderors to
appear at the said Court of Attachements, and there to find Sureties or
Pledges to answer the same trespass or offense according to the Law in that
behalf at the next Justice seat of the Forest before the Lord Justice in Eyer
of the Forest. And thus much concerning the first attachement by goods and
cattals.

The second manner of attachement, is, The second manner of Attachement.
to attache a man by his body, by pledges, and by mainprise: and this manner of
attachement may be made and used in every case where the Forester does find
any offender in the Forest trespassing in Vert, and does take him with the
manner doing of the same (so that the same be not in the Kings demeasne woods,
making of Asserts or Purpresture there:) then the Forester may attach him by
his body, and then cause him to find two Pledges to answer the same offense
at the next Court of attachements. And then upon his appearance at the said
next Court of attachements there to be mainprised until the coming of the
Lord Justice in Air of the Forest. Consuetudines et Assisa Forestae Articulo.
1.


And this manner of attachement is warranted by Consuetudines and assisa
Forestae, Articulo. 1. in these words, Si quis Forestarius inuenerit aliquem
attachiabilem pro viridi in Foresta nostra primo debet ipsum attachiare per
duos plegios, etc. And if the same offender be taken with the manner offending
in the Forest the srcond time, then the Forester shall attache him by the body,
and cause him to find four pledges to appear at the next Court of
Attachements, and then there to be mainprised until the general Sessions of
the Lord Justice in Eyer of the Forest to answer the said offense: For in the
said Statute of Assisa and Consuetudines Forestae, the words are these, Si
idem inueniatur alias debet ipsum attachiare per quatuor Plegios. And if
afterward the same offender be found offending again in the Forest the
third time, then the Forester shall attach him by the body, and cause him to
be brought before the Verderors, Assisa et Consuetudines Articulo 1.
and there to be mainprised by eight Pledges, according to the same statute of
Assisa and Consuetudines Forestae, articulo. 1.

And it is to be noted, that in all cases where the offender is to be attached
by the body and Pledges, there of necessity the offender must be taken with
the manner: Assisa et consuetudines Foresta, altered by the Statute of ^. E. 3.
cap. 8.
for otherwise, the Forester, nor any other officer in the Forest may not
attach any such offender by the body and Pledges (except he do take the same
offender with the manner:) For this Statute of Assisa and Consuetudines
Forestae aforesaid, was made in Anno. 6. Edwardi primi, And now long since the
making of that Estatute of Anno. 6. Edwardi primi, this Law and Statute is
altered in some part, by a Statute that was made in Anno. 1. Ed. 3. Cap. 8.
For the same Statute of Anno. 1. 1. E. 3. cap. 8.
Edwardi tertij, cap. 8. does directly set down there the very manner and
form how every offender in the Forest, either in Vert or Venison shall be
Endicted for the same offense, and also before whom the same shall be done, and
there adds to the same Statute further, that if any man be indicted for any
offense done in the Forest either in Vert or Venison in any other manner then
in the same order and manner that the same Statute there does set down and
declare, that then the same Indictment and proceeding shall be void and of none
effect. 1. E. cap. 8. 7. R. 2. cap. 4, no man shall be taken nor Imprisoned for
Vert nor Venison, unless he be taken with the manner.
And it is by the same Statute likewise enacted also, that from thence forth
no man shall be taken nor imprisoned for Vert nor Venison, unless he be taken with
the manner, or else, indected after the form before specified in the same
statute, so that now by this Satute of 1. E. 3 cap. 8. and also by ye Statute
of 7. R. 2. cap. 4. if the forester or other minister of the forest, do not
find the offe^der doing of the trespass, or do take such an offender in the
forest with the manner, then the same Forester or other minister of the forest
is forbidden by these two latter Statuts to take the body of any offe^dor, or
to imprison him, to find Sewerties, in this case, because the same person was
not taken with the manner. But yet, if any person have done an offense in the
Forest, and the same offense is not presently known, so that the offender is
not taken with the manner doing of the same offense, and therefore by the law
the Forester cannot attache his body for the same: yet in that case, the
forester may now attache him by his goods as is aforesaid, and so cause him
to find pledges to answer the said offense, or else to forefect his goods
or cattells that shall be attached for the same, from time to time, until he
does appear and find pledges as is aforesaid: but surely no offender in the
Forest, either in Vert or Venison, may be attached by his body, or imprisoned
for Vert or Venison, unless he be taken with the manner, or else indicted in the
form before specified in the said Statute: A. 6. E. 1.
for these two later Statutes were made directly in the negative of the Law
that was before: and so the said Law or Statute of Assisa et Consuetudines
Forestae, Assisa et consuetudines, is altered by this Statute of 1. E. 3. cap.
8. 7. R. 2 cap. 4.
made in Anno 6. E. 1. is altered in this point, that is to say, that in all
cases where the Forester is to attache an offender by the body, there the same
must be understood, that such an offender must then be taken with the manner,
or else he may not be attached by the body, nor yet imprisoned to find suerties
or pledges causa qua supra. Note the statute well, for the words are these: No
man shall be taken, nor imprisoned, for Vert nor Venison etc. and by this
word, taken, is to be understood, that he shall not be arested by his body for
Vert nor Venison, unless he be taken with the manner. But now how this word
(with the manner) shall be understood, I leave you to the sense and construction
of the Statute it self. And see the Statute here before, and the notes in the
margent, concerning the same. And this much concerning the second manner of
attachemente, that is to be made by the body, by pledges, and by mainprise.

THe third manner of attachement for offenses of the Forest, is to attache an
offender by the body only without any pledges or mainprise: The third manner
of Attachements by the body only.
and this manner of Attachement is warranted by the Statute of Assisa et
Consuetudines Forestae, and afterward the same manner of attachment is in
some part confirmed and allowed of by the foresaid Statute of Anno 1. E. 3.
cap. 8. And this manner of attachementes by the assizes of the Forest, called
Assisa et Consuetudines Forestae, made in Anno 6. E. 1. and by the Statute of
1. E. 3. ca. 8. which you may see here before amongst the Statutes, is there
expressed and declared to be for offenders in the Forest, that are, in six
degrees, as it shall plainly appear.

1. degree, assisa Foresta Articulo 1.
THe first degree of those offenders in the forest that are to be attached by
the body only without any suerties or mainprise, is specified and declared in
Assisa et Co^suetudines Forestae Artic. 1. in these words: Postea post tertium
Attachiamentu^ corpus debet Attachiarae et retinere vt memoriam habeatur quid
sit virid': so that if an offender have been taken with the manner offending in
Vert in the Forest, Verte.
and have been delivered by two pledges for that offense: and likewise for the
second time offending, by four pledges: and afterward for offending again,
the third time have been delivered by 8. pledges, according to the said
article: then if he he taken with the manner doing of a trespass in the forest
in Vert the fourth time, his body shall be detained in Prison according to the
said assizes of the forest: Scilt', postea post tertium Attachiament' corpus
debet attachiare et retinere etc. And then he that is so attached by the body
and imprisoned, he shall not be delivered out af Prison, Who may bail an
offe^der Imprisoned in this case.
or be bayled without the kings especial warrant for that purpose, or that he
be bailed or delivered out of Prison by the Lord chief Justice in Air of the
Forest, or by the chief warden of the Forest: for otherwise he that is so
imprisoned, as is aforesaid, no officer of the forest, may deliver him out, or
to mainprise.

2. Degree, assisa Forestae Articulo 4.
THe second degree of such offenders as are to be attached by the body only is
specified in the said assizes and customs of the forest Art' 4. in these
words: Si quis inuentus fuerit in dominico domini Regis assertando vel
purpresturam faciendo corpus debet protinus retinere, so that if any man be
found or taken with the manner, Vert.
making of purpresture in the demeasne woods of the king, his body shall be
forth with taken, and after that he is so attached by the body, he shall be
detained in Prison for the same offense, and then he shall not be delivered out
of Prison or bailed without the kings especial warrant, Who may bail an
offender in this case.
or by the Lord chief Justice in Air of the forest, or by the chief Warden
of the forest: for in this case no other person can deliver him by bail or
otherwise.

3. Degree.
THe third degree of such offenders, is also declared in the said assizes of
the forest in the fourth article, in these words: Si autem extra dominicum
infra rewardum debet poni per sex plegios, et si alias inueniatur debet
duplicare eius plegios, Vette.
si tertio corpus debet retinere: so that if a man he found in the Forest,
asserting or making of Purpresture out of the kings demeasne Woods, For the
first offense be is to be delivered by six pledges. And if he be found
offe^ding so again the second time, Who shall bail an offender in this case
then he shall double his pledges. But if he be found so offending again the
third time: then he shall be attached by his body, and shall be detained in
prison, and shall not be delivered or bailed out of prison, but as is
beforesaid, and not otherwise.

THe fourth degree of offenders in the Forest in this case, 4 Degree, Assisa
Forestae Articulo 5.
is expressed and declared in Assisa and Consuetudines Forestae articulo the
first, in these words: Si quis attachiabilis fuerit contra vadios et plegios
debet distringi per cattalla sua infra metas Forestae inuenta, si autem
defecerint, corpus eius detineatur, quosque fecerit quod debuerit: In this
case, Vert.
if any person that has bin an offender in the Forest in Vert, and being
therefore bound to the good behavior of the Forest, and afterward the said
offender committing the like offenee in the forest again, and being taken with
the manner, and having no Cattle in the Forest that may be attached by for the
same offense: then his body is to be attached and to be detained in prison
until that he have done that which by the Law he ought to do. Who may bail
an offender in this case.
And such an offender is called contra vad'et plegios, because he does now
offend contrary to his pledges and suerties: and such an offender shall not be
delivered out of prison by means or by any other person then is aforesaid.

THe fifth degree of offenders in this case, is for Veuison, 5. Degree, Assisa
Forestae Artic. 10. and 11
which is declared in Assisa et Consuetudines Forestae Articulo 10. in these
words: Si quis ceperit feram sine Warranto in Foresta corpus suum arestetur,
vbicunque inueniatur infra metas Forestae, et quando captus fuerit non
deliberetur sine speciali precepto domini Regis, vel capitali Iusticiar'
Forestarum suarum: and again in the same assizes in the 11. Venison.
Article in these words: Si quis viderit aliquos malefactores infra metas
Forestae aliquam feram capere vel asportare debet illos capere secundum posse
suum, et si non possit debet leuare hutesium and Cry etc. Note the word is,
^^^a, a wild beast.
In which cases, if any offender be taken with the manner killing of a Dear in
the Forest, or carrying of the same away without a good warrant so to do: then
such an offender in this case is to be attached by his body, and to be
imprisoned, and there to be detained until such time as he be delivered out
of Prison by the kings especial commandment, Who may bail an offender in
this case.
or the commandment of the Lord chife Justice in Air of the Forest, or by
the chief Warden of the Forest: for no other person may deliver him or let him
to mainprise.

6. Degree, Anno. 1. E. 3. cap. 8.
THe 6. degree of such affenders in the Forest, as are to be attached by the
body only without pledges or mainprise, is set down and declared in the
Statute of Anno 1. E. 3, cap. 8. and this is either in Vert or Venison, in
these words. It is agreed and ordained, that from henceforth, no man shall be
taken, nor Imprisoned for Vert nor Venison, unless he be taken with the
manner, or else indicted after the form specified and declared in the same
Statute: So that it does apeare plainly by the very words of the same Statute,
Vert and Venison. Vide the Statute, Anno. 1. E. 3. ca. 8.
that if an offender in the Forest, either in Vert or Venison, be indicted
after the same form and manner mentioned and declared in the said Statute, and
before such officers as is there appointed: that then if such an offender be
attached by the Forester, or by the Shirif, by his body: (as he by the Law
ought to be:) having a warrant for that purpose from the Lord chief Justice
in Air of the Forest to attache such an offender, or from the chief Warden
of the Forest, or his Lyeutenant: then his body is to be retained still in
prison, and then he shall not be mainprised, nor let to bail by any person,
unless it be by the special commandment of the king, or by the Lord chief
Justice in Air of the Forest, or by the chief Warden of the Forest. And in
the very like manner it is, where an offender in the Forest is outlawed for the
same offense, and his body is attached by the Shirife, by Capias vtlagatum.
And this you do see that there be six degrees of offenders that are to be
attached by the body only without pledges or mainprise. And note this for a
special learning, that in every case where the offender is to be attached by
the body only without Pledges or mainprise, Where the offender is to be
attached by the body only without Pledges or Mainprise: there the Verderors
nor Foresters, may not bail the offender. 1. E. 3. cap. 8.
as in the foresaid six degrees, there such an offender is not to be bailed
by the Verderors, nor by the Foresters, nor by any other minister or officer of
the Fofest, unless the same be by the Kings special commandment, or by the
Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest, or by the chief Warden of the
Forest: See the words of the said Statute and note them well, for they are as
follows, vz, No man shall be taken nor imprisoned for Vert nor Venison, unless
he be taken with the manner, or else indicted after the form before specified:
and then the chief Warden of the Forest shall let him to mainprise till the
Air of the Forest, without any thing taking for his deliverance. And if the
chief Warden will not so do, he shall have a writ out of the Chauncery, which
has been in old time ordained for such persons endicted to be at mainprise til
the Air. And if such a chief Warden after that he has received the writ, do
not incontently deliver such persons endicted to mainprise without taking any
thing: then the plaintiff shall have a writ out of the Chauncery to the Shirif
to attache the said Warden to be before the king, at a certain day, to answer
wherefore he has not repleuied him that is so taken: and the Shirife, the
Verderors being called to him, shall deliver him that is so taken, by good
mainprise in the presence of the Verderors, and shall deliver the names of the
mainpernors to the same Verderors to answer in the Air of the Justices. And
if the chief Warden be thereof attainted, the plaintiff shall recover his
treble damages, and the said Warden to be committed to prison, and raunsomed
at the kings will. And from henceforth it shall be written to them, as to the
chief Wardens of the Forest, Because they may not be Justices, nor have any
record: but here in this case, the Shirife does let him to mainprise by the
kings commandment, that is to say, by the kings writ: for otherwise the
Shirife might not so do. And the Verderors in this case are but assistantes to
the Shirife, for they do not join in authority with the Shirife, in letting
of him to mainprise, for they have no such commission ro^ authority, for the
writ is directed to the Shirife only, and not to the Shirife and Verderors, but
it is contained in the same writ, that the Shirife shall let him to mainprise
in presentia viridariorum, because that the Verderors being Judges of record,
the names of the mainpernors be delivered unto them. And this much concerning
attachments, and the repleuing of persons that are attached.

How men that are baylable shall be baied, and by whom.
Now it is to be seen, how this band by Pledges shall be taken, and by whom. And
therefore first of all it is to be noted, that in all cases where any offender
is to be attached by his goods and cattals, which is the first manner of
attachements, or else to be attached by his body, by Pledges and mainprise
which is the second manner of attachement: The most meetest Officers to take
bond of such offenders in the cases aforesaid, in the which they are by the
Law to be bayled, are the Verderors, and that for two causes. The first is,
that for as much as the said Verderors are Judges of Record, and have the
keeping of the rolls for matters of the Forest until the coming of the Lord
Justice in Air of the Forest: therefore if the Foresters do take any offender
with the manner offending in Vert in the Forest, they are to attache him by the
body, and to bring him before the Verderors: and then they may take a
Recognizance of the offender and his Pledges to answer the same offense in the
Air of the Justice of the Forest, because they are Judges of Record, and
therefore they may take a Recognizance in this case, and so may not the
Foresters do, for they are no Judges of Record, but accusers of offenders, and
presenters of offenses done by others in the Forest before the said Verderors.
The second cause is for that, that the said Verderors are men, that of
necessity must be learned and well practiced in the knowledge of the Laws of
the Forest, and such offenders must be bayled and Mainprised according to the
quality and degree of their offense, in some cases by two Pledges: and in
other some cases by four, six, or eight Pledges: And in some other cases, the
offender is not to be bayled at all by the said Verderors or Foresters, as it
has been already showed before: nor yet by any other person, but only by the
Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest, or by the chief Warden of the
Forest. And then if the Foresters or other Officers of the Forest that are
ignorant of the Laws of the Forest, should take upon them to bail such
offenders, no doubt but great inconveniences would ensewe thereby, as well unto
the King as also to the offenders themselves: And therefore such offenders are
most meetest to be bayled by the foresaid Verderors, to the end that the said
Verderors may bail them according to the very Laws of the Forest. And for
that cause the Law has provided and appointed a Steward that must be learned
in those Laws to join with them and to direct them in their proceeding,
according to the same Law. And when such offenders are Bayled before the said
Verderors, then the same Verderors are to keep the same Recongnizance for the
Kings use, until the coming of the Lord Justice in Air of the Forest, and
also to cause the Forester to present the same offense in the same nature as it
was done: and then such presentiments to be entered in the Rolls of the
Verderors accordingly. Whereas, if the Foresters when they have arrested such
an offender might Bail such offenders themselves at their own will and
pleasures without the Verderors, there might be great parcialitie used therein:
and many grievous trespasses concealed from the King, and never any presentment
made thereof before the Verderors at the Court of Attachements, or at the
Swanimoce Court. Obligations taken to the Queens use shall be of the same nature
as a Statute or Recognizanc^
And also the Verderors may take an Obligation of the offender and Pledges with
him as the Law does appoint in that case: Which Obligation being made unto the
Queens Majesty's use, shall be as forcible in Law, by reason of the Statute of
Anno. 33. H. 8. cap. 39. as any Recognisance knowledged according to the
Statute of the Staple.

The Court of Swanimote.
IT is to be understood, that the Court of Swanimote is a Court of the Forest
which should be holden three times in the year, as is aforesaid, for to
enquire of Vert and Venison and other trespasses that are done within the
Forest. An. 1. E. 3. cap. 8.
And there all the trespasses shall be enquired of and presented. And that is
proved by the Statute made in the first year of King Edward the third, Cap.
8: Where he does say, Because many people be often times disinherited,
hindered and undone by the chief Warden of the Forest, The officers that
shall be at the Swanimot
and by other ministers, contrary to the form of the great Charter of the
Forest, and contrary to the declaration that King Edward, son to King Henry,
in this manner and form that follows: All other persons ought to appear at
the Swanimote.
That is to say: We will and grant, for us and our heirs, that of
Trespasses done and made in our Forestes for Vert and Venison, that the
Foresters in whose Bayliwike such trespasses shall be done, present the same at
the next Swanimote Court before the Foresters, Verderors, Regarders, Agistors,
and other ministers of the same Forest: and that upon such presentiments before
them, by the oaths as well of the Knights, as of otherwise and lawful men, and
not suspected of the parties, and most near where such offenses or trespasses
shall be done, and where the truth may be best known: And such presentiments so
inquired of, shall be presented by the common accord and assent of the ministers
aforesaid, solemnly engrossed and sealed with their seals. And if any
Indictment be made in any other manner, it shall be holden from henceforth for
naught, etc. So that it is provided by the said Statute, that all the Officers
and other sufers ought at this day to come to the Swanimote: That is to say,
the free tenants of the Forest ought to come thither for to make an inquest of
inquiry before the Steward of the same Court. There is also a Statute made in
the seventh year of King Richard the second, which says, that at the
grievous complaint which is now made of the ministers of the Forest: It is
agreed and accorded, It appears by this Statute that Freeholders are to be at
the Swanimote.
that no manner of Iurye be from henceforth compelled by any minister of the
Forest, nor other person whatsoever, to travel from place to place, out of the
place where the charg was given them against their will, neither by malice,
threatening, nor otherwise: by which words it is to be noted, there must be
freeholders at the Swanimote, to be of the inquest or Iuries, according as is
aforesaid: and so all other officers in like manner.

And furthermore it is to be understood, that what soever is established by
man, it is of no continuance, unless the same be put in ure with daily supply.
What soever is ordained by wisemen for a law, the same by order is to be put in
due execution: I mean this as touching the Laws of the Forest: For as our
forefathers made laws, so they did ordain a Court como^ly called a Swanimote,
intending thereby to punish such as committed any offense against the Forest
Laws, so that thereby the Law which was made might have continuance.

And it is to be understood, What the word ^wanimote does signify.
that a Swanimot is porperly a Court of freeholders within the Forest, for this
word Mote in Normandy speech, is called properly a Court, as Halimote are the
Courts Baron, Folkomote are the Courts holden in London, where in all the
Folk and people of the City did complain upon the Mayor and the Aldermen,
for mysgouernement within the City: and Portmote is ever in a Haven town,
Here you may see, that from the signification of the word Swanimote, it is a
court of freeholders.
for it is the Court of the Port or Haven. And this word Swain, in the
Saxons speech is a Bookeland man, which at this day is taken for a Charterar or
a freeholder: and so the Swanimote is in English, a Court within the Forest,
whereunto all the freeholders do owe suit and service, and therefore called a
Swanimote. The chief Judges in this Court are the Verderors, and the plees
that are here in this Court are called placita Forestae, the plees of the
forest. Also the chief Warden of the forest does sometime use to sit at this
Cour^e, Hesket in his reading, fo. 34.
or his Lieutenant, as it does appear by Master Hesket, in his learned Reading
upon the Statute of Carta de Foresta: and yet it should seem that the chief
Warden of the forest is no judicial officer appointed to sit there: for if he
were, he could not appoint his deputy to sit there for him: for a judicial
place cannot be executed by a deputy, as it does appear by diverse presidents
and cases at the common Law: and for that cause the Lord chief Justice of the
forestes being a most especial judicial place, it was enacted by the Statute of
32. The chief Warden of the Forest, nor his Lieutenant are no Judicial
officers.
H, 8. Cap. 35. that they might make Deputies to execute their offices in
writing under their hands, and sealed with the Seals of their Offices, and
not otherwise: so that they could not make any such Deputies or Lieutenants to
execute their Offices before the making of the same Statute: But there is no
such authority given by any Act of Parliament to the chief Warden of the
Forest, to make any Lieutenant to execute his Office: And therefore, seeing
that he does and may make a Lieutenant under him, his place cannot be a
judicial place: and also it appears by the Statute of An. 1. E. 3. caput 8.
which does begin thus:

Item, whereas diverse people be disinherited, raunsomed, and undone by the
chief Wardens of the Forest on this side Trent, The Statute of An. 1. E. 3.
ca. 8
and beyond etc. And afterward it does follow in these words: It is agreed
and ordained, that from hence forth no man shall be taken or imprisoned for
Vert or Venison, unless he be taken with the manner, or else that he be
indicted after the form before specified: and then the chief Warden of the
forest, shall let him to mainprise until the Air of the forest, without any
thing taking for his deliverance: A write of Homine Replegiando.
and if the said Warden will not so do, he shall have a writ out of the
Chancery, which has been in old time ordained for such persons indicted to be
at mainprise until the Air. And if such Warden after he has received the
writ, do not incontinently deliver such persons indicted without taking any
thing: Then the plaintiff shall have a writ out of the Chauncerie to the
Shirife, to attach the said Warden to be before the King at a certain day to
answer wherefore he has not repleuied him that is so taken: and the Shirife,
the Verderors being called to him, The Recital of the Statute of 1. E. 3. ca.
8.
shall deliver him that is so taken by good mainprise in the presence of the
Verderors, and shall deliver the names of the mainpernors to the same
Verderors, to answer in the Air of the Justices: and if the chief Warden be
thereof attainted, the plaintiff shall recover his treble damages, and the said
Warden to be committed to Prison and ransomed at the Kings will. And from
hence forth it shall be written to them, as to the chief Wardens of the Forest,
because they may not be Justices, nor to have any record: And so note by that
Statute, that the writ aforesaid, is directed to them as if it were to the
Shirife to execute the same writ: and such a writ is not directed to a
judicial officer. Also the same Statute does say, that the names of the
mainpernors shall be delivered to the Verderors, as if he should say, because
they be (as Justices:) And that from hence forth it shall be written to the
said Wardens, as to the chief Wardens of the Forest, because says the
Statute they (meaning the same Wardens) may not be Justices, nor have any
record. Then Ergo the chief Warden of the Forest, nor his Lieutenant are no
judicial officers, and then I see not by what authority they should sit at
the Swanimote.

And note that there are two Lieutenants most commonly in every Forest, vz, 2.
Lieutenants in the Forest.
the Lieutenant of the Lord Justice in Air of the Forest, and the Lieutenant
of the chief Warden of the Forest. Ordinatio Forestae.
And it appears very plainly by the Statute of Ordinatio Forestae caput 1.
that the Foresters, Verderors, Regardors and all other ministers of the Forest,
These officers are bound to artend at the Swanimote.
are bound to attend at every Swanimote, or else the indictmentes and
presentmentes there taken are utterly void. It is here to be noted, what is
meant by these words in the said Statute of Ordinatio Forestae cap. 1. ac alijs
earundem forestar' ministris: for other ministers of the forest are Stewardes
of the Swanimote, who ought to be men very well learned, and especially in the
Laws of the Forest. Assisa and consuetudines Forestae, ca 20.
And to prove that there ought to be a Steward at every Swanimote, it appears
by the assizes and customs of the forest, where it is said, quod homo
attachiatus pro ramis cesis placitu^ illud pertinet ad Swanimotum coram
Senescallo etc. There are also other officers of the Forest mentioned in the
great Charter of the Forest Cap. 16. and Cap. 17. that is to say,
Constabularij, Castellani et Balliui et Bedelli etc. and if it do chance any
of the said officers or ministers to be sick, so that he or they cannot be at
the Swanimote: then the Justice of the forest or his deputy shall incontine^tly
place others in their places for them: et hoc est secundum ordinationem
Forestae Anno 34. An. 7. R 2. c. 3
E. 1. caput 2. And it is ordained in the assizes of the Forest. Anno 7. R. 2.
caput 3. that the inquest shall not be compelled to travel to any other place to
give their verdict, but where they received their charge: and note that the
court of Swanimote has power to inquire of all those matters that do
hereafter appear in the charge of the Swanimote, The power of the Swanimot
and to take presentmentes of all such matters, but no judgment shall be given
there, nor execution awarded, for that is reserved to the Justices of the
Forest only.

At this Court of the Swanimote, all the presentmentes of the Foresters for any
offense in the forest, either in Vert or Venison, are there delivered to the
Jury, which are sworn for that purpose to inquire the truth of those
matters: and if the Jury do find that those presentmentes that the Foresters
have presented be true, then the offender against whom they were presented,
does stand convicted thereof in Law: and then the entree thereof, is
presentatum est per Forestarios et duodecem Iuratores et conuictum per
viridarios. Ordinatio Forestae ca. 1.

All the freeholders that dwell within the Forest do owe suit to this court.

Asserts and Purprestures are to be enquired of Consuetudines. ca. 4.

Purprestures that be arented Vide ante, the case of my Lord Dyer. fo.


And this much concerning the Court of Swanimote, and hereafter does follow
the charge of the same.

The charge of the Court of Swanimote for the Forest.
INprimis, you shall inquire if all those that owe suit to this Court of
Swanimote be there or no, and those which be not, shall you present their names.

2 Item, if there be any assertes or purprestures within the Forest newly made,
more then has been made by the kings grant or any of his Progenitors, in what
place the same is, and by what authority, by whom, and what harm it is to
the King, except it be arrented.

3 Item, if there be any that makes any great closes or small closes, which
are annexed to the borders of the Forest: This is Purpresture.
and inlargeth his own ground with setting out of his hedges and ditches, and
so straytneth the Forest.

4 Item, if any man have raised, dug up, or carried away, This is a Trespass
and Purpresture: For Omnes metae Forestae sunt integro domino Regi.
any land, Stone or stake that was set or laid for any mark or bound of the
Forest, ye shall do us to wete of their names, the day and place when the same
was done.

5 Item, if any man makes any Mines, Clay-pittes, or turueth for Iron without
license in any place within the Forest.

6 Item, if any man leuieth any Mill within the Forest, without the Kings
license, you shall inquire what hurt the same is to the Forest, and who it is
that does so, and present the same.

7 Item, if any have made any Swine-house or Sheepe-house or any other house or
Cote within the lands of the Forest without license, you shall present it.

8 Item, if there be more Foresters or Walkers within the Forest, then have been
of old time accustomed, in oppressing of the Kings people, or over charging of
the Forest, who has made them, and by what authority he has done it.

9 Item, if there be any minister of the Forest, that makes any oppressions or
extorcions of the Kings people, by color that he is an officer of the Forest,
and for taking excess chiminage: if any such be, you shall present them.

10 Item, if any man come into the Forest in Fawning time, with Sheep or any
other Cattle where they have common, and is not Sworn to be true to the Kings
game.

11 Item, if there be any man that does burn any Heathe or Fearne or Ling
within the Foreste or towns next adjoining to the same Forest, you shall
present the same.

12 Item, touching the Kings Vert, that is to say, Woods, Verte.
you shall inquire if any have come into this Forest and have felled any great
Oaks, and carried them away by night or by day, being the Kings Wood, and the
price of the Horse, Carte, and Trees so carried, and by what authority.

13 Item, of small Wood, as under Wood, Sparres, blackthorne, Watling rods
and such like, if any cut or fell them, and carry them away, you shall present
his name and the price of the Wood so taken.

14 Item, if the Wardens of the Forest or their Lieutenants or any forester
bruseth any waste bows or great Oaks in Winter time, more for his own
advantage for the sale, than for the sustenance of the Kings Dear, ye shall do
us to were thereof, and the names, and the price of the Wood.

15 Item, if any man do take out of the hollow trees any Honey, Wax, or swarms
of Bees within the forest, ye shall do us to weete.

16 Item, if any man take any Hawks eggs, Herrons eggs, Fesantes eggs, or
Partridge eggs out of their neastes being within the forest, you do us to
weete.

17 Item, if any man have any warrant of the Lord Chancellor of England, Lord
Privy Seal, or of the kings Justices of the forest, to have certain Trees: if
he have taken more then his warrante will serve for, or if he have taken the
said trees without view of the Verderors, or of the foresters, you shall do us
to wite.

18 Item, if any warrant were granted for any Oaks, or other timber to be
employed to the kings use, or on his works: if any man have bestowed them to
their own peculiar use, or otherwise conveyed them, or sold them, you shall
present the prise thereof, and who he is that has don so.

19 Item, if any commission were directed to any Woodsellers for the sale of
the great Woods and under Woods, or either of them: if the same Wood-seller
have made the hedges and fensings of the Coppies, for saving the kings Covert.

20 Also, if any of the said Woodsellers have concealed any thing of the kings
profit upon their account, or if they have enclosed any Moors, great
plains, or waste grounds, to the hurt of the commoners, or put any other
cattle into the Coppies and spring or Wood then is allowed by the Statute, you
shall present the same.

21 Item, in Pawnage time, if there be any that has Woods annexed to the
Kings Forest, and makes percourse out of his own Wood with Swine and Pigges
into the Forest, in hinderance of the Kings Pawnage, of all such you shall do
us to wete, both of the number and of the price of them, for they are
forfeitable to the King.

22 Item, if any man have any Swine coming into the Forest in Pawnage time,
vnringed, wrouting, deluing, or turning up the kings soil, which is cause of
exylation of the kings Dear, ye shall do us to weete of the number, and of
the price of them, for they are forfeitable to the king.

23 Item, if there be any man that has any Patent by the grant of any king,
and confirmed, or any specialtie allowed to him before any Justice in Air, for
a certain number of Swine to run in Pawnage time in the kings Forest, if he
have more then is allowed in his Patent, ye shall do us to weete of the number
and price, for they are forfeitable to the king.

24 Item, if there be any Swyne not ringed, or Goats, that have been attached
sithence the last Sessions within the Forest, ye shall present the number and
price of them: for they are forfeitable by the first attachement to the King,
for that they be not beasts Commonable.

25 Item, if there be any Sheep running in the Forest, and has been attached
iii. times sithence the last Sessions, ye shall present the number and prise,
for they are likewise forfeitable to the King.

26 Item, Venison. Puraley. Canutus, Canon. 31.
you shall inquire if there be any that has hunted the kings Dear within
seven miles about the Forest, at any time within xl. days next after the kings
hunting, neither xl. days before it was so hunted, for these causes: First for
that the king before his Hunting, or his Commission to kill the Dear, his
grace should have a sight of the Dear where they lie at rest in their haunt:
and after his hunting, because the Dear being driven out with strength of
hounds, Puraley.
and noise of men and horns, may afterward resort again to their haunt in
the Forest: if there be any such you shall do us to weete.

27 Item, if any man have any great Park, or great close within three miles of
the Forest, Puraley.
that have any Saltaries or great gappes, called Dear lopes, to receive Dear
into them when they be in chasing, and when they are in them they cannot get
out again.

28 Item, if any man have slain any of the kings Dear within the Forest
without warrant, you shall present his name, and what Dear was so slain, and
within whose walk the same was done.

29 Item, if any man had any Warrant for to have any Dear, if he have taken
more Dear than is mentioned in his Warrant: how many they were: what Dear
they were: and of what season: for a Bucke in Winter, is out of season, and so
is a Do in Summer: and whether he took the Dear comprehended in the Warrant
without sight of the Verderors and Forresters, yea, or no.

30 Item, if any man keep any Hounds or Dogs, and ryding or going through
the Forest, as the hye ways do lie, and takes not up his dogs, but does
suffer his dogs to chase and kill the Kings Dear: whether the death of such
Dear be within the Forest or without, you shall present the name of the man,
and the Dear so killed.

31 Item, if any man take any Dear with Nets, cords, ropes, Double
Paternoster Buckstalles, or other Engine, and who does keep any such Engynes
within the Forest, or near to it, yea shall present their names.

32 Item, if any man chase, course, or set any net, or engine though he kill
not, you shall present his name and fact, and where the same was done and when.

33 Item, if any man come into the Forest, and there slay any Fox, Hare, Cony,
or any other beast or foul of Warren without authority, the same is to be
punished for the breach of the kings free chase, and therefore you shall do us
to weet.

34 Item, if there are any manner of rentes or services, wax or honey, due to
the king or any of his officers of this Forest, that are now behind or
withdrawn: by whom, how long, what it is, and what damage it is to the King,
You shall also do us to wite.

35 Item, if there be any man that dwells about the borders of the Forest,
which keeps any strange Greyhound, and wayteth when the Kings Dear are out
of the Forest, and foresetteth the same Dear, so that they may not return
home again, and so by that means are slain or hurt: ye shall present who he
is, and who owes the Greyhoundes, that he may be punished for the same
accordingly.

36 Item, if there be any person within the jurisdiction of this Court that
keeps any hounds or Greyhoundes, that may not dispend xl. s. by the year of
freehold, over and above all charges, according to the Statute, which hunteth
in the Purleuy, as of his own authority, you shall present his name, the
time, and what damage he did to the King in diminishing the game at such
hunting.

37 Item, if any Purrely hunter, Puraley.
hunt oftener than thryse in a week, or before the Sun rising, or after the
Sun setting, or with other than his own menyall servant, The defense
month is xv. days before Midsummer and xv. after. Puraley.
or otherwise on Sundays, or in the fence Month, which is the time of
Fawuing, and that is accounted xv. days before Midsommer, and xv. days after
Midsommer.

38 Item, if any Purluy hunter, at any time, forestall the kings Dear, whether
it be with dead Hay, or with quick, for they ought to let run at the tail
of the Dear, otherwise it is finable, as if he did hunt in the forest.

39 Item, Puraley.
if any person have made any Coppies or closure of Purluy, in estrayteng of the
kings Dear from the Forest, to the hurt of the owners, or do pin the beasts
of any commoner out of the shire, and not put them in open pound in the
Country, whether it be in Pawnage time or not, you shall do us to weete.

40 Item, if any man gather any Acornes or Crabbes in the Forest, and do make
sale of them at marketes or else where, to the hurt of the commoners, and the
kings beasts of the Forest, ye shall do us to weete.

41 Item, if any man have stopped or strayted any Churchway, Puraley.
mylle-way, or other ways in the Forest or Purleu, to the common nuisance of
the kings free people, and to the hurt of his Dear, you shall do us to weete
thereof.

42 Item, if any man have any Milles within the forest, which are not repaired
as they ought to be, you shall do us to weete.

Puraley.
43 Item, you shall present all the Waifes and Straies which has been and
happened since the last Court within the forest.

44 Item, if any man take any agistment in the forest or purleu, to the hurt of
the kings Dear and the Commoners there: you shall do us to weete.

45 Item, if there be any man that does surcharge the common with any manner of
Cattle, or otherwise more then the law does suffer, acording to the quantity
of his tenure or grant, you shall do us to wete: and of these and al other that
you do know to be any offense, either in Vert or Venison, or against the Laws
of the forest, you shall inquire thereof and present the same.

And there are also many other things to be inquired of, which cannot be done
without inquest, which must be by the suitors to the court, and when they are
there presented, they shall be sealed with the seals of the ministers aforesaid,
and sent before the Justices of the forest to the Sessiones. And if the
presentiments be not certified in this order they are void, as is aforesaid.

And thus ends the Charge.
The high Court of the Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forestes, commonly
called the Justice Seat of the Forest.
FOr as much as the Court of Attachements, called the forty day Court, or
Wood-mote, and also the Court of Swanimote, have already been spoken of
briefly, and also the proceeding in those two Courts against such as are
offenders in the Forest in Vert or Venison. And for that it appears that by
the Laws of the Forest, all the proceedings of those Courts for the greatest
offenses done in the Forest, are as nothing, until such time as they are
presented to the Lord Justice in Air of the Forest at the Justice Seat,
because, that although the offenses and trespasses of offenders be presented in
the said Court of Attachements: And that afterward, upon the same
presentiments, the offenders be indicted at the Court of Swanimote, according to
the Statute of An. 1. E. 3. cap. 8. and according to the Statute called
Ordinatio forestae: Yet cannot either of the said Courts of Attachements or
Swanimote give any judgment of those offenses, or assesse any fines for the
same: for that does appertain only unto the Lord Justice in Air of the
Forest, to do at his will and pleasure at the said Court of Justices Seat.
And therefore all those Rolls of all such offenses as have passed the court of
Swanimote, and the Court of Attachements, are to be sealed up with the Seals
of the said Verderors: and they are to keep the same Rolls until the Justice
Seat, and then they are to present the same unto the Lord Justice in Air of
the Forest. And if the said Verderors do not there appear to bring in their
Rolls the first day of the same Justice Seat: then there shall forthwith go
out a write to the Shirife to sease the lands of the said Verderors into the
Kings hands, until such time as they shall come before the Lord Justice in Air
and bring in their Rolls, as it shall appear hereafter by sundry ancient
Presidents of the Assizes of the Forest. And it is to be noted that before the
lord Justice in Air of the Forest do keep this high Court of Justice Seat,
when he has received the Kings Commission for that purpose, then the Lord
Justice in Air does make out his warrant or precept to the Shirife of the
same Shire within the which the Forest is where the Justice Seat shall be
holden. (The Tenor of which write shall be showed hereafter,) thereby commanding
the same Shirife to sommon by sufficient sommons all the Archbishops, Bishops,
Earls, Barons, and Knights, and their free tenants which have any lands or
tenements within the bounds of the Forest of our Sovereign Lord the King
called the Forest of Windsor, and also of every town and village within the
bounds of the same Forest, to sommon four men and the Reave: and also to sommon
of every ancient Borough within the bounds of the same Forest xii. good and
lawful men, and also all other free holders that ought to apeare before the
Justice in Air of the Forest, and that they shall be before the same Lord
Justice in Air at Windsor on Monday next after the Feast of S. Peter the
Apostle, or at such day as the Lord Justice in Air shall appoint in the same
warrant for to sit and hold plees of the Forest. And furthermore, to command
the same Shirife, that throughout all the whole liberty of the same Shire,
as well in all the ancient Boroughes and other towns, as also in all Faires
and Markets, and other public places, that he shall openly proclaim or cause
to be proclaimed, that al manner of persons whatsoever they be, which claim to
have by the Charter or Charters of our Sovereign Lord the King, or of any of
his ancestors or progeuitours, or by any other ways or means, any liberties
or fraunchises, or free customs of the Forest within the said Forest of
Windsor, that they shall be before the Lord Justice in Air or his deputy, at
the day and place mentioned in the same Warrant, to show what liberties they
do claim to have in the same Forest. And that all manner of persons that are
attached for Verte and Venison within the Forest aforesaid, after the last
plee of the Forest holden before the Lord Justice in Air, and also that all
Pledges and Manucaptors which have day by their Manucaption before the Justice
of the Forest of our Sovereign Lord the King at his next coming into the
Forest to hold his Justice Seat, that they be before the said Lord Justice in
Air at such a day as is mentioned in the said Warrant to the same Shirife,
ready to fulfill and do those things which by the Laws of the Forest they
ought. And that the same Shirife with his Bailifes be there also to certify
the said Lord Justice in Air of the premises, and also to execute the office
of a Shirife in these and such like matters concerning the same. And it is to
be noted, that the Lord Justice in Air must always by their precept as
aforesaid, give day by the same precept of Sommons, so that all men that are
to be sommoned by it, may have forty days warning at the least of the same
Justice Seat by the Shirifes Proclamation. And when the Lord Justice in Air is
come to the place appointed, according to the Proclamation, and that he is set
in his judicial Seat, and those that are in commission with him, then after
the Commission is read, and the officers of the Forest called, then the
Freeholders of the same Forest shall be called also, and all others that were
warned to appear there at that day, and then out of those freeholders and
others, there is chosen a most substantial Jury of xxiiii. or xx. or xviii. of
the discreetest men. And they shall be sworn that they shall truly inquire, and
true presentment make, of all such matters as shall be given them in charge, And
then, to the intent that the Kings most excellent Majesty may the better be
certified what offenses have been done in the Forest in any degree since the
last Seat of the Justice, and also how those offenders have bin prosecuted,
favored, or punished by the officers of the Forest, whom the King does trust
in that behalf: and that the King may likewise know what officers of the
forest have well and dutifully discharged their office as they ought to do. The
Lord Justice in Air, or some man learned in the Laws of the forest, by his
apointment, shall give unto the fame Jury a charge which charge in effect does
comprehend briefly he whole scope of the Laws of the Forest, which is as
follows.

The Charge of the Lord Justice in Air of the Forest, that he does give at the
Justice Seat.
FIrst, ye shall inquire of all attachementes made since the last Sessions, as
well of Vert as of Venison: and as well in the Demesne Woods of our Sovereign
Lady the Queen, as in any other place within the bounds of the Forest: and
by whom such attachementes were made, and how they were made, and whether
there has bin any hunting within the bounds aforesaid: and if any such has been, then, by what person it has so ^en: and who has been consenting or
agreeing to the same, that is to say, the Foresters or any other: and what
they have been that have hunted with warrant, and who without, and how often,
when and where the same was.

2 Ye shall also inquire where there has been any attachement made by night:
and who they were that has been so attached, and by whom they were attached.

3 In like manner you shall inquire what attachementes has bin made in Fence
time, as well of those persons that have offended as of others suspected: and of
all others found in the Forest serching and going after a suspected manner.

4 You shall further inquire if there have bin any asserts, wastes, or
Purprestures newly made since the last Sessions or before, and not presented:
other then such as has been made by grauntes or license of the Queens
Majesty, or any of her progenitors: and within whose Fee the same has been,
or is so made, that is to say, in the Kings demesne lands, or in the lands
of any other: and who has so made them or any of them: and who does now hold
the same: and how they be enclosed: and how much the same does contain by the
number of Acres.

5 Item, you shall inquire if there be any person or persons, that has or have
enclosed any quantity of ground what soever it b^ adjoining or bordering upon
the Forest, and thereby inlargeth his or their own ground, in setting out of
their hedge or hedges, ditche or ditches, and so streighteneth the Queens
Forest, ye shall present his or their names, and the quantity of the ground
so enlarged.

6 Ye shall further inquire if any person or persons has or have raised up or
taken away any mark or bound of the Forest: if any has so done, ye shall
present his or their name or names, and the day and time when it was done.

7 Ye shall further inquire of the bands and limits of all Bailiwikes within
the Forest, and how and after what manner they be bounded: and how every of
the said Bailifes and Fosters have used to keep and walk: and what they and
every of them do claim to apertaine to his or their office or offices: and
what they do take by reason thereof, and by what warrant the same is done.

8 Item, if any person or persons has or have made any Mine Delphe or Coal,
stane, Claye, Marle, turfe, Iron, or any other Mine, you shall present his or
their name or names, and the place where the same is so done.

9 Also you shall inquire whether any Tanner or White tawer does dwell within
the precinct of the Forest, and do use their faculties there yea or no.

10 If any person or persons have newly builded or made any Mine within the
Forest, since the last Sessions or before, and not presented, you shall present
his or their name or names.

11 Item, if any Church, town or house since the last Sessions or before and not
presented, has been erected and builded within the bounds of the Forest: by
whom the same has been so builded, and how long it is sithence: and how many
beasts be pastured and fed in the Forest, by reason of the same, to the
prejudice, hurt and ouercharging of the said Forest.

12 Item, if any man has builded any Swine-house, Neathouse or sheepe-house,
or any other house or enclosure within the bonds of the forest, to the
noisance of the forest: ye shall inquire by whom it was ^on, and how much the
ground is, and what it contains: and how much pasture by your estimation for
the Dear of the Queen is thereby surcharged and impaired by the beasts which
go in or out, to or from the said house or houses.

13 Item, if all the inhabitants within the Forest, as well clerks holding lay
Fee, as others, being of the age of xii. years and above, be sworn to be
true to the Forest or not, and of their appearance and defaults made here at
this present time.

14 Item, if any of the Foresters, keepers or other officers, which have
walks, and to do in the said Forest by reason of their office, be yet
vnsworn: and if any such be, you shall do us to weete what is his name or names,
and whether he or they be present or absent.

15 Item, you shall inquire what Parkes be within the limits and bounds of the
said Forest or near unto the same, and how they be enclosed: and what salters
and leapers they have in hurt of the said Forest: or what common trespassers
be in any of the Queens Parkes within this Shire, as with Bows and Arrows,
or any other engine: and whether any ground be tilled within the Queens Parkes
without license yea or no: if there be, then by whom the same is tilled.

16 Item, you shall inquire what wayued goods and straies has been within
the said Forest since the last Session or before not presented: and how the
King is answered for them: or what other person or persons claims or takes
them: by what title or warrant the same is done.

17 Item, you shall inquire if any person or persons, has or have taken any
Swarm of Bees, honey or Wax within the said Forest: how many and how much, and
the value, and who ought of right to have them.

18 Item, you shall inquire who makes or takes the profit of Turberie, if any
be within the said forest: and what ground it is: and whether there is or ought
to be answered any rent for the same or no: and to what detriment or hurt of
the forest the same is.

19 Also, if there has been any River, Haven or creek newly made, whereby
Wood, Timber or Venison has been con^^ied away by Boat, Barge or Shipp: of
all such offenders and their aidors and concentors, you shall do us to weete.

20 Item, you shall inquire if any officer of the forest has made any
Scottales, gathered any Sheaues of Corn, or done any extortion or oppression
by color of their office: you shall present their names, and the same offense.

21 Also if there has any person used to come into the forest in fence time to
seek Sheep, Swine or other Cattle, Driving of cattle in the fence month.
being not sworn to the assise of the forest, ye shall present his name.

22 Item, you shall inquire whether the Steward has kept the Courts of
Swanimote three times in the year according to the Laws of the forest: and
taken his presentmentes, and caused them to be affirmed by the verdit of xii.
indeferent men: and also to be insealed by the Werderors and other officers,
according to the said Laws or not. And whether the xl day Court has been
kept or no, according to the Statute.

23 Item, whether the Keeper, Bailife or Steward, have taken fines or
amercementes of the trespassers, or of those that were indicted or suspected
for Vert or Venison: and if they did, of whom: how much, and what it was: and
whether they have caused any person to be falsely indicted: how, and after what
manner it was done.

24 Also, whether the foresters, Verderors, Regardors and Agistors, or others
have conceiled any trespassers indicted or suspected, or made any attachementes
for their own luker, or for favor, or for the cause aforesaid, have
concealed purprestures or any other thing pertaining to their office: and
whether they have appropried any thing to themselves which should appertain to
the Queens Majesty, yea or no.

25 Item, ye shall inquier if any foresters of see, or other officers have
taken any manner of fine or reward or chiminage or passage, other then to his
Bailiwike has apertained: or which by color of their office make any
collections, which are prohibeted by the great Charter of the forest, you shall
present the same.

26 Also ye shall enquire, if any Forester or Fosters has or have any person
or persons which do accustomably resort unto them and haunt the Forest. And
what the said person or persons do take and receive of the said Foresters. And
whether the said persons be suspected for any trespass or offense done or
committed within the said Forest. And if any such be, ye shall present his and
their name and names.

27 Item, you shall enquire, how the Foresters do behave them selves in their
several Bailiwikes and offices: and who are profitable to the Queens
Majesty, and who not.

Item, Inquiratur, si Forestarius sit vtile domino Regi, et si non sit, de qua
causa. Et si aliquid dent pro Balliuis suis, et cui. Ita quod dominus Rex
perdit in aliquo.

Item, Inquiratur de Forestarijs amotis per Senescallum, vel per viridarium, ob
quam causam, et qui sunt illi.

And whether there be in any of the said Bailiwikes any more Foresters then
there ought to be, and were wont to be, or do suffice and are necessary or
needful for the safe keeping of the said Bailiwike: And whether they or any
of them do surcharge their said Bailiwikes by undue, or too often lodging of
any person or persons: And which have had their horses there by the space of
three nights and three days, in other men's houses within their Bailiwikes or
without, by reason of the said Bailiwike or office. And which of the said
Foresters have any lewd, hurtful, noysom or walking servant under them to the
charge or burden of the country: And which of them have made or levied any
new custom or innovation concerning the Forest, to the damage of the Queens
Majesty, and the trouble and burden of the Country, etc.

Bailifes which be Foresters of Fee.
28 You shall further diligently inquire of all Bailifes which be Foresters of
fee, what warrant or specialtie they have to hold and enjoy their said
Bailiwikes. And which of them do give or render to our sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty any yearly ferme or annuitie for their said Bailiwikes: And
how much they render for the same, And who do not, And what of right they or
any of them ought to have and take of the said Forest to pay the said ferme
or Annuitie. And by what metes and bonds they do and of right ought to hold
their said Bailiwikes, And what demesne lands the Queen has in every of the
said Bailiwikes: and by what meats and bounds they be inuironned and set
about with etc.

29 Item, you shall enquir if any Forester of fee, or any other has taken any
reward of any Forester, that he ought to be put, deemed and taken within the
liberty of the Forest: and after the receipte of such reward, does remove and
displace the said Forester, and put a new in his place, for a new reward, to
the great detriment and hurt of the Forest and grief of the Country.

30 If any person or persons, within the limittes and bounds of the Forest or
without, to the hurt or prejudice of the Forest, have newly enclosed his
several ground, Woods or Warren, or has afforested any Wood of his own
without warrant of the Queens Majesty, you shall do us to weete of his name.

31 Item, Dear found dead or wounded.
you shall inquire whether any Dear found newly dead, or otherwise wounded in
such sort that the same cannot recover his hurt: and so found and taken by the
Foresters, whether the flesh and bodies of such dead or hurt Dear has been
given and bestowed to the Lazer-house or Spitell-house next adjoining, if any
such there be: and if there be no such Lazer-house nere adjoining, then whether
the flesh and bones of such Dear aforesaid has been bestowed, given and
imparted among the poor people next inhabiting the Forest: and if they have
been so well bestowed, then whether the Verderors or Country can testify the
samd yea or no etc.

32 Also of all such Dear as has been found and taken, as last before,
whether the head and skin of the same have been delivered to the freemen of
the next town adjoining etc.

33 Item, if any Arrowe or Arrows has been found within the Forest: whether
due presentment has been made to the Verderors thereof: to the intent that
the said Verderor in his Roll might enter the same etc.

34 Item, Greyhounds.
if there be any Grey-houndes found running within the said forest, to the
disturbance of the Queens game, whether the same has been presented in the
presentme^ts of the verderors to the intent that the same should be sent to the
Queen, or to the chief Justice of the Forest.

35 Item, you shall inquire if all the deggs which be within the bounds of the
Forest, and ought to be lawed, be well and orderly lawed, and made profitable
for the said Forest, yea or no.

36 Item, if any man in time of Harvest have taken in any Massiue or great
dog within the said Forest etc. to the hurt of the Dear or not.

37 Also if any person or persons to whom the Queens Majesty or any of her
progenitors, has of late or old time granted liberty of free chasing within
the Forest: if they or any of them by means and color thereof, have done any
prejudice to the Queens Majesty in the said Forest, yea or not.

38 Also if the Queens Majesty or any of her progenitors, has granted
liberty to hunte Vermen of chase, that is to say, Foxes, Marternes, Wild
Carts, Pole-Cattes and Squiriles, within the said forest, whether they or any
of them by color thereof has killed any of the Queens Dear, yea or not.

39 Item, if any person have at any time seen any trespasser in the Forest
take any Dear there, and has not levied hue and cry to take him, ye shall
present his name etc.

40 Item, you shall inquire what persons there be within the bounds of the
Forest or without, that does keep any Dogs that will runn and kill the Dear,
or kill Hares or any other beasts of chase, or does keep any manner of engine to
take the said Dear or other beasts, or who does by any manner of engine take a
Dear or such beasts: and who are receiuors, ayding, and concenting to the
same, you shall present the same.

41 Item, whether any Dear were or has been taken: and by what manner of
persons the same has been so taken: and whether it were by warrant or
without warrant.

Item you shall inquire if any have been offenders in warrens or fish-pooles
within the liberties of the Forest.

42 Ye shall moreover inquite what person or persons within the bounds and
limittes of the Forest, has any Bows, Shaftes, hounds, or any other engines,
to the end to prejudice the Queens Majesty of her beasts of chase: and who
is accustomed to enter into the said Forest with Bow and Shaftes: you shall
present the same.

43 Item, you shall inquire whether any person to whom the Queens Majesty or
any other person by reason of his office has given any Dear, has taken any
other kind or more Dear then has been so given him: And what Foresters,
officers or other persons have been ayding and assisting to the same: and
whether the same were taken without sight of the Foresters and Verderors yea or
no. Also ye shall inquire who has taken any kind of Hawks, Fesants, Partridge
or other Foul of Warren within the said Forest, contrary to the Laws of the
same. Purlieu borders.


44 Item, ye shall inquire if there be any man that has hunted the Queens
Dear within vii. miles about the forest, at any time within xl. days next
before the Queens hunting, or xl. days next after it was done: for these
causes: for that the King before his hunting or his commissioners ordained to
take the view of the game, his grace should have the sight of his Dear where
they lie at rest in their haunt: and after the hunting, because when they be
driven out with strength of hounds, and noise of men and horns, may after
resort again to their haunte in the Forest.

45 If any Purlew hunter, hunt disorderly to the destruction of the Queens
game in the Forest or kill Dear, Purlieu.
or hunt before the Son or after, or with any other then with his meniall
servants, or hunteth upon the Sondaies.

46 Item, if any Purlew hunter at any time forestall the kings Dear, whether
it be by dead haie or quick heye: Purlieu.
for they may not forstall but let flip at the tail: and whether any Purley
hunter has hunted in the fence Month or not.

47 Item, Purlieu.
if any man comes into the Purlew and finds a Dear in his feading, and
goes against the wind and so slays him with bow or Gray-hounde, or other
Engine, or forseth him at any gap or pitch as the Dear is wont to walk, or
takes his flight, ye shall do us to weete.

48 Also if there be any person that holds any long running hounds and rides
or goes through the forest as the high ways lie, and takes not up his said
hounde or hounds with a fast knott, so that they wind the Dear and fall
thereto, and drive the Dear til he be dead, be it within the forest or
without, do us to weete of the persons names and dwelling places and of the
Dear so killed etc.

49 Item, if any man takes any Dear with nets, cords, roapes, double
paternoster, or other engine, ye shall do us to weete.

50 Item, if any man chase or course, or set any net or Engine, though he kill
not etc. you shall present the same.

51 Item, if any man comes into the Forest, and there staieth Fox, Hare,
Conny, or any other beasts or Foul of Warren without authority etc. you
shall present the same.

52 Item if there be any man that dwells about the border of the Forest and
keeps any strange Gray hounds, and waits when the kings Dear be out of
the Forest, and forseth the said Dear, so that they may not come home, but by
that means is dead: ye shall do us to weete who he is, and who owes the
Greyhoundes, and the place where the same was done.

53 If there be any man that has slain any Dear of the Queens within the
Forest: of his name, and what Dear was so stain, you shall do us to weete.

54 Item, if there be any person that keeps any hounds or greyhoundes, An. 13.
R. 2. cap. 13. Purlew men.
and if he be Spiritual and may not dispend x.li. by the year: and if he be
Lay and may not dispend x.li. by the year of free hold over all charges, and
hunteth in the Purlew of his own authority: do us to weete of his name and
hunting, for otherwise he ought not to hunte. etc

55 You shall in like manner inquire whether the Foresters or any other
officers have agisted any cattle in the Queens demesne Haies and several Woods
wherein no person has common. And whether they have Mowen any of the Queens
lands, and taken the grass and hay thereof to their own use and sold the same
to the prejudice of the Queeeens Dear: and how much the same grass and Hay
was worth, or what they received for the same.

56 Also you shall enquire, if all Agistors of our Sovereign Lady the Queen
have truly and faithfully agisted her highness demesne woods: and truly and
faithfully levied and received the pawnage: and fully answered and accounted
for the same. And if they have not fully accounted for the same, as is
aforesaid: then how much the sum is that does still remain in their hands.

57 Item, you shall enquire of such as has any Woods adjoining to the Forest,
and in Pawnage time has put his Swine into his own Woods, and makes gappes
and procures his Swine out of his Wood into the Forest in hindering of the
Queens Pawnage: Of all such Swine, you shall do us to wite, of the number and
value of them, and also of such offenders therein.

58 Item, Swine vnringed. Vide titulo Common of pasture.
if any man has any Swine coming into the Forest in Pawnage time, or any
other time in the year vnringed, Wrooting, deluing or turning up the Queens,
soil which is cause of exhilation and making leave of the Queens Dear, You
shall do us to weete of the number and price of them, and who it is that does
so.

59 Also, if there be any man that has any Patent by grant of any King or
Queen, or any specialtie, and it confirmed to him before any Justice in Air
for a certain number of Swine in the Queens Forest: if he has more than his
specialtie or Patent allowed does make mention of, do us to weete, and the
number and price of them, and the offender herein.

60 Item, you shall enquire, Swyne not ringed.
if there has been any Swyne not ringed, or Goats, that has been attached
since the last Session within the Forest: of the number and price of them, you
shall do us to weete: For they be forfeitable by the first Attachement, for they
are no beasts of common. Also, if there has any Sheep come within the Forest
or within the Covert, Sheep.
and have been attached three times since the last Session, of the number and
price of them, ye shall do us to weete, etc.

61 Item, you shall enquire of all strangers that have had horse, Mares, beasts,
or other cattle in the forest, by which the pasture of the Kings Dear has
been surcharged, or ouerlayd, to the hurt of the same Dear: and to the
noysance of them that have common in the same Forest, You shall present their
names, etc.

Stone Horse.
62 And you shall enquire, if there be any person or persons, that puts any
Stone horse or horses upon the Forest to be fed, or commoned within the Forest,
Drift days of the Forest. Anno 33 H. 8 cap. 5. Note that the days of the
drift is appointed by the Statute.
being of the age of two years, which are not of the stature of xv. handfulles
high by the Standard. Or whether there be any Mares, Fillies, or Foles, which
be not like to be able to bear foales of reasonable stature, pasturing within
the Forest. Whether the Hedborowes and Tythingmen of every of the townships
within the said Forest at every of the driftdayes, according to the Statute,
has duly executed the same Statute.

63 Also, ye shall inquire whether any officer of the Forest has taken any
fines for the Agisting of strange cattels within the said Foreste to the
hinderance of the pasture for the Queens Majesty's wild Beasts, and to such
as have common in the same. And what, and how much the pasture of the said
Dear has bin hindered thereby, etc.

64 In like manner ye shall enquire, if any man has spoiled or destroyed any
Brush or Fern, Destroyers of any Couer^.
or any other covert or defense in such place or places where the Queens Dear
has or does commonly use or haunt, or does usually calue or fawn.

65 And also, whether any person to whom the Queen has granted Estouers for
his own only use of such Fern and Brush, or other Estouers, whether they
have by color thereof given or sold any of the said Fearne or Brush, or
Estouers to others. And who has had any such warrant for the taking of any
such Estouers, and what warrant: And how much the Forest is thereby prejudiced
and hurted, and of his or their name or names that has so done, you shall do
us to weete.

Surcharging the Common.
67 Item, whether there has any person or persons inhabiting within the
Forestes, surcharged the pasture and meadow within the same: and how the same
has been surcharged: and to what loss and hurt the same has been, you
shall do us to weete.

68 And further, you shall enquire, if there has any person come into the
forest, and felled and cut down any great Oaks of the Kings, and carried them
away by night or by day: Of the price of the horses and Carte, and of the said
trees carried, ye shall do us to weete.

69 Also ye shall enquire, if any person or persons has or have come into the
Forest and cut down any small wood or underwood, as Sparres, Blete, Thorns,
or watling rods, and carried the same away vnattached, ye shall do us to
weete of his name and of the price, etc.

70 Item, if the Forester of the Forest, his Lieutenant, or any Foster browseth
any Mast, bows, Browsewood.
or great Oaks in Winter time, more for his own advantage for to sell, than
for the sustenance of the Queens Dear, do us to weete, and the name and price.

71 Item, if takers of wood by the Queens license or grant, whether they did
not exceed their grant and authority, you shall do us to weete: And by whose
assent, and how much, and what person has done so.

72 Item, if any man have any warrant to have certain trees: if he has taken
more than his warrant: or if he has taken the said trees without view of the
Verderors or Fosters, ye shall do us to weete, etc.

73 Item, if any warrant were granted for any Oaks to the Queens use, if any
man take them to his own use, or otherwise bestow them or sell them, of the
prise ye shall do us to weete etc.

74 If any commissions were directed to any Woodseller for a certain number of
great Wood or Underwood, or both, if the Woodsellers have well made their
hedges of the coppies for the saving of the Queens covert. And if they have
concealed any of the profit on their account that the Queen ought to have.
And if they have enclosed any Moors, great plains, or wastes, to the hurt of
the commoners, or put in cattle to the hurt of the springs, ye shall do us to
weete.

75 Also, what Oaks or other wood the said Foresters have given, sold, or
taken, or undermined, or otherwise impaired, to which the officers has
consented, or otherwise, etc. Le quantity et le value de tiel boise. etc.

76 Ye shall further enquire who has made any spoil or waste in the Forest of
Vert in the Queens demesne Woods: And also in the woods of other persons
within the said Forest. And what, and how much every of the said Foresters
has given, sold, or has suffered to be given, or has taken to their own
proper use of the woods within their Bailiwikes. And if for the favor of any
manner of person (that is to say) of Noble men or mean men, the said officers
has suffered them or any of them to make spoil or waste of their woods within
the said Forest: what, and how much spoil it is. And if they or any of them
by means thereof have taken anything of them: what and howmuch it is, etc.

77 Further, ye shall enquire how much vesture and covering all and singular
woods and shadowing of the same now being asserted were worth before they were
so asserted, Assartes.
as well of the Queens demesnes, as of other men's grounds: and who has
received the profits thereof: and how much the Corn is worth of all and
singular the said asserts which be now sown, etc.

78 If any person or persons does walk in the Forest out of the Queens high
way with Bow and Arrows, other than the Reepers or officers appertaining to
the Forest, contrary to the Assise of the same: ye shall present his or their
name or names.

79 Further, ye shall enquire, if the Forester or Foresters of the said
Forest, has and have early every morning walked within his walk and limits,
and so diligently used their duties at other times of the day, looking to the
Queens Dear and other beasts of chase, in watching and harkening what
offenders shall come into the said Forest, yea or no.

80 If any man have stopped or straightened any Church Way Milne-way, or other
ways within the Forest and Purlew: you shall present his name. Aco^rnes and
Crabbes.


81 If any person or persons gather any Acornes, Crabbes, or any other Mast,
and makes sale of them in the Market or else where to the hurt of the Queens
Dear and commoners there, you shall present the same.

82 Item, Purlew.
if any person has made any Copes or Closure in the Purlew, estraigntning the
Queens Dear from the Forest, to the hurt of the owners, or pounded the
beasts of any co^moners out of the shire and not put them in open pounds,
whether it be in Pawnage time or not, do us to weete.

83 Item, whether all such Rentes services, and other duties which ought to be
paid and done to the Queen or her Foresters, have been duly and truly
answered and done yea or no.

84 And finally, if there be any person or persons which has impleded or sued
any Plee which does appertain to our Sovereign Lady the Queen: And which is
within the jurisdiction of the Justice of the Forest, and before him to be
determined. Or if there be any person that has taken any fine or ransom for
taking or killing any Hares, and for having and keeping of any unprofitable
dogs in the said Forest, contrary to the assise of the same: or for any other
trespass which appertained to the Queens Majesty to have reformation for,
you shall present the same likewise.

Thus ends the Charge of the Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest.
BEfore that I do begin to speak or write any thing concerning a Forest: it
is necessary first of all to see what thing a Forest is in his own proper
nature. I have read and seen many definitions of a Forest: and yet not any
that is a perfect definition of the same. Definitio Nominis.
Some do make this definition of a Forest, vz, Foresta id est Ferarum Statio:
this is but definitio nominis non rei, it is but an exposition of the word
forest, and not a perfect definition of the nature of the very thing in deed.
Othersome do say that Foresta est tuta mantio Ferarum: and this is no more but
an exposition of the word Forest nether: Forest.
as if a man should say, An imperfect definition of a Forest.
that a forest is a safe abiding place of the wild beasts to restin. Some do
make this definition of a forest, vz, a forest is a teritory of ground, meered
and bounded with unremovable marks, meeres and boundaries, either known by
matter of record, or else by prescription. This is no perfect definition of a
Forest, neitheir, because it does not concist Ex genere and vera differentia:
for by this definition Westminster Hall may be a Forest, Westminster Hall a
Forest.
for that the same is a Territory of ground, it is also meered and bounded
with vnremouable marks, meeres and bounds, for the same has most strong stone
walls that do enclose it round about, that are ancient enough to make a
prescription, and yet the same is no Forest: Although peradventure there are
some kind of persons that have more felicity to hunt there after greedy
gain, than in any other Forest after game. And in like manner Saint Paul's
Church in London may be a Forest very well by that definition, for the same is
a Teritory of ground, it is also meered and bounded with Stone walls, that
are vnremouable boundaries, and they are known by prescription ancient
enough: and yet the same is not a Forest in deed. And if the definition of a
Forest were this, vz, a Forest is a Terretory of ground, meered and bounded
with vnremouable marks, meeres and bounds, either known by matter of record or
else by prescription, The definition of a Chase.
which territory of ground is also replenished with wild beasts of Venerie, in
the protection of the King, for his delight: this is a good definition of a
Free Chase: and yet is this no perfect definition of a Forest: for then every
Free Chase were a Forest, and there is no difference between a Forest, and a
Chase by this definition: for a Free Chase is a Teritory of ground: the same
has also meeres and bounds, either known by matter of record, or else by
prescription, to the intent that if any offense be done there, it may be known
by the same bounds whether the offense were done within the Chase or out of
the Chase, by the which it is known either to be an offense or no offense. A
Chase has bounds and beasts of Venery.
And also a Free Chase is replenished with wild beasts of Venerie, for the
Kings delight, as the Bucke and the Do, and other beasts of the Forest and of
Chase. Why then what does this definition lack of the true definition of a
Forest? Marie this, that a Forest has certain particular Laws and officers yt
are only proper to a forest, and not to a Chase, and a Chase has no such Laws
nor officers: The difference between a Forest and a Chase
for all offenders in a free Chase are punishable according to the common Laws
of this Realm, and not by the Laws of the Forest: And therefore this is the
very true definition of a Forest, that is to say: a Forest is a certain
Territory of ground and Privileged place for wild beasts to rest in: meered
and bounded with unremovable Marks, Meres, and Boundaries, The definition of
a Forest.
either known by matter of Record, or else by Prescription: Which Territory
of ground is also replenished with wild Beasts of Venerie, and Verte, and
Couerts for the succor of the said Wild beasts, which place has also
certain particular and proper laws and officers for the preservation of Vert
and Venison: A Forest does consist of iii. things.
So that a Forest does consist of these three things, that is to say: of Vert,
Venison, and of certain particular laws that are only proper unto it.

And a Chase does consist of Vert and of Venison, A Chase does consist of ii.
things.
for the same has not any particular Laws that are proper to a Chase only.
And thus much concerning the definition of a Forest.

What things do make a Forest: How a Forest is made. What things be incident
to a Forest. Who may have a Forest. And what difference there is between a
Forest, Chase, Park and Warren, hereafter follows.
Charta de Foresta.
THe words of the Statute of Carta de Foresta Articulo primo, are these: Omnes
Forestae quas Henricus auus noster aforestatuit etc. Concerning this first
Article, it does plainly apeare in a book which does remain in the Exchequer,
called Liber Rubrus: that a Forest is a safe abiding place of wild beasts, not
of all manner of wild beasts, but only of them that are belonging to the Wood:
not in all places, but in certain places meet for that purpose. And of this
word Foresta (o) is changed into (e) as who should say Feresta, id est,
Ferarum statio: And a Forest is not in every Shire, A Forest must be in the
woody Contries.
but in the Woodie Countries, where great Covert and fruitful pastures be. It
makes no force whose the Woods be, either the Kings or any other man's, so
that the wild beasts may have their free and safe course and abiding within
the circuit of the same Forest. This Article is neither for then larging nor
diminishing of the common Law: The Woods of other men may be afforested as
well as the Woods of the King. Carta de Foresta Artic. 1.
but it is a rehearsal, that the King before that time had made Forestes of the
Woods of other men, as well as his own demesne Woods: whereby it does appear
that before the making of this Statute the King might have made a Forest in
every Wood that he would, as well in the Woods of other men, as in his own
demesne Woods: and so he may yet at this day: because yt it is necessary
that the king shall have game and other disportes of pleasure, mere for the
dignity of a Prince, to pass the time in every place within his dominion
where he will command. For if the king by his Royal authority will command
that any place within his Regal jurisdiction, where wild beasts are, shall be
kept for a certain time for his pleasure and disporte: then no person ought to
chase or hunt there for the time commanded: and yet the same is not a Forest
by that commandment: for the King is to have such things by matter of Record.

And so it appears that a Forest is a safe abiding place for wild beasts,
What a Forest is.
in the protection of the King for his pleasure and delight: and yet not for
all kind of beasts, but for such beasts as are belonging to the Wood, that is
to say, for Hearts, and Hindes, Buckes and Dooes, Rooes, Sangliers, wild
Hogs, wild Bulls, Kyne, wild Bears, Hares, wild Goats, Martrons, Foxes,
Wolfes, Squireles, Beasts that are belonging to the Wood.
and all other beasts of Venerie and Vermius of chase, so long as they are
remaining within the circuit of the Forest, it is not lawful for any person
without the Kings license to hunte, chase or kill them or any of them there,
although that some of them are not beasts of the forest, nor beasts of chase:
Usage and custom to hunte in their own Land at little Vermins.
yet so long as they are within the forest they are in the kings free
protection: so that no man may chase them there (except only in places where
they have been accustomed time out of mind to chase at such little Vermines in
their own lands, out of the kings demesne lands and Woods:) Master Hesket in
his learned reading of the Laws of the Forest does say that there be five
wild beasts that are accounted beasts of the Forest, that is to say, There
are five beasts that are beasts of the Forest. And there are also five beasts
that are beasts of Chase.
the Heart, the Hynde, the Hare, the Wolf, and the Boar: and there are also
five other wild beasts that are accounted beasts of the chase, that is to
say, the Bucke and the Do, the Fox, the Martron, and the Rooe: these also
the old Foresters were wont to call the beasts of the Forest, and the beasts
of chase. And it does appear by the ancient Laws of the Forest made by King
Canutus in his Canon the 27. that all the wild beasts that do live within the
Forest, are not acompted beasts of Forest: Canutus laws of the Forest: Canon
27.
but only remain of them: for the words are these: Sunt inter alia preter
feras Forest^e bestiae quae dum etc. By which it does appear that there are
diverse wild beasts remaining in the Forest, that are not properly beasts of
the Forest in deed: and yet it is not lawful for any person to kill them: for
the killing hunting or hurting of them in the Forest, is Fractio Regalis
Chaceae: Fractio regalis Chaceae.
which by the Laws of the Forest is punishable, as hereafter it shall be
showed. The old Foresters do account that Connyes are not at all belonging to
the Wood, for that they have animam reuertendi: a mind of returning again:
and therefore they are not of such nature as the other wild beasts are: but
yet it is not lawful for any person to kill them within the Forest without
the Kings license. Wild Bulls nor wild Kine are not now in every Forest, nor
scant in any Forest in this Realm: and wild Wolfes being enemies to the
common wealth, are not to be suffered in any place, as heretofore they have: so
that they are at this day all destroyed and not remaining in any Forest in
this Land.

The manner how a Forest is made, is this.
WHen the Prince is minded to make a Forest in any place that is meet for the
same: then the King may grant out a commission under his great Seal of
England, How a Forest is made.
directed to certain discreet persons appointed for his grace for that
purpose, thereby commanding them to view, perambulate, and also to mere and
bound the place where the King will have the same Forest to be made. And when
they have so executed his graces commandment according to the tenor thereof:
The King is to have a Forest by matter of record.
and the same being once returned and certified of record into his high Court
of Chancery accordingly: and Proclimation thereupon openly made, through out all
the Shyre within the which the same Forest is so made, that after that time, no
person shall hunte or chase any manner of wild beasts within the precinctes
or bounds of the same place so returned and certified of record as is
aforesaid, without the Kings especial license for the same. Which said
perambulation, Proclamation and certificat of the meets and bounds of the same
piece of ground being once returned, and the King entitled to the same by
matter of record, does make the same a Forest, whose land or ground soever
the same be, where the same Forest is so made: For it is at the liberty and
pleasure of the King, to reserve the wild beasts and the game to him self,
for his only pleasure and delight in such Privileged places, where he will
have a firm peace appointed for them. And in the very like manner, a writ may
go out of the Chauncery to the Shirife of the Shire, to inquire what place is
most convenient to make a Forest in: Here you may note that every Forest must
have bounds, as it does appear in Assisa Forestae, articulo 18. and these
bounds being once by matter of Record, they are the Kings, for Omnes Metae
Forestae sunt integre Domini Regi: and therefore no man can or may take them
away. And so every man may by search know the true limits and bounds of every
Forest: And the like of the Purlew, for the same was once Forest, and
afterward disafforested, which is done by matter of Record also.
whereupon the Shirife shall charge an inquest to inquire of the certainty of
the place, and the bounds thereof: and to put ye same in writing, and then to
certify it into the Chauncery: and when the king is thereof a certained by
matter of record: he may send to the Shirife by letters pattents, that he
shall then cause it to be proclaimed in the Kings name: that the place which he
has so certified, shall from hence forth be a Forest: and that all persons
shall refrain from hunting or chasing of any of the wild beasts within the
bounds of the same.

And also that the game therein shall be reserved for the pleasure and disporte
of the King and his nobles only. The King is to have every thing by matter of
Record. The commandment of the King by word only does not make the land of his
subjects a Forest. In the Kings own lands no man may hunt.
And that does make the same a Forest: and if the same be made in any other
manner then is aforesaid, then it is no Forest: for the King ought to have
those matters, by matters of record, and not otherwise. For if the King
command by word only that no person shall chase or hunte in certain
grounds of his Subjects own lands any wild beasts of venery: this does not
make the same a Forest: neither shall any person be punished for hunting of
wild beasts of venerie in his own lands: (for such a commandment by word
only) by the Laws of the Forest, as if the same were a Forest in deed, where
such a person did so hunt: but yet it is otherwise where the same ground does
belong to the King only as his own demesne lands.

Also if the King do make such a commandment by matter of record, as is
before declared: Every Forest must have wild beasts of necessity.
yet the same is not a Forest before that wild beasts of Venerie be therein:
for if there be no wild beasts of the Wood in it, the ground is in the same
nature that it was before, and the same is not altered.

What is incident to a Forest.
Also before that it can be a profitable Forest, it behooves that the King do
appoint certain nesessarie and meet officers, for to take charge of the same:
as Verderors, Foresters, Regardors, Woodwardes, Agistors and such like. And
before that such officers be appointed, What officers do belong to a Forest.
it is not a profitable Forest for the King: for these officers must have the
charge of the Vert and of Venison, for the preservation of it. Of which two
things, a Forest does chiefly concisle, and without the same it can be no
Forest. And also it behooves that every forest have a Court, which is called
the Court of Swanimote: for a Court of Swanimote is incident to every Forest:
A Court of Swanimote is incident to a Forest: and also the court of
Attachementes.
even as a Court of Pipowders is incident to a Faier: And yet there are diverse
places within this Realm, that are called Forestes, and they have the names of
Forestes, and yet they have not used to keep any Court of Swanimote: but such
Forestes do not seem to be Forestes in deed, but they are rather Chases then
Forestes: For it cannot be a Forest, unless the same have both a Court of
Attachementes, and also a Court of Swanimote beloning to the same.

The King may make a Forest in the lands or Woods of any other man as it
apeareth in the foresaid Red book of the Exchequer in these words: nec
interest cuius sunt nemora sieve Regis side Rigni, sieve procerum.
Who by the Common Law may make a Forest.
Amongst the learned in the Laws of the this Realm, it has been always
holden for a general oppinion, that by the common law, the King may make a
Forest in all Woods or Places wheresoever he will within this Realm: as well
within the Woods or lands of his Subjects, as within the Kings own demesne
Woods or lands as is aforesaid: and no other person may make a Forest, but
the King only. And yet there is no doubt, but that a noble man or a common
person may have a Forest by especial grant from the King or Prince, under the
great Seal of England: As the Ducke of Northfoke in times past had: A common
person may have a Forest by the grant of the King.
And also the Lord of Burga^eny had a forest in Sussex, called the Forest of
Saint Leonardes: Also the Duke of Buckingham had diverse forestes, as the
forestes of Brecknock, Hay, and Cantselly and others: which notwithstanding
that they were in their hands being subjects, yet they were Forests still, A
Forest is a Franches of such noble and princely pleasure incident only to the
royal dignity of a Prince: that therefore no person can make a Forest but the
King only. But yet a common person may have a Forest by grant from the King,
as it does appear by the reci^all of the Statute of 22. E. 4, ca. 7. For at
the time of the making of that Statute, diverse persons had Forestes besides the
King.
and of the nature of Forests. And so there are diverse noble men at this day
that have Forests of their own by the grant of the King or Prince, made to
them or to some of their ancestors: and if any affender be found offending in
any of those places that are such forestes, then they shall be punished for the
same offense according to the laws of the Forest, and acording to the quality
of their offense.

It seems that in times past, there were diverse Forestes in Wales, Exactions
by the owners of Forestes in Wales.

Strange customs concerning forests in Wales. 27. H. 8. ca. 7.


which although they were in the hands of Lords and noble men, yet the owners
of them had by the grant of the King Iura legalia: by reason whereof those
owners of such Forests and their officers did use such extreme dealing
toward the people of the country, that diverse great misdemeanors and ryots
did thereby ensue: besides that they had such laws, exactions, and strange
customs in those places, as it does appear by the recytall of the Statute of
27. of H. 8. ca. 7. that the same act was made of purpose to reform and take
away the same. Wales was a Principality of it self.
And the reason why the Laws and customrs of Forests in Wales did so much
differ from the Laws of the Forest in England is, as it seems, because that
some time Wales was a jurisdiction of it self before that the same was united
and annexed to this Realm by the Statute of An. 27. H. 8. ca. 26. And before
that time, they have had Princes of them selves, The Queens Majesty has a
royal Prerogative to make a Forest.
which have had authority to make Forestes and Laws. also concerning the
same, which is contrary to the laws of this Realm now: For at this day no man
can make a Forest in England but the Queens most excellent Majesty, because
her highness has that Soueraignetie and royal Prerogative reserved only to
her self. For as it is proved by the opinion of Master Treherne in his reading
upon the Statute of Carta de Foresta, the King of Skottes, Treherne^. in his
reading. fo. 3.
although that he be a King or Prince in his own country: yet he neither may
make a Forest nor yet have a Forest in England, without the especial grant of
the King or Queen of England, because in that respect he is but a subject
himself, neither has he any Prerogative or soueraignetie in this land to make
a Forest, or to have any Forest here, except the same be by the especial grant
of her Majesty. And this much concerning these two points, Who may have a
Forest, and who may make a Forest by the common laws of this realm at this day.

Now at is to be seen what difference there is between a Forest, Chase,
Warren and Park.
The difference between a Forest and a Chase

The officers of the Forest.

The wood mo^e court, The Swanimote court.

The difference between the beasts of the Forest, and the beasts of the Chase

The beasts of the Forest are called Siluestres.

The beasts of the Chase are called Campestres.


THe difference between a Forest and a Chase, is, that a Forest has keepers,
Foresters, Verderors, Regarders, Agisters, Woodwards, and other officers, and
also a Court of Attachementes, which the old Foresters do call The Wood-mote,
and a Court of Swanymote: and a Chase has only Keepers or a Keeper, and no
court of Attachements nor court of Swanimote, nor other officers as a Forest
has. The diffence between the beasts of the forest and the beasts of the
Chase is said to be this: that the beasts of the Forest are tantum siluestres,
and the beasts of the Chase are Campestres tantum: for the beasts of the Forest
do make their abode all the day time in the great Couerts and secreat places in
the woods: and in the night season they do repair into the lawnes, pastures
and pleasant feedings for their food and relief: and therefore they are
called Siluestres, that is to say, of the wood, or beasts that do haunt the
woods. And the beasts of the Chase, they do make their abode all the day time
in the feeldes and upon the Hills or high Mountains, where they may see round
about them, who does stir or come near them: And in the night season when
every body is at rest, and all is quiet, then they do repair unto the corn
feelds or unto the lawnes, meadows and pleasant feedings for their relief: and
therefore they are called Campestres, that is to say beasts of the feelde, or
beasts that do haunt the feeldes. There are but five beasts of the Forest,
There are five beasts of the F^^est

And there are five beasts of the Chase.


and there are also five beasts of Chase, as has been showed before. Also, a
Forest does most chiefly consist of these three things, vz, of Vert, Venison,
and certain particular laws and officers for to see the due exetution of the
same. And as concerning the first of them, which is Vert, it is to be
understood, that Vert, A Forest does consist of Vert. Venison, and Laws for
the purpose. Green hew. Venison. Particular Laws.
which the old Foresters were accustomed to call Green hew, is every kind of
thing that does grow within the Forest and bear green leaf, which may be
any succor or covert for the wild beasts to have their secreat abiding in.
The second thing is Venison, by which is understood all manner of wild beasts
of Venerie, which are beasts of the Forest, and beasts of the Chase. The
third is, certain particular laws which are only proper and belonging to a
Forest for the preservation of the same Vert and Venison, and for the
punishment of such as are offenders therein. A Forest does contain in it, a
free Chase, a Park, and a Warren.
And because that these laws might the better be executed: Every Forest has
certain meet officers for that purpose only, as Verderors, Regarders,
Foresters and such like, etc. Also, this word (Forest) is both a general and a
compound word, for that the same does comprehend many things in it. For a
Forest does always comprehend in it, a Free chase, a Park and a Warren, and
all these are contained in a Forest: And therefore, if any person do hunt or
kill within the Forests any manner of Wild beasts, which are but vermin,
Fractio Regalis Chaceae, see Carta de Foresta of king Canutus, canon 27.
and neither beasts of the Forest, nor of the Chase, yet the same person is to
be punished for the breach of the kings free Chase. Also if any person do hunt
or kill wild Conyes in the Forest, he shall be punished for ye same. And
likewise, if any person do destroy Partridges or Fesants within the Forest, he
is to be punished: for they are fowls of warren: The taking of Fesaunts and
Partridges are forbidden by the Statute of 11. H. 7. ca. 17.
and the King having the franches of a free Warren within every Forest, all
such fowls and beasts of Warren are by him protected in the same only for
himself and his nobles, for his pleasure and princely delight. The King himself
may have a Forest, but so can not a common person without a special grant from
the King for the same. Also a common person may have a free chase by the grant
of the King or Prince, or else by prescription. Itinere Northampton. An. 3 E 3.
Br titulo Prescription, 57. Vide ibide^ quoque, 108.
And it is to be noted that a common person may prescribe to have a park or a
warren, in a certain place within his Manor as appendant to the same: as it
does appear in Itin' Northanpt' An. 3. E. 3. and An. 13. H. 7. f. 16 and An.
5. E. 4. f. 18. where al these are holden for good prescriptio^s, and diverse of
them are allowed in the Air before the Justices of forests for good claims. He
yt has a Freechase by ye king must not use the same for all manner of wild
beasts, but only for wild beasts that are beasts of the Chase. Misuser.
Prescriptions. The punishment of offenders in a chase
And the offenders that are taken offending in any Chase they are to be
arrested, imprisoned and punished by the common law and by the Statute de
Malefactoribus in Parcis Chaceijs etc. which was made in An. 21. E. 3. But such
offenders are not to be punished by the Laws of the Forest, as offenders in
the Forestes are.

Now it is to be seen what thing a Warren is.
A Warren is a fraunches, or privileged place of pleasure only for those
beasts and Fowls that are beasts and fowls of Warren, Campestres non
Siluestres.
id est, tantum Campestres and non siluestres, vz, For such beasts and fowls
as are altogether belonging to the feelds, and not unto the woods, Vide, the
Register, in titulo Trespass de malefactoribus, That these only are beasts and
birds of Warren. 21. E. 3. de Malefactoribus in Parcis.
and for none other beasts or fowls. There are but two beasts of Warren, that
is to say, Hares and Connyes. And there are also but two Fowls that are Fowls
of Warren, vz, Fesants and Partridges. And no other wild beasts nor birds
have any firm peace, privilege or protection within the Warren. If any person
be found to be an offender in any such free warren, he is to be punished for
the same by the course of the common law, and by the Statute of 21. E. 3.
called the statute de Malefactoribus in Parcis, Chaceijs etc. For the most
part, there are no officers in a Warren, but only the master of the game, or
the keeper. A free Warren is sometime enclosed, and also sometime the same does
lie open: for there is no necessity of enclosing of the same as there is of a
Park: Abuser.
for if a Park be suffered to lie open and not enclosed, the same ought to be
seized into the Kings hands.

What a Park is.
A Park is a place of Privilege for wild beasts of Venerie and also for
other wild beasts that are beasts of the Forest, and of the Chase, tam
siluestres quam Campestres. And all those wild beasts are to have a firm
peace and protection there: so that no man may hunt or chase them within the
Park without license of the owner of the same: for if any person shall do the
contrary, then he is to be punished by the course of the common law, as by an
actio^ of Trespass, which the same owner of the Park shall bring against him
that shall so offend, or else such an offender shall be punished according to the
Statute de Malefactor' in Parcis, etc.

But yet a Park is of an other nature then either a Chase or a Warren is: For
a Park must be enclosed and may not lie open: Abuser. A Park must be enclosed
of necessity, for the same may not be suffered to lie open: for if it do, the
same is a good cause of seysure of the same into the hands of the King: and
this is called abuser, for that the same is abused from the nature of a Park.
Master Hesket in his reading fo. 3.
for if it do, that is a good cause of seysure of the same into the hands of
the King or Prince, as a thing that is forfeeted unto the King, and therefore
the same is inquitable, as a special thing given in charge at the Justice
seat of the Forest: as you may see in the xv. Article of the Charge hereafter:
And the very like is of a Free Chase, if the same be enclosed which ought to
lie open. And it is further to be noted also, that the owner of such a Park
cannot by the Law punish offenders or hunters for hunting in the same Park if
it do lie open: as Master Hesket affirms in his reading of the Laws of the
Forest fo. 3. Also there are no such officers in a Park, as there are in a
Forest: for in a Park there are no officers at all, but only a Keeper or
Keepers, and the Master of the game. And this you may see how a Park does
differ in nature from a Free Chase, a Forest or a Waren: and what difference
there is between any of them.

The words of the Statute are further videantur per bonos et legales homines,
etc.
Now it is to be seen how the Forest shall be vewed, and by whom the same
shall be done: And for that the King shall cause a writ of ad quod damnum to be
made, How the Forest shall be viewed. The Shirife or Exchetor shall take an
inquest to inquire what Woods the King has aForested that were not the Kings
own demean woods.
which shall be directed to the Shirife, or to the Exchetor of the Shyre, or
else a commission which shall be directed to certain persons which the King
shall appoint for that purpose: commanding the same commissinors thereby that
they shall take an inquest, and by their oaths diligently to inquire if King
Henry the Second graund father to King Edward the First, have aforested or made
a Forest of any Woods of any other man's, then of his own demean Woods. Then
the inquest upon their oaths, shall present what lands they were that so were
afforested, (if any such were:) and what damages the parties have sustained by
the making of such lands Forestes: and then the commissioners shall return
such presentmentes into the Chauncery: to the end that it may appear by matter
of record what lands were aforested by him: The King does not take any thing
but by matter of record, nor depart from any thing but by matter of Record.
so that the same lands or Woods as they were aforested at the First by matter
of record, they may likewise be disaforested again by matter of record. There
is a most excelent Priecident, concerning the Puralies of Windsor Forest, which
were vewed and returned into the Chauncery, and afterward disaforested and so
became Purl^ew: which I do omit here to set down, because the same is so long
that a Quier of Paper will scant contain it: but I have placed the same in the
end of this book.

The words are further: Et si boscum aliquem alium quam suum dominicum
afforestauit: ad damnum illius cuius boscus ille fuerit statim deaforestentur.
IT appears by the recital of the Statute in these words: Et si boscum
aliquem alium etc. that all such Woods as were afforested by King Henry the
Second, graund-father to King Edward the First: (which were not the Kings
demesne Woods:) to the damage or hinderance of them whose woods they were:
that then the same Woods so afforested, Lands vewed.
should be viewed as before said: and after such vewe, and the certainty
thereof known: then they should be disaforested. Ad quod damnum.
Now it is to be seen what is the meaning of these words, ad damnu^ illius
euius boscus etc. And for that matter it is to be understood, that if the King
do afforest any of the Woods or lands of any of his Subjects, the same is both
a great damage and hinderance to him whose Woods or lands the same is that so
is afforested: The hinderance of him whose land is aforested and in what.
for that the owner of the same is now thereby restrained of his former
liberty, and tied to the bondage of the assizes of the Forest: so that he
cannot hunt nor chase the wild beasts that do Feed in his own ground, but
suffer them to Feed in quiet, by reason that the same place is now within the
Kings Forest, and so become a Preuiledge for them by the law: whereas before
that the same place was made a Forest: if any wild beasts had then fedd upon
the same ground: the owner of the ground might have hunted and killed them to
his own profit and commodity: Also before that the same was made a Forest, the
owner of such ground might have felled his Woods at his own pleasure,
without any license or view of the Foresters, and so have converted the same to
his best profit. Also before the afforesting of the same, the owner thereof
might have converted his Pasture or Meadows into tillage, to his best
commodity: He that does dwell within the Forest may agist his own Woods by
the Statute of Carta de Foresta Arricul. 9
And also to have taken the Agistment and Pawnage of his Woods which they that
had lands within the Forest could not do before the making of the Statute of
Carta de Foresta Articulo 9. For that branche of the said Statute does give
that liberty to the inhabitance of the Forest which they had not before: that
is to say, that every man may agiste his own Woods, and take the Pawnage of
them to their own use: which before the making of the said Statute, the
Foresters did claim to have the same to the use of the King only. All which
things considered, you may see that for any man to have his Woods or lands
afforested is a very great damage and hinderance unto him: The bondage of the
Forest.
for the inhabitants in Forestes do suffer a very great bondage more then those
do which do dwell without the bounds of the Forest.

The words are further, Statim deaforestentur.
SO that all the Woods and lands which were afforested by King Henry the
Second, which was graund-father to King Edward the first, after such view and
inquisition made, as is aforesaid by the commissioners or vewers: and the same
vewe or inquisition by them returned into the Chauncery: Lands disaforested.
so that the king may be thereof acertained of the truth of the same by matter
of record as is aforesaid: then after such a certificat thereof made by such
officers and inquestes and perambulations of the very bounds of those lands so
afforested: the same is dissaforested and no Forest any more: and then those
lands are ever after called Purlewes: Lands disaforested Purlews euer-after.
because that the same was once Forest, and afterward disaforested: so that
now the same is become free again as it was at the first for every man that is
a Puelewman to hunte in his own Purlew: and he is accounted a Purlew man that
may dispend forty shillings by the year of free hold: and therefore the same
does take the name of Parlew, that is to say, Purlui, Word Purlui.
that is for him and no other person, but he that may dispend forty shillings
by the year at the least of free hold.

The King may disaforest any part of the Forest by his letters Patens.
Also the King may dissaforest any lands that are aforested by his letters
patents: as he did to the Abbot of Stratforde for Wale-Wood in Essex, within
the Forest of Waltham: which although the same be now at this time Forest, yet
the same was once no Forest. And here note that all such land as is so
dissaforested, after the dissaforesting of the same: then that land or Wood is
Purlew: Walewood.
(id est Purlui:) for the same is a Forest still, as unto him that is no Purlew
man: and the same is Free (Purlui,) only for him that is a Purlew man: What is
meant by Purlui, Purlieu, Puraler.
there is Purlui, Purlieu and Puraler: Purlui, for him, that is to say, only
for him to hunt that may dispend forty shillings by the year: Purlieu, that
is to say, The wild beasts of the Purliew must have Free returning to the
Forest if they can escape.
for the place, so that he must be a Purlew man in the place where he does
hunte, or else he is no Purlew man there: Puraler, that is to say, to go and
come: so that if a man be a sufficient Purlewman in the same place where he does
hunt: yet he may not forestall or foreset the Dear, but he must hunt the wild
beasts so, that if they have a mind of returning to the Forest again, they may
as the word is (Puraler, A case.
) go home to the Forest again if they can escape and over run the
Grey-houndes being put on after the game. The grauntee of the King may have a
Forest with Foresters etc.
And if the King which has a Forest with all the incidentes, do grant the
same to another man: then the grauntee shall have the same Forest with all the
officers and incidentes belonging to the same, which connot be severed, as
keepers, Foresters Agistors and Woodmen: as it appears by Master Treherne in
his reading of the Laws of the Forest, fo. 4. But quere of Verderors and
Regardors, A Justice of the Forest must be made by the King under the great
Seal of England.
for they are chosen by the Kings writ. But such a grauntee shall not have
Justices in his Forest, says Master Treherne: for no man can have a Justice
in his Forest but the King only: for such a Justice must be made by the Kings
commission, under the great Seal of England. Before the making of the Statute
of Carta de Foresta, there was no Law certain for offenses committed in
Forests: for at the beginning the same was at the pleasure and arbitrament of
the King to punish the offenders in Forestes, The beginning of the Forest Laws.
until that King Canutus and others did make certain Canons and
Constitutions, for the maintenance of Vert and Venison, which afterward by
continuance of time, such Constitutions were taken for a law, and such laws
were not certain neither, The beginning of Forest Laws.
before the making of this Statute law of Carta de Foresta: But the Laws of
the Forest were always differing from the Laws of this Realm, as it does
appear in the book of the Exchequere aforesaid, where it is written as
follows: Sane Forestarum Lex, ratio, Libro Rubro Scaccarii.
pena quoque vel absolutio delinquentium. sieve pecuniaria fuerit sieve
corporalis scorsum ab alijs regni iudicijs secernuntur. Here you may note that
offenders in Forests, before the Statute of Carta de Foresta, were punishable at
the will and pleasure of the King only.
Et solius regis arbitrio seu cuiuslibet familiaris ad haec specialiter
deputati subiecitur, legibus quidem proprijs subsistit, quas non Iure communi
sed voluntaria principum Institutione subnixas esse debent adeo vt quod per
legem eius factum fuerit non Iustum absolute, sed Iustum secundum legem
Forestae dicatur, quia in Forestis penetralia regum sunt and eorum maxim
deliciae, ad has quidem venandi causa curis quandoque depositis accedunt vt
modica quiet recreentur illic Serijs simul and multis Curiae tumultibus
omissis in naturalis libertatis gratiam paulisper respirant, vnde sit vt
delinquentes in ea soli regie subiaciant animaduersioni, which in English is
this: Truly (says the said Book) the Laws of the Forest: the reason, and
punishment: the Pardon, or absolution of the offenders, whether the same be
pecuniarie or corporal, it shall be differing from other Judgments of the Laws
of the Realm, By this it appears that the Lord chief Justice of the Forest,
has always bin one of the noble men of this Realm.
and shall be subject unto the Judgment of the King only, to determine at his
will and pleasure, or of some of dis Nobles thereunto especially appointed for
that purpose, which foresaid Law, reason, punishment, and pardon shall not be
tied to the order of the Common Law of this Realm, but unto the voluntary
appointment of the Prince, so that, the same which by his Law in that behalf
shall be appointed or determined, shall not be accounted or called absolute
Justice or Law: but Justice or Law according to the Laws of the Forestes:
Because that in the Forestes there are the secret pleasures and Princely
delights of the Kings: For Kings and Princes do resort to the Forest for their
pleasure of hunting, having for that time laid aside all cares, to the end
that they might there be refreshed with some quiet, being wearyed with the
continual business of the Court, they might (as it were) breath a while for the
refreshing of their free liberty.

And thereupon it comes to pass, that such offenders in Forestes, for their
offenses are subject unto the only Judgment and determination of the King:
And so before the making of the Statute of Carta de Foresta, and always since
unto this day the Law of the Forest did differ from the Common Laws of the
Realm: And by this Statute the Laws of the Forest which were not certain
before, are now by the same made certain in most things. And whereas this
Statute was defective, the same has been since supplied by other necessary
Statutes, as you may see here before.

And whereas the words before rehearsed are, Et solius Regis arbitrio seu
cuiuslibet familiaris ad haec specialiter deputati, It does appear that the
Office of the Lord chief Justice of the Forest is a place both of great
honor and of high authority, and that the same place is to be executed by
some great Peer of the Realm that is always one of the Kings most honorable
privy Counsel. The authority of the Lord Justice in Air.
And then when that any such noble person is made Lord chief Justice in Air
of the Forest by the Kings especial Commission, he has by that as great
authority as any other Justice in Oyer has and more: For then he may punish
all trespasses of the Forestes, according to the Laws of the Forest. A man may
prescribe to have waife and straye, but not felons goods.
And he may hear and determine all the Clames of the liberties and franchises
which be within the Forest: as to have Parkes, Warrens, and Viuaries: And also
of them which do Clame to be quite of assartes and Purprestures, and of them
which do Clame Leetes, hundreds, felons goods, waifes and fugitives, and other
liberties within the Forest: and likewise of them which do Clame to keep Hares
and other beasts of the Chase within the Forest. For by lawful and good
Clames men may justify the doing of many things within the forest, which
otherwise were unlawful. But those Clames must be such Clames as I have showed
before that have been allowed before the Justice in Air within the time of
Prescription.

The diversity between the Justice of the Forest and Justices in Oyer at
large, and other Justices, is, that the Justice of the Forest shall punish
those that be indicted at the Swanimote and presented before them in their
Sessions by fine and imprisonment at their discretion: and the party indicted
shall not trauerse it, because he is presented by more persons than by twelve:
and that is a condemnation against him. But the Justices in Oyer, and other
Justices of the peace, if they do determine such Trespasses done in Forestes,
(which by the Law they cannot do:) which is presented before them by way of
indictment: then the parties so indicted shall have their trauerse allowed
them, which they shall not have of the Enditement taken in the Swanimote, and
tried before the Justice of the Forest.

Those which be Justices of the Forest, when they have their Commission from
the King, The warrant of the Lord, Justice in Air to warn the Sessions of
the Forest.
for the keeping and holding of the Justice Seat there: they shall make their
warrant and Precept to the Shirife of the Shire, within the which the same
Forest is, where the Justice Seat shall be holden, which said Precept is in
these words: Thomas Louell nobilis ordinis garterij Miles Iusticiarius
Itinerans omnium Forestarum Domini Regis in Anglia tam citra Trent quam vltra,
Vic' Essex salutem ex part dicti Domini Regis tibi precipio quod summoneas per
bonos summonator' omnes Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, De qualibet villa
and villata quatuor homines and propositus duodecem, probos and legales homines
Priores, Comites, Barons, Milites, and eoru^ liberi tenentes qui terr' aut
tenementa habent infra metas Forestae domini Regis de Waltham in Com' Essex and
de qualibet villa and villata infra easde^ metas quatuor homines and propositus
and de quolibet Burgo infra metas eiusdem forestae duodecem probos and legales
homines, and omnes alios qui coram Iusticiar' placita Forestae ten' venire
solent and debent quod sint apud Waltham die Lunae prox' post festum Sancti
Petri apostoli prox' futur' coram me praefato Iusticiario Itineranto vel meo in
hac part deputato audituri and factur' ea quae ad placit' Forestae ibidem
pertenent. Et vlterius tibi precipio quod totam balliuam tuam, videlicet, tam
in Burgis and alijs villis quam in Ferijs, The general Sessions of the Forest
proclaimed.
Mercatis and alijs locis publicis public proclamare facias, Quod omnes illi
quicunque qui per Cartas dicti Domini Regis and antecessoris seu progenitor'
aut alio modo aliquas libertates Franchesias aut liberas Consuetud. Forestae
infra dictum forestam habere clament, sint coram me praefat. Iusticiar. aut meo
in hac part deputato die and loco praedictis ostensuri quas libertates habere
clament. Et omnes attachiati pro virid. and venatione infra forestam praedictam
post vltimam placit forestae tenent. ac eorum pleg. and manucaptor habuerent
diem per manucaptionem coram Iusticiar. Domini Regis, Itinerant proxim illic
venient. quod adtunc sint ibi coram me praefat. Iusticiar ad stand. recto and
ad faciendum ea quae secundum legem forestae facere debent, and quod tu ipse
fis ibidem cum Balliuis tuis ad exequend* and cerciorand. me super his and
alijs negotijs illis tangentibus and habeas ibi summonator. and hoc breue,
Test, etc.

Also, when that the Justices of the Forest have obtained their Commission at
the hands of the King to hold their general Sessions for the Forest. It is
to be understood, that when they do make out their Write of general Summons
for to Summon and command all manner of persons to appear there where the
same is to be appointed by the said writ in such manner and form as is before
declared, they must by the order and course of the Law, of very necessity
give unto these officers and others that are to appear there, a day of
reasonable warning by the space of forty days at the least, to hold their
Sessions in, in the same manner as the Justices in Eyer at large do make:
Forty days warning.
and they shall hold Plees of quo warranto, as the other Justices do: and that
is the general Summons that the Statute of Carta de Foresta does speak of.
And there is also another kind of general Summons, which the Justices of the
Forest shall cause to be made by directing of their warrant to the chief
Warden of the Forest, which warrant is in the form as follows.

Thomas Louell nobilis Ordinis Garterij miles Iusticiaries itinerans omnium
Forestarum domini Regis in Anglia tam citra Trent quam vltra: Iohanni de Vere
comiti Oxon. The writ to the chife warden.
custod'Forestae domini Regis vel eius locum tenent' in eodem salutem ex part
dicti domini Regis vobis mando ac firmiter iniungentes quod venire facias cora^
me prefat' Iusticiar' apud Waltham die Lunae proximum post festum Sancti Petri
Apostoli prox. futur. omnes Forestarios, Veridarios, Regardatores, Woodwardos,
ac alios ministros eiusdem Forestae qui nunc sunt et qui post vltimam placit'
Forestae predict. tent' fuerunt et eorum quemlibet, cum omnibus rotulis
scriptis minumentis et attachiamentis Forestae tam de viride quam de venatione
quae post vltimam placitam, illa emersa, et non determinat. extiterunt: facias
Regardatores Forestae qui sunt et qui post vltimam placitam predict. tent'
ibidem fuerunt cum omnibus regardis suis per idem tempus factis et irrotulatis:
faciasque insuper ad tunc et ibidem omnes agistatores eiusdem Forestae qui nunc
sunt et qui post tempus predictum fuerunt et eorum quemlibet cum omnibus
attachiamentis suis et rotulis agistamentor, Rotula Regardatorum.
ad stand'inde recte et ad faciend'ea que eis et eorum quamlibet secundum legem
Forestae iniungent. aut que facere debent, Rotulo Agistatorum.
facias etiam venire omnes illos qui clament habere aliquas libertates aut
franchesias infra Forestam predictam quod sint coram me aut loco meo tene^te ad
predict' diem et locum ostensur' quomodo clamant habere libertates franchesias
seu priuilegia et quo waranto et quod vos sitis ad tunc and ibidem cum
nominibus omniu^ predict' ministror' et hoc breue nobis remittente, test etc.

It appears by this writ, that the authority of the Justice of the Forest,
does differ from the authority of other Justices in Eyer, for the Justices of
the Forest may make their deputy or Lieutenant to execute their office and
place, The Justice of the Forest may make a deputy by the Statute of 32. H. 8.
ca.
and so cannot other Justices in Eyer do: but that is by reason of the Statute
of 32. of King Henry the 8. for before the making of that Statute, it seems
that the Justices of the Forest could not make a deputy or Lieutenant to
execute their place or office: for as much as the same is a judicial place of
authority.

And if the King which has a Forest with all the incidentes unto the same: and
he does grant the same unto any other person: the grauntee shall not have the
Iusticeship of the Forest by the same grant: nor he shall not have a Court of
Swanimote in the proper nature of the same: for if such a grauntee do keep a
Court of Swanimote for his Forest: he cannot do any thing in the same but take
presentme^tes against offenders, as they do commonly use to do in the Court of
Attachementes: and the reason is, because that the grauntee by such a grant,
cannot have Verderors nor Regardors, for they are chosen by the Kings writ: and
there can be no procedings against offenders in Forests in the Court of
Swanimote, Treherne in his reading of the Laws of the Forest fo. 7 Master
Hesket in his reading of the Laws of the Forest fo. 7.
without the Verderors and Regardors: And again it shall be in vain to have a
Court of Swanimote and such officers in a Forest as is aforesaid: if he may
not by the Law have a Justice of the same Forest, that may cause Justice to be
executed of such presentiments against such offenders: but yet such a grauntee
as is aforesaid, by the same grant may have Foresters, Agisters and
Woodwardes, for the safe keeping of his Vert and Venison: as it does appear by
Master Hesket in his learned reading of the Laws of the Forest, A Forest in
the hands of the King: but a Chase in the hands of another man.
fo. 7.

But if such a grauntee chance to have any trespass done in his Forest by
offenders in the same, he may very well have his remedy against them by an
Action at the common Law: and so the common Law has not left such a grauntee
unprovided of his remedy against such offenders: and because that such a
grauntee does want some part of the authority of a Forest by such a grant
as is aforesaid: A Forest in the hands of the King, may be a Forest in the
hands of another by the Kings especial grant Note the difference.
therefore the same Forest is not properly a Forest in deed, but rather a
chase being in the hands of such a grauntee: and yet the same was a Forest in
the hands of the King: But if the King by his letters patents, do grant a
Forest to any of his Subjects, and by the same his letters patents he does give
and grant unto the grauntee full power and authority to make a Justice of his
Forest, and to have all the officers of a Forest, as is aforesaid: as
Verderors, Regardors, etc. (which is Iura regalia in that defalse:) then such a
grauntee may well have the whole authority of a Forest in his own proper
nature: and then the same Forest does continue a Forest still in the hands of
such a grauntee, by reason of such a grant only. Note the difference.

Whereas the words of the Statute of Carta de Foresta Articulo Secundo are
homines vero qui manent extra Forestam non ven^ant de cetero coram Iusticiarijs
nostris de Foresta per co^munes Summonitiones: nisi sint implacitati vel plegij
alicuius vel aliquorum qui Attachiati sunt propter Forestam.

Now it is to be seen what persons are compellable by this Statute to
appear before the Justices of the Forest by this general Sumons mentioned in
the branch of the same Statute. And it is to be understood, that before the
making of this Statute of Carta de Foresta: the Law of the Forest was, that
all men within the County, as well those that did dwell out of the Forest, as
also all those that did dwell within the Forest, were bound to appear before
the Justices of the Forest, by this general Sumons, when they did hold their
Eyer or Sessions of the Forest in that County: and all Earls, Barrons,
Knights, Freeholders and others, were bound to appear before the Justices of
the Forest, by this general Sunio^s, at their general Sessions before the
making of this Statute as it does appear in assisa Forestae facta tempore
Henrici Secundi Caput 19. (in hec verba) Comites, Barrones, Assisa Forestae H.
2 cap. 19.
Milites et liberi tenentes et omnes homines de comitatu veniant ad
Sumonicionem nostri forestarij sicut se voluerint defendi ne incidant in manu^
Regis ad placitand'placita^ de Forestis suis vel ad alia negotia faciend'in
com^. And also the same is affirmed and proved by the words of the Statute, vz,
de cetero which is, that from henceforth no man that does dwell within the
Forest shall be compelled to come before the Justices of the Forest by this
general Sumons of the Forest: by which word from henceforth it is plainly
noted and showed unto us that before the making of this Statute, all persons
that did dwell without the Forest, within the same County, were then bound to
appear before the Justices of the Forest, by the general Summons, which was a
very great vexation and trouble to all persons which did dwell without the
bounds of the Forest, to give their attendance there during all the time of
the Sessions. The reason of the making of this Law.
And it does seem that one principal cause of the making of this Law was:
that for as much as K. Henry the Second, graund father to King Edward the
First, had afforested the Lands and Woods of diverse persons which were not the
Kings own demeasne Woods: (as it does appear by the first Article of this
Statute: and all those are there appointed to be dissaforested again, and so
to be put clean out of the Forest:) Now this Second branche or Article, is
as it were an especial provision thiefly for them that then were dwellers in
those places which some times were within the Forest, and yet by this Statute
put out of the Forest, that they being out of the bounds of the Forest, should
not be compelled to come before the Justices of the Forest at their general
Sessions by this general Summons as they were wont to do, unless that they be
Pledges for same other person that is an offender: or that they be there
impleaded for any plee of the Forest: or that they be attached by any Minister
of the Forest to appear before the Justices for the same offense of the
Forest. And it is to be understood that this branch of the Statute is divided
into two parts (that is to say,) concerning those that do dwell without the
Forest, and those that do dwell within the Forest: for in some cases those that
do dwell out of the Forest ought to appear before the Justices of the Forest
by reason of the general Summons, notwithstanding the words of the Statute
aforesaid.

And again in some cases, they that do dwell within the Forest shall not be
compelled to appear before the Justices of the Forest by the general Summons,
notwithstanding the words of the Statute aforesaid: And in some cases they
shall appear by other Process than by general or common Summons. And as
concerning the first division which is of those that do dwell out of the
Forest, and yet they are compellable to come before the Justice of the Forest,
by this general or common Sommons: notwithstandind the words of the Statut
aforesaid. It is to be understood that if any person which do dwell out of the
Forest, have any liberty or franchises within the forest, for the which he is
to put in a Claim before the Justices of the Forest: then such a Forrener or
dweller out of the Forest, must of necessity appear before the Justices of
the Forest, must of necessity appear before the Justices of the Forest, by
this general or common Sommons and there to prefer his Claim for the same
liberty or privilege at the first day of the Sessions of the Forest:
(notwithstanding the words of the said Statute:) or otherwise his Claim
shall be seysed into the hands of the King: for non Clamer of the same. Non
clamer, is cause of seizure
And in like manner it is if one that does dwell out of the Forest have a
profit aprender out of any land within the forest, or any office within the
Forest, or any other Privilege or liberty: then he must of necessity appear
before the Justices of the Forest, at the first day of the Sessions, and there
put in his Claim for the same: and so he is bound to take notice of this common
or general Sommons, and thereby to appear, although that he does dwell out of
the Forest: (not withstanding the words of the Statute aforesaid:) or else
the same office, privilege or liberty, shall be seysed into the hands of the
King for non Clamer of the same. So it is if a man have two houses, the one of
them within the Forest, and the other of them is out of the Forest, and the
owner of them is resiant and dwelling some times at the one, and some times at
the other: so that he is peradventure resiant and dwelling out of the Forest at
the time of the Sommons of the Sessions of the Forest: yet notwithstanding such
an owner ought to appear before the Justices of the Forest by this common
Sommons: Master Heske^t in his reading, fo 7.
(notwithstanding the words of the Statut aforesaid:) as it appears by Master
Hesket in his learned reading of the Laws of the Forest.

And now, as to the Second division of the said Statute, concerning those that
do dwell within the Forest: and yet they shall not be compelled to appear
before the Justices of the Forest upon the common Sommos aforesaid: It is to be
understood, that all manner of persons dwelling within the Forest, and being
under the age of 12. years: although that they be inheritors of lands within
the Forest: yet they are not compelled to appear before the Lord chief
Justice in Eyer of the Forest, at the general Sessions: by reason of this
common Summons aforesaid.

And in like manner, all manner of persons that are dwelling within the Forest,
being either Lame, Sickly or else blind: they are not to be forced to appear
before the Lord chief Justice in Eyer of the Forest, by this common Sommons
aforesaid.

Vide the Statute of Marlebridge. An. 52. H. 3. ca 24.
And all manner of persons that are of the age of 70. years and vpwardes: they
are not to be forced to appear before the Lord chief Justice in Eyer of the
Forest by this general Sommons, although that they do dwell within the Forest:
(notwithstanding the words of the Statute aforesaid:) for they are provided
for by the Statute of West. the Second Cap. 38.

Vide the Statute of 13. E. 1 ca. 37,
If any man that is dwelling within the Forest: and the same person is employed
in the service of the King in some other place, so that he could not by reason
thereof appear before the Lord chief Justice in Eyer of the Forest, he may
have his writ called Warrantia diei for to excuse his appearance before the
Justice of the Forest.

If any Archbishop or Bishop have lands within the Forest: the said
Archbishop or Bishop him self in his own proper person, shall not be forced
to appear before the Lord Justice in Eyer by reason of the general or common
Sommons: Heske^t. fo. 8
and yet note the words of general Sommons are these: Precipio quod Su^moneas
per bonos Su^monator' omnes Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Priores,
Comites, Barons, Milites, et eorum liberi tenentes qui terram aut tenementa
habent infra metas Forestae domine Regis etc. But all spiritual persons are
exempted to be compelled to be put in Iuries by the Statut of Marlebridge ca.
24. But yet their Free tennants shall apeare by reason of this general Sommons,
An. 52. H. 3 ca. 24
if they do dwell within the Forest, or else they shall be amerrid,

Also all Earls and Barrons which have lands within the forest, and they do
dwell out of the Forest: they themselves shall not be compelled to be before the
Lord Justice in Eyer of the Forest, by this general Summons: Treherne in his
reading, page. 8.
but it shall suffice if their Free tenentes do appear there, although the
words of the writ be to Sommon the Earls themselves, et eorum liberi
tenentes: as it does appear by Master Hesket in his reading fo. 8. but Knights
and ^l ^ther Free tenantes which do dwell within the Forest they shall be forced
to appear before the Lord Justice in Eyer of the Forest, by this common
Sommons: Master Hesket in his reading, fo. 8.
or they shall be put in inquests there: so shall not Earls, Barons, nor other
Lords of high estate, for they shall not be compelled to be sworn upon
enqu^stes them selves for any manner of trial there: And the l^ke Law is for
w^men that are francke tenantes within the Forest, for they them selves shall
not be compelled to be put upon any enquestes.

Furthermore the Servants of any man dwelling within the Forest, shall not be
compelled to appear before the Justices of the Forest by this general Sommons
mentioned in this Statut: for it shall be sufficient for the Master of such a
Servant him self to appear and not his Servant: quia illi sunt sub manu
pastu alterius coram Iusticiarijs nostris de Foresta.

But all Archebishopes, Bishops, Abbotes, ^riors, Earls and Barons, and all
other of what estate or degree soever they be, which do claim any liberties,
freedoms, preuilidges or other Free customs within the Forest: they must
appear before the Justice of the Forest by this general Sommons, to make
their Claims for the same, or otherwise the same liberties, freedoms and
customs shall be sey^ed into the hands of the King for non Clamer of the same:
but they need not to appear in properperson but by their Attorney.

All R^ghtes and those that be Free-holers which do dwell within the bounds of
the Forest: Vide ante, fo. 76 assisa Lancast.
and also all those that be franck^tenantes of any lands within the Forest:
and although they be Spiritual persons and do dwell out of the Forest: yet
they shall be compelled to appear before the Justice of the Forest at the
general Sessions of the Forest, by ^h^s general Sommons, notwithstanding the
words of the Statute are, qui manent extra Forestam: for although that they do
dwell out of the Forest, yet because that they have lands within the Forest,
the law does acompt them resiant where their land is in that respect: for
otherwise the Sessions could not be holden, What persons shall appear in proper
person, and what persons by Attorney.
nor Justice done in the trial of liberties and other things there concerning
the Forest. And it is to be understood, that all manner of persons that do dwell
either within the Forest or out of the forest, if they are to appear at the
Justice Seat or general Sessions by any such Sommons in respect of their
Lands that they have within the Forest to serve there upon inquestes: then
those persons are to appear in proper person only, and not otherwise.

And all manner of persons which do appear before the Justice of the Forest,
to make any Claim there for any manner of liberties or priuilidges: those
persons may appear there either in proper person, Those that do make any
clame may appear by Attorney.
or by their Atturny, whether they will at their election. I do find by the
assizes and Iters of the Forestes of Lancaster and Pickering: that men that are
impleaded for trespasses which are done in the Forestes, may make their
appearance in four sorts, which are as follows.

Sometimes In proper person. By Attorney. By Garden. By Prochein amy.


IT seems by Master Hesket in his reading of the Laws of the Forest: that
upon any Bill, presentment or Indictment for trespasses done in the Forest, the
defendant may appear by an Attorney, or in proper person at his election to
answer the same trespass. But I do think that he does mean by that
appearance by an Attorney, to be at the Court of Attachementes, or at the
Swanimote Court, and not at the Justice Seat before the Lord chief Justice
in Air. For as I do take it, every offender that is bound to appear there to
answer any trespass of the Forest, he must appear in proper person, and not
by any Attorney: For although the same be but a trespass, yet in this
trespass the King is a party: 20. E. 3.
and it is holden for Law in 20. E. 3. fo. that in trespass where the King is
a party: the defendand must appear in proper person, and not by Attorney: and
so a difference is there taken. And also all offenders that are bound to
appear at the Justice Seat, which have been presented at the Swanimote Court
before as they ought to be, they do stand convicted in Law: so that they are
then past aunswering of their offense in that place. But if any trespasser in
the Forest after the Court of Swanimote was holden, and before the Justice
Seat be kept, have done a trespass in the Forest in Vert or Venison: In proper
person.
and the same being presented at the Justice Seat before the Lord Justice in
Air of the Forest: and the same offe^der hearing of it, does repair to the
same Justice Seat, and there does appear in proper person gratis: he may then
trauerse the same presentment if he will: For as yet this shall not be said to
be presentatumper Forestarios et conuictum per viridarios, By an Attorney.
unless the same were done at a Swammot, according to the ordinance of the
Forest, made in Anno 34. E. primi. But in this case the defendant may appear
by an Attorney if he will: and so by his Attorney he may be allowed his trauerse
to the presentment against him.

If an Infant be impleaded for any trespass of the forest, before the Lord
Justice in Air of the Forest: the same Infant may appear in proper person at
the same Justice Seat, Per Garden.
and there declare unto the court that he is an infant within age: and pray the
said Lord Justice in Air that I. P. may be allowed his Garden to plead for him
in this case: which the court will allow him so to do, or else in this case, if
the infant do not appear himself in proper person, but does send the said I.
P. which declares unto the court that William Blunt which is here impleded is
an Infant within age: and prays that he may be received as his Garden to
plead for him: Then the Court will admit him thereunto.

And in like manner it is where an Infant having chosen his Garden, Per
procheine amy.
which Garden is sick or otherwise will not or cannot appear at the Justice
Seat before the Lord Justice in Eyer of the Forest, to answer for such an
Infant that is there impleaded before the Lord Justice in Eyer of the Forest:
Then if the said Infant do appear before the Lord Justice at the said
Court, and there prays that John Astile may be received for him as his
Prochena^my to plead for him, the Court will receive him thereunto.

But it seems that al those that are mainprised or bailed until the general
Sessions of the Forest: they must of necessity appear in proper person before
the Lord Justice in Air of the Forest, And not by Attorney, nor by Garden, nor
by Prochen amy, by reason of the said general Sommons.

If a man attached for a trespass of the Forest, do find pledges to appear
at the nexe general Sessions or Eyer of the Forest: there as well the Pledges
as the defendant ought to appear^: quia principales debitores et plegij sunt
equales ad debitum regis, s^d aliter est de alijs debitoribus: M. Hesket. f. 11
and if the Pledges to such a trespass do appear by common Sommons, but not
the defendant him self: then the Pledges shall be imprisoned for that default
of the defendant, until that they have made fine for that default of the
defendant: The difference between a fine and a mercement,
But otherwise it is, if the defendant himself do appear and be re^dy in the
Court before the Lord Justice in Eyer, to receaiue his judgment and to pare
his fine. But if such Pledges do make default, in that case the Pledges shall be
amerced, but not fined. But if the Pledges, that be Pledges for him, be bound
in a certain sum of Money for the appearance of the defendant: then if the
defendant do not appear him self at the general Air of the Forest by the
common Sommons, although that his Pledges do appear there, and do also aledge
some reasonable excuse for him: yet notwithstanding those Pledges have
forfected the sum that they were so bound in, by reason of his default.

But the King in that case shall not have execution against them of that sum
presently, but only a Scire facias against those Pledges to answer the King:
S^rien point dire, why the King should not have execution of the said sum
against them: and then if they have any matter to plead to save the default of
the defendant: they may plead the same or any other matter that they will in
Bar of it, although that the dafault do appear by matter of Record: for in
every case upon a Scire facias, the defendant may plead any special matter in
avoydance of the same, Bail and mainprise.
as he might do upon any other original process. And note that there is a
great diversity between Bail and Mainprise: for he that is maynprised is
always said to be at large, and to go at his own liberty out of ward,
after that he is let to maynprise, until the day of his appearance, by reason
of the said common Sommons or otherwise. But otherwise it is where a man is
let to bail to four or two men by the Lord Justice in Air of the Forest,
until a certain day, for there he is always accounted by the Law to be in
their ward and custody for the time: and they may if they will keep him in
ward or in prison all that time, or otherwise at their will: So that he that
is so bayled, shall not be said by the Law to be at large or at his own
liberty. And this manner of Bail is, when any man is attainted of a trespass
in the Forest, and is taken in execution of the same: then the Lord Justice in
Air of the Forest, may let him to bail as is aforesaid: and the form of the
entree of that bail is I.S. tradietur in balliuum: et S. corpus pro corpore
vsque ad etc. and in this case maynprise does not lie: But he that is either
bayled or maynprised, he must be in proper person: and the Lord Justice in
Air of the Forest himself is only to let an offender in the Forest attaynted
to bail as is aforesaid, and not the Shirife nor Gayler nor any other officer
of the Forest, but the chief Warden of the Forest may let a trespasser o^ the
Forest to maynprise by the words of the Statute of An^o 1. E 3 Cap. 8. But he
cannot deliver a man attainted of a trespass in the Forest to bay^e, as is
aforesaid. Note the difference: 1. E. 3. ca. 8.
Et nota q^e cest parol mainprise est intend, quasi manu captus et liberatus ad
largum vsq. ad diem, et cest parol bail est intend, quasi traditus in ball^nu^
ad saluu^ custodi^nd'semper in eorum custodia quibus tradietur vsq, ad diem.
Quod nota. Hesket. fo. 11.


The words of the Statute are further: Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates,
Priores Comites, Barons, Milites et liberi tenentes qui habent boscos suos in
Forestis, habent boscos suos sicut eos habuerunt te^pore prime coronationis
regis Henrici aui nostri, ita, quod quieti sunt imperpetuum de omnibus
Purpresturis vastis et assartis factis in illis boscis post illud tempore vsque
etc.
THe scope of this Article is in effect but assurance of the common Law in
this point, that all men that have Woods within the Forest, shall from
henceforth have those Woods as they were wont to have and use them. And then
afterward it goes further and extends to a general pardon for all manner
of Purprestures, Wastes and assertes, that were before that time made or done
in their Woods within the Forest until the beginning of the Second year of
the Reign of King Henry the Third, which did make this Charter of the Forest
with this clause: That all those that from henceforth shall make any waste,
purpresture or assertes in any Woods within the Forest, without the Kings
especial license so to do: that then they shall answer the King for those
wastes, Assisa Forstae Articulo 4.
purprestures and assertes: By which you may note that by this branch of this
Statute, Purpresturs, wastes and assertes in Forestes are forbidden, for they
are punishable and finable: so that therefore you may note by this Statute, that
if the King shall afforest any Woods or lands of any of his Subjects, for the
safe keeping of his wild beasts of Venery for his only pleasure and
disporte: that then after the same is so afforested, it is not lawful for any
person to cut down or destroy their own Woods within the Forest, without the
license of the King: For if it were lawful for men that have woods within the
bounds of the Forest to destroy and cut down their Woods at their pleasure:
then by that means they might in very short time make the Forest no Forest at
all, for if they might be suffered to cut down their Woods in the Forest, and
to destroy them. Then by that means they should drive all the Dear out of the
bounds of the Forest to seek for Woods and Couerts for to succor them in out
of the Forest where every man would kill them at their pleasure: which were
against all reason, that he that has the charge of all the Realm and the
public weal thereof for our defense, should not have that prerogative to
reserve unto him self such things as are meet for the pleasure of a Prince in
such places as they may be found for his consolation and comfort, but all
manner of wild beasts, of what kind soever they be, if they be found at large
out of defensive places, as out of Forests, Chases, Warrens, Parkes, and
Purliewes, then Capienti conceditur, that is, they shall be said to be theirs
that can take them: But so long as they are in such defensive places they are
the kings or the owners of the ground, as it has been showed before, fo. 61.
Ante fo. 61.


Now because the words of the Statute are: Et qui de cetero vastum Purprestu
ram vel assartum sine, etc.

IT is necessary to see what thing Purpresture is, and what thing Assart is,
and also what is Wast. Purpresture.
And therefore it is to be understood that purpresture is most properly where
any man does usurp or wrongfully medleth with any thing that he has no right,
3, Branches of Purpresture.
title or warrant by the Law to have or to meddle with the same: and there are
three branches of them: (that is to say) Purpresture against the King and a
common person.

Purpresture against the King and the common weal.

And Purpresture against the King only and no other common person.

1 Purpresture against the King and a common person is, where any person has a
certain close in the Kings Foreste, lying upon the wast soil of any Lord of a
Manner: and he that is owner of the same close, does incroch upon the wast
soil of the same Lord: and so thereby inlargeth his own ground, and takes in
the wast soil of the same Lord which he has no right nor title so to do:
this is Purpresture against the King to new enclose ground that was not
enclosed before: and so thereby the Kings wild beasts are restrained of their
Free passage more then they were wont to be: and this is also Purpresture
against the Lord of the Manner: for as much as the said owner of the close
has wrongfully taken in and enclosed the wast sail of the said Lord of the
manner.

2 Purpresture against the King and the common weal is, where any man does
build a house or a wall, or a hedge, or a ditch, in any common high way^, or
lane, or passage within the Kings Forest: so that by reason thereof the Kings
subjects nor his Dear can have their quiet and Free passage as they have had
in times past: this is Purpresture against the King, and also against the
Common weal: for as much as the same is an anoyance to all the Subjects of the
Kings.

3 Purpresture against the King only is, where any person within the Forest of
the King does build a dwelling house or any other house where there has not
been any house before that time, although the same be in his own ground, if
it be done without the license of the King, or the Lord Justice in Air of the
Forest: this is a Purpresture done against the King, for that the same is a new
incroching of a thing that was not before: and every such new erecting of any
house in the Forest is Purpresture: for the same is ad terrorem ferarum, and ad
nocumentum ferarum.

And so you may see that where any man does incroch any thing unto himself
being within the Forest, either upon the King or upon any other person without
any good or lawful warrant for the same, then the same is called Purpresture:
and if any man with out good warrant or title do take upon him any jurisdiction
or fra^chise within the Forest: that is a Purpresture of the Forest. Also if
any man do hold any Fair or Market without the grant of the King or lawful
prescription: the same is Purpresture. And the very like is, if any man do take
in or enclose any of the wast soil of the King within the Forest: or do
build any Swynecoat or houell upon the wast soil of the King or any other
man, or upon his own ground where there has not been any before that time,
the same is Purpresture: Inuenies in libro rubro Scaccarij titulo Accide^tibus
quod Purprestura fit interdum per negligentiam vicecomitis vel ministrorum
regis, Vnde dicitur Purprestura.
vel per continuationem in longa tempora vel bellicam tempestatem, vt qui
habitant prope fundum coronae vel adiaciantur, aliquam eorundem portione^ sibi
vsurpant et suis portionibus ascribant cum autem perlustra^tes Iudices per
sacrame^tum legittimor' viror' compartum fuerit, apreciantur et vic. traduntur
vnde seorsum respondeat et hanc dicimus Purpresturam vel occupationem, iniustam.

And it appears by Glanuil in his book de legibus Angliae in titulo de
Purpresturis: that Purpresture is properly when any thing is taken or done by
wrong upon the Kings high way: as in stopping or turning of the common Water
course from their right course. Or when any person does set up a House in the
kings City upon the Kings ground. And so generally, when any thing is by wrong
incroched upon the King or his tenauntes, the same is Purpresture: and all such
Plees says Glanuil do belong to the Kings Crown. The pain thereof is, that
the offender shall be grievously amerced, and the Purpresture shall be destroyed or
else arented at the will and pleasure of the King. But if the King will have
the same to remain still: then the value thereof shall be inquired by an
inquest: and so the King shall be answered of the value thereof. But it
appears further by the said book: that if any such offender be dead, his
heir shall not be charged of the amercement. And this much concerning
Purpresture.

Now it is to be seen what is meant by this word Assartes: And what by this
word Waste.
ANd for that it appears by the said redd book in the Exchequer: quod
assarta vero occasiones nominantur quando scilicet Forestae nemora vel dumeta
pascuis et latibulis oportuna succiduntur, quibus succisis et radicibus a
vultis terra subuertitur et excolitur: So that it appears by these words,
that if any Woods or Vnderwoodes, or other couertes of the Forest: as Heath,
Broom or Fearne and such like be cut down and plucked up by the roots: so
that the busshy lands or Woods or couertes, be thereby made plain and become
erable land or pasture: M. Hesket. fo. 20.
Then that is called assartes or land assarted: although that the owner of the
same receive no profit by it. And it is said for Law by Master Hesket in his
learned reading of the Laws of the Forest: that if a man have Medowe or
Pasture lying within the great Couertes of the Forest, where the wild beasts
have their continual haunte and rest: if he do convert the same to tillage,
then the same is assartes also, and shall be called land asserted.

But if the same Meadow or pasture dolye within the Forest of the King, and yet
out of the great couertes of the Forest, and the owner of the same does plowe
it and convert the same Meddow or pasture into tillage: A Wast of the Forest.
Now this is not assartes or land assarted: but this is land wasted, and shall
be called a wast of the Forest. But a waste of the Forest is most properly
where any man does cut down his own woods within the Forest, without
license of the King, or of the Lord chief Justice in Eyer of the Forest. And
if, afterdwardes the same owner of the ground having so wasted the same as is
aforesaid, do digg and pluck up the roots of the same Wood and Trees out of
the ground, and so make the same Couerte a plain: then that is assartes, and
shall be called land assarted. And so you may see that a man may make both
assartes and wast upon one and the self same piece of ground. And note that
the punishment of such offenders for assarting and wasting of their lands
within the Forest, is, that they that are convicted of those offenses shall
pay to the King grievous amercement for the same.

Some men do hold an opinion that the difference between Purpresture and
assartes is, that Purpresture is made upon the Kings ground only: and assartes
upon the land of another man. But that is not so: for a man may commyt
Purpresture and assartes also, as well in the lands and Woods of the King, as
in the lands and Woods of other men. Carta de Foresta, Artic. 4
And Econtraria, Purpresture and assartes may be made as well in the lands and
Woods of other men, as in the lands and Woods of the King. And that is
proved by the words of Carta de Foresta Articulo 4. where the king does grant
that all the Subjects of the Realm shall have their Woods within the Forest,
as they had them before the making of the same Charter.

And also does there grant further unto them a pardon for all Purprestures,
wastes and assartes, made and done before the making of the said Charter in
their own Wood: For the words are there habeant boscos suos, that is, they
shall have their own Woods. And afterward the words of the pardon are,
quod quieti sint imperpetuum de omnibus purpresturis vastis et assartis factis
in illis boscis. Then Ergo both Purpresture and assartes also may be made in
the Woods and lands of other men, as well as in the lands of the King: which
is contrary to the opinion of Master Treherne in his reading, And also of
Master Archer in his reading of the Laws of the Forest, Assisa and
Consuetudines Forestae, Vide this Statute ante, Pa. 23- in Latin, and in
English, Page 36.
which I do greatly marvel at. For it does also most plainly appear by the
assizes and customs of the Forest, made in Anno 6. E. 1. Articulo 4. in these
words: Si quis inuentus fuerit in dominico domini regis assertando, vel
purpresturam faciend'corpus debet reteneri, si antem extra dominicum infra
rewardum debet poni per 6. pledge. etc. By which words of the Statute it does
appear, First, that assartes and purpresture also may be made and done in the
demeasne lands and woods of the King: and therefore the Statute has an
especial manner of proceeding and punishment appointed for the same only,
differing from assartes and purprestures that are done in the lands and Woods
of other men. And Secondly, that assartes and purprestures may be made and done
in the lands and woods of other men also: and therefore the same branch has
there set down a manner of proceeding and punishment differing from the proceeding
and punishing of those that have made assartes and purpresture in the demesne
woods and lands of the King. Then Ergo it is not the land of the king that
does make the difference between assartes and purprestures, seeing that both
assartes and purpresture are as well in the lands of other men, as in the
lands of the King: and so to conclude in both.

But surely the true difference between purpresture and assartes in deed is
this, that purpresture is a wrongful incroching of a new thing upon the King
only, or upon the King and a common person that was not before. The difference
between purpresture and assartes.
And assartes is the converting of any covert in the forest into earable land:
as if a man do destroy his woods and digg them up by the roots, and so
convert the same into tillage, this is assartes as has already been showed
before.

The words of Carta de Foresta Articulo, 4 are further: Et de vastis,
purpresturis et assartis nobis respondeant.
NOw it is to be seen how the King shall be answered of such wastes, assertes
and purprestures, and by whom. And therefore first of al, it is to be
understood, that the king must be answered of such offenses in this manner,
that is to say, when a man is indicted or presented in the Swanimote Coure of
any such wastes, purprestures or assartes: and that the same is presentatum per
Forestarios et duodecem iuratores et conuictum per viridarios, and afterward
when such indictmentes or presentmentes be certified before the Justices of the
Forest: then they shall make out process against such as be indicted, as is
aforesaid. And when they do come before the said Justices of the Forest, by
reason of such process: then they shall make their fine for the same offenses
that they do stand so indicted of and attainted, at the discretion of the
Justices of the Forest, without any answer or trauers to such indictmentes,
because the same is a conviction against them by the Law in that befalfe, and
is done by more then twelve men. And when that the Justice of the Forest has
assessid their fines for such offenses: then the same shall be estraighted into
the Exchequer, and thereupon the Barons of the Exchequer shall make our process
against them, directed to the Shirife of the same County where they do dwell:
Libro Rubro Scaccarij.
and then the same Shirife shall answer the same fine upon his acompt, as it
does appear in libro rubro Scaccatij, and in this manner they shall answer
unto the King for such wastes, purprestures and assartes which are finable. But
some times it is otherwise of purpresture, for that the same may be tollorated
to stand still at the discretion of the Lord Justice in Eyer, Vide ante Pa.
49. the case of my Lord Dier.
and so to be arrented, and to pay yearly a certain rent to the Queens
Majesty for the same. And such a renting of such purpresture must also be
certified into the Exchequer: and the Queens Majesty must be answered
thereof upon every Shirifes acompt.

The words of the same Charter in the third Article are these: Article 3.
Omnes autem Bosci qui fuerunt afforestati per Regem Richardum a^unculum
nostrum vsque iud primam coronationem nostram, statim de afforestentur nist sic
domiincus boscus noster.
THis Article is to that effect that the first Article in the said Charter is.
For as King Henry the Second, which was graund-father to King Edward the
first, had a forested a great part of the lands of his Subjects, which did
cause a great harteburning, to grow against him: For the remedying of which
mischief, the said first Article has provided, that al such lands that he
had so afforested, which were not the Kings own demesne lands, to the hurt of
his Subjects, that they should be vewed by good and lawful men: and all such
lands so afforested, which were not the Kings own demesne lands, should be
forth with dissaforested again. So likewise King Richard and King John had in
their time afforested the lands of their Subjects in many places in this
land, to the great discontent of the whole Realm: for the pa^^f^ing whereof,
this third Article or branch has likewise provided this remedy: that they
forth with should be disafforested again, as those should that King Henry the
Second had afforested.

How lands are afforested and made to be a Forest: and how they are
dissaforested and made no Forest again. What hurt the afforesting of the same
land is to the owner thereof: and how the same shall be v^wed before the same
shall be so dissaforested: and by whom, it has been showed already before.

And ^owe as concerning this word Dominicus Boscus: that is, those woods
which were the kings ancient demesne woods or lands: although that the King
by the Law might afforest the Lands of his Subjects in any place where he
would within this Realm: yet any King or Prince has seldom or never
afforested the lands of any of their Subjects in any place in this Realm, but
where as the same King or Prince also has had lands or Woods of their own.
And then when that such a King or Prince did so afforest their own lands for
the enlarging of their pleasure and delight in hunting: they did afforest the
lands of their Subjects next adjoining to the Kings lands or woods so
afforested: all which lands that were so afforested by King Henry the Second,
King Richard his uncle, or King John his father: they are here by these two
branches, the 1. and the 3. to be dissaforested again. But such lands or
woods which were the Kings own demeasne woods or lands, they are here by 2,
branches reserved to remain and be Forestes still, In these words nisi sit
dominicus boscus noster: and those lands that were not the Kings own demeasne
lands that were adjoining to the lands of the Kings that were so afforested
after such dissafforesting of them: then they are at the liberty of the owners
thereof, as they were before that the same was so afforested, to cut down
their woods, to make their lands earable that were Medows or pasture before, or
any other way to convert the same to their best advantage and profit. And also
the same owners may chase the wild beasts that they do find there, at their
own pleasures, and slay them if they can take them by chasing with Greyhoundes
or otherwise: so that they do not forestal them or foreset them in their
returning to the Kings Forest again. For all such lands that were once
afforested by the King, and afterward disaforested: then the same is ever
afterward Purlieu, Purlieu.
and of the nature of Purlieu: so that there is not any land that is or can be
Purlieu, but such as was once a Forest or a Free Chase. For there may be lands
that are Purlieus, adjoining as well to a Free Chase as to a Forest, as it does
appear in the Case of the Lord Gray for Whaddon Chase in my Lord Die^ his
book in 15. and 16. Elizabethae fo. 326. And it is to be understood that such
lands or woods as are here disaforested by this statute or Charter, the same
was at the request of the Comminaltie of this realm, that is to say, of
Gentlemen, Vide the case hic ante, page 64
yomen, and of the poorer sort of people which had such lands so afforested by
the said Kings, for whose relief these two branches of this Charter were most
especially made, as it does also apeare by another Statute that was made in 33.
E. 1. Statute. 5. called the Statute of the Puraley beginning in these words:
That whereas certain people that be put out of the Forest for the Purley, Hic
ante 34 35. The Statute of the Puraley.
And by the great men have made request to our Sovereign Lord the King at his
Parliament, that they might be acquitted of their charge, and of things that the
Foresters demanded of them, as they were wont to be. So that you may thereby
see that the Puraleys were first granted at the especial request of the
Comminaltie of this Realm for their relief. And here you may note by the
words of the Statute of Carta de Foresta, and also by the said Statute of the
Puraley of Anno 33. E. ^. that all such lands as were so disafforested, be
thereby now clearly out of the Forest and are Puraleys, according to the grant
of the King by his Charter of Puraleys granted to his subjects. By which
Charter, if you do diligently read and peruse it, you shall thereby know the
very nature of the Purlieu, and how the same is made, and how it had his
beginning, The Charter of the Purlieu, in the end of this book.
with all other things that do belong to the Purlieu: what things a Puralie
man may lawfully do: and how he may hunte in the Puraleys by the laws of the
Forest, and the Charter of the Purlieus. For although it be lawful for
sufficient Purlieu men, to hunte and chase the wild beasts in some sort in
their own land that is so disaforested and made Purlui or Free for them only:
Yet it is not lawful for every owner of land disaforested, to hunt or chase
the wild beasts in their own land disaforested: but only for them that have xl
s. by the year of freehold lands. For those that have lands of freehold, to
the yearly value of xl. shillings, they may keep Greyhounds or other dogs to
hunt withal out of the Forest, by the statute of An. 13. R. 2. ca. 13. 13. R.
2. ca. 1^
But so may not every other man that has not lands to that valewe: For such
pastime is by the Laws of this Realm reserved for Earls, Barons and
Gentlemen, and for some other men of good acompt: and not for hindes nor
pesantes of the Contrie to hunt at their pleasure without all order, and so to
destroy the Princes game. And it is to be understood, that al such persons as
were put out of the Forest by the Purlieu, they are excluded thereby of having
any common within the Forest, by reason of the Statute of the Puralsey
aforesaid, unless that they will relinquish the benifit of the Purlieu,
Ordinatio Forestae, anno. 34. Ed. 1. in fine,
and become Subjects to the bondage of the Forest again as they were before.
And it does appear by the Statute of Ordinatio Forestae, that the Puralty did
first begin by the dissaforesting of such lands as were once aforested, for
the words are these: Volumus insuper quod illi qui co^munem pasturam in
Foresta ante perambulationem factam, habeant: Et qui sunt postea repositi in
Foresta, quinque de dicta co^munia per perambulationem predictam impediti
fuerunt, habeant comuniam pasturam de cetero in Foresta adeo large et libere
ficut ante perambulationem predictam habere folebant saluis arent' nostris in
forma predicta: and so you may see that such lands of the Forest as be
disaforested, afterward they are Purlieus. And it does also appear by the
same words that the Purlieus are made by perambulation and view, The
repositio^ of the Forest.
returned into the Chauncery. And in like manner the reposition to the Forest
of such lands as were disaforested by the Statute, and afterward made Forest
again, the same is to be done by perambulation and view which must be
returned into the Chauncery or Treasury, because that the King can have
nothing but by matter of record, nor in such cases depart from any thing but
by matter of record also. And all such lands as are put again to the Forest,
they are called Purlieus after the same reposicion, for then they shall be Forest
as they were before. But such lands as were disaforested by the Puraley, and
so remain dissaforested without any reposition, The difference between the
Purlieu and reposition.
those are called Puralleyes, in the which the owners may chase the wild
beasts, and also cut down their woods, and make their aprouementes to their
best advantage. But of those lands that are put again to the Forest by
reposition, they cannot do so there without license of the Lord chief
Justice in Eyer. And if it do fortune that a Dear go out of the Forest into
the Purlieu, then the owner of the ground there may chase and kill him if he
can. The same Law is, if a Heart, a Hind, a Buck, The Purlieus.
a Do or a Hare, or any other wild beasts of the Forest, or of the Chase,
which be clearly wild of nature, and that have not animam reuertendi, so that
such an owner of the lands, have lands of free hold, to the valewe of forty
shillings in the Purlieus. And if a Puraley man which has lands in the
Puraley to the value of ten shillings by the year, and one other man which
has lands within the Puraley adjoining to him, to the yearly value of xxx.
shillings: and wild beasts of the Forest do come upon their lands in the
Purlieus: those two Puraley men cannot chase together. But he that has lands
of Free-holde, to the value of forty shillings by the year of his own
lands, he may chase and kill his Dear and carry it away upon his own
Purlieus, and justify the same by the Laws of this Realm: For all wild
beasts are theirs that can take them, As it appears by Bracton. But if such
wild beasts being within any Forest, Chase, Park or Warren, or other
Priuileged place, then they are the Kings or the owners of those Privileged
places where they are remaining, as it has been showed before, for of such
wild beasts men have property in them, but ratione soli.

And if the Forest be in one County, and the Puraley in another County
adjoining to it: he that has forty shillings by the year of Free-holde land
in the County where the Puraley is, he may Chase and hunte the wild beasts
in his own Purlieu: But if he have forty shillinges by the year of
Freehold, in the County where the Forest is, but has not any land in the
County where the Puraley is: then he is not any Puraley man, neither may he
take the benefit of a Puraley hunter.

And if a man having lands to the value of forty shillings by the year
within the Purlieus, do chase a Dear there, and does let his Greyhound run
after the wild beasts, and the Greyhounde does follow the wild beast into
the Forest, and there does fasten upon him and flea (...): Now in this case
the owner of the dog shall not have the wild beast so slain, but the king or
the owner of the Forest: and such a Puraley man that does so chase the wild
beasts into the Forest, he may not follow his dog into the Forest, but he
must stand at the outermost bounds of the Forest, and there blow his horn
for his dog, and so call him bark again: for in this case, when the wild
beast has recovered himself into the Forest again, then he is in Statu quo
prius: and then the King or the owner of the Forest has property in him
again ratione soli, and then the killing of him in the Forest is not lawful,
neither does the same gain the owner of the Greyhounde any property therein.

And in like manner it is if a man do let his Fawcon, Goshauke, or any other
Hawk fly at a Fesant or Partridge being out of the Forest, Chase or Park,
and they two do fly together, and the same Hawk does kill the Fesaunt or
Partridge within the Forest Chase, or Park: now the owner of the same Forest,
Chase or park where the same is so killed, shall have the game that is in such
sort killed, causa qua supra, for the owner of such Greyhound or Hauk cannot
claim any interest or property in any such game before that the same be taken:
and before the taking of it, the said game was returned into the Forest, Chase,
Park or Warren, whereas then the owner had property in it again ratione soli.
A man may have the possession of a wild beast by his dog.
And if a Greyhounde being let run in the Purlieus after a wild beast of
the Forest, and in chasing after him the Greyhound does fasten and seize upon
the Dear near unto the Forest, and the wild beast by his force draws the
Greyhounde biting upon him within the bounds of the Forest, and there is
slain: the owner of the same Greyhound may very well take the wild beast so
slain although that he were slain within the Forest, for by the seizing of the
dog, the owner of the same dog was in possession of the wild beast: and the
like law is if a Hawk be seized of his game without the Forest, Chase or
Park, and so seized, they do fly togeether within the bounds of the Forest,
Chase or Park, and there is slain: then the owner of the same Hawk may enter
into such a Forest, Chase or Park, and take the game so slain by the reason
aforesaid. But the contrary is, when my Hawk is not seysed of such game
before he enters into such a Forest, Chase, or Park, but does follow his
game, flying into the same, and there does seize upon the game: in that case
the game being killed, it does belong to ye owner of the Forest or ground: And
this is proved by the opinion of Master Bracton in titulo Diuisione rerum. And
if a Heart or any other wild beast of the Forest do come into the lands of a
Purlieu man, which has lands to the value of xl. Bracton. 14. H. 8. fo. 18.
shillings by the year: such a Purlieu man may lawfully Chase those wild
beasts and take them by chaseing: but he may not forest all them nor foreset
them in their returning into the Forest, so that they cannot have free passage
back again but do kill them. Wild b east of the Forest have animam reuertendi.
For notwithstanding that they be wild of nature, yet in this case they have
anima^ reuertendi, that is to say, they have a mind of returning home to the
Forest again. And yet if I do let my dog run at any wild beast of the
Forest within the Purlieus, and my dog of his own courage does cross the
Dear in his course toward the Forest and turns him, and by that means
does kill the same Dear, this is not forestalling, for it comes of the
courage and cunning of my dog, and not of my own labor nor policy.

Also if any man not having lands within the purlieu, do find any kind of
Dear or wild bestes of the Forest in his own ground out of the Forest, Chase,
Park and Purlieu, then he may kill or take them by what soever means he can
devise: for then such beasts shall be said to be clearly wild of nature, and
it cannot be known whose they are, nor from whence they come, nor whether they
will, when they are so strayed abroad. And even so it is of all manner of wild
Hawks: (except only Hawks of the pray) for they ought not to be forestaled
with nets or other inguns: but yet if they do breed within the lands of the
Purlieus, then the owners of the ground may take them.

At appears by the Assizes of King Henry the second, Assisa Forestae H. 2.
that the same King did altogether forbid any manner of forestalling of all
such things as were wild of nature: for the words are these, Dominus Rex
precipit quod nullus (...) homo^^ ad capiend'ferat per natem infraforestas nec
extra su^ p^^na imprisonamenti vnius anni. Et quod nullus sub eadem poena
facint aliquam forstallationem feris suis inter forestam su^m and bosco^ suos
vel alio loco per ipsum vel progeniter' disaf^ue^tat' ^ And here began first
the prohibition of forestalling.

And he that is a sufficient Puraley man by the law, that may hunt and take
the benefit of the Purlieus by hunting, he must learn this lesson, and know
that a Purlieu man may not hunt in the Purlieus at all times nor in what manner
he himself will. For he must understand, that there be ten things that a
Purlieu man is forbidden to do by the laws of the Forest in his hunting in the
Purlieus: And the hunting of any Purlieu man, contrary to any one of those
ten things so forbidden, is punishable by the laws of the Forest.

A Purlieu man must not hunt 1 In the night. 2 On the Sunday. 3 In the
Fence-moneth. 4 Any oftener than three days in one Week. 5 With any more
company than his own servants. 6 Within forty days next after the Kings
general hunting. 7 Within forty days next before the Kings general
hunting. 8 When the Forester is serving of any Warrant in the next Walk. 9 By
forestalling of the Kings wild beasts. 10 After unseasonable Dear.


So that a Purlieu hunter or Purlieu man must know this commandment of the
Law, vz, Vtere tuo vt alienum non ledas, which is, that every Purlieu hunter:
(I mean those that are sufficient Purlieu men by the law) must use their
pleasure of hunting there, so that they do not by the fame disturb the Kings
wild beaste^ that are remaining within the Forest or Chase of their firm
^ea^e. And therefore the Laws of the Forest has set down the foresaid ten
points, as things that are most offensive to the Kings wild beasts of the
Forest: and for that cause they are prohibited by the law to be done or used.

1 The first of them is, That no manner of person shall hunt in the Purlieus in
the night, that is to say, after that the Sun is set until the rising of
the same: for by the Law it is accounted in many cases for a day, from the
rising of the Sun until the going down of the same: And likewise for a
night, from the time of the setting of the Sun until the rising of the same:
and such a day is called Dies Solarius, that is, a day that is accounted by the
Sun. And the reason why it is not sufferable for any person either Purlieu
man or other, to hunt in the Purlieus in the night is, because that the Kings
wild beasts may not be troubled or disquieted of their quiet feeding and
rest in the Forest: for it is not possible for any man to hunt in the purlieus
in the night, but that the same will be Ad terrorem ferarum quae sunt infra
Forestam, for although that perhaps their dogs do not follow the wild
beasts out of the purlieus into the Forest in their chase after them, yet the
noise of their running together, and the gazening of those Dear that are
scared out of the purlieus, will disturb the quiet of the wild beasts within
the Forest. For the very nature of the wild beasts of the Forest is to seek
their food in the night time when every body is quiet and at rest: for then
they do not see any body stir up and down. Nor they are not troubled or
feared with any noise. And all the day time they resort to the Couerts being
terrifyed with noise and the sturring of men, so that they cannot feed quietly,

2 Secondly, it is not lawful for any man to hunt in the purlieus on the
Sunday: for that day is appointed for the service of Almighty God only, and
by his laws that day is to be kept holy, and not to be profaned. For on that
day all profitable business is forbidden to be used, although that the same tend
to the profit and good of the common Weal: then Ergo much more all vain
business and idle pastimes, as hunting and such like. And for that cause, the
Laws of this Realm do not account the Sunday to be any day in any Court at
Westminster.

3 Thirdly, No man may hunt in the Purlieus in the fence-moneth, or as it is
called in the defense month, which month is always fifteen days before
Midsommer, and fifteen days after Midsommer, which Month is the time of
fawning: for then the Fawnes are very young and not able to run or to make
any shift. Or else the Does are then great bellyed, so that they are not able to
run. And if a Purlieu hunter should then chase in the Purlieus, and his
Greyhound should follow the Dear into the Forest, no doubt but that the same
Greyhound would either destroy the Does being great with young, or the Fawnes
being then very young. And neither of them both able to run: or else the
coursing amongst them then would be ad magnum terrorem ferarum, and for that
cause the same is forbidden for that Month by the Laws of the Forest.

4 Fourthly, It is not lawful for any Purlieu hunter to hunt in his own
Purlieu every day, nor any oftener than three days in one week, whereof the
Sunday must not be any. And the reason is, because that the wild beasts in
the Forest may not be disquieted or put from their food and wonted layer where
they do use to lie at rest with the noise and fear of their often hunting in
the Purlieus. For the forest Laws do prohibit things that are ad terrorem
ferarum, only, and for that cause, a man may not buyld a Mill in the Forest,
because the same is ad terrorem ferarum.

5 Fifthly, It is not lawful for any Purlieu hunter to hunt in the Purlieus
with any more company than with his own servant, because that the Laws of
the forest do not allow of multitudes of people to assemble themselves
toge^ther to hunt, for that is ad terrorem ferarum quae sunt infra met as
Forestae. But every Parlieu man that may by the Law iustifye to hunt in his
own Purlieu for him self, he may also justify for his servants to hunte with
him: for to hunte and kill his Dear there is a thing of profit and of pleasure
all. And it is held for a learning in our Law, that he that has a license or
an interest of profit, Vide le case in 13. H. 7. s. 13. ante page 54,
he may justify for himself and for his Servants also. But he that has but
an interest or a license of pleasure only, he cannot justify for his
Servants but for himself only: Note the difference. But he that may Justify
for to hunte which his Servants, he cannot Justify to hunte with every other
person.

6 Sixt^y, no manner of person may hunt within the Pulieus of any Forest within
the time of forty days next, after that the king has made any general
hunting in any Forest adjoining to such Purlieus, because in this case the
wild beasts of the Forest do not come into Purlies of their own freewill,
but they are forced with strong hand and with the noise of blowing of horns,
and with a multitude of people: So that for fear of being slain, they are
driven to fly into the Purlieus for succor and refuge. And therefore the Laws
of the Forest does give unto all those wild beasts which are in such sort
forced to fly into the Purlieus for refuge, a firm peace and free protection
to remain there, during the space of xl. days, without any hunting, chasing or
other harm. In which time the law is intended they will return to the Forest
again, and therefore they have that liberty. And in every Charter or grant
of the Purlieus that the King does grant unto any shire of such ^andes as were
disaforested, in that grant the King does always reserve unto himself forty
days of Free liberty for his wild beasts of the Forest that are in the
Purlieus to return back again to the Forest: as you may percea^ue by the
perusing of the Charter, granted for the Purlieus of the Forest of Windsor.

7 Seventhly, it is not lawful for any Purlieu man to hunt in the Purlieus,
bordering upon any Forest that the King does mind to make any general
hunting in, after open proclimation thereof made. For then no person shall hunte
within seven miles of the borders of the Forest, nor within the Purlieus during
the time of forty days next before such general hunting: because that all
that time the wild beasts of the Forest must not by any means be disquieted
of their rest, to the intent that the King may take the vewe of them where they
do lie and make their secret abode.

8 The eight is, that no Purlieuman may hunt in the Purlieus during the time
that any keeper or Forester is serving of any warrant in any walk within the
Forest adjoining upon the Purlieus, nor during the time that any Noble man is
hunting there, because that such hunters in the Purlieus may not disturb the
game in the Forest at such times as they are hunting there, if they have notice
or knowledge of any such hunting or serving of any such warrant.

9 The nynth, It is to be understood, that as a Purlieu man may hunt and chase
the wild beasts of the Forest being in the Purlieu, yet may he not forestall
or foreset those wild beasts with dogs, bows, or any manner of ingyne, to
kill them or stop them from their free passage to the Forest again. Neither may
any man make any salteries or leaping places out of the Forest into the
Purlieus where any Dear may easily leap in, but cannot return back again,
but they shall be killed there for want of passage.

10 And last of all, it is not lawful for any Purlieu man to kill or hunt any
unseasonable Dear in the Purlieus, as a Buck in Winter, or a Do in Summer:
for such wild beasts when they are out of Season, they are not meet for any
man to eat, for their flesh is not good nor holsom, and then they are so poor
that they cannot run nor make any course to escape from a dog, and therefore
the Law of the Forest does prohibit the killing or hunting of them in the
Purlieus or else where, during the time of their vnseasonablenes.

The punishment for unlawful hunters in the Purlieus.
But now let us see by the Laws of the Forest, how such Purlieu hunters as do
hunte in the Purlieu contrary to the Laws are to be punished: And therefore it
is to be understood that all such offenses in the Purlieus are to be presented
at the next Swanimote, and to proceed from the Swanimote to the next Justice
seat of the Forest, as other trespasses of the Forest do: And then there such
hunters in the Purlieus are to be fined at the discretion of the Lord chief
Justice in Eyer of the Forest, and imprisoned and bound to the good behauior
of the Forest: Which band does extend to all manner of unlawful hunting in the
Purlieus. For unlawful hunting in the Purlieus is a breach of the laws of
the Forest, and so a breach of the good behavior of the Forest.

And here it is to be noted, that the Purlieus are Purlieus but only quoad, to
those that are sufficient Purlieu men, and the same Purlieus do remain Forest
still quoad, to those that are not sufficent Purlieu men by the Law.

But all Purlieu hunters as well those that are sufficient Purliumen, as those
that are not, must understand this: That the lands of ye Queens Majesty
whersoeuer they are, they shall not be aco^pted Purlieus, nor of the nature of
Purlieus, although that such lands do lie without the bounds of the Forest and
within the Purlieus: yet for as much as those lands are the Queens Majesty's
own lands they shall be accounted of the nature of a free chase which is a
Privileged place for wild beasts: and therefore no Purlie man nor other may
hunte in her Majesty's own lands: (without good warrant) by any color of the
Purlieus or otherwise. And you may perceive by the.1. and.3. branch of the
Statute of Charta de Foresta, that amongst all such lands as were by the same
Charter appointed to be dissaforested, Charta de Foresta, artic. 1. 3. 33. E.
1. stat. 5.
the lands of the King are always reserved to be Forest still. And also by
the Statute made in Anno* 33. of Edward. 1. Statute 5. called the Statute of
the Puraley: By which Statute the King does grant that forthwith the
Puraleyes shall be made in every shire: yet the King by that Statut, wills
and appoynteth that all his demesne lands wheresoever they be that has been
of the Crown, being returned by way of escheat or otherwise, shall have estate
of free chase and free warren: and in such manner shall be saved and kep^ to his
use, for all manner of escheats: so that although the lands of the Kings do
lie amongst the lands of other men in the Purlieus, yet the same is not
Purlieu: neither may any man hunte or chase the wild beasts there, because
the same is the Queens Majesty's Freee chase, for as much as the same is her
Majesty's own demean lands.

Hesket, fo. 12.
But if seems by the opinion of Master Hesket and others, that have read upon
this branch of the Statute of Charta de foresta, that the disaforesting of such
lands as were aforested by King Richard or King John, whereof the letter
speaks in the 3 Article of Charta de foresta, Charta de Foresta. artic. 3
does greatly differ from the disaforesting of such lands as were afforested by
H. 2. mentioned and declared in the first Article of Carta de foresta: For of
all such lands as were afforested by King Richard or King John, mentioned and
declared there in the third Article of Carta de foresta to be disaforested
again: every man shall have the advantage thereof, as well he that had not the
land nor any interest in the lands or woods at the time when the same was
afforested, as he that had the land or Woods at the time of the afforesting
of the same or before.

But of such lands as were afforested by King Henry 2. and are here appointed
to be disaforested again by the letter of the Statute of Charta de Foresta
Articulo 1. it is otherwise: for although that the same King Henry 2. had
afforested the lands of any other man in right or in posession, Charta de
Foresta, artic. 1.
the same land shall be disaforested, but only against him whose land the same
then was, and not against any other person that has no title or right to the
same land. And Master Hesket affirms that thereupon the same took the name
of Purlui: Because that such land is not disaforested generally for every man,
but only pur lui, that is to say, for him: and therefore the same is called
Purlui. Note the difference hereof. And this much concerning Purlieus or
Puraleys.

The words of the Statute of Charta de Foresta, articulo 5. are further as
follows, vz, Regardatores nostri cant per Forestam ad faciendum regardum,
sicut fieri consueuit tempore primae coronationis Regis H. aui nostri, et non
aliter.

Now it is to be seen what a Regarder is: How a Regarder is made: and what his
office is. And therefore first of all, it is to be understood that A Regarder
is an Officer of the Kings Forest that is sworn to make the regard of the
Forest as the same regard has been used to be made in ancient time: And
also to view and inquire of all offen^as of the Forest, as well of Vert as of
Venison, The definition of a Regarder.
and of all concealments of any offenses or defaults of the Foresters, and of
all other officers of the Kings Forest, concerning the execution of their
offices. And this is the definition of a Regarder of the Forest.

Now it is to be seen how a Regarder of the Forest is made. And for that it is
to be understood that a Regarder of the Forest may be made by the King himself
by his letters Patents, How a Regarder is made.
or by any one of the Kings Justices of the Forest at his discretion in the
general Air of the Forest: or at such time as the regard of the Forest is to
be made by virtue of the Kings writ, which shall be directed to the Shirife of
the same County, commanding him to sommon the whole regard of the Forest,
and to make the regard of the Forest as they have been accustomed to do. And
then if any of the Regarders of the same Forest be sick or dead, so that
because there are not the whole number of twelve Regarders, the regard cannot
be made, that then the same Shirife shall choose other Regarders that are meet
men to serve in their places by virtue of the same write in his full County:
the Tenor of which write, is as follows: Elizabetha Dei gratia Angliae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regina fidei defensoris etc. Vic. Essex. salutem, The
writ to the Shirife.
Precipimus tibi quod sine delatione conuenire facias omnes Forestarios and
Regardatores ad regardum faciendum in Balliua tua ante aduentum Iusticiariorum
nostrorum de Foresta. Et locis regardatorum qui motui sunt, Note that the
Regarder is to be sworn.
aut infirmi alios Elegi facias. Ita quod duodecim sint in Foresta and nomina
eorum inbreuiantur. Et Forestarij dictos duodecim milites electos ducentur per
totam Balliuam suam ad vidend'omnes transgressiones quae exprimuntur in Script'
Capitulor' quae tibi mittimus and quod hoc non omittas pro aliqua^re. Et quod
dicti milites iurent quod facient regardum sicut solet and debet fieri. Et quod
ibuut sicut Forestarij eos ducent ad praedictam Forestam videndum. Et si
Forestarij noluerint vel nesciuerint eos ducere, vel aliquod fo^stact'
voluerint Concelare, ipsi milites non omittentur propter illos q^in foris
factum illud videant. and imbreuiari facias. Et hoc pro nullare dimittant. Et
quod regardu^ illud fiat cantra tale festum, Test, etc.

And it is to be understood, that in times past, when the Forest Laws were
carefully put in execution: then the general Sessions of the Forest called the
Seat of the Lord Justice in Air of the Forest was holden and kept every
third year. And also every third year, the Regarders of the Forest did make
their regard of the Forest. And now at this day, always before that the Lord
Justice in Air of the Forest do hold his general Sessions of the Forest, he
does cause the write aforesaid to be made and sent to the Shirife of the same
shire where the Forest is, in the which the Justice Seat for the Forest shall be
kept, together with a brief remembrance or abstract of all such matters as the
Regarders of the Forest shall enquire of. By virtue of which write, the same
Shirife does cause all the Foresters of the same Forest, and also all the
Regarders to meet together at a certain day and place which the Shirife shall
unto them assign for that purpose, at which day and place so appointed by the
same Shirif, upon the appearance of the said Foresters and Regarders, the
shirife does declare unto them the Tenor of his write: and also does give unto
them a charge, to inquire of al such matters as are contained in the said
Abstract. At which time of appearance, if any of the said Regarders be dead or
sick, so that there be not the full number of twelve Regarders, to make the
regard of the Forest: Then the said Shirife shall according to his said write
in his full County of the shire, choose other Regarders, and cause them to
serve in their places, and so make up the number of twelve Regarders: and in
such sort Regarders are made. And also it appears by the Statute of Ordinatio
Forestae made in Anno. 34 E. 1. hic ante fol. 26. and 39. That if any of the
Foresters, Regarders, or any other minister or officer of the forest be dead,
or by sickness, or any other means, they be let or hindered, so that they
cannot be at the court of Swanimote: And because that the absence of such
officers or ministers should not be any hinderance of the proceeding of the
court of Swanimote, then the Lord chief Justice of the Forest, or his
Lieutenant, incontinently shall choose and appoint other Regarders in their
places, so that all the Inditements in the Swanimote may be made and done by
all the officers of the Forest, according to the order set down and appointed
by the said Statute called Ordinatio Forestae. And such electing and
appointing of Regarders at the Swanimote is done but as it were of necessity
to make up the full number of twelve Regarders to serve for the place at that
time. And such Regarders as be dead and others chosen in such manner by the
Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest or his Lieutenant in their places:
then they shall remain Regarders still. But the Regarders that are chosen and
appointed, as aforesaid, to serve in the places of others that then were sick
or absent upon some especial business: such Regarders are not Regarders Nisi pro
hac vice tantum, as it does appear by M. Hesket, fo. 24 b. For (says he) they
are officers but to serve the Court for that time only. Hesket fo. 24.


I do find by the Laws and customs of the Forest, that there may be three
sorts of Regarders of the Forest, which are as follows.

1 First, there is one sort of Regarders made by the King him self by his
letters Patents, to whom the King does grant the said office sometimes for
term of life: sometimes to him and to his heirs, to be one of the Kings
Regarders of such a Forest.

2 Secondly, there is another sort of Regarders that are made by the Lord
chief Justice in Air of the Forest, or by the Kings writ to the Shirife, as
has been showed already before. And such Regarders are officers of the
Forest but durante been placito, that is to say, during the Kings pleasure.

3 Thirdly, there is another sort of Regarders that are made Regarders for the
present service of the Court of Swanimote, or to serve at some other time in
the absence of some of the Regarders that are sick or otherwise not able to
serve at that time: and such Regarders are officers Nisi pro hac vice tantum.
And thus much concerning Regarders, and how he is made a Regarder of the Forest.

And now, forasmuch as it appears by the writ aforesaid directed to the
Shirife to choose new Regarders in the place of such as are dead: And that the
same Shirife according to his writ must give unto such Regarders as he shall
choose in their places, A Regarder must be sworn.
an oath (for the words of the writ are these. Et dicti milites Iurent quod
facient regardum sicut solet and debet fieri) Now therefore it is necessary to
see what the oath of a Regarder is. And to the end that every such officer may
the better know his oath, and also his office, I have set down the same here,
which is as follows.

The Oath of a Regarder of the Forest.
The oath of a Regarder.
YOu shall truly serve our Sovereign Lady the Queen in the office of a
Regarder of the Forest of Waltham. You shall make the regard of the same Forest
in such manner as the same has been accustomed to be made. You shall range
through the whole Forest, and through every Bail^wike of the same, as the
Foresters there shall lead you, to view the same Forest. And if the Foresters
will not, or do not know how to lead you, to make the regard or range of the
Forest: or that they will conceal from you any thing that is forfeited to the
King, you your selves shall not let for any thing: but you shall see the same
forfeiture, and cause the same to be enrolled in your roll. You shall inquire of
al wastes Purprestures and Assertes of the Forest: and also of concealements of
any offense or trespass in the Forest, either in Vert or Venison by any officer
of the same Forest. And all these things you shall to the uttermost of your
power do, So help you God.

It seems by the Laws of Canutus the Dane King, Canon the 2. that in his
time there were certain persons that did execute the very same office that
the Regarders do now at this day, and then there were 16. of them, Canutus.
Canon 2.
they were called Mediocres homines, But the Danes did call them (Young men.) H^
Curam and onus tum viridis tum veneris suscipiant. But of like such officers
were clean worn out of use in most forestes. For it seems that in the time
of King H. 2. there were no Regarders left in any Forest, and then the
Foresters and Woodmen did take no good regard to the Forestes, and most
especially the woodmen, whereby the Kings woods were greatly destroyed, which
was an especial cause of the decay of Venison. And because that the said King
H. 2. would have his Forestes the better kept and looked unto, he did ordain
that certain Regarders should be appointed in every Forest throughout his
whole Realm, for to survey the Forests as it does appear by the Assizes of
the Forest made in his time: where he does say as follows, Item Dominus Rex
precipit quod in quolibet Comitatu in quo habet venationem ponantur duodecim
milites ad custodiendum Venationem suam and viridem in Foresta: Assisa Forestae
H. 2.
Et quatuor milites ponantur ad agistandu^ boscos suos. And these Knights for
the time that they are officers of the Forest they are called Regardors, taking
the name of Regardors of the effect of their office, because they do, as it
were agere curam, custodiendi viridis and veneris, that is: that they must
always regard the safe keeping and preserving of the Kings Vert and Venison
in his Forest. And so it seems that at that time no man was called to the
place of a Regarder but he that was a Knight. But now at this day, other good
and lawful men which are not Knights are chosen to be Regarders of the Kings
Forest, which officer of a Regarder, is an officer of the Forest appointed by
the King to see the preservation of Vert and Venison in the Kings Forest, and
also to survey all other officers of the Forest. And also it appears by the
Assizes of the Forest domini Wilhelmi Veysey made in the fifteenth year of the
reign of King Edward the first, Assisa domini Wilhelmi Veysey, anno 15. E. 1.
that it was established there as a law, that there should not be any more
than 12. Regarders in a Forest where he does say, Quia Euedenter constat
Iusticiario Itenere suo quod tam magna oneratio regardatorum est in Foresta
praedicta quod non est sustinendum propter magnum domini Regis dampnum.
Prouisum est quod de cetero in Foresta non sint nisi tantum dict' duodecim
regardatores. Et quod illi Regardatores faciant regardum per totam Forestam
quoties Assisa Forestae voluerit, etc.

And it is to be noted, that in every Forest of the Kings, or in the greatest
part of them, there are certain woods that are the Kings own demean woods
belonging to the Crown, and the King has the regard of all the woods and
waste grounds and other lands which are afforested and within the bounds and
limittes of the Forest, as well those that are not the Kings own woods, as
those that are the Kings own woods. And sometimes it falls out, that there are
some woods that be within the bounds and limits of the Forest, and yet they are
no part of the Forest, as in times past Wallwood in Essex was: for the same
was within the Forest of Waltham, and yet not any part of the Forest, nor
within the regard of the Forest. The difference, I^^ra rewardu^, and Extra
rewardum.
But all such woods and lands as are parcel of the Forest: the same is within
the regard. And all such lands as are within the bounds of the Forest, and yet
not any part of the Forest, the same is out of the regard of the Forest: and
this is the meaning of the Assizes of the Forest, Articulo 3. and 4 where the
words are, Si quis inuentus fuerit extra dominicum boscum infra rewardum, etc.
and so note the difference infra rewardum Forestae, and extra rewardum Forestae.

And it is also to be noted, that in the making of the regard of the Forest,
there are diverse officers besides the Regarders to be employed: as the
Foresters, woodwards, and other persons which be owners of the woods and lands
within the same regard of the Forest. And if any man have a regard within the
Kings Forest, belonging to him of inheritance, and has there of certain
Foresters of fee belonging to the same: then in that case the Foresters and
Regarders of any other regard cannot enter in there to do any thing, because
that the same is out of their charge, and within the charge of others. But yet
nevertheless, in that case the chief W^rden of the Forest together with the
Foresters and Regarders, may go thither to survey the same, Assisa Forestae H.
2.
and to make the regard of the same, as it does appear by the Assizes of the
Forest, where he does say, Quod omnes illi qui habent boscos infra metas
Forestae ponant idoneos Forestarios in boscis eorum de quibus etc. Whereby it
appears that the Foresters of the King may lawfully survey all other
Foresters, And so it is of the Regarders of the King: for they shall survey all
other Regarders being within the bounds and limits of the Kings Forest,
although that there be some particulars or officers for that place. vide
Treherne in his reading, fo. 17
And note that no man may have Regarders for any Forest but the King only,
(except it be by the especial grant of the King:) Neither may any man take
upon him the office of a Regarder of the Kings forest, but he that has lawful
title to the same.

Now it is necessary to see what is the office and duty of a Regarder, The
office of a Regarder.
and how he ought to behave himself in the execution of his office: and
therefore it is to be noted that the words of the Statute are further, Eant
per Forestam ad faciendum regardum, etc. And also it appears by the assizes
of the Forest, that the regard of the Forest ought to be made by the Regarders,
Foresters and Woodwards, where he does say, Milites, Assisa Forestae H. 2.
Forestarij et woodwardi debent intent inquirere in Itinere suo quis habuerit
a liquod ingenium ad malefaciendum domino regi in feris suis. And such Knights
or Regarders were ordained at the first to control the other officers of the
Forest as is aforesaid.

Also the Regardors of the Forest shall see and inquire if any Surcharge of the
Forest be made by the Foresters of the Forest, and they shall assign and
appoint so many foresters in the Forest as they shall think meet and
convenient to keep the Forest.

Also the Regarders must go through the whole Forest every third year to make
their Regard, and to see and inquire of all the offenses of the Forest in Vert
or Venison, and of all concealmentes of such offenses by any officer of the
Forest, which Regard or going through the Forest in ancient time was called
Visitationemorum. Also the Regarders shall go through all the Forest with the
foresters and Woodwardes, to surueie all the assar^s, wastes and purprestures
of the Forest, and al other defaultes that have been made, and as well those
that be ancient assarts, wastes or purprestures, as those that have been made
since the last Regard, and esteem them by the number of acars: And also to
inquire who has made any such assartes, wastes or Purprestures, or any other
such defaults: and who does hold the land where any such trespasses of the
Forest were made or done. And if such land be sowe^ with corn, then whose
corn the same is, and how often the same has been sown so with corn since
that any such assartes, wast or purprestute has been made in the same. And
also how much the same is worth to be sold. And in whose fee the same is. And
to what town the same does belong. And the said Regarders shall write the
ancient assarts, wastes and purprestures, and such other defaults in a roll by
themselves. And all such as have been newly made since the last regard of the
Forest was made, they shall write them in another roll by themselves. And if
the Foresters will not go with the said Regardors, nor lead them to the same
place where such defaultes are: then the Regarders may go thither themselves
and there view and inquire of such defaultes and all other that they can learn
of.

Also the Regarders of the Forest shall survey all the old purprestures and new
that have been made within the Forest, and valewe them severally by
themselves, and to set down the same in the rolls of the Forest. And in what
place the same purpresture is so made, wheresoever it be: As in Woods,
Playnes, Heathes, Waters, or in land, Stangues, Hedges or Ditches, or in any
other place of the Forest. And all such defaultes shall be written in a roll by
themselves.

Also the said Regarders of the Forest shall survey all the woods of the Forest
that are wasted, as well those that are ancient, as those that are new, which
have been made since the Second year of King Edward the first.

Also the Regarders of the Kings Forest, shall see and vewe all the Kings
demeasne lands and Woods: And also al manner of Trees that have been felled
or cut down within any of the Kings demeasne lands or Woods, as the felling
of Oaks or any other great ^niber since the last Regard. And upon such inqu^^e
and view thereof made, they shall certify the number of such Trees, the damage
and hurt that the same is to the kings woods or lands. And in like manner
they shall do of all manner of lopping of Trees and destruction of any
vnderwoodes.

Also the Regarders shall survey and vewe all the Kings demesne hedges, for
the fencing in of his lands and woods: And whether they be made or maintained
and kept as they ought to be or not: and if that they be not so maintained and
kept, then in whose default the same is that they be not so kept as they ought
to be, and what damage to the king the same is that the same is not fenced: and
whether by reason that the same land or wood is not fenced as it should be,
the same be suffered to lie open and made common yea or not.

Also the Regarders of the Kings Forest shall see and survey all the Eyries of
hawks in whatsoever woods they be: and who does take them, and who ought by
the law to have them. And they shall thereof make certificat accordingly.

Also the Regarders of the Kings Forest shall survey and see all the Forges and
Mines, for the finding of any kind of metal, in what fee soever they be within
the Forest, or within the Kings demesne woods or lands being within the
Forest or without: And what rentes and customs they pay for the same, and to
whom. Also they shall see and view all ports and creekes of the Sea, where any
Ships or Boats do or may aryue to carry any Timber, Wood or vnderwoodes out
of the Forest, and who does occupy then: And by whom they are brought
thither: And in whose fee the same is done.

Also the Regarders of the Forest shall inquire who has or does keep any Bow
and Arrows in their houses, or Crosbowes, Gunnes, Hounds or braches, or any
other ingins to hunte or to destroy the Kings wild beasts and game of the
Forest with all.

And when the Regarders of the Forest have made survey, vewe and inquiry of all
such matters as by their oath and office they ought to do, as is aforesaid,
they shall write the same fair in a roll, and bring it to the Court of
Swanimote, or to the Court of Attachementes, where all the officers of the
Forest ought to assemble themselves together every forty days: And all such
matters as are so found by the Regarders in their raunge through the forest, the
same shall be there affirmed by the said Regarders by their hands and seals,
which Regardors shall also present the same under their hands and seals unto
the Lord Justice in Eyer of the forest, at the next general Air or Sessions
of the forest.

The Air, general Sessions of the forest, or Justice Seat, is to be holden
and kept every third year, and of necessity before that any such Sessions or
Justice Seat can be holden, the Regardors of the forest must make their
regard. And this making of the regard must be done by the Kings writ, as it
does appear by the writ aforesaid: Whereby it is to be noted, that the
Foresters, and Regarders cannot make the regard of the forest of their own
authority, without the Kings writ for the same purpose. The words of the
Statute are:

Regardatores nostri eant per Forestam:
That is to say, the Kings Regargers must go through the whole forest of the
King. Whereby it is especially to be noted that the Regarders may not do or
certify any thing concerning their office, but that they must first view the
same: and for that cause the words are eant per Forestam, that is, that they
must raunge over all the forest, and through every bailiwike of the same, to
see and inquire of the trespasses and offenses of the forest. The words of the
Statute are further.

Ad faciendum Regardum.
Here in these words is most plainly showed the cause why the said Regarders
must go through the forest of the King, which is ad faciendum Regardum, to
make their Regard: for in these words ad facie^dum regardum, is comprehended
the whole office of a Regarder, which does concist in these four things, that
is to say: Ad videndum. Ad inquirendum. Ad imbreuiandum. Ad certificandum.


1 And now as concerning the first of them, which is ad Videndum, to see the
offenses and trespasses of the Forest: and to see what officers of the Forest
have executed and done their office as they ought to do: It is to be noted
that the Regarders of the Forest ought not to certify any thing but upon their
view, as it shall appear hereafter in the fo^rth point, which is to certify.

2 The second is, ad Inquirendum, to enquire. So that the Regarders ought to
range throughout all the Forest: not only to see and view all the trespasses
and defaults of the Forest, but they ought also to inquire out the certainty
of every such trespass and to learn the truth of all such matters as shall be
delivered them in charge, as is aforesaid.

3 The third point is, Imbreuiare, which is, to inroll their view and
inquisition that they have made: So that after they have gone throughout all
the Forest, and have viewed the trespasses and defaults of the forest, and that
they have learned and inquired out the truth of them in every thing according
to their charge given them, as is aforesaid: Then they must inroll the same,
that is, they must cause all those defaultes that they do so find in their
range thorough the forest to be fair written in a Parchment Roll, in which
inrolling, they must observe these four things, that is to say: 1 What the
offense is. 2 When the same was done. 3 Where the same was done. 4 Who did the
offense.


The fourth point is, ad Certificandum, which is, to certify that which they
have done: So that when they have gone thorough out all the forest, and have
made their view and inquiry of all the defaults of the forest, and that they
have also enrolled them in their roll: yet th^ee can be no execution nor
punishment done to the offenders or doers of those trespasses until such time
that the same Regarders have made certificat thereof unto the Lord chief
Justice in Air of the forest at the Justice Seat. And yet before that they do
make such Certificate to the Lord chief Justice in Air of the forest of
their inquisition, they must present the same inquisition at the Swanimote
before the other officers of the forest, Ordinatio Forestae. 34. Ed. 1
to the intent that the offenders thereof may be there indicted of the same
offenses according to the ordinance of the forest made in 34. E. 1. For
otherwise, if the same be certified to the lord Justice in Air before that the
offenders be thereof indicted at the next Swanimote, then the offenders may
trauers the same presentment or Certificat, because that the same is not
Presentatum per Forestarios and duodecim Iuratores and conuictum per
Viridarios, etc.

But now it is necessary here in this place to speak something concerning the
manner of the same Certificat. And therefore first of all it is to be
understood that in this Certificat there are two things most especially to be
observed, that is to say:

The number of the Regarders that must certify the same.

And that they do Certify the same upon their view: and not otherwise.

It has been showed already before: that by the Laws and Assizes of the
Forest, Assisa Forestae H. 2.
made in the time of King H. 2. that of necessity there must be twelve
Regarders in every forest. And it does also appear by the writ aforesaid, that
if any of those twelve Regarders be dead or sick, there must be others chosen
in their places to serve: So that of necessity there must be the whole number
of twelve Regarders in every Forest, or else they cannot make the Regard of the
forest, nor make any certificat thereof. For if the certificat of their
inquisition be made by 11. of the Regarders of the forest: then that
certificat is not a sufficient certificat to charge any offender to answer
thereunto, Vide master Hesket in his reading, fo. 25.
for as much as it does appear by matter of record, that the same certificat
was not made by all the Regarders of the forest: for it must be intended that
there be always 12. Regarders, and the certificat of their inquisition must be
made by all the Regarders, that is to say, by 12. Regarders. And this much
concerning the number of the Regarders that must certify.

Now concerning the certifying of their inquisition upon their own view. It
is to be understood, that if it do not appear in their certificat before the
Lord chief Justice of the Forest, that the Regardors did raunge and go through
all the Forest, Master Heske^ fo 25.
to see and vewe the Forest, and the offenses and trespasses of the Forest,
which they do certify: Then that certificat or presentment, although that they
as Regarders of the Forest do certify their presentment of an offense of the
Forest within their charge: Vide the case 34. H. 6.
yet that certificat is not good, neither shall the offender or dooer of such a
trespass be impeched upon that presentment, but the Regarders shall be
amerced for their insufficient certificat. For in this case their certificat is
like to the return of the Shirife in an Action of wast, where the Shirife does
leave out of his return (these words:) Accessi ad locum vastatum, vt patet in
An. 34. H. 6. And also it is like to the presentment of the Coroner that does
not make mention that the inquisition of the Coroner was taken super visum
corporis. But if in the Certificat of the Regarders mention be made of their
Perambulation through the Forest, and view of the trespasses that they do
present or certify: whereas in the very truth they did not Perambulat nor view
the same: yet that presentment and Certificat of any such offenses as they
shall so certify is good and sufficient in law. For a man cannot by the law
trauers the return or Certificat of an officer that is sworn. But here it does
appear that the office and duty of a Regarder is, to go and vewe the
offenses and trespasses of the Forest: and they must also certify their vewe:
and it is not sufficient for one or two of them to vewe the same, but they must
all vewe the Forest, and the offenses or trespasses that are done in the
forest: even so they must all certify the same as their verdict or
presentment. For as a Jury at the common law, if 11. of them be agreed of
their verdict, and they do give a verdict, and one of them will not agree to
it: then their verdict is no verdict at all in Law. So it is, if 11. of the
Regarders do certify, and the twelfth will not certify: the Certificat of the
other 11. is void and no certificat at all: for as much as it does appear by
matter of Record, that their certificat was not made by all the Regarders, as
by law it ought to be. And thus much concerning the Second, point that the
Regarders must make mention in their Certificat, that the same was made and
done upon their own view, that is, upon all their vewes: So that now you see
that by the letter of the Statute in these words: Regardatores nostri eant per
Forestam: It is ordained and appointed that the Regarders shall go through out
all the Forest: and then afterward in these words: Ad faciendum Regardum: It
is showed and declared to what end, or for what cause they ought to go through
the Forest: which is, to make the regard of the Forest. And afterward the
letter is further: Sicut fieri consueuit tempore primae Coronationis Regis H.
aui nostri and non aliter: In which words it is plainly set down and declared
unto us, how and in what manner the Regarders shall make their regard of the
Forest, which is according to the assizes and customs of the Forest used in
the time of King Henry the Second: so that this branch of the said Statute
does not hereby ordain or appoint any new thing that was not before. But this
branch is made for an affirmation of the law and usage of the Forest that was
used in the time of King H. 2. Now therefore it is necessary here in this
place to show how and in what manner the law and usage of the Forest was at
that time used in making of the regard of the Forest. For the declaration
whereof, it is to be understood, that the inquitie and presentment of all the
Articles aforesaid, which are to be inquired of by the Regarders of the Forest,
the same shall be enquired of as they were wont to be enquired of, at the time
of the Coronation of King H 2. and that is every third year, as it does
appear in the Assizes of King H. 2. and then the same regard is to be made
but only within the bounds of the Forest: Assisa Forestae H. 2. C. 10. and 17.
for the said Regarders ought not to enquire nor to present any thing that is
made or done out of the bounds of the Forest, nor yet out of the precinct of
the regard within the forest, as it does appear in the same Assizes of H. 2.
Cap. 10. and 17. For it is there written, that those that have Woods out of
the regard of the Forest, where the wild beasts of the King have their
haunt, peace or rest: Or any other man that has lands or Woods within the
Forest, and has also this Privilege, that those lands and woods shall be out
of the regard of the Forest: and that the same shall not be impeched for any
cause: yet in that case he or they that have such a Privilege, ought to have a
woodwarde there to keep his woods, which woodwarde must also be sworn to the
assizes of the Forest, that is, Assisa Forestae H. 2 Vide Master Hesket fo. 26.
for the preservation of Vert and Venison, as it does appear by the same
assizes of H. 2. And if the Regarders do enquire or make any presentment of
any thing that is done in any such place Priuileged, as is aforesaid: then
that presentment may be avoided by the plee of the party, by pleading of that
matter: For the party shall never be punished upon such a presentment if the
very truth of the matter do appear of record unto the high Court of the
Lord Justice in Air of the Forest.

And the same law is also, if the Regarders of the Forest will make
presentment of any Article that is not specified in dictis capitulis de regardo
fiendo: (which is always sent to the Shirife, together with the writ, when the
regard is to be made as aforesaid,) as if they do present, that John Astyle
has agisted his woods or his demeasne lands, before that the demeasne
hedgrowes of the King within the Forest be agysted: or that he has taken any
pannage contrary to the assizes of the Forest: then that presentment is void
without any plee, if that it do appear unto the Court by matter of record
comprised within the same presentment, that the thing of the which they have
made their presentme^t is not any matter whereof they had charge given them to
enquire of, or to present.

And if the regard of the Forest, be made by the Regarders that are elected by
writ, and yet they have not any writ to make their regard when they do make
the same, but they do make their regard of the Forest of themselves
voluntarily, Presentment per le Regard sans authority est void.
within the time of three years, that is to say, every year: that regard,
and also the presentmentes made by the same regard against any person are also
void: and the party against whom any such presentment is made, may discharge
himself of that presentment by plee.

But such a presentment and inquiry made by the Regarders which were once
elected and chosen, although that they do make their regard every fourth
year or every fifth year, it is good and sufficient in law, and the same
shall bind the party to the punishment, notwithstanding that every such
presentment and regard by them made, was not by a commandment directed to
the Shirife as aforesaid: For when the Regarders are once elected by writ and
Sworn, then they may hold their regard according to the assizes of the Forest,
that is to say, every third year ex officio, without any new writ, precept,
or commandment. But if any of them be dead, so that there are not the whole
number of 12. Regarders living, then they ought to have a writ as is aforesaid,
to choose new Regarders in their places, to make up the full number of 12.
Regarders again, before that they can make their regard of the Forest. And so
in like manner it is if the King by his letters patens do make one or more
Regardors to fill up the number of 12. Regarders again, they cannot ex
officio, make the regard of the Forest without such a writ vt supra, Les
Regarders ne point fair lour regard del Forest si non que ils soint Iure.
directed to the Sheriff: for the Sheriff by the authority of that write, must
swear the Regarders, as is aforesaid: and they cannot by the law make the
regard of the Forest before that they be sworn: for if they do, then their
proceeding therein is void, quod nota.

The letter is further in the 6. branch of the said Statute as follows. vz,
Inquisitio vel visus expeditatione canum existentium in Foresta nostra de
cetero fiat quando fieri debet regardum, scilicet de tercio anno in tertium
annum: Carta de Foresta. cap. 6.
By which words of the said Statute, there are two things especially to be
noted: First, that the regard of the Forest ought to be made every third
year. Secondly, the time when all the Dogs in the Forest ought to be viewed
whether that they be expeditated or not: and then all the Dogs that are found
to be vnexpeditated, they must be expedicated according to this law. And this
is also to be done every third year, when the Regarders do make their regard
of the Forest.

And then the letter is further as follows, Et tunc fiat per visum and
testimonium legalium hominum, et non aliter. In these words of the said Statute
it is plainly set down, The Regard of the Forest ought to be made every third
year.
how the expeditating of Dogs within the Forest shall be made, which is by the
view and testimony of good and lawful men: So that it does hereby appear,
that before there can be any expeditating of dogs within the Forest, there
must be an inquisition and view taken throughout all the Forest by the
Regarders of the same Forest, to the end that thereby it may first appear by
matter of Record to the Court, what manner of Dogs they are that are
vnexpeditated within the Forest. For some Dogs are not to be expeditated, as
Greyhounds and such like: for they may not be kept within the Forest although
that they were expeditated: for no Dogs shall be expeditated but only the
Mastife or the Mungrell of the Mastifes kind: and of such kind of Dogs it
is that the Statute does mean. And also who is the proper owner of such Dogs
as are so remaining within the Forest vnexpeditated, to the end that they
only who are the proper owners of such Dogs, may be compelled to pay the
fine for the same offense. And then when the same Regarders have taken such
view and inquisition of such Dogs, as is aforesaid, the same must be
certified and returned by the certificat and presentment of the said Regarders
of the Forest. And this is the meaning of these words, Per visum and
testimonium legalium hominum, And in this sort the expeditating of Dogs must
be made. And if it be made otherwise, then the same is void by those words et
non aliter. Master Hesket in his reading of the laws of the Forest upon the
words aforesaid, says as follows. It appears, says he, by the letter of
the Statute aforesaid, that the inquiry and view of the expeditating of dogs
shall be made when the regard is made by the same Regarders as one Article and
parcel of their charge: and that does appear to be every third year: And
that then the same shall be done by the view and testimony of good and lawful
men, and that is, says he, by the view and testimony of the same Regarders.
And he says further, that before the making of that Charter of the liberties
of the Forest, the law of the Forest was, that expeditating of dogs should be
made wheresoever the wild Beasts of the King have their peace and rest, and
have used to have their peace and rest, as it does appear in the Assizes of
the Forest, made in the time of H 2. Cap, 11. But says he, the certeintie of
the expeditating of Dogs was not known nor expressed until that this
Charter of the Liberties of the Forest was made, which now does declare and
express the certeintie of five things that were not certain before, Five
things are put in certainty by the Statute.
that is to say: How the same shall be done. At what time the same shall be done.
In what manner the same shall be done. Who shall do it. And the certainty of the
fine or amercement of the offender.

And it is to be understood, that although the expeditating of Dogs be one of
the Articles of the Charter De Regardo fiendo, as it does appear there, Cap.
13. Yet the letter of this Statute here has not now made the law so strait
that of necessity the inquiry of the expeditating of Dogs must be made in
the Court of the Regard only, and not otherwise. For it does appear that the
Justices of the Forest in their general Sessions may inquire and determine
that matter also. And so likewise the expeditating of Dogs may be inquired
and determined at the Courts of the Forest called the Swanimotes, as it does
appear by the charge of the Courts: But that is only by the presentment of
an Inquest, and then that presentment must be affirmed by the Foresters,
Regarders, and all other officers and ministers of the Forest before the
Justices of the Forest, the expeditating of Dogs shall be inquired only by a
Jury or Enquest. And in that Court of Regard it shall not be only inquired,
of the expeditating of Dogs by the Regarders: But they only ought to have
the view of that matter when that they do make their Regard upon the said view
and perambulation, or otherwise, the same is a void inquiry and presentment
by them upon those words aforesaid, Et non aliter, Which words shall have
relation to that intent only, and not to the time, nor to the Court where the
Articles shall be enquired. For that presentment of the Regarders shall be made
upon the view of the Dogs only, even as the presentment of the Coroner shall be
made super visum corporis, although that the letter of the same Statut be in
the Disjunctive Inquisitio vel visus. For this is held for a learning in the
Laws of the Forest: In every presentment of the Regarders, it ought to appear
by mattes of Record that they had the view.
that nothing is lawfully presented by the Regarders of the Forest, if it do
not appear by matter of record that they had the view of the same in their
perambulation. And Master Hesket notes further, that by the letter of the
said Statute, there is full authority and power given to the Regarders to
inquire and determine that Article for and concerning the hameling of Dogs.
For before the making of this Charter of the Liberties of the forest: The
Regarders did not meddle in this Article, but only with Wastes, Assarts,
purprestures, and such like within their regard only, as it does appear in
the Assizes of the forest of H. 2. Cap. 10. And now by the letter of the
Charter of the forest aforesaid, the Law is enlarged greatly touching this
Articles, more than it is concerning any other Article of the Regard of the
forest. For the Regarders cannot proceed any further in any other Article of
the Regard in their charge, but only to view and inquire of them, and then to
inroll their presentiments: and then when they have so done, they must also
certifye that presentment before the Justices of the forest, at their coming
into the forest, when they do hold the general Sessions of the forest, and
then there the offenses that they have presented shall be determined. And before
that time nothing shall be done by Process or otherwise: But all the presentiments
shall lie dead until then. But otherwise it is of that Article of Expeditating
of Dogs: for that the Regarders have authority to hear and determine the
fine or amercement for that matter only, because that the fine is already by
the said Charter set down and made certain. The words of the Statut are
further as follows, Et ille cuius canis inuentus fuerit tunc non expeditatus
det pro misericordia tres solidos. By these words of the Charter aforesaid,
here are two things especially to be noted. The first is, that it must be found
by the inquisition and view of the Regarders, what manner of Dog it is that is
vnexpeditated. And who is the owner of the same Dog, that is by Law to be
charged with the fine or amercement for the same. The second is, that he whose
Dog the same is, shall pay for his amercement 3. s. which is certain: Master
Hesket fo. 27.
So that now the certainty of the fine or amercement is here specified and
declared, and who shall be charged with the same. But (says Master Hesket) it is
to be understood, that the same 3. s. shall be taken or leuyed upon the
determination of the view and inquiry which shall be done so soon as the regard
is made, as is aforesaid, and their view and inquiry certified of record.
Then, if in case that the Regarders by their view and presentment do find and
present one Mastiffe within the forest which is not hameled or expeditated
according to the Laws of the forest: And they say further in their
presentment, quod ignorant' cuius Canis ille est, that is a void presentment,
If that there be no other words afterward to help the same: but yet
nevertheless the same dog shall be taken and kept by the officers of the
forest, or else avoided away clean from the forest, if no person will claim
the same dog. And if that any person do claim the same dog by Accion of
trespass, or repleui, or otherwise by matter of record, as a man may very
well as it seems, and the same Accion is tried and thereby proved to be his
Dog that so did claim him: Then upon that trial and upon the first
presentment, the same owner shall be amerced to the King three shillings,
according to the said Charter of the forest.

And if the: Regarders do find and present one dog vt supra, which is the
dog of one John Astile: that is a good indictment: and the said John Astile
cannot disclaim nor say that the same is not his dog generally: and the
cause is as Master Hesket and Master Treherne do think by reason of the
letter of the Statut, which is, quod ille cuius tunc inuentus fuerit etc. So
that if it be there so found by matter of record for the king: then John Astyle
shall pay his amercement: for he cannot counterplede that point generally
against the presentment or return of the officers of the king, that are sworn.

And if a man be indicted that he did keep one Dog of one John Astyle within
the Forest not hameled, contrary to the laws of the Forest: If before the
Justices of the Forest he do plede that the dog is not his: that is no plee
without saying to whom the property of the dog is, as to John Astyle etc.
And if the Jury do find that the property of the dog is not to the said
John Astyle, nor yet unto John Adowne: that is no sufficient verdict, without
finding to what other person the property of the dog was. For in that case it
is like to a man that is indicted by the Coroner, super visum corporis, and he
does plede not guilty: and so it is found by the Jury that he is not guilty:
yet that is no sufficient verdict without presenting one other person that did
the murder, which presentment shall be in the nature of an enditement against
him: so that if he plede not guilty, that is no plee, nor yet to find him not
guilty, is not any verdict against such a presentment vt supra.

If the Regarders do find and present such a Dog at the house or in the
house of John A down within the Forest: yet that John Adowne shall not be
amerced by reason of such a presentment. But if the Regarders do find that
John Astyle did kee^^ such a Dog within the Forest: that is a good presentment
for to charge John Astyle with the amercement of that Statute. But if the
Regarders do find and present that John Astyle did deliver one Dog to John
Adowne, to keep within the Forest: and that he kept that dog there: In that
case the deliverer or bayler shall be charged upon that presentment and
amercement according to the said Charter, and not the baylee or he to whom
the dog was delivered.

But if the Regarders do find and present that John Astyle did deliver the
said dog for a certain time to keep unto John Adowne, which John Adowne did
keep the same dog within the Forest not hameled. There both the bayler and
the baylee shall be amerced. But if it be found that the dog that was so
delivered was a pledge or a morgage for money vt supra: there he to whom the
dog was delivered only shall be charged of the amercement, and not the baylor.

And if it be found and presented that John Astyle as a trespasser, vi et
armis, did take the dog of one John Adowne, and did keep him within the
Forest not expeditated: John Adowne the owner shall be charged of the amercement,
and not John Astyle the trespasser. So it is if it be presented that John
Astyle vi et armis, do take the dog of one John Adowne from him: And he upon
that brought a repleuie, and that John Astyle so kept that dog within the
forest not expeditated: There John Adowne the very owner of the dog only
shall be charged of the amercement, and not John Astyle that kept his dog.
Now the letter of the Statute is:

Det pro misericordia tres solidos.
So that if it be presented and found that one John Astyle has 2. dogs
within the Forest not expeditated: he shall not be amerced for every dog
three shillings, but only three shillings for all the offense. But if two men
have jointly or in common one dog within the Forest not expeditated: There
every one of them shall be amerced to three shillings severally.

But otherwise it is if it be found and presented that the husband and wife
have one dog, by reason that the wife is executrix to him to whom the dog was
belonging: There the husband only shall be amerced but to three shillings.

And if it be found by the Regarders of the forest, in their inquisition: that
a Duke, an Earl, a Baron, or any other person of the Realm, Spiritual or
Temporal, do keep such a dog within the Forest vnexpeditated: he shall pay
but only the amercement of three shillings, according to the letter of the
Charter of the liberties of the Forest, and not any amercement according to his
dignity and degree as they do at the common law. But if such a great person
of dignity or honor be presented and indicted for the keeping of such dogs
before the Justices of the Forest: there they shall be out of the remedy and
Privilege of that letter, and then they shall be amerced for the same by the
Justices of the Forest at their discretion, Hesket fo. 28.
according to their dignity and estate

And it is to be noted upon that word Det, that the said amercement of three
shillings shall be levied by distress, presently before the coming of the
Justices of the Forest. For in this case the same is like to the amercement of
a Leete, as it does appear by the rolls and presentmentes of the Regarders in
diverse Forestes. And so you may see that this Article for the inquisition and
view of expeditating of dogs does differ from every other Article of the
regard: For the Regarders themselves may cesse the fine concerning this
Article: And the same fine shall be levied presently by the Foresters of the
Forest.

So that now you may perceive by the very construction of the letter of the
Statute aforesaid, that the meaning of these words, Et ille cuius canis
inuentus fuerit tunc no^ expeditatus det pro misericordia tres solidos, is as
much as to say: that he whose dog is found by the inquisition and view of
the Regarders, and by their certificat presented to be vnexpeditated, he shall
pay 3. s. for a fine for his dog: and yet nevertheless he must have his dog
expeditated, if he will keep his dog within the Forest.

Now the words are further, Et de cetero nullus bos capiatur pro expeditatione
canum: By these words it does appear, that before the making of this Charter
of the Liberties of the Forest, it was then an usual thing, that for every
default or offense of the Forest, the Foresters would distraine his Ox, which
often times was of a great price. And sometimes also the same was done of
malice and evil will, to vex and trouble the offenders without any just or
lawful cause. And therefore this Article of the said Charter has greatly
mittigated that great amercement and vexation, and has here set down a
reasonable amercement, that is to say, three shillings: and does now prohibit
that from henceforth no Ox shall be taken for the expeditating of any Dogs.

Then the words are further as follows, Talis autem expeditio fiat per
Assisam communiter vsitatum videlicet quod tres ortelli abscindantur sine
pellota de pede anteriori: In these words here is set down and declared what
manner of expeditating of Dogs has been used heretofore by the ancient
Assizes of the Forest, which is, that the three claws of the forefoote on the
right side shall be cut off by the Skin. And also here is further added to it a
confirmation, that is to say: that the same manner of expeditating of Dogs
shall be still used and kept, and no other manner of expeditating of Dogs.

The words are further, Nec expeditentur Canes de cetero nisi in locis vbi
consueuerunt Expeditari tempore primae Coronationis praedicti Regis Henrici aui
nostri. Assisa Forestae H. 2.
The declaration of the meaning of this branch of the Statute does appear in
the Assizes of the Forest of King H. 2. Cap. 11. in which Assizes it is
declared that hameling or expeditating of Dogs shall be made Vbicunque ferae
Regis pacem habent vel habere consueuerunt: that is to say, the expeditating
of Dogs shall be made wheresoever the wild beasts of the King have a place of
firm peace, or have used to have a place of firm peace. Master Hesket in his
reading of the Laws of the Forest, Master Hesket fo, 28.
says, that if the King do afforest certain land after the said Coronation,
where the wild beasts of the King now have their peace and rest, there shall
be hameling or expeditating of Dogs: and yet such hameling of Dogs was not
used there at the time of the said Coronation.

The same law is if a man have license to enclose his land where the wild
beasts of the King only at the time of the Coronation use to have their
haunte and rest: and he does enclose the same land with stone walls:
Expeditating of Dogs.
so that the wild beasts cannot have their haunt there, by reason whereof
they do change their haunt and rest, and do resort to some other place
whereas they did not use at the time of the Coronation: yet there shall be
hameling of dogs: Notwithstanding the words of the Statut are as aforesaid. And
the like law is of the contrary part. For if the place where the wild
beasts have had their haunte and rest at the time of the said Coronation: And
where at that time there were hamelyng and expeditating of Dogs used: Hameling
of Dogs.
If afterward the same place be disaforested? then after such disaforesting
of the same, there shall not be expeditating of dogs any more used:
notwithstanding that expeditating of dogs was used there at the time of the
said Coronation. So it is also if such haunte and rest of wild beasts and
expeditating of dogs were used at the time of the said Coronation, by usage,
by matter in fait in the country: Expeditating by matter in Fait.
and not by matter of record, as by presentment, or by amercement for such
offenses, there if the haunte and rest of the wild beasts be changed from
thence to another place, then at this day there shall not be any hameling of
dogs in that place, where in deed the same was used at the time of the said
Coronation: for that, that no usage was of that there after the time of
memory, and the usage before is but matter in fait, which cannot be tried nor
lie in notice, or use, now at this day.

The same law is if the king do grant to John Astile a francke Chase through
out all his lands within the Forest of the King, and within those lands the
wild beasts have used to have their haunt and rest upon that land, and
before that grant made, there was always halmeling of dogs used: Yet now in
this place the dogs of John Astyle the grauntee of the king shall not be
hameled, although the contrary were used at the time of the Coronation.

The same law shall be where the king does grant license to John Astyle to
make a Park, and to imparke certain of his lands within the Forest, and he
shall have the Privilege of a Park and Saltarie there, and he does make the
same Park and Saltarie, according to his grant: in which place before that
time expeditating or hameling of dogs was used vt supra: there his dogs
within the Park shall not be hameled: but in neither of these two last cases
the dogs of any other person, be it his Servant or other stranger, they ought
to be hameled within that Park or Close. And this much concerning hameling of
dogs.

It may peradventure here be demanded what dogs shall be expeditated by this
Statut. And what dogs a man may lawfully keep within the Forest. And to this
question I answer, that by the Assizes of the Forest, it is most plain that
there are two sorts of Dogs that may be suffered to be kept within the
bounds of the Forest, which are Mastiuos et pa^uos catulos, and all other dogs
are forbidden by the Laws of the Forest, to remain within the bounds of the
Forest. But any inhabitant within the Forest may lawfully keep a Massiue for
the safety of his house and goods in the night: so that the same Mastiue be
expeditated and lawed according to the assizes of the Forest, Assisa et
Consuetudines Forestae Articulo 9.
as it does appear in Assisa et Consuetudines Forestae Articulo 9. In these
words: Si quis Mastiuus inuentus fuerit super aliquam feram, et mutulatus
fuerit, ipse cuius erat, quietus erit de illo facto, si non fuerit mutulatus
ipse cuius fuerit Mastiuus, erit culpabilis tanqua^ de manupasto suo. Et debet
poni per sex plegios quoru^ nomina debet imbreuiare et etiam qualis fuerit
canis. So that hereby you may note that a man may keep a Mastiue within the
Forest lawfully if that he be expeditated: Although that such a Mastyue be
found upon a Dear, the owner of the same Mastiue shall be quite of the offense.
Also it does apeare in Assisa et consuetud'Forestae Art. 16 that a man may
lawfully keep little dogs within the Forest, that can neither fear nor hurt
the Kings wild beasts of the forest: for the words are as follows, nullus
messarius ducat secu^ Mastiuu^ magnu^ ad fuga^du^ feras domini regis, Assisa et
Consuetudines Forestae Artic. 16.
sed paruos catulos ad expecta^dum extra copertu^: By which words you may here
note that a man may not lawfully drive the Dear out of his Corn with a great
Mastyfe, but with a little dog that can but look after them out of the
covert: so that such little dogs as do not dare to follow the Kings wild
beasts into the covert of the Forest, nor to run after them to fear them,
may be kept lawfully within the Forest, and such dogs shall not be
expeditated, nor any fine paid for them, for they are out of the meaning of
the words of the Statute of Carta de Foresta aforesaid.

Carta de Fotesta Artic. 7.
The words of the Statute are further, as follows, Nullus Forestarius vel
Bedellus de cetero faciat Scottallas, vel colligat herbas, vel auenam, vel
bladum, aliquod, vel agnos, vel porcellos, nec aliquam collectam faciat, nisi
per visum and sacramentu^ duodecem regardatorum, quando facient regardum. Tot
Forestarij ponantur ad Forestas custodiendum, quot ad illas custodiendum
rationabiliter viderint sufficere.

Here it does appear by the examination of this branch of the Statute, what
great oppressions and extortions in times past were offered and done to the
inhabitants and dwellers within Forestes, or near unto Forests, and unto such
as had any lands or woods within the Forestes by the Foresters and other
officers of the Forest: And therefore this branch of this Statute was made as
it were upon the general complaynt of the whole comynaltie of this Realm, for
a special provision and remedy for the avoiding of those myschiefes, which
the comynaltie were then so oppressed withal. Which said myschiefe and
oppressions do seem by this Statute to be two foulde, that is to say. First
the extortions of the Foresters and other officers of the Forest. And Secondly,
the multitude of those officers by whom they were so oppressed: and as the
myschiefes at the time of the making of this Statute were two fold: so the
provision and remedy of this Statute is twofolde likewise. The first is a
general prohibition for the avoiding of all manner of extortion by any officer
of the Forest, beginning in these words: Nullus Forestarius vel bedellus de
cetero faciat scottallas, vel colligat herbas, vel auenam, vel bladum aliquod,
vel agnos, vel porcellos, nec aliquam collectam faciat nisi etc. The Second is
a general prohibition, made for the avoiding of all manner of surcharging of
the Forest with ouermanie Foresters and Walkers, and other under officers: to
the end that there should be no more of those officers in the Forest, then
might resonably suffice for the keeping of the kings wild beasts: and so by
reason of the diminishing of those officers, their extortio^ might also the
easelyer be deminished. And as concerning the first provision of the Statut,
which is for the avoiding of extortion. It is to be understood that there are
Seven things forbidden in this branch of the Statute, which are, those things
wherein the e^tortion of those officers in times past was most chifely
committed: which are as follows.

That is to say: that no Officer of the Forest shall by coulor of his office
only make any 1 Scottall. 2 Or gathering of any Hey. 3 Or Oats. 4 Or any
other Corn. 5 Or Lambs. 6 Or Pigges. 7 Nor shall make any manner of gathering.


Now it is to be seen what thing Scottall or Scottale is. And for that it is
to be understood that a Scottal or Scottale is, where any officer of the Forest
does keep an Alehouse within the Forest, A Scotale is a kind of extortion.
whereas he is an officer and by color of his office does cause men to come to
his house, and there to spend their Money, for fear of having his displeasure:
this is called a Scottall, and this is to be inquired of, per duodecim
iuratores at the Swanimote, and also at the general Sessions of the Forest.
And if such a Forester or officer of the Forest be attaynted of any such
offense, then he is to be punished for the said offense, and also to be put
from his said office. And the like law is, where any Forester or other officer
of the Forest does keep any game, or sell any Ale at a certain day, and by
color of his office does cause the people to spend their Money with him: this
is also a Scottale. But if a Forester or other officer of the Forest be robbed,
or have his house broken or burned by mischaunce, so that by those means he is
undone, and he does desire the people of the Forest for his relief, to come
and drink with him, and to give him their money for charities sake. This is no
Scottall, Colori officij virtute officij.
nor yet any extortion: for a Scottall is extortion because the same is taken
Color officij, and not virtute officij. But whatsoever is taken virtute
officij, is not extortion: Note the difference.

And in like manner it is, if any Forester or other officer of the Forest, by
coulor of his office only do oppress the people of the Forest that have any
common of pasture within the same forest: and do secretly compel them, in
respect to have his favor, to give them Hay or Oats, or any other Corn, or
Lambs or Pigges: It appears by the word, (de cetero) that before the making
of this Statute, these extortions were used.
or do make any manner of collection for any Money or any other things: This is
extortion, and is now prohibited by the Statute to be used any more hereafter:
For the words are de cetero, that is to say, from henceforth, that is, from
the making of this Statut, such things shall not be used. And if any officer of
the Forest do use any such Scottall or gathering now at this day, the same is
extortion by the law, and the offender therein is to be punished for the same
as an extortioner in this case. And then it follows with a further addition
unto it: Per visum et sacramentum duodecim regardatorum quando facient
regardum: so that although the making of Scottales and gathering of Hey or
Oats, or any other Corn, or Lambs or Piggs, or making of any manner of
collection by any Forester or officer of the Forest, is unlawful in some cases:
(as where any such thing is newly exacted upon the people of the Forest without
any good title or right to the same:) yet in othersome cases al those things
that are here prohibited and forbidden by this Statute may be lawful, so that
the same, usage had his beginning by good and lawful title, which may be in
three sorts which are as follows.

1 By Tenure. 2 By Grant. 3 By Prescription.
1 The first is, by Tenure, as where a man does hold certain land of the
Kings within the Forest, By Tenure.
to pay unto any officer of the Forest every year at his Scottall xii. d. or.
v. s. or one Sheep or Lamb: this is not extortion nor within the letter of
this Statute, for this is not done Colori officij, that is by color of his
office only without any other right or ty^le to the same: but this is a thing
done virtute officij. And in like manner it is if a man do hold land of another
man, paying for the same a certain rent, and also to pay yearly to a
Forester or other officer of the Forest certain Oats or Corn or such like:
this is not extortion nor within the letter of this Statute.

So it is if a man do give land by his deed enrolled unto another in tail, to
find or to give unto the Foresters of the Forest a certain collection every
year. In this case if the donee will not pay nor deliver the said collection
accordingly, the foresters or other officers of the Forest have not any
remeadie by the law to compel the said donee to pay the said collection. But
otherwise it is of the King himself, for he may by endictment in respect of
his right of the Forest have remedy: And in this case the donor himself may
compel him by distress to pay the said collection unto the said officers of
the Forest: And notwithstanding that the donee do pay the same collection unto
the donor, and not unto the said officers of the Forest according to the
Tenure, yet that donee shall not be discharged by that payment, but that the
donor may in this case distrayne the donee a new for his service not done.

2. By grant.
2 The second is, by grant, as if any man dwelling within the forest will grant
unto the King a certain collection or a certain profit for his forester or
other officer of the forest, to be received yearly by the said officers: In
this case the said Foresters or other officers of the forest may lawfully
gather that collectio^ or other profit, notwithstanding the prohibition of the
said statut.

The same law is if a man do grant to such an officer of the Forest any such
collection, profit or other thing in Sustentationem officij, that is a good
grant, and by that grant the said officers of the Forest which have such a
grant may lawfully take and gather such a collection: notwithstanding the
prohibition by that letter of the Statute, and upon the first case the King may
force him to come and to pay the said Foresters the said collection or other
profit, by an assise or information for the King before the Justices of the
Forest, by a datum est curiae intelligi, that the grauntee will not pay such a
collection according to his grant may compel him to pay the same, and also
in the said Second case he shall be forced to perform his grant by an Action
of covenant.

3. By prescription.
3 The third sort or manner of lawful gathering of such things is by
prescription, and that is only where there has been a forest and officers
there, the time whereof the memory of man is not able to remember the contrary:
for in that case to allege that the Forest was made after the lymitation of
the writ of right does avoid the custom and prescription clean.

A Forester in fee may prescribe in him and his ancesters to have three half
pence every day throughout the whole year, pro victu suo, and he may lawfully
gather the same, notwithstanding the prohibition of the said Statute. Hesket f.
30. E.
And the like law is in all cases of prescription where the same prescription
is lawful.

So a Forester of fee may prescribe to have all the wind-fal-wood, or Mort boys
within the forest, or thorowout all his bayliwike, and in like manner all the
browswood that is felled for bruise in Winter for the Dear. Also a Forester may
prescribe to have the vmbles, and also one shoulder or both the shoulders of
every Dear that is killed within his Bailiwike, and likewise the skin, and
this is a good prescription in law.

And whereas the words of the Statute are Nisi per visum and Sacramentum
duodecem regardatorum. It is to be understood, that these words do permit and
suffer some sort of scottals and collections made by the Foresters and other
officers of the Forest to remain and continue still at this day: So that the
same be such Scottals or collections as had a lawful beginning at the first,
as has been showed before, which of necessity must be in one of those three
degrees aforesaid. And also that the foresaid Scottals or collections must be
found and presented by the view of the Regarders upon their oaths when they do
make their regard of the Forest, that the said Scottals or other such like
collections had a lawful beginning at the first, as by Tenure: by Grant: or by
ancient Prescription: so that thereby it may appear by their view and oaths,
that the said Scottals or collections which the Foresters and other officers of
the Forest do so use to make, is a thing that is lawfully done by right and
good title to the same, and not wrongfully exacted upon the people by color of
their office only.

The letter is further, Tot Forestarij ponantur ad Forestas custodiendum quot
ad illas custodiendum rationabiliter viderint sufficere, Before the making of
this Statute the Foresters and keepers of the Forest, and others which had
Bailiwikes of Fee within the Forest would appoint and place many more Foresters
and walkers to keep the Forest then were needful, which multitude of such
officers did oppress the people by sundry Extortions for their maintenance to
keep them because they had no wages or allowance of their masters, but such
things as they could get of the people by oppression and extortion by color of
their office. And therefore, now it is ordained by this Statute for the
avoiding of the same, that there shall not be any more Foresters or Walkers in
any Forest then shall be thought meet and convenient by the discretion of the
Regarders when they do make their regard of the Forest. And if the Regarders do
find that there be more Foresters and walkers than are needful, and also
more then has been accustomed to be in ancient time: Then upon their
presentment of that matter, The Statut of Ordinario Forestae, made in Anno. 34.
E. 1. cap. 4.
They shall be removed by the Justices of the Forest. And the offenders in this
behalf shall be punished, as it does appear by the Statute called Ordinatio
Forestae, Cap 4. in these words: Et si superoneratio Forestarum aut aliorum
qui se gerant vt ministri Forestae inueniatur, amoueantur huiusmodi
superonerantes, Ordinatio Forestae cap 4.
and imprisonentur secundum discretionem Iusticiariorum Forestae vel eius locum
tenent', necnon and illi, per quos positi fuerant ad voluntatem nostram
similiter puniantur, The punishment of surchargers of Forests with officers,
and ad quodlibet Swanimotum inquiratur de superoneratione Forestariorum, and
aliorum ministrorum Forestae, and de eoru^ oppressionibus populo nostro and
fiant inde emende and punitiones, pro vt superius est expressum. Hereby it
appears, that this manner of surcharging of the Forest, is to be inquired of
also in the Court of Swanimote: and then if any such be there found, the same
is to be certified to the Justices of the Forest: And they are to remove such
surchargers of the Forest. The punishment of such offenders is expressed by the
words aforesaid. And it does appear by those words, Quot ad illas Custodiendum
rationabiliter viderint sufficere: that the number of the Foresters and other
officers of the Forest aforesaid are to be established by the discretion and
oath of the Regarders, as it does appear by those words, Viderint sufficere,
and that shall be according to the quantity of the ground of the Forest. For if
the Foresters have diverse Bayliwikes and Walks: In capitulis attachiamentorum.
then there ought to be one Forester or more in every Walk or Bailiwike within
the Forest to walk the same as it is proved by the tenth Chapter de Capitulis
attachiamentor' que voit Quod Forestarij mane surgant and in Balliuam eant and
ibi more faciant vsque ad hora^ nonam and tunc eant ad prandium. Et cito post
prandium redeant in Balliuam suam videlicet, in parts illas vbi non fuerant
ante prandium and ibi eant audientes and insidientes, How and in what manner a
Keeper or Forester shall walk.
ne quis in ea malum faciat vsque ad vesperum. Et sic faciat singulis diebus.
And whereas the words of the Statute are Nullus Forestarius nec Bedellus: It is
to be understood, that this word Bedellus a Bedell is an Officer or servant of
the Forest that does make all manner of garnishments of the Courts of the
Forest, Quid est Bedellus.
and also all manner of Proclamations as well within the Courts of the Forest as
without: and also to execute all the Process of the Forest. He is like unto a
Baily Errant of a Shirife in his County. And here it is also to be noted, that
although the letter of the Statute does speak but of a Forester and a Bedle,
yet nevertheless the same Statute does extend to all other officers in the
Forest, as well as to the Foresters and Bedles, for the Statute was made for the
redressing of one general mischief: and therefore the said Statute shall not
be said to redress it in part, but in all: like as the Statute that does
speak but of the Warden of the Fleet only, and yet the same does extend to
all other Keepers of prisons as well as to the Warden of the Fleet, for as much
as the same statut was made for the redressing of a general mischief, and yet
the letter thereof speaks but only of the Warden of the Fleet: and the like
is of diverse other Statutes.

The letter of the Statute is further as follows: Nullum Swanimotum de cetero
teneatur in regno nostro, nisi ter in anno videlicet, etc.
Carta de Foresta, artic. 8.
THe chief scope of this branch of the Statute tends to this end and purpose
to establish and set down the time certain for the holding of the Courts of
the forest, that is, the Court of Swanimote, and the forty day Court, and that
for two causes. The first is, because that all the officers of the forest and
all others that shall have any thing to do at these Courts of the forest
might by this branch of the Statute know the times of these Courts certain,
which before were uncertain. The Second is, that for as much as before the
making of this Statute there was no time certain lymitted for the holding of
these Courts of the forest: And therefore the chief Wardens and foresters of
the forest did hold the Courts of Swanimotes as often as they themselves would,
and constrained the people which did dwell within forestes thereby to appear
at these Courts so often, that the same was a great oppression unto all the
people of the forests within this Realm, and oftentimes great exactions were
paid by the inhabitants of forests to the officers of the forest, to have
their favor and frindship rather then they would appear so often at those
Courts: therefore now these mischiefs are avoided and provided for by this
Statute, which wills and appoynteth that from the time of the making of this
Statute, the Courts of Swanimote shall be holden but thrice in the year: and
the Statute does also there set down at what days in the year the same Court
shall be kept, Hic ante page 31. Artic. 8. page 18. Art. 8. Vide the Statute, and
there note 4. things.
and where, and what officers and other persons shall be compelled to appear
there, and to give their attendance at these Courts: as it has been showed
before pa. 92. and as the same does appear by the Statute it self at large
here before pa. 31. And whereas the letter of the Statute is, that no Swanimote
from henceforth shall be kept within this our Realm but thrice in the year:
First the xv. day before Michaelmas, when that our Agystors of our Woods do
came together to take agistment in our demeasne Woods. And about the feast of
Saint Martin in Winter, 1. How often the Swanimot shall be holden in a year. 2.
At what days in the year they shall be holden. 3 What officers shall be there.
4 At what place the same shall be kept.
when that our Agistors shall receaiue our pawnage: and to these two Swanimotes
shall come our Foresters, Verderors, Agistors, and none other by distress. The
third Swanimote shall be kept in the beginning of 15. days before the feast of
Saint John the Baptist, when that our Agistors do meet togeether to hunte our
Dear. And at this Swanimote shall meet our Foresters, Verderors and none
other by distress. Yet nevertheless it is to be understood that as the law
is now at this day, all the officers of the Forest ought to appear at every
Swanimote, as the Verderors Regardors, Agistors, Woodwardes, and all other
persons within the compass of the Forest which are free holders, and also de
qualibet villa et villata quatuor homines et propositus: that is to say, of
every Town and Village within the forest, the four men and the Reave: for
although that this Statute of Carta de Foresta were made in the negative of the
Law and usage that was before the time of the making of the same, prohibiting
thereby that no other person but only those before recyted shall be compelled to
come to the said Courts of Swanimote by distress, yet that law is now
alterrd by a later Statute made in Anno 34. Edwardi primi called Ordinatio
Forestae. Vide le brief de Sommons. hic anre page 155 Vide Assisa Forestae,
art. 7.
And also by a Statute made in Anno 1. Edward 3. Caput 8. For the words of the
Statute of 34. of Edward 1. are these, vz, First we have decreed for us and our
Heirs, that of trespasses hereafter to be done in our forestes of green hugh
and of hunting: The foresters within whose bailiwikes such trespasses shall
happen to be committed, shall present the same at their next Swanimote, before
the Foresters, Verderors, Regardors, An. 1. E. 3 c. 8. Hicante Page 41. nota
ibide^, 24
Agistors, and other ministers of the same forest. And upon such presentiments
there before the Foresters, Verderors, and all other ministers aforesaid, by
the oath as well of Knights as of other honest and lawful men of the nearest
parts where the trespass so presented shall be done, not suspected, by whom the
truth of the matter may be fully inquired of, and the truth so inquired of,
the presentiments shall be solemply affirmed and sealed with their Seals, by the
common agreement and assent of all the ministers aforesaid. And if the
indictment be made in any other manner, the same shall be utterly void. So
that now it does appear by this later statut, that the foresters, Verderors,
Regardors, Agistors, and all other ministers of the forest: And also the
freeholders and other honest and lawful men of the forest must of necessity
appear at the Courts of Swanimote, according to this latter Statute, for
otherwise the endictmentes that are there made against trespassers of the
forest are void: for all the officers of the forest must affirm the same
endictment, and the party endicted must be indicted before all the officers of
the forest: Then Ergo all the officers of the forest must of necessi^ie by this
Statute come to the Swanimote Court: And there also must be at the Court of
Swanimote the freeholders of the forest and other good and lawful men, for to
make enquestes and iuries there: for the presentiments there by the words of the
Statute aforesaid must be made per sacramentum tam militum quam alioru^
proboru^ et legaliu^ hominum de partibus vicinoribus vbi etc. Then Ergo there
must be freeholders and other honest men of necessity: notwithstanding the
words of the said Statute of Carta de Foresta aforesaid: and therefore
although that the same Statute does speak but of three sorts of officers,
that is to say, of foresters, Verderors and Regardors, that are compellable to
come to the Court of Swanimot by distress. And also says further: Et nulli
alij per districtionem: Yet notwithstanding the Regardors, Woodwardes, and all
other officers of the forest: And also all the freeholders within the forest,
and the four men, and the Reave of every Village within the forest must come to
the said Courts of Swanimote and give their attendance there: for if any of
them do make default at any Court of Swanimote that is holden within the
forest: every such defaulter shall be amerced for the same default, and the same
amerceme^t shall be estreighted out of the chief Warden of the Forest to leuy
the same by distress: and so by this means every person that ought to give
any attendance at the Courts of Swanimote, shall be compelled to come to the said
Courts of Swanimote by distress, notwithstanding the letter of the Statute
aforesaid.

The letter is, et nulli alij per districtionem.
Now it is to be seen what is meant by this word (per districtionem:) And for
yt it is to be understood, that if any of the officers of the Forest or others,
which ought to give any attendance at the said Courts of Swanimote, and they
will not come to the same but do make default there: then that default there
shall be enrolled in the rolls of the said Court of Swanimote: and upon that
inrollment, the Verderors and the Steward of the Swanimote or his Clarke or
deputy there, by the Oath of the other officers of the same Court, those
which do make default shall be amerced, and that a mercement there shall be
assessed also and estrayted presently to the chief Warden of the forest or to
his deputy, or to the Bedel of the Forest (which is an officer to go
throughout all the Forest, What is meant by this word distress.
like unto the Shirifes special baylife) to be levied by distress. But in
this case the Verderors may choose if they will, whether that they will so
estreat the said amercementes upon the defaulters presently by distress as is
aforesaid, or else to certify those defaultes in their rolls before the
Justices of the Forest: and then the Justices of the Forest will cause writes
to be made out to the chief Warden of the Forest, or to the Shirife of the
Shire where such defaulters do dwell, to leui those said amercements by
distress, or else the Verderors if they will may certify those defaultes into
the Court of Exchequer before the Barons of the said Court of Exchequer: and
then thereupon the Barons of the Exchequer will cause process to be made out to
the Shirife of the Shire to leuy the said amercementes by distress. And there
are sundry very good presidentes to warrant either of these three ways
aforesaid. And concerning distresses, as I do take it, those that do make
defaultes at the said Courts of Swanimote, and the same defaultes being
recorded, then the defaulters may be distrayned to appear at the next
Swanimote of common right: Like as upon an original, where a man is Sommoned
and does not appear, afterward a distress shall go out immediately against
him, and then as it seems, those that do make default there, shall be bound
to a double distress by reason of that default, that is to say, one distress
for the amercement, by reason of his non appearance pro secta sua non facta, The
nature of a distress.
and another for a new appearance at the next Swanimote be it suit real or suit
Service, or else by direct process of common right, like unto a distress
against a Iuror to distraine him to come to the next Swanimote. But now for the
better understanding of the word distress, I will here speak something
concerning the nature of the same: And where distresses may be lawfully made
and taken, in such cases which do concern Swanimotes: and what things may
lawfully be had or taken in execution for distresses. And for that it is to be
understood, that if an officer of the Forest do make default at any Court of
Swanimote, then the chief Warden of the Forest or his Lieutenant or the Bedell
of the Forest may destraine him for that amercement of three shillings, or more
or less, in any land that he has, or does hold by reason of his office, if
he do hold any land so. And in the like manner, he may distrayne any other land
that he has within the Forest, although that the same do not appertain unto
his office: but he cannot distraine him out of the Forest in his lands: but he
may distraine the goods or Cattels of that officer, How distresses ought to be
taken.
although that they be in the lands of any other man within the Forest. And
the same law is of every other man that ought to appear at the said Courts
of Swanimote, as the four men and the Reave, Baylife, Constable, Tithingman,
Freeholder, of Iuror which is Sommoned to appear at the said Court of
Swanimot, to be of any Jury for the Queens Majesty, or any other service
there as in the case is before said. And if the said chief Warden of the Forest,
or his Lieutenant, or the said Bedell of the Forest, which ought to distraine,
cannot find any distress of his within the Forest, then he ought to certify
the same before the Justices of the Forests: and upon a Testatum there, that
such a person which ought to appear at the Court of Swanimote in such a forest
did make default, and for the same he was amerced, and that he has not any
lands nor goods within the Forest that he may be distrayned by, but that he
has sufficient lands within such a County which is out of the Forest: then
upon that Testatum there shall go a write or precept to the Shirife of the
said foren County which is out of the Forest, where he has sufficient of
lands, ad distringendum terras et tenementa cuiusmodi A. B. comitat' illo etc.
And then by virtue of that write or precept the Shirife may lawfully distraine
him there for that amercement: and so you may see that the Justices of the
Forest upon such a Testatum as is before said, may cause a write or precept to
be made to the Shirife of a foren County, that is out of the Forest, to levy
such a mercement by distress: and yet they are not properly Justices within
the said Counties, but Justices of the Forestes within those Counties: and
this is affirmed by the opinion of Master Hesket. Master Hesket Fo, 37.


And if the Bedell of the Forest or other officer do come to distraine for such
an amercement in the Forest, and the owner of the same goods, (which are to be
distrained) knowing thereof by couine does come before that the said Bedell or
other officer has distrained them and does convey them away out of the forest:
in this case, although that such an officer do freshly pursue them: yet he
cannot lawfully take those goods nor distraine them being out of the bounds of
the forest. But if such an officer had taken and once seized the beasts of the
defaulter for such an amercement lawfully as a distress, and then the owner by
force had taken them from him, and so drive them out of the Forest: then the
said Bedell or officer may make hue and cry and freshly pursue after him, and
so take those beasts from the said rescusor in any place wheresoever out of
the Forest. And the same law is, if a stranger do take those beasts from the
Bedell or officer after that he has distrained them, and then does deliver
them to the first owner again which does drive them out of the Forest: then
the said Bedell or officer may lawfully pursue them and take then again. But
if that the beasts distrained vt supra, do come back to the owner again into
his land, that is out of the bounds of the Forest by the negligence of the
Bedell or officer that ought to have impounded them, then the officer cannot
take them again: Master Mesket Fo. 38.
For now the first distress is determined by the coming back again of those
beasts to the first owner, which is done without his act: for in this case it
is not like to a rescous, where the owner of those beasts does come to the
possession of them again by his own wrong.

But if the Bedell or other officer do distraine for any amercecement vt supra,
and then does deliver the same beasts which he has taken by distress to a
stranger to keep to his own use, whereby the stranger to whom they were
delivered so to keep, does drive them to his own land being within the
Forest: and afterward the owner of those beasts does take them out of his
land that has the keeping of them, and drive them out of the Forest: in this
case the Bedell nor other officer can not take them again now being out of the
Forest. But otherwise it is, if that the Bedell or other officer had taken the
distress and delivered the beasts unto a stranger to keep as a distress:
In this case, if the owner take them and do drive them out of the Forest, yet
the Bedell or other officer may freshly pursue them and take them again from
him although that they be without the Forest in a foreign County. Note the
difference where such beasts were delivered to be kept as a distress, and
where to be kept to his own use.

If an officer of the Forest, or other person that ought to appear at the
Swanimote Court, have land within the Forest, and the beasts of a stranger do
escape into his land, by reason whereof the land-tenant does distraine them and
put them in the pound in the same land as in one pound: and then afterward
the Bedell of the Forest does find them there so leuant and cowchant,
afterward he may distraine them for that amercement. But otherwise it is if
those beasts were never leuant and cowchant there.

If the Bedell of the Forest or other officer do break the close or the land
that is enclosed with one ditch and a hedge and a gate with a lock to it, and
does there distraine for such amercement of the same man to whom the land does
belong: That distress is not lawfully taken there. But if the gate be
unlocked, or the hedge do lie open, otherwise it is. And otherwise it is, if
such officers do distraine such beasts in the high way within the Forest out
of any close or enclosure.

And if one be amerced vt supra, and after that he is so amerced, he does
deliver his beasts and his goods that he has so within the Forest to another
in pledge or in morgage: There the Bedell of the Forest nor other officer
cannot afterward distraine them during the pledge or morgage.

But otherwise it is, where issues are returned upon the lands of a freeholder
within the Forest which has made default and lost the issues, and afterward
he does alien that land: there the said Bedel may distrain in that land that
is aliened for those Issues that are lost. And thus much concerning distress.

It were a thing very necessary here in this place to show of what things
distresses may lawfully be made and taken. But because that the same is a
matter that does altogether follow the course of the Common Law, I will here
omit it and referr you to the Register of Writtes in titulo Distresses for that
matter.

The words of the Statute aforesaid are Conueniant Forestarij, viridarij, and
agistatores: It is necessary now here to show what a Forester is, how he is
made, and what his office is. What a Forester is.


And for that it is to be understood that a Forester is an officer of the
Forest of the King, or of another man, That is sworn to preserve the Vert and
Venison of the same Forest, and to attend upon the wild beasts within his
Bailiwike, and to attache offenders there either in Vert or Venison, and the
same to present at the Courts of the same Forest, to the end that such
malefactors may thereby be punished according to the quality and quantity of
their offenses and trespasses.

And a Forester of the Kings Forest is made by the King him self by his
letters Patents under the great Seal of England: And some such Foresters, are
foresters in fee, and have the same office to them and to their heirs, paying
unto the King a certain fee ferme or rent for the same, How a Forester is
made. Who is a Foester of see.
as it does appear by the Assizes of Pickering and Lancaster. And there are
other some foresters of the King that have their office but for term of their
life only. And again, there are some foresters of the King that have their
office by Letters Patents from the King under the great Seal of England but
durante been placito only.

And in like manner it is of other foresters that are not foresters of the King.
Who are Foresters.
And those that are servant to such foresters to look to the Forest, and to
attend the Dear for them, they are not properly called foresters, Walkers or
vnderkeepers.
but Walkers or vnderkeepers.

The oath of a Forester, Walker, and Vnder-keeper, has been showed already
before, Page 51.

The oath of a Forester ante page 51.
Now it is to be seen what is the office of a Forester. And for that it is to
be understood that the whole office of a Forester of the Forest does concist
in these iiii. things, that is to say: To Preserve. 1 To Watch. 2 To Attach. 3
To Present. 4


1 And as concerning the first point, which is to preserve: It is to be
understood, The office of a Forester is to preserve.
that a Forester or Keeper of the Forest must be a special preseruatour of the
Vert and Venison of the Forest, without the which it can be no Forest: And
therefore such an officer must always have a vigilant eye to preserve the
Couerts of the Forest where the wild beasts may have their secret abiding,
and also the wild beasts which are beasts of venerie. And such an officer
may not kill or destroy any of those beasts of Venerie of his own authority
without good Warrant for the same: for if he do, the same is cause of
forfeiture of his office. And also such an officer must be very careful to
provide that the Dear may have food in the Winter: And for that cause the Law
has provided that the Forester may lawfully lop Trees in another man's land
upon some special occasions for browse to succor the Dear in the Forest
withal, as it has been showed before. Like wise every good Forester must be
careful for the looking unto his Dear in the fence-moneth, which is the time
of their fawning, for the preservation of the young Fawnes, for the increasing
of the game, according to the Assizes of the Forest. And thus much concerning
the first point of his office, which is to Preserve.

2 The second point of the office of a Forester is to watch, or to be careful
in attending of the Vert and Venison of the Forest, to see that the same be not
by any means destroyed: For as a Forester himself may not kill nor destroy
any of the wild beasts of the Forest without good warrant, nor yet cut down
or destroy the Vert of the Forest: No more he must not suffer any other person
to do any manner of trespass in the Forest to the hurt of the Vert or Venison of
the same Forest. For it does appear by the Laws of Canutus, Canon. 2. That
Foresters were appointed at the first Ad suscipiendum Curam and onus tum
Viridis tum Veneris.

3 Now the third point of the office of a Forester is to attach offenders or
trespassers in the Forest: So that as a Forester by his office is to be a
Preseruatour of the Vert and Venison of the Forest, and therefore to watch and
attend the same: He is likewise to attach or arrest all such offenders and
trespassers as he shall find offending or trespassing within the Forest, to
the end that they may receive such punishment for the same as the laws of the
Forest does in that behalf appoint.

4 Now the fourth point of the office of a Forester is to present, which is,
that he that is a Forester must not conceal any manner of offense that shall be
done within the Forest by any manner of person, either in Vert or Venison, but
present the same: and also all manner of attachmentes that he has made for any
offense or trespass of the Forest, before the Verderors of the Forest, at the
forty day Court, and at the Court of the Swanimote, according to the assizes
and laws of the Forest, to thend and purpose, that the Vert and Venison of the
Forest may be the better preserved and kept by the due punishment of such as
shall be found to be any trespassers or offenders in the same: And thus ^uch
concerning the office of a Forester.

And now because the words are: Conueniant Forestarij viridarij et agistatores:
It is to be seen what a Verderor is: how he is made, what is his oath, and
also what is his office.

A Verderor is a judicial officer of the Kings Forest, chosen by the King in
the full County of the same shire within the forest where he does dwell, The
definition of a Verderor.
and sworn to maintain and keep the assizes of the Forest, and also to view,
receive and inroll the attachmentes and presentmentes of all manner of
trespasses of the Forest of Vert and Venison.

And it is to be understood, that there are most commonly in every one of the
Kings forests within this Realm four officers of the forest called Verderors,
which ought to be Esquires or gentlemen of good account, ability and living,
which are wise and discreet men and well learned in the laws of the Forest.
The office of a Verderor is almost like unto the office of a Coroner in some
points: for as a Coroner by the law is to view the dead body of any of her
Maiestes Subjects that is suddenly slain or found dead, and it is not known
how he does come by his death, then the Coroner is to repair to the same dead
body upon notice thereof unto him given, to see and view the same, and there
also to inquire by the oath of xii. good and lawful men upon the view of the
same dead body, and such evidences and circomstances as can by any means be
there learned how he came to his death, and who was the occasion thereof. Even
so a Verderor is to view the wild beasts of the Forest: And if any of the
Kings wild beasts in the forest be found slain or sore wounded, or hurt:
then upon notice thereof given unto the Verderors or unto any one of them, then
he ought to repair to the same wild beast that is so slain, killed or hurt,
and there to cause an inquisition to be made per quatuor villatas propinquiores
Forestae, to know how the same wild beast was killed, and by whom: as it does
appear by the assizes of the Forest, Articulo 7. Assisa et co^suetudines
Forestae Artic. 7.
And so a Verderor in that respect is an officer like unto a Coroner. And it is
to be noted, that even as a Coroner is chosen by the Kings write in the full
County: So is a Verderor also, for when any of the Kings Verderors of his
Forest is dead, then upon certificat thereof made unto the King in his high
Court of Chauncery that T. Barfoote one of the Verderors of the Forest of
Waltham is dead, How a Verderor is made.
the king thereupon does grant out a write de viridario eligendo directed to
the Shirife of the same Shire, within which the Forest is, where he is to be
chosen Verderor, commanding him in his full County to choose another Verderor
in the place of him that is dead, the tenor of which write is as follows.

Elizabetha dei gratia Angliae, Frantiae, et Heberniae, The write de viridario
eligendo.
Regina fidei defensor etc.
vic' Essex salut'
quia Tho. Barfote nuper vnus viridarior' nostrorum Forestae nostrae mortuus
est vt accepimus, ideo tibi praecipimus quod si ita est, tunc in pleno com^ tuo
de assensu eiusdem com^ loco praed'Thomae Barfote eligi facias vnum alium
viridarium, qui prestito sacramento provt moris est, extunc ea faceret et
conseruaret quod ad officium viridarij pertinet in Foresta praedict' et talem
eum eligi facias qui melius sciatet possit officio illi intendere et nomen eius
nobis scire facias

test etc.
By which write it appears that a Verderor shall be chosen in the full
County, in the same manner as a Coroner is, by the freeholders. So that when
the Shirife has received the Kings write aforesaid for the choosing of an
other Verderor, and that he by virtue of the same write in his full county
has caused the freeholders there to elect a wise, discreet, sufficient and
able man, See the oath of a Verderor at large before page 51.
to serve in the said place of a Verderor, and that the same Shirife has
given unto him an oath according to the Tenor of his write, which is, that
from henceforth the same Verderor shall observe and do those things which unto
the office of a Verderor does appertain within the same Forest: And then this
election of such a new Verderor togeither with his name must be certified into
the Court of Chauncery by the same Shirife, in his return made of the same
write: and in this sort a Verderor is made, and no otherwise then this no man
may be made a Verderor of any Forest of the Kings.

Fitzh. fo. 164
And if any Verderor of the kings Forest be discharged from his office by falce
suggestion by a write of the Kings, directed to the Shirife: then the party or
Verderor so discharged, may come into the Chauncery and there require a
commission to inquire of that suggestion, and to certify that inquiry in the
Chauncery before the King: or the Justices of the Forest may certify the King
of that falce suggestion under their Seals. And if the same suggestion be
found false, then the King may make a supersedeas to the Shirife, that he shall
not remove the said Verderor etc. And if that he be removed already, that
then he shall still suffer him to use and occupy the said office of a
Verderor as he did before. And thus much concerning the making of a Verderor
and also his oath, which you may see set down at large here before page 51.
And if any Verderor, Forester, or any other minister of the Forest, be
compelled by the Shirif to any Assizes Iuries or inquestes they may have a writ
directed to the Shirife to discharge them, as it does appear in Fitzherberts
N^atura breuium.

Vide Natura breuiu^, Fitzh. fo. 167. a The office of a Verderor.
And now concerning the last point, which is, the office of a Verderor, and
what the office of a Verderor is: and in what things the same does chiefly
consist: it is therefore to be understood that the whole office of a Verderor
does consist in these six things, that is to say: 1 Ad videndum. 2 Ad
inquirendum. 3 Ad recipiendum. 4 Ad inbreuiandum. 5 Ad iudicandum. 6 Ad
certificandum.


And as concerning the first point, which is, Ad videndum to see and to view,
It is to be noted that a Verderor ought to view the Vert and Venison of the
Forest, Assisa Forestae Artic. 3
as it appears in Assisa Forestae Articulo 3. in these words: Si quis
inuentus fuerit extra dominicum boscum et infra rewardum prosternens quercum
sine visu aut liberatione Forestarij aut viridarij debet attachiari per quatuor
plegios et per visum viridar' debet quercus apreciari, et in Rotulo Forestar'
et viridarior' nomina pleg. imbreuiari: By which Article it is proved, that if
an Oak being over Vert within the Forest, be felled or cut down out of the
Kings demeasne Woods, the same Oak is to be apprised by the view of the
Verderors. And also, as to the fourth point of the office of a Verderor, which
is, Ad inbreuiandum, to inroll, It is also there provided that the Verderors
ought to inroll their apricement and view in their roll.

And it does also appear in Assisa Forestae Articulo 19. that the Verderors of
the Forest ought to take inquisitions of matters of the Forest, and of
trespasses of the Forest, Assisa Forestae Artic. 19
as well of Vert as of Venison, and those inquisitions they must inroll in their
roll likewise, and also certify the same before the Lord Justice in Air of
the Forest at his next coming into the Forest to hold the general Sessions of
the Forest. Carta de Foresta, cap. 8
And it does also appear by Carta de Foresta cap 8. that the office of a
Verderor is, Ad videndum attachiamenta de Foresta tam de viridi quam de
venatione per presentationem ipsorum Forestariorum: So that it does thereby
appear that the office of a Verderor is, both to view the attachments of the
Foresters, and also to receive their attachements and to inroll them in the
rolls of the Verderors, and then it follows that all those rolls of the
Verderors must be by the said Verderors certified to the Justices of the
Forest at their coming into the same Forest to hold their general Sessions of
the Forest, Assisa Forestae Articulo 19.
as it does appear in Assisa Forestae Articulo 19. And also the Verderors
office in some causes is to judge of offenses and trespasses that are committed
and done within the Forest, as of trespasses in Vert, the value thereof being
under the some of four pence. And it does appear by the Assizes of Lancaster
and Pickring, that the entry of the plees of the Forest are thus, presentatum
per Forestarios et conuictum per viridarios: Whereby it does appear that the
office of a Verderor is a judicial place or office: and this much concerning
the office of a Verderor.

The letter of the Statute is farther: Et Agistatores.
IT is therefore now very necessary here in this place to declare what an
Agestor is, how an Agistor is made, and what his office is. And for that it is
to be understood that an Agistor or gistaker of the King, The definition of an
Agistor,
is an officer of the Kings Forest, to ouersee and to agist the Kings demesne
Woods and lands, and to receive the Kings Pawnage, and to do for the profit of
the King therein the best he can, Assisa H. 2.
and to make a true acount thereof.

And it does appear by the Assizes of Henry 2. that the Agistors of the Kings
Forest are made in the same manner as the Foresters of the Kings Forest are
made, How an agistor is made.
and that is by the Kings letters pattents under the great Seal of England, as
it has been showed here before. And it does appear there also that the King
has in every Forest where he has any Pawnage, four Agistors or gistakers, to
receive the agistment and Pawnage for the King: For the words are these, Quod
in quolibet com^ in quo dominus Rex venatione^ suam habet, ponantur duodecim
milites ad ostend'et supervidendum venatitionem suam et quod viridarij cum
Forestarijs et quatuor militibus ponantur ad agistandu^ boscos et recipiendu^
paunagiu^ suum: And by these words it does appear that the office of an
Agistor is to agist the Kings demesne Woods, and to receive the Pawnage thereof
to the use of the King, and to render an account thereof.

And it is to be understood, that the office of an Agistor of the Kings Forest
does consist in these four things, that is to say: 1 Ad agistandum 2 Ad
recipiendum. 3 Ad inbreuiandum. 4 Ad certificandum.


And concerning the first point, that is to say, Ad agistandum, which is to
agist the Kings demesne Woods and lands: he that is an Agistor of the Kings
Woods within the Forest, must have an especial care to agist the same for the
best advantage and profit of the King, and also to receive the Money for the
agistment and pawnage for the same to the use of the King, and then he must
faithfully and truly inroll the same in the Agistors rolls of the Forest,
which inrolling and receipt of the said Agistment and Pawnage, the said
Agistors must also certify before the Lord Justice in Air of the forest at
his next coming into the forest, to hold the general Sessions of the forest,
and thereupon to make a true account of such Money as they have received for
Pawnage or otherwise to the Kings use, as it does appear by the wrte of
Summons of the Justice Seat of the forest: And thus much concerning an Agistor
of the Kings forest.

The Letter of the Statute of Carta de Foresta Articulo the 9. is further as
follows, Vnusquisque liber homo agistet boscum suum in Foresta, pro voluntate
sua, et habeat Paunagium suum, concedimus etiam quod vnusquisque liber homo
ducere possit porcos suos per dominicu^ bosc' nostru^ libere et sine
impedimento ad agistandu^ eos in boscis suis proprijs vel alibi vbi uoluer it.
Et si porci alicuius liberi hominis vna nocte pernoctauerint in foresta nostra,
non inde occasionetur vnde aliquid de suo perdat.
THe Law of the Forest before the making of that Charter of the Liberties, was
that no man might agist his Woods or lands which he had within the Forest,
until the Woods of the King were agisted, and the agistment of the King did
alwaie begin fiftene days before the feast of Saint Michel, and did endure
forty days after the feast of Saint Michell: And that agistment of the kings
shall be made by the Verderors Agistors, and Foresters, as it does appear by the
Assizes of the Forest of Henry 2. Cap. 7. for all the herbage throughout all
the Forest before that time of the year, Assisa Forestae H. 2.
every year was kept and preserved for the wild beasts of the King for their
pasture. And if any person did the contrary, then they were grievously
punished. And also if any had Woods within the Forest to be agisted he might
not drive his Hoggs through the demesne Woods of the King to his own Woods,
without license of the officers of the Forest. Or if the Hoggs agisted in those
Woods did chance to escape by night out of the Woods where they were agisted
into the Kings Woods, then the owner of those Hoggs was grievously punished
for that matter: and also the Hoggs by the law were forefeited by the
presentment of the officers of the Forest. So that by such means, a man that
then had Woods or lands within the Forest, should have great damage, prejudice
and loss of the profit of his lands or woods, and the agistment there fore the
greatest part of the year: and for the remedy of these matters, that Charter
of the liberties of the forest was made, which said Charter of the liberties
of the Forest does now give unto every such man that has Woods within the
Forest, a very great liberty, which is, that he may agist his own Woods or
lands which he has within the Forest at his own will and pleasure at any time
of the year: And also that he may take the pawnage of them him self at his
own will and pleasure: And also that he may drive his Hoggs or Swine through
the Demeasne Woods of the King, without any vexation or troble to agist them in
his own Woods or else where there. And though that the Hoggs of any other
person do remain all one night damage fesant within the Kings Forest, yet
notwithstanding he whose Hoggs they were shall not be impeached or lose any
thing for that offense: But for as much as this letter of the Statute of Carta
de Foresta was so general a liberty given unto all men, therefore the Assizes
and customs of the Forest made in Anno 6. Edwardi. 1. Caput 13. has made one
especial lymitation and order concerning Swine or Hoggs, which is, that
although they are not beasts comminable within the Forest, nor to be kept there
all the whole year, Page 4
but only during the time of Pawnage, yet a man may agist his Hoggs yearly
within the Forest in the time of Pawnage, as it does appear in the words of
the same Statut, the words being as follows: Si quis habuerit boscum iuxta
dominicum boscum domini Regis, Assisa Forestae cap 13
licitum est ei postquam dominice haie agitate sunt habere in bosco suo tempore
paunagij tot porcos quot boscus per visum forestariorum viridariorum
regardatorum agistatorum et aliorum proborum hominum possit pati, et hoc fiat
etc.

And so it does appear that the agisting of the Hoggs of any man at this day
within his own demesne Woods within the Forest, cannot lawfully be done until
the demeasne hedge-rowes and hedges of the King be agisted, and then he shall
have the agistment for Hoggs during the time of the Pawnage yearly, What is
Agistment.
by the view of the officers of the Forest, and by their discresion assigned as
the Woods may sustain. But now here it is very necessary to show what thing
agistment is, and what thing Pawnage is. And for that it is to be understood,
that agistment is most properly the common of Harbage, What is Pawnage.
of any kind of ground or land or Woods, or the Money due for the same. And
Pawnag is most proper the mast of the Woods or land, or hedg-rowes or the Money
that is due to the owner of the same for it.

Master Hesket in his reading of the Charter of the Forest, says that the
Pawnage is not the pasture and mast for the Hoggs within the Forest, but says
he, Master Hesket fo. 48.
it is the duty or Money that is to be paid to the owner of the ground, for
the pasture feeding and Mast of Hoggs. And he says further, that the same has
been so adjudged in the time of Edward the first, but he does not show in what
year, but he sets down the case in these words.

Trespass fuit port per un home pur entrer in son park and oue ses au^s son
pawnage la depasta. Et le brief fuit abate per agard del Court. Car le brief
doit estre que il oue ses auers pessonem suam la depasta et nemi vt supra, Car
le pawnage est solement les deniers pays pur cest pession.

The Letter is, vnusquisque liber homo
And if a man do hold of me in villanage certain Wood with in the Forest, yet
notwithstanding he may agist his own wood for he is free against all men but
only against me. But the law is contrary, if a villain of the Kings do hold
Wood within the Forest, for it is properly such a villain that the Statute
does mean: for such a villain has not any liberty by this letter of the
Statute: and in that case the King shall have his agistment and not his
villain.

If I do give land or Wood lyinge within the Forest to another in tail,
Frankemariage, or for term of life, the donee or grauntee shall have agistment
and pawnage there.

The same law is if I do let my land or Wood within the Forest to one for
term of life or for years, or at will, such a lessee shall have the agistment
and pawnage there, but the law is contrary of tenant by sufferance.

Carta de Foresta. cap. 10.
The words of the Statute of Carta de Foresta caput 10. are Further as
follows. Nullus de cetero amittat vitam vel membrum pro venatione nostra. Sed
si quis captus fuerit et conuictus de captione venationis nostre grauiter
redimatur si he^at vnde redimi possit. Si autem non habeat vnde redimi possit,
iaceat in prisona nostra per vnum annum et vnum diem et si post vnum annu^ and
vnum diem pleg. inuenire possit, exeat de prisona, sin autem abiuret regnum
Anglie. etc.
AT the commmn Law before the making of this Charter, if any man had killed the
Kings Venison or his Dear in his Forest, then such killing was felony by the
law, and for that offense such an offender should by the law lose and forfeit
as well his life and member, as all that he had, at the will and pleasure of the
King. And in ancient time, that was called plena vita, hoc est, plena
forisfactura: and then the same was taken as a forfeiture and offense, as if a
man had fought and broken the peace within the Kings house or his hostell in
war, or before the Justices of the King sitting in the time of peace in their
Judicial seat, which Judicial seat is by the law a place priuileged and a
peaceable place as the Forest is for the preservation of the kings wild
beasts, in which cases it was then felony to kill them, and the offender
should lose his life by the law for such an offense, or else if he did not lose
his life for that offense, then he was to make a grievous raunsom for the same,
as it does appear in the ancient laws of Saint Edward in his book, fo. 69.
And afterward in the time of William the Conqueror, Legibus Sancti Edwardi,
fo. 69
in the end of his decrees that he made and set down for laws: he wills
that no man shall lose his life for any such offenses, but only that such an
offender shall be punished by the loss of some of his members, which decree is
there set down in these words: Interdicimus etiam ne quis occidatur vel
suspendatur pro aliqua culpa, Les decrees del William la Conqueror.
sed evelluntur oculi, et abscindantur pedes vel testiculi vel manus, ita quod
truncus vnius remaneat in signum nequitii sui and secundum quantitatem delicti
debet pena maleficientis infligi: And this law in some cases does endure until
this day: As at the Common Law, if a man do make an affeaie within the Kings
Palace, the offender shall lose in that case his right hand: The Statut of An
33. H. 8 41. Assisarum.
and this was the Common law before the making of the Statute of An. 33. H. 8.
as it does appear in 41. Assisarum, where the case was, that a man was endited
and arraigned, for that he did strike a Iuror in the Palace at Westminster
which had passed against him: which said stroke was given in the presence of
the Justices: Striking in the Kings palace or in the presence of the Justices.
for the which he had his judgment that he should remain in prison in the
Tower during his life, and also that his right hand should be cut off, and that
the issues and profits of his lands should be forfeited unto the King during
his life, but his heir should not be disinherited. And the very like case is
adjudged in Anno 19. E. 3. and also in M. 22. of E. 3, Where an Esquire of good
account which drew his sword to strike another person in the presence of the
Justices, 19. E. 3. M. 22. E 3.
of which offense he was afterward convicted and had his judgment for the
same to have his right hand cut off: and he was also for the same offense
committed to Newgate, there to remain as in the case before recited. And
therefore now this grant and Charter of the Liberties has provided a remedy
for this extremity in these words, Nullus amittat vitam vel membrum, which is
a very great liberty unto all the Kings Subjects. And it is also a restraint
and an abridgement of the Kings will and pleasure, upon which the punishment of
such offenders did then only depend, which at that time was uncertain, where
as now the same is a most certain punishment appointed for those that do hunt
the Kings wild beasts: for the words are Provenatione etc. So that the same
Charter is now a general pardon to all men of life and member for all offenses
of hunting the Kings wild beasts of Venery. Pro venatione.
And because the letter is pro Venatione, it is necessary to consider what
beasts are called beasts of Venerie or the Kings Venison, and therefore it
appears as it has been showed before, that there are five wild beasts that
are accounted beasts of the Forest, that is to say, the Heart, the Hynde, the
Hare, the Boar, and the Wolf. And there are also five beasts remaining in
the Forest that are accounted beasts of Chase, that is to say, the v. beasts
of the Forest. The v. beasts of the Chase.
the Bucke, the Do, the Fox, the Martron, and the Roo. And there are also
diverse other wild beasts in the Forest, that although they are not beasts of
the Forest, nor beasts of Chase, yet they are accounted beasts of Venery, and
this Charter of Pardon of life and member does extend to the hunting and
killing of any beasts of Venery, according to the letter of the said Charter
which is, pro Venatione, which entendeth also to all manner of Hawking and
destroying of Fowls of Warren and Fishing in any viuarie within any Forest
where such kind of things are that are fere naturae.

The letter is further, Sed si quis captus and conuictus, etc. Which is as much
in effect, as if the words had been, That if the offender be taken and
attainted of the Trespass or offense by the course of the Laws of the Forest.
But if the defendant upon an Indictment do confess the offense, or will say
nothing at all to it: or will make default after his appearance, if the same do
pass the Swanimote in due form of Law, according to the Statute called
Ordinatio Forestae, Ordinatio Forestae, An. 34. E. 1. An. 1. E. 3. ca. 8
and according to the Statute of Anno primo of Edward the third, Cap. 8. then
such an offender shall be said to be convicted. And when any offender is thus
convicted, he shall make his fine for the same offense: For the letter is
further, Grauiter redimatur, and that is as much to say, The offender so
convicted must be grievously redeemed, or make a grievous Fine or ransom for
his offense. The diversity between a Fine and a Ransom.
And it is said that there is a great diversity between a fine and a
ransom: For a fine is arbitrable by the Justices of the King, and is to be
assessed by them without the King. But a ransom is not to be assessed by the
Justices of the King only, but that the King shall first therein show his
pleasure and will. And therefore it does seem that in this case the recompense
for such an offense is to be called a fine and not a ransom, because the
Justices of the Forest do assesse the same without making of the King privy to
it first as common experience does daily prove, and ancient presidents of the
Laws of the Forest confirm the same.

And thus having passed over 10. articles of the Charter of the Forest, I will
here end and leave the rest to others of better learning and judgment to
handle. And because it is very necessary to see and know the manner of the
making of a Forest, and of the dissaforesting of a Forest again: I will now
here set down the Charter of the Puraley, to the end that it may thereby
appear in what manner a Forest is made: And as a Forest is made, in like
manner the same is made a Puraley and dissaforested again, as it shall appear
by this President hereafter following.

Charta de Foresta caput. 1. Ad ordeigne que touts Forests que Henricus auus
noster aforestauit videantur per bonos and legales homines and si etc. Et
postea pur le plus speedy remedy de fair Puraleys del Forests and
perambulations fuit ordain in An. 1. E. 3. cap. 1. Statut. 2. que le graund
Charter de la Forest soit guard in touts points et que la poner il que estoit
Chiuache in temps le Roy E. ayel le Roy qui ore est se ^eigne in la form qui
estoit Chiuache and bound and que sur ceo soit Charter fait a chescun County
and ore al intent que poit in plus ample manner ceo intend'ieo aie icy escrie le
perfect manner and form de ceo.
ICy comence le Process de la Puraley de Windsor fait en le County de Surrey au
parliament tresnoble seignior nostre Seignior le Roy Edward 3. apres le
conquest summons and tenus a Westm' lan de son reign primer.

1 Au quel Parliament al comp. des Prelates, Countes, Barons and la Co^munaltie
del Royalme fait au Roy que les Purales en temps treshonorable Roy Edward aiel
nostre seigniour le Roy Edward quorest graunts and confirms ne furent mye
gardes: et auscuns Puraleys en diverse Forestes nient faits remistrent a fair
en temps le Roy Edward piere nostre seigniour le Roy quorest: nostre seigniour
le Roy a lour priere graunta que les puraleyes deuant faits grauntes and
confirms dishore enauant fuissent tenus and gardes. Et que les Purales qui
remistrent a fair per ses feaux and leaux a ceo assigns fuissent faits a plus
en haste come les porrent tonement fair, Et come les fuissent faits et ensa
Chauncellerie retornes, and per certain bounds and metes que les confirmeret
per sa Charter pur luy and pur ses heirs a garder and a teni^' a touts iours.
Et nostre seigniour le Roy de ceste sa bon volunte en Parliament fait and
graunta en chescun County Dengleterre sa Charter aeux qui voylent sure que
mestr' en auaunt: per que la Comunaltie de County de Surr' qui se senti grieve
en la dit Forest de Windsor deins launds del dit County de Surr' auantdit sui
dauoir la dit Charter nostre seigniour le Roy aseale et aneyent tesmonsant sa
volunte auauntdite come plus pleignement est contenus per exemplification de la
dit Charter la quel demoort en labre de Certesey a garder.

2 Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquit'. Omnibus
ad quos presents literae peruenerint salutem. Sciatis quod cum celebris
memory Dominus E. quondam Rex Angliae Auus noster dudum fideles suos
assignass' ad perambulationes in forestis suis tam citra Trentam qua^ vltra
faciend'et postmodum quasdam perambulationes in aliquibus forestar' illar' sub
certis metis and boundis in eisdem content' factas and returnatas per litteras
suas Patentes pro se and haered'suis co^cess. and confirmasset ceteraque
precepisset per praedictas metas and bundas imperpetuum obseruari,
perambulationibus huiusmodi tempore dicti aui nostri in aliquibus Forestis
remanentibus faciend', ac dominus E. nuper Rex Angl'pater noster in parliam'
suo nuper apud Lyncoln' conuocat' ad supplicationem Prelator' Comit' Baronum
and Coi^tatis regni sui asserentium dictas perambulationes factas obseruatas
non fuisse iuxta concessionem and confirmationem praedictas. Et perambulationes
huiusmodi alibi factas non fuisse per litteras suas patentes quin^o die Augusti
Anno regni sui decimo, concesserit pro se, and haeredibus suis quod
perambulationes praed'per dictum auum nr' concesse and confirmate sicut
praed'est sub metis and bundis in dictis litteris patentibus ipsius aui nostri
con^' and specificat' teneantur and imperpetuum obseruerentur, Promittens quod
fideles suos ad perambulationes in forestis in quibus tune factae non fuerunt
faciend'assignari faceret Ita quod perambulationes ille fierent ante festum
Natal'Domini tune proxim^ futur' and quod perambulationes illas cum fact
fuissent and returnate per litteras suas patentes quas in eisdam contingent
contineri pro se and haered'suis confi^maret prout in hijs literis patent'
ipsius patris nostri super hoc confectis before continetur. Ac etiam
insinuatione Prelator', Comit', Baron' et totius coi^tatis regni nostri in
instanti parliamento nostro apud Westminster conuocat' accepimus quod tempore dicti
patris nostri perambulationes praed'per dictum auum nostru^ vt premittitur
concesse and confirmate non fuerint obseruate and quod perambulationes
huiusmodi non factae remanserunt faciend'per quod nobis cum instantia
supplicarunt vt perambulationes per dict' auum nostrum vt permittitur concessas
and confirmatas confirmare and ratificare velimus. Ac etiam perambulationes
quae nondum factae sunt fieri facere indilate. Nos eorum supplicationi in hac
part fauorabiliter annuentes concedimus pro nobis and haered'nostris quod
perambulationes praed'per praefat' auum nostru^ concesse and confirmate sub
metis and bundis in dictis litteris ipsius aui nostri contentis and
specificatis teneantur and imperpetuum obseruentur. Et volumus quod
perambulationes quae in aliquibus forestis adhuc restant faciend'per fideles
nostros ad hoc assignand'fiant sub ea celebritate qua fieri poterunt bono modo.
Quas quidem perambulationes cum fact fuerint and nobis returnate sub metis and
bundis quas in eisdem inueniri contigerit per litteras nostras paten' pro nobis
and haered'nostris confirmari and approbari faciemus. In cuius rei testimonium
has litteras nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test meipso apud Westminster xxiij.
die Martij, Anno regni nostri primo.

Per ipsum Regem and Cons. 3 Puis apres la dit comminaltie de County de Surrey
que se sentz grieve de ceo que la Purale ne fuit pas fait en la Forest de
Windsor en le dit county de Surrey en temps le Roy Edward aiel nostre
seigniour le Roy E. querust ne en temps le Roy Edward son piere ne uncore
remist a fair and a chiuacher la dit comminaltie per virtue de la Charter
nostre seigniour le Roy come plus pleignerement est contenus en la dit Puraley
qui en suit.

4 Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, dominus Hiberniae and Dux Aquit' dilectis
and fidelibus suis Thom. Tregorr, Iohanni de stonore, Iohanni de Ifeld, and
Iohanni Dabnoum, salutem. Sciatis quod cum in parliamento nostro apud Westm'
conuocato per Prelatos, Comites, Barons, and communitatem regni nostri
asserentes quod fuisset supplicatum vt nos eas sic factas per dictum Auum
nostrum concessas and confirmatas easdem concessionem and confirmationem in
omnibus obseruari and in forestis vbi dictae perambulationes remanent
faciend'eis fieri and factas in forma praedicta confirm' curaremus assignauimus
vos duos and tres vestrum quorum vos praefat' Iohanne^ de stonore vnum esse
volumus custodem forest' nostr' citra Trentam Nota que la fuit un chief keeper
de touts Forestes citra Trent, que est le chief garden del Forest mention in le
statute de An. 1. E. 3. cap. and Stat. 1. hic ante, page 42
vel ipsum quem posuerit loco suo and omnes forestar' de feod'and viridar'
forestar' nostrar' in Com' Surr' ad perambulationem rectam per visum trium vel
duor' viror' quorum vos praefat' Iohanne^ de Stonore vnum esse volumus and
illorum in forestis nostris in eodem Com' in quibus dictae perambulationes
tempore dict' aui nostri fact non fuerunt per Sacrn^' tam Militum quam alior'
proborum and legaliu^ hominum de eodem Com' per quos rei veritas melius scir'
and perambulationes ille fieri poterunt faciend'iuxta tenor' cartae domini
Henric' quondam Regis Angliae proaui nostri de foresta. Et idco vobis mandamus
quod ad certos dies and loca quos vos tres vel duo vestrum quorum vos praefat'
Iohanne^ de Stonore vnum ^sse volumus ad hoc prouidentes premissa faciatis in
forma praedicta. Ita quod perambulationes praed'fiant and nobis returnentur
citra festum Natalis Domini prox' futur'. Mandauimus enim vic. nostro Com'
praed'quod ad certos dies and loca quos vos tres vel duo vestrum quorum vos
praefat' Iohanne^ de Stonore vnum esse volumus and scire faciatis and venire
faciatis coram vobis tribus vel duobus vestrum quorum vos praefat' Iohanne^ de
Stonore vnum esse volumus tot. and tales tam milites quam alios probos and
legales homines de Com' praedicto per quos rei veritas melius sciri and
perambulat' praedict' fieri poterint sicut praedictum est. Et perambulationem
illam distinct et aperte sic facta^ nobis sub sigillis vestris trium vel
duorum vestrum quoru^ vos praef. Iohanne^ de Stonore vnum esse volumus et
sigill'eorum per quos factae fuerint reportetis ante festu^ suprad'vt eam
confirmemus iuxta concessionem nostram dictis magnatibus inde fact'. In cuius
rei testimonium has litteras nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test meipso apud
Westminster xx. die Martij, Anno regni nostri primo.

Per ipsum Regem and Cons. 5 Et pur ceo que la dit Commission en fait mention
que le vic. de Surr' feit venit' deuaunt les Justices a certain iour and lieu
per eux assigns bones and loyaux Chiualers and auters del dit County pur la
dit Purale fair, nostre seigniour le Roy horse de sa Chaunceller maunda son
brief al dit viscount de Surr' en garrant de la dit chose fair come plus
pleinement est contenus en la dit brief qui ensuit.

6 Edwardus Dei gracia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae and Dux Aquit' vic' Surr'
salutem. Sciatis quod cum in parliamento nostro nuper apud Westminster conuocat' per
praefatos Comites, Barons, and communitatem regni nostri asserentes quod
perambulationes tempore domini E. quondam Regis Angliae Aui nostri in forestis
suis tam citra Trentam quam vltra factae non fuerunt obseruat' nobis fuisset
supplicatum vt nos sic factas per dictum auum nostrum concessas and confirmatas
iuxta easdem concessionem and confirmationem in omnibus obseruari and in
forestis vbi dict' perambulationes remanent faciend'eas fieri and factas in
forma praedicta' confirmare curaremus, assignauimus dilectos, and fideles
nostros Thom. Tregorr', Iohannem de Stonore, Iohannem de Ifeld, Iohannem
Dabnon, tres vel duos eorum quorum praefat' Iohannem de Stonore vnum esse
volumus ad conuocand'in prae sentia eorundem Thom. Iohannis, Iohannis, and
Iohannis, trium vel duor' eor' quor' praefat' Iohannem de Stonore vnum esse
volumus custodem forestae nostrae citra Trentam vel ipsum quem posuerit loco
suo and omnes Forestar' de feodo and viridar' forestar' nostrar' in Com' Surr'
ad perambulationem rectam per visum eorum vel duor' eorum quorum praefat'
Iohannem de Stonore vnum esse volumus in forestis nostris in Com' praed'in
quibus perambulationes tempore dict' aui nostri fact' non fuerunt per sacrm^
tam militum quam alior' probor' and legal'hominum de Com^ tuo per quos rei
veritas melius sciri and perambulationes ille fieri poterint faciend'iuxta
tenorem cartae domini Henrici quondam Regis Angliae proaui nostri de Foresta.
Nota que la fuit un chief garden del Forest.
Et ideo tibi precipimus qd'ad certos dies and loca quos ijdem Thomas,
Johannes, Johannes, and Johannes, tres vel duo eorum, quorum Iohannem de
Stonore vnum esse volumus tibi scir' faciant, venire faciatis coram eis tribus
vel duobus eorum quorum praefat' Iohannem de Stonore vnum esse volumus tot, and
tales tam milites quam alios probos and legales homines de Com^ praedict' per
quos rei veritas melius sciri and pera^bulac' praed'fieri poterint sicut
praed'est. Et habeas ibi hoc breue. Test me ipso apud Westm' xx. die Martij,
annoque regni nostri primo.

Per ipsum Regem and Cons.

7 Et pur ceo que la dit commission veloit que les Justices nostre seigniour le
roy facent appeller a eux le gardeine de la Forest citra Trent ou son
lieutenant a la Purale fair droiture me^t per virtue de ceo commission les
dits Justices maunderont lour brief au dit gardeine ou a son lieutenant quils
fuissent a certain iour and lieu ou le dit brief limit enfemblement onestes
eux a la dit chose fair solonc ceo que plus pleignement est contenus en le dit
brief que sensuit.

8 Thomas Tregorr', Johannes de Stonore, Johannes de I^^ld and Johannes Dabnon
custod'forestae domini nostri Regis citra Trentam and eius locum tenen' in Com'
Surr', salutem. Cum in parliamento domini nostri Regis nuper apud Westm'
conuocat' per Prelatos, Comites, Barons, and coi^tatem regni asserentes quod
perambulationes tempore dicti Edwardi quondam regis Angliae aui sui in Forestis
suis tam citra Trenta^ qua^ vltra fact non fuerunt obseruat'. Et eidem domino
Regi supplicatum fuiss. vt ipse eas sic factas per dictum auum suum co^cessas
and confirmatas iuxta easdem concessionem and confirmationem in omnibus
obseruari, Et in forestis vbi dict' perambulationes remanent faciend'eas fieri
and factas in forma praedicta confirmare curaret. Idem dominus noster Rex
assignauit nos tres, and duo nostrum quorum Iohannem de Stonore vnum esse vult
ad conuocandum in presentia nostra trium vel duorum nostrum, quorum Iohannem de
Stonore vnum esse vult custodem Forestae suae citra Trentam vel ipsum quem
posuerit loco suo and omnes forestar' de feodo and viridar' forestar' suarum in
dicto Com' Surr' ad perambulat' rectam per visum nostrum trium vel duorum
nostrorum quorum Iohannem de Stonore vnum esse vult and illor' in forestis suis
in eodem Com' in quibus perambulationes tempore dict' Aui sui fact non fuerunt
per sacram' tam militum quam alior' proborum and legal'hominum de eodem Com'
per quos rei veritas melius sciri and perambulationes ille fieri poterint
faciend'iuxta tenorem Chartae domini H. quondam Rex Angliae proaui sui de
foresta. Et quia dominus Rex nobis mandauit quod conuocari fac' custodem
forestae suae citra Trentam vel ipsum quem loco suo posuerit in dict' Com'
Surr', ad perambulac' rectam faciend'nos pretextu illius mandati assignauimus
die essendi apud Certesyam die Lunae proxim' post quindenam sancti Iohannis
Baptistae ad incipiend'de negotio supradic' ad perficiend'exinde ad dictam
perambulationem faciend'quem diem vobis signauimus, vt vos ad diem praedictam
ibidem personaliter intersitis vel ipsi quem loco vestro posueritis ibidem
intersint. Ita quod dicta perambulac' per visum vestrum, nostrum and alior' ad
hoc sum' recte fieri possit secundum Tenorem Chartae domini H. quondam Regis
Angliae proaui domini Regis de Foresta.

9 Et ausi pur la commission purporte que les Foresters de Fee and les Veredors
de la Forest auantdit en le Counce de Surr' a la dit Puraley fair fuissent a
iour et lieu ass. les dits Justices maunderent brief de garnishment as dits
ministers quil fuissent illock and que eux feissent garnir les restoants deins
la Forest auaunt dit en le dit County en la querque la Puraley en temps le Roy
Edward aiel nostre seigniour le Roy Edward quorest ne fuit pas fait ne Chiuache
ne quils fuissent illock a iour and lieu a Chiuacher and a feire dreit and
leife Puraley come appiert en le brief qui sensuit.

10 Thomas Tregorr', Johannes de Stonore, Johannes de Ifeld and Johannes
Debnon, dilectis sibi Forestar' de feodo and viridar' forest' domini Regis in
Com' Surr', salutem. Cum in parliamento domini Regis apud Westm' conuocat' per
Prelatos, Comites, Barons, and coi^tatem regni asserent' quod perambulationes
tempore domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae aui sui in Forestis suis tam citra
Trentam quam vltra fact non fuerunt obsecrat' and eidem domino supplicatum
fuisset vt ipse eas sic factas per dictum auum suum concessas and confirmatas
iuxta easdem concessionem and confirmationem in omnibus obseruari, and in
forestis vbi dicte perambulationes remanent faciend'eas scire and factas in
forma praedicta confirmare curaret. Idem dominus noster Rex assignauit nos tres
vel duo quorum Ioh. de Stonore vnum esse vult ad conuocand'in presentia nostra
trium vel duor' nostr' quorum Iohannem de Stonore vnum esse vult custodem
forestae suae citra Trentam vel ipsum quem posuerit loco suo and oe^s forestar'
de feodo and viridar' forestar' suar' in dicto Com^ Surr' ad perambulationem
rectam per visum nostru^ triu^ vel duor' nostru^ quorum Iohannem de Stonore
vnu^ esse vult and illor' in forestis suis and in eode^ com^ in quibus
perambul'dicti aui sui fact non fuer' per Sac^m^ tam militu^ quam alior'
probor' and leg' hominu^ de eodem com^ per quos rei veritas melius sciri and
perambulac' ille fieri poterunt faciend'iuxta tenor' chartae domini H. quonda^
Regis Angliae proaui sui de foresta. Et quia dominus nr' nobis mandauit quod
conuocar' faceremus omnes forestar' de feodo and viridar' forestar' suar' in
dicto com'. Ac etiam illos in forestis suis in eode^ com' in quibus
perambul'tempore dicti aui sui fact non fuerunt ad perambul'rectam faciend'.
Vobis mandamus ex part domini nostri Regis quod apud certes. die Lunae prox'
post quindenam sancti Iohannis Baptistae personaliter intersitis ad
perficiend'exinde ad perambul'illam faciend'ac etiam premunir' fac. omnes illos
in forestis domini Regis in eode^ com' comorantes in quibus perambul' tempore
dicti aui sui fact no^ fuer' quod tunc sint ibi ad diem praed'exinde ad
perficiend'nobiscu^ vt perambul'ill'per visum illor' nostru^ and vestru^ fieri
posset competenter.

11 Et fait a scauoir qui a dit iour asses. a Certesey touts les Justices et le
vicount de Surr' le lieutenant le gardein de la forest citra Trent' Foresters,
Verders, and auters resceants deins bound'della Forest et bone gents et loiaux
Chiualers et auters illocks sum' per le dit viscount vindrent et les Justices
feissent lour office et pristrent enquest de chiualers et auters, cest est a
sauoir mons. Henr. Have. and Henr. de Montforth Chiualers, Rob. le Dol. Hen. de
Sunnerbus, Will. Huse, John de Bures leyne, N. chole Bachiller, John Prodhoame,
Will. de Porkle, Joan at Stoket, Robert de Dittone, Johan de Kingsnode and les
chargerent la dit Enquest solonque lour Commission.

12 Et per monsieur John de Swynerton Chiualer lieutenant le gardein de la
Forest nostre seigniour le Roy citra Trent per certain commission a luy fait
illcoke monstre allegea illcok deuaunt les Jurors de la enquest pur le roy qui
luy auoit un enquest prise a lamphethe deuant certain Justices en temps le roy
Edward aiel nostre seign' le roy quorest testmoignant qui cel lieu le quel il
furent entour de fair Puraley a cel temps remist Forest per icel enquest Et
pria as iours quil fuissent auyses pur le roy a seign' icel inquest quil tout
auant en evidence pur le roy come appiert per la copy de la dit enquest qui
sensuit.

13 Perambulatio facta in com' Surr' de Foresta de Winds. die Sabbati prox'
post festum sancti Gregorij P. An. regni Regis E. 18. apud Lampheth coram
Rogero Brainson, Ioh. de Barwik, Rad. de Hengham, Nota que la fuit un chief
garden and un lieutenant de la Forest come appiert hic.
Will. Inge, and Ioh. de Crokes^e in presentia Phil. de Say cleric' Iustic'
Forestae forestat' viridar' forest' praed'per sacrm' Will Amubesas, Johannes de
Bourstow, Will. de Bekewette milit', Rob. de Dol. Rob. de Valeton, Will. de
Northwood, Ioh. Prodhome, Rob. Attesond, Nich de Wistone, Ric. de Horton,
Edmundi de Suteworth, and Iohannis de Farnham: Qui dicunt per sacrm' suum quod
totus com' Surr' fuit foresta te^pore H. regis proaui Regis nunc vnde ide^
Henr. obijt seisitus, et ita remansit foresta, vsque ad quart' die^ Decembris
Anno regni regis Ric. 1. After the disaforesting of a part of the County of
Surrey, the rest was not used as a Forest by King Richard nor by any other.
Qui tunc deforestauit qua^da^ partem ipsius com' per certas metas quae
continentur in Charta ipsius regis inde facta, vz, inter Kanciam and aqua^,
quae dicitur Way, et de monte de Guldedone quantum com' Surr' durat versus
meridiem and residuum com' praed', Scilicet incipiend'ad aqua de way per
montem de Guldedonne quantum com' durat' versus Aquilonem remansit and est
foresta. Et post illius chartae confect. nihil aforestatum vel occupatu^ fuit
per ipsum Regem Ric. nec per regem Iohannem, nec per aliquem alium dicunt etiam
quod non sciunt quod aliquid de com' praed'afforestatum fuit per praed'Hen.
proauum regis nunc. In cuius rei Test. praed'Iur' sigilla sua apposuer'.

14 Et la communaltie alegea en evidence pur eux enconter le Roy que la Puraley
fuit fait en le dit county en le temps le roy Hen. besael le roy que ore est
issint que tout le county de Surrey fuit disaforest, and de ceo mistient
auaunt un Copy de un enquest de la dit Puraleye fait en la manner qui ensuit.

15 Perambulatio facta in com' Surr' per sacrm' Iohannis de Waltone, Gilberti
Dabnour, Gilberti de Abingworth, Nic. Malemeyns, Hamonis de Gatton, Rob. de
Watenill, Tho. de Hurtmere, Walteri Outworth, Will. de Wanton, Will. de Insula,
Iohannis de Mikelham, et Iohannis de Burstowne Qui dicunt apud Brudford sunt
divise inter Bark. South. and Surr' and tunc divise inter Bark. and Surr' de
Brudeford per viam quae ducit de Fremeley apud Wyshemere, et postea per crucem
Rad'vsque Gomerichesford per medium la Shete vsque ad Horton and de Hoyton per
la le^ versus cursum aquae, and inde iuxta aqua^ quae dicetur Sydway vsque ad
Thornehul de Thornehul vsque ad Harpesford de Harpesford per aquam vsque ad
Inggfeld, and de Inggfeld vsque Lodertake shacche vbi tres com' conueniu^t, vz,
Surr', Bark. and Buck. Et sic dicunt quod totus com' Surr' fuit extra Forestam
sicut divise content' Suth. Bark. and Surr' condonant dic' quo domino Hen.
filius R. Iohannis fuit coronatus.

16 Dauter part le communaltie mist auaunt pur eux en evidence un Copy de un
Charter fait per un Abbe Alein iadis Abbe de Certesey and Covent de mesme le
lieu al Roy Hen. Besael nostre seigniour le roy quorest qui les dits Abbe et
Covent gra^teront certeines terres al roy Henr. estr' deins bound'de Forest
nient aresceant la Puraley auaunt fait per le dit Roy Hen. come plus
pleignement apiert per la copy de la dit Charter que ensuit.

17 Omnibus ad quos presens scriptum peruenerit, Alanus Abbas de Chertesey and
eiusdem loci conuentus salutem eternal in Domino. Noueritis nos concessisse
quod non obstante perambulatione facta per praeceptu^ domini Hen. illustris
regis Angliae, fil'Regis Iohannis de Foresta de Windsor in com' Surrey omnes
terre, Nota been cest grant que lour terres soint quite de regard.
and bosci, and omnia ten^ contenta infra metas and diuis. subscriptas
remaneant ipsi domino Regi and hered'suis foresta imperpetuum: vz, a ponte de
Stanes per Reg. Chim^ sicut se extendit per mediam villam de Egeham vsque
Harpesford, and de Harpesford vsque la Knapp, et de la Knapp vsque Loderlake
shacke vbi cadit in aquam Tamisie. Ita quod omnes terrae and bosci and omnia
tenementa infra metas praed'and omnes homines manentes infra easdem metas ex
concessione ipsius domini Regis erunt quieti de regardo salua ipsi domino Regi
venatione sua. In cuius rei testimonium presenti scripto Sigill'nostrum duximus
apponend'hijs testibus domino S. Cantuar' Archiepisc. domino E. London, I.
Bathon, H. Lincoln, R. Sarum, R. Dulon Cancellar' domini Regis, R. Cicestriae,
and W. Oxon' Episcopis, H. de Burgo Justice. domini, R. Will. Mareschall', Rad.
fil'Nic. Godfr. de Grancombe, and multis alijs.

18 Et de ceo la comunaltie mist Copy de un testification de certain
Chiualers tesmoignants ceo qui labbe Allein de Certesey et son Covent auient
fait a Roy H. apres la dit pur ale fait come appiert per la Copy que ensuit.

19 Omnibus ad quos presens scriptum peruenerit Gilbertus de Abyngworth, Rob.
de Watenill, Will. de Insule, Nich. Malemciens, Johannes de Mykelham, et
Walterus de Cacceworth, salutem in Domino. Noueritis nos interfuisse and
audiuisse vbi Alanus Abbas Certesey et eiusdem loci et conuentus concesserunt
domino nostro H. illustri Regi Angliae fil'Regis Iohannis et cartam suam inde
fecerunt quod non obstante perambulatione facta per preceptum ipsius domini
Regis de Foresta de Windsor in com' Surr' omnes terrae et bosci et omnia
tenementa contenta infra metas, Cest est bon color pur le roy pur clame^ come
Forest.
et diuisas subscriptas remaneant ipsi domino Regi et haered'foresta
imperpetuum, vz, a ponte de Stanes per Reg' Chim' sicut se extendit per media^
vill'de Egeham vsque Harpesford, et de Harpesford vsque la Knap, et de la Knapp
vsque Loderlake vbi cadit in aquam Tamisie. Ita quod omnes terrae et bosci et
omnia tenementa infra metas praedictas et omnes homines manentes infra easdem
metas ex concessione ipsius Regis erunt quieti imperpetuum de Regardo salua
ibidem ipsi domino Regivenatione sua. In cuius rei testimonium presenti scripto
Sigilla nostra duximus apponend'hijs testibus S. Cantuar' Archiepisc. domino E.
London, I. Bathon, H. Lincoln, R. Sarum, R. Duliu^ Cancellar' domini Regis, R.
Cicestren', and W. Oxon. Episcopis, H. de Burgo Iusticiar' domini regis. W.
Mareschall', Rad. fil'Nich. Godofr. de Cramcombe et multis alijs.

20 La quel Puraley auauntdit chiuache en le temps H. ensemblement oue la
Charter et testification auauntdit furent en la treasorie nostre seigniour le
roy et ceo la fuist communaltie pressed auoucher record si les Justices le roy le
voillent suffrer et les Jurors charges per lour serement adire verity seu
alerent et long temps ensemble consailer enter eux and reviendrent et firent
lour serement en la manner qui sensuit.

21 Qui dicunt per sacramentum suum quod tempore dicti regis Edwardi aui domini
regis nunc nulla perambulatio facta fuit in forestis com' de Surrey, Verdit.
et dicunt quod perambulatio faciend'nunc in forestis illis micheanda est apud
Waymouth, et abinde semper in longitudine Tamisie vsque Loderlakeshache vbi
tres com' conueniunt, vz, Surrey, Bark. and Buck. et abinde vsque orientalem
corneram parci de Windsore. Et abinde vsque molendinum de Harpesford. Et abinde
vsque Thornhull. Et abinde vsque Sydway Et abinde vsque la Lee, et sic vsque
Horton. Et abinde per medium Lashete vsque Gomerichesford. Et abinde vsque
Rolnescrouch. Et abinde vsque Wyshemoredene. Et abinde vsque Brudeford, vbi
tres com' conueniunt, vz Surr', Bark. and Suth. Et sic dicunt quod totus com'
Surr' est extra Forestam and fuit tempore Regis H. proaui domini Regis nunc
sicut patet per quandam perambulationem factam tempore eiusdem regis H.
secundum tenorem chartae Regis H. de foresta: dicunt tn' quod tempore regis
Edwardi aui dicti Regis nunc quedam inquis. capta fuit apud Lampeth coram
Rogero Granason, Iohan' de Berew^ke, Rad'de Hengham, Will'Inge, and Ioh. de
Crokesle per procurationem dom' Hug. le Despens. senioris hominibus com^
praed'non praemunitis except' quibusdam personis in Inquis. illa existen' vi
and metu eiusdem Hugonis ad hoc ductis ad bundas and metas in Forestis com'
praed'faciend'qui nullam perambulat' nec equitationem in forestis illis
fecerunt, nec bundas nec metas in eisdem posuerunt. In cuius rei testimonium,
etc.

22 Et pur ceo qui cest enquest fuit mys auantdit iour en evidence pur le roy
encounter la communaltie and ceo la troue per cest enquest auauntdit les
Justices ne obseynt aler auaunt and chiuacher la dit Puraley solonque les
bounds faits per les Jurors sans estre meint' auises ov counsels oue nostre
seigniour le roy, mes assistrent iour enter a lieutenant le gardeine de la
Forest deceo Trent as Verderors de la Forest as Jurors de lenquest and as
auters resceants deins bounds de Forest illcok esteant nomement le Lundy en la
Forest Seint Matthew procheine ensuant a weymuth, Brief de procedendo oue un
non obstante.
and quils fuisset ilcok al dit iour and al mesme temps les Justices se voilent
auiser a quel iour touts les Justices etc. Sir Thomas Tregor vindrent and les
verderers et les Jurors de la enquest et touts les resceants deins bound de la
Forest auantdit, mes le gardeine de la Forest decea Trent ne son lieutenant ne
null des Foresters et qui iour ancient per prefiction de vindret' point. Et al
dit iour la comminaltie de Surr' mist auaunt brief nostre seigniour le roy
direct as Justices qui eux alassent auaunt a la Puraley fair nient a resceant
la enquest prise en temps le roy Edward aiel m' seign' le roy, qui ore est. Et
come les furent retournes en la Chauncellarie nient voillant nostre seign' le
roy qui execution de la dit Puraley ent soit fait deuaunt ceo qui lenquest
fuisset retorn' en Chauncellarie et illok venu la un enquest and lauter que
adonk. droit et reason ent soit fait per le consail nostre seigniour le roy
comeplus pleignement appiert per le brief qui est appele non obstante qui
ensuit.

23 Edwardus dei gracia Rex Angliae, dominus Hiberniae, et Dux Aquit' dilectis
et fidelibus suis Tohmae Tregor, Ioh. de Stonore, Iohanni de Ifeld, et Iohnani
Dubnon salaute^. Cum nuper ad prosecutionem Praelator', Com', Baronum, and
Coi^tatis Regni nostri nuper nobis in parliamento nostro apud Westminster conuocato
suggerenc' perambulationes tempore domini Edward'quondam R. Angliae Aui nostri
in Forestis suis tam citra Trentam qua^ vltra facta obseruatas non fuisse et
nobis supplicantium vt nos eas per dictum auum nostr' sic factas concessas and
confirmatas iuxta easdem concessiones, et confirmationes obseruari in forestis
vbi dict' perambulationes rem' eas fieri et factas in forma praedicta
confirmare curaremus assignauimus vos tres and duos rest. quor' vos praef.
Custos forest^^ vltra Trentam.
Ioh. de Stonore vnum esse volumus ad conuocand'in presentia vestra trium vel
duorum vestrum quorum praef. Iohanne^ de Stonore vnu^ esse volumus custode^
forestae nostrae vltra Trenta^ vel ipsum quem ponere vellet loco suo. Et omnes
feod'et viridar' forestar' nostrar' in com^ Surr' ad perambul'rectam per visum
vestrum trium vel duorum vestrum quorum vos praefat' Iohanne^ de Stonore vnum
esse volumus et illo' in forestis nostris in eode^ com', Le brief de non
obstante.
in quibus perambul'tempore dicti aui nostri factae non fuer', per sacrm^ tam
militum quam alior' probor' and leg hominum de codem com' per quos rei veritas
melius sciri and perambul'illae fieri possunt faciend'iuxta tenore^ chartae
domini Henr' quondam Reg. Angliae proaui nostri de foresta. Et vobis mandamus
quod ad certos dies et loca quae vos tres and duo vestrum quorum vos praef.
Iohanne^ de Stonore vnum esse volumus ad hoc prouideritis praemissa faciatis in
forma praed'. Ita quod perambulac' illae praed'fierent and nobis return' citra
festum Natiuit' Domini prout in litteris vestris paten' inde vobis confect'
before continetur. Ac etiam ex part coi^tatis com' praed'accepimus quod licet
vos inquis. super metis and bundis forestar' in com' praed'praetextu assignac'
nostrae praed'feceritis, perambul'tamen iuxta metas and bundas inquis. illius
contentas praetextu quarunda^ inquis. tempore dicti aui nostri de huiusmodi
metis and bundis fact' vt dicit' hucusque facere distulistis and nobis sic
supplicat', vt super hoc remediu^ apponamus. Nos ea que in dict' parliament'
nostro sic concessa fuerunt, volentes execuc' debit' demandari vobis mandamus
quod perambul'in forestis nostris in com' praed'iuxta forma^ assign^ nostrae
praed'cum celerit' qua poteritis faciatis, inquisic' te^pore dicti aui nostri
inde vt dicit factis non obstantibus, and easdem perambul'sic factas ad term'
praed'in Cancellar' nostra iuxta formam assignac' nostrae supradict' ret'.
Nolumus tamen quod perambul'sic per nos faciend'executioni demandentur antequam
in Cancellar' nr' nobis returnarentur, and visis inquis. tempore dict' aui
nostri sic capt' vlterius inde fiat quod de consilio nostro rationabiliter fore
videbimus faciend'. Nota hoc verbum apud Stanhope.
Test me ipso apud Stanhop Primo die Augustj, Anno regni nostri primo.

24 Per virtue de quel brief les vereders de la Forest del county auant dit,
les Jurors de lenquest et auters deins bound'de Forest resceants per view des
Justices n^' seigniour le roy sans auoir regard al absence le gardeine de la
forest citra Trent ou de son lieutenant qui point devindret al dit iour a eux
assign alerunt auant a la Puraley fair mesme le ieur le Lundi en la forest
seint Matthew auandit en la manner qui ensuit.

25 Videlicet quod de Weymuth in longitudine Tamisie vsque Stanesbridge.
Perambul. sact^ in temps E. le 3.
Et ab inde in longitudine Tamisie vsque ad Loderslakeshache vbi tres com
conueniunt Surr', Bark. and Buckingh. Et abinde dimittendo com' Bark. a dextra
part vsque Stonyhuldwell. Et abinde vsque les Quelmes. Et abinde vsque
orientalem corneram parci de Windsore. Et semper in longitudine palacij eiusdem
parci vsque ad molendinum de Harpesford. Et abinde per eundem palacium vsque
australem partem eiusdem parci. Et abinde transmeando Regiam viam vsque
Wyndwyggshull. Et abinde vsque ad interiorem portam de Bromhall. Et abinde
vsque Thornhull. Et abinde per viam quae dicitur Sydway in longitudine eiusdem
viae. Et abinde vsque la Lee. Et sic vsque Horton. Et abinde per medium la
Shete per Gomericheford quae in antiquo tempore vocatur Bacshhetesford. Et
nyent pius Chiuacherunt al dit iour eyns demorerenta Bacshete mesme la nutt,
Lendemaine le Mardie ensuyant chiuacherent auant de Gomerichesford. Et abinde
vsque Rolnescrouch. Et abinde declinando in dextera part vsque Wyshmorsden. Et
abinde vsque Brudefordesbridge, vbi tres com' conueniunt, videlicet Surrey,
Bark. South. Et les auauntdits Justices en diverse lieux en la dit chiuache
firent la Proclamation solemnement que ne fuist cy hardy de chacer ou malfaire
en le Forest auaundit per reason de icel chyuachy tant il fuit return a la
Chancerie and puis confirm per le Roy et. son Counsel.

26 Puis apres les Justices faissent lour record de quant ils auient fait de
iour en auter solonque le tenure de lour Commission a eux grant a
commencement et ceo la returnerent desubs lour seals en le Chauncerie nostre
seigniour le Roy long temps deuaunt le iour a eux done de return fair per
lour Commission et la manner come il returnerent appiert per la Copy del dit
Record que ensuit.

27 Perambulatio Forestae comitat' Surrey, iuxta metas and bundas per inquisic.
captam coram Thoma Tregor. Perambulatio facta per visum Iusticiar.
Iohanne de Stonore, and Iohanne de Ifelde, and Iohanne Dabnon ad
perambulationem illam factam assign', Anno Regni Regis Edwardi tercij a
conquestu primo, postea per visum praedict' Iohannis de Stonore, Iohannis de
Ifeld, and Iohannis Dabnon.

28 Dominus Rex mandanit Tho. Tregorr, Ioh. de Stonore Ioh. de Ifeld, and
Iohanni Dadnoun breue suum in haec verba, Edwardus dei gratia rex Angl',
dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquit', dilectis and fidelibus suis Tho. Tregor,
Ioh. de Stonore, Io. de Ifeld, and Ioh. Dabnon salutem. Sciatis quod cum in
parliamento nostro nuper apud Westminster conuocat per Prelatos, Comites, Barons,
and Coi^tatem regni nostri asserentes quod perambul'tempore domini E. quondam
regis Angl'aui nostri in Forestis suis tam citra Trentam quam vltra factae non
fuerunt obseruat' nobis fuisset supplicatum vt nos eas sic factas per dominum
auum nostrum concessas and confirmatas iuxta easde^ concessionem and confirmac'
in omnibus obseruari, Et in forestis vbi dictae perambulationes remanent
faciend'eas fieri and factas in forma praed'confirmare curaremus assignauimus
vos tres, Custos forestae vltra Tre^tam.
and duos vestrum quorum vos praef. Iohanne de Stonore vnu^ esse volumus ad
conuocand'in praesentia vestra trium vel duorum vestrum quorum vos praefat'
Iohanne^ de Stonore vnum esse volumus custodem forestae nr' citra Trentam vel
ipsum quem posuerit loco suo et omnes Forestarios de feodo and viridarios
Forestar' nostrar' in com^ Surr' ad perambulac' rectam per visum vestrum trium
vel duorum vestrum quorum vos praefat' Ioh. de Stonore vnum esse volumus et
illor' in forestis nostris in eodem com' in quibus perambulal'dicti aui nostri
factae non fuerunt per sacrm^ tam militum quam alior' prob' and leg. hominum de
eodem com^ per quos rei veritas melius sciri and peramb. ille fieri poterint
faciend'iuxta tenorem chartae domini Henr' quondam regis Angl'proaui nostri de
Foresta. Iuxta tenorem Chartae.
Et ideo vobis mandamus quod ad certos dies et loca quosvos tres vel duo
vestrum quorum vos praefat. Ioh. de Stonore vnum esse volumus ad hoc prouiderit
is premissa faciatis in forma praed'. Ita quod perambul'praedictae fiant and
nobis returnent' citra festum Nat' domini prox' futur'. Mandauimus enim vic'
nostro com^ praedict' quod ad certos dies and loca quos vos tres and duo
vestrum quorum vos praef. Ioh. de Stonore vnum esse volumus ei scire faciatis
venire fac' coram vobis tribus vel duobus vestrum quorum vos praef. Iohanne^ de
Stonore vnum esse volumus tot, and tales tam milites quam alios, probos and
legal'homines de com' praed'per quos rei veritas melius sciri and
perambul'praed'fieri poterint sicut ptaed'est. Et perambul'illam distinct and
aperte sic facta^ nobis sub sigillis vestris trium vel duor' vestrum quor'
praef. Iohanne^ de Stonore vnum esse volumus and sigill'eorum per quos facta
fuerint reportetis ante festum supradict' vt eam confirmemus iuxta concess.
nostram dictis magnatibus inde factam. In cuius rei testim' has litteras
nostras fieri fecimus patentes. T. meipso apud Westm' die Martij Anno regni
nostri prim'. Pretextu cuius litter' praef. Thomas and socij sui mandeuerunt
vic. Surr quod venire faceret coram eis tribus vel duob. eorum apud Certeseyam
die Lunae prox. post quindenam sancti Ioh. Baptistae xxiiii tam milites quam
alios probos and leg homines de com' praed'per quos rei veritas melius sciri
and perambul'fieri poterint secundum formam breuis praed'. Et similiter
significauerunt custod'forestae citra Trentam et omn' forestar' de feod'and
viridar' forestar' com' praed'diem praedict' Mandantes quod idem custos vel
alius quem loco suo ponere voluerit nec non viridar' and forestar' ex part
domini Regis tunc interessent ibidem, and ijdem viridar' premunir' facerent
illos in forestis com' praedict' comorantes in quibus perambul'te^pore dicti
regis aui domini regis nunc factae no^ fuerunt quod ibidem similiter
interessent ad perambul'rectam faciend'in forma praed'. Thomas Swinnerton miles
deputatus Iusticiarij Forestae citra Tre^tum.
Postea ad diem ill'in present' praed'Thomae and socior' suor', Ioh. de
Swynerton miles quem Tho. Wake custos forestae domini Regis citra Trentam per
litteras suas patentes loco suo posuit, venit: quas quidm^ litteras idem
Johannes pretendit ibidem in haec verba.

29 Thomas Wake seigniour de Lydel Justice de la Forest citra Trent a touts
iceux qui cest letter verront salut. Saches nous auoir ordeine et assign
nostre chiual'and bon amie monsieur Johan de Swinerton nostre lieutenant per
tout en les dits Forestes a fair touts chooses qui appendent en nostre nom' en
icels parties que nous mesmes ne poions entender, pur quey nous vouz maun^eins
and chargeins de part ^^' seigniour le Roy qui al dit monsieur Johan com a
nostre lieutena^t en les dits Forestes soies entendants et respoignants en
tesmoignance de quel chose al dit mons. Johan nous auomus fait fair cestes
nous letters Patents a durer a nostre volunte done a nostre manor de Pyngge le
xx. iour dauerell, lan de reign n^'seign' le roy E. tiers apres la Conquest
primer.

30 Et Henr. de Stogton, Galfr' at Down, and Robert de Immoworth viridar'
Forestar' illar' veniunt et testatum est per eosdem viridarios quod non est
aliquis Forestarius de feodo in Forestis praedictis, Nota hic Forestarii de
feodo. Et forestarii qui non sunt de feodo.
alij tamen forestarij qui non sunt de feodo Scilz Robertus at Lake and
Robertus de Bifflete, and Thomas de Keneton veniunt and similiter alij in
Forestis praedictis comorantes, scz Rolandus de Wykford, Richardus de
Trottesworth, Richardus de Wyke, Wilhelmus de Wythwell, Robertus de Certeseye,
Simon de Woodeham, Thomas de Fremelesworth Thomas de Hamme, Henr' de Bergh,
Will'de Brudnestone, Robertus de Kerswell, Gilbertus de Wythewell, Stephanus de
Froillebur', Robertus Miles, Thomas de Wonbourne, Johannes de Watingford,
Petrus Pain, Walter' at Church de Basseligh veniunt and vic' Surr' venire
fecit Henr Huse, and Henry de Monte forti milites, Robertum le Dol', Henr' de
Somerbury, Will'Hufe, Iohannem de Bures seniorem, Nicholaum le Bachillev,
Iohannem Prodehome, Will'de Porkle, Iohannem at Stokett, Robertum de Ditton, et
Iohannem de Kingesnode Iur'. Et postquam ijdem iurati fuerunt ad ueritat' super
praemissis dicendam praedict' Johannes de SWynerton suggessit eisdem Iurat'
quod tempore Regis E. aui domini Regis nunc capta fuit quedam inquis. de metis
and bundis forestar' Com' praedict' coram quibusdam fidelibus ipsius R. ad
inquis. illam capiend'assignat' quam inquis. idem Johannes asserit vt
intellexisset in Chart' domini Regis returnata et ab hoc requisiuit eosdem Iur'
quod praedicta Inquis. latere non debuit ex part domini Regis quod ipsi in
inquis. ista de praedictis metis and bundis fac' circumspecte agerent and
porrex. quandam cedulam formam illius inquis. continentem. Et praedict' lur'
habito inter eos diu^ino consilio dicunt per sacrm^ suum quod tempore regis E.
aui domini Regis nunc nulla perambulatio facta suit in Forestis com' Surr' and
dicunt quod perambulac' faciend'nunc in Forestis illis micheanda est apud
Weymouth. Et abinde semper in longitudine Tamisie vsque Loderlake^^ache vbi
tres Comit' conueniunt, videlicet, Surr' Bark. and Buck. Et abinde vsque
orientalem corneram parci de Windsore. Et abinde vsque molendinum de
Harpesford. Et abinde vsque Thornehull. Et abinde vsque Sidwey. Et abinde vsque
la Lee. Et sic vsque Horton. Et abinde per medium la Shete vsque
Gomerichesford. Et abinde vsque Rolnescronche. Et abinde vsque Wyshemorseden.
Et abinde vsque Brudeford vbi tres com' conueniunt, videlicet, Surr', Bark. and
Suth. and sic dicunt quod totus com' est extra Foresta^. Et fueru^t tempore R.H
proaui domini Regis nunc sicut patet per quendam perambulationem factam tempore
eiusdem R. H. secundum tenorem Chartae eiusdem R. H. de foresta: dic' tamen
quod tempore R. E. a^ domini R. nu^c quaedam Inquis. capt fuit apud Lambeth
coram Rogero Brabason, Ioh. de Berwike, Rad. de Hengham, Will'Ingge, and Ioh.
de Crokessey per procurac' domini Hugonis le Despens. senioris hominibus com'
praed'non praemunitis, exceptis quibusdam personis in Inquis. illa existen' vi
and metu eiusde^ Hug. ad hoc ductis ad bundas and metas in forestis com'
praed'faciend'qui nullam perambulationem nec ullam equitationem in Forestis
illis fecerunt nec bundas, nec metas in eisdem posuerunt. Et quia al'tempore
R.E. aui. domini R. nunc capta fuit inquisie' de huiusmodi metis and bundis
prou^ liquet per inquis. ista^ modo captam and etia^ ex dictis praed'Io. de
Swynerton, Ideo praed'Tho. et socij sui perambul'in forestis praedict' iuxta
metas and bundas in Inquis. i^ta modo capti, co^tent' facere distulerunt vsque
diem Lunae in festo sancti Mathei apud Weymuth ad interim consulend and
deliberand'qualiter in hoc casu in praemissis fit faciend'quem quidem diem
praefixerunt praesatis Iohanni d^ Swynerton viridar' forestar' Iurator' and
alijs de Forestis illis ibidem existen' vt praedictum est quod ipsi ibidem tunc
inter^ssent: postea ad ^em illum praedict' Ioh. de Stonore, Johannes de Ifeld
and Johannes Dabnon venerunt ad locu^ praed'and custos forestae domini Regis
citra Trentam nec eius locum tenens, nec aliquis forestarius forestar'
praedictar' s. viridar', lurator' praed'and alij in forestis ill'comorantes
venerunt. Et super hoc dominus Rex mandauit Tho. and focijs suis tribus vel
duob. eoru^ breue suum quod vocatur non obstante, vt patet supra.

31 Et ideo praed'viridar' Iuratores and alij in forestis praed'comorantes per
visum praed'Ioh. Ioh. and Ioh. non expectata presentia custodis forestae vel
eius locum tenentis ad praed'perambul'faciend'processerunt in hunc modum, vz,
de waymuth in longitudine Tamisie vsque Stanestragg. Et abinde in longitudine
Tamisie vsque Loderlakeshache vbi tres com' conueniunt vz, Surr. Bark. and
Buck. Et abinde demittendo com' Bark. a dex tra part vsque Stony heldwell. Et
abinde vsque les Quelmes. Et abinde vsque Oriental'Cornera^ parci de Windsore.
Et insuper in longitudine palacij eiusdem parci vsque molendinum de Harpesford,
Et abinde per cundem palaciu^ vsque australe^ portam eiusdem parci. Et abinde
transmeando Regiam viam vsque Wyndwingshull. Et abinde vsque interior' parte^
de Bromhall. Et abinde per viam quae dicitur Sydwey in longitudine eiusdem
viae. Et abinde vsque la Lee. Et sic vsque Horton. Et abinde per medium ^a
Shete vsque Gomerichefford. Et abinde vsque Rolneserouch. Et abinde declinando
in dextera part vsque Wyshemoresdene. Et abinde vsque Brudefordesbrug, vbi
tres com' conueniunt, vz, Surr', Bark. and Suth. Et ita per praed'metas and
bundas facta est perambul'forestar' praed'in com' praed'. Et praef. Open
proclamation that no man shall hunt.
Johannes and socij sui in diuersis locis vbi videbatur eis faciend'present'
proclamac' fecerunt inhibent' omnibus and singulis ex part domini Regis, ne
quis venaret seu aliquid malefaceret in praed'forestis praetextu
perambul'antequam perambulatio illa per dominum regem et consilium suum
confirmaretur prout in praed'parliamento ipsius domini Regis fuit ordinat' sub
pena quae incubuerit.

32 Puis apres la dit communaltie del dit county suy a la Chaunceller nostre
seigniour le roy esteant adounk' a Pontfret enpriant en pleine court a sir John
de Hothoni euesque de Ely Chaun^. adonk nr' seign' le roy que veult lenquest de
la Purale de Surr' fair chiuache and ret' per les Justices deuant luy quil fait
droit and reason, et que la dit Purale fuiss. confirm' per charter nr' seign'
le roy solon sa primer Charter quil graunta des Purales confirm' a son
parliament a Westm' lan de son reign primer. Et cela Chart' fuit mys auant
tesmoignant la volunte nr' seign' le roy come auant dit est. Et le dit
Chaunceller appelles a luy les plus vanes clerks de la place nomement mestr'
Hen. de Clif. sir Will. de Harlastone, sir Michel de Wath. sir Tho. de Euesham,
sir Henr. de Edonstowe, sir Hugh de Bourgh, Enquest et perambulatio^ in plene
Com.
and sir Adam Brom, et auters, et prist lier la dit enquest en pleine Count
and puis consailerent ensemble ceo que meux fuit afaire pur le Roy. Et daryen
agarderent que la dit comnnaltie suy brief de garnish. la Constable del Castle
de Windsor, quil fuit a certain iour deuant eux a la dit Chauncellerie a
monstrer sil sauoit rien dire pur le roy qui la dit Purale ne serroit confirm.
Le constable del Castle de Windsor.
Et en ceo que le brief fuit a seal auant qui mons. Johan de Lyle adonke
Conestable de Windsore vient a Pontfret et fuit assis. ouesk le Chau^celler en
pleine Court. Et pur ceo que le Cnoestable fuit illoke en proper person dit
fuit a luy per le Chaunceller quil alast et se auysat pur le roy sil sauoit
rien dire a Targer execution de le die Puraley et sur ceo iour luy fuit don de
iour en auter un semaigne enter illok a Ponfret et quil parlat en le mesne
temps oue nostre seign' le roy, et oue son counsel adonk esteant a Pontfr'
pur la dit bosoigne le quel Couestable alast et ceo auisat de ceo ouesque nr'
seign' le roy et o^e son counseile et ie dreint iour de la semaigne il vient en
la Chaunc. et demand luy fuit si il sauoit rie^ dire pur le roy et il allegea
en pleine court pur nr' seign' le roy qui luy auoit un enquest prise en temps
le roy E. aiel nr' seign', seignior le roy qui ore est a Lamheth de certain
metes et bounds de la Forest de Windsor en le county de Surr' deuant certain
feaux et leaux nr' seign' le roy a ceo desputes et la quel chose fuit allege
deuant mons. Thome Tregor et ces co^paignons per men's. John de Swynerton
lieutenant le gardeine de la Forest de la Trent et pria que la Court de se
voilet auiser pur le Roy E. la comunaltie allegea que cest enquest de cest
Purale return a ore deuant eux ne fait mention de la dit enquest. Et puis
demand fuit per le Chaunceller al Conestable sil sauoit auter auter chose dire
pur le roy and il respond'qui non, pur quoy il alast sans iour adonk horse de la
court, Et dit fuit a la Constable que agardast lour iour de iour en auter et
qui se voilet auiser en mesn temps. Constable del Forest.
Et puis nr' seign' le roy se endressa horse de parties del North. tank a les
parties de West et la Chaunceller euesque et la communaltie auant suy apres pur
la dit bosoigne de iour en iour tanke nr' seign' le roy vient a Hayles et de
Hayles a Winchecombe, et a quo seu la Chauncellerie fuit assess. plenerement.
Et mons. Roger de Mortim' Count de la March et auters graunds furent assess.
pres le Chaunceller ou la dit communaltie pria la Chaunceller que il en fait
droit et reason et quil commandast si luy plest que la dit Purale soit
confirm: ou le dit Chaunceller fist liar lenquest deuaunt le dit County de la
March et auters et counsailerent ensemble et adareine dit fuit a eux que les
graundes de la terre et le counsel le roy serroit plener a Gloucester la
procheine Semaigne suyant quant lenterrement le roy Edward piere nr' seign' le
roy que ore est se feit' et adonk counsels ensemble deuaunt le roy and oue
piers de la terre qui adonk il serront quil ent feit droit et reason et sur ceo
ils furent aiournes a Gloucester et la dit communaltie suy apres de Winchecombe
taunke a Chyltenham. Et de Chyltenham taunk a Gloucester and illoke il mistrent
auaunt lour besoigne enpryant confirmation come auant et illok en pleine
counsel nr' seign' le roy enter les graunds de la terre illokes esteants.
Note that the Charter was confirmed by the King and his Nobles.
s. Henry de Lancaster Mareshall, Edmund County de Kent, John Count de Garne,
Rog. Count de la March, et auters Barons et Chiualers primes de Counsel le
roy firent chooses auantdits declares and pronou^ces deuant eux per le
Chaunceler ou adaren acorde fuit enter eux que les chooses fuissent confirms
solonc. le grant que nostre seign' le roy grant a son parliament. Et command
fuit a dit Chanceller quil deliuerast la dit co^munaltie sur quoy ils aueront
iour de iour en auter, pur ceo que nr' seign' le roy se remove horse de
Gloucester a Tewkesburie et de illok tanke a Worcester ou nr' seign' tient son
Noel. Et le dit communaltie pria execution come auant et le Chaunceller
command a fair la Charter and qua^t la Charter fuit escript pur eux, fuit
command que il ne voleit la Charter a sealer sans sauoir adeprimes la targe
nr' seign' le roy de ceo fair en garrant et puis apres tant fuit suy
frechement per la dit communaltie la Venderdy le iour de la Not. nr' seigniour
qui la targe fuit command de fair al dit Chaunceller et fuit fait et il
auient en garrant issint qui lendemaine le samady le iour de S. Steven fuit la
Charter de confirment de la dit Purale fait et enseale en un petit meason ass.
sur leave de Sere deins la Prior de Wyrcester la ou il asselerent la dit iour
tout auter briefes touchants le commune de la terre et payerunt lour fee del
seal et aueyont lour Charter confirm come appiert per exemplification de icel
en la dit manner qui ensuit.

33 Edwardus dei gratia Rex Angl', dominus Hiberniae and Dux Aquit'. Omnibus ad
quos praes. lit. peruenerunt, salute^. Sciatis quod cum nuper in parliamento
nostro apud Westminster conuocato ad supplic' praelatoru^ Com', Bar', and coi^tatis
regni nostri per litt' nr' patentes concess. quod perambul'te^pore domini E.
quonda^ regis Angl'aui nostri in forestis suis tam citra Trentam quam vltra
factae and per ipsum auum nr' concesse and confirmat' secundu^ metas and bundas
in eisdem perambul'contentas obseruentur imperpet' et teneant'. This is the
Charter of the Puraley.
Et quod perambul'in forestis in quibus tempore dicti au^ nr' factae non
fuerunt per fideles nostros ad hoc assignand'fierent sub ea celeritate qua
fieri possent, bono modo. Et quod nos peramb. illas cum factae fueru^t and
nobis returnate sub metis and bundis quas in eisd^m inueniri contigerit pro
nobis and hered'nostris conseruari and approbari faceremus prout in lit.
nostris praed'plenius continetur ac post modu^ ad requisic' coi^tatis com Surr'
nobis suggerent' qd'peramb. in forestis nostris in eod'com' factae non fuerunt,
Volentes concess. nostram praed'effectum mancipari assignauimus di lectos and
fideles nostros Tho. Tregor, Ioh. de Stonore, Ioh. de Ifeld, and Io. Dabnon, ad
peramb. rectam in forestis nostris in eode^ com' per quos rei veritas melius
sciri and peramb. illae melius fieri possent faciend'iuxta tenore^ chartae
domini H. quonda^ Regis Ang. proaui nostri de foresta. Ac ijdem Tho. Ioh. and
Ioh. peramb. huiusmodi in eode^ com' praetextu assignac. nostrae eis inde sic
factae fecerint and eas nobis in Cancellar' nr' miserunt in forma subscripta.
Peramb. forestae com' Surr' iuxta metas and bundas per inquis inde captas coram
Tho. Tregor, Ioh. de Stonore, Ioh. de Ifeld, and Ioh. Dabnon ad peramb. illam
faciend'assign', and postea facta per visum praed'Ioh. Ioh. and Ioh. ac per
sacrm^ Henr. Huse, H. de Montfort militum. Rob le D. Henr. de Somerbury, Will.
Huse, Ioh. de Burts sen', Nich. de Bachiller, Ioh. Prodehome, Will. de Porkle,
Ioh, at Stoket, Rob. le Dytton and Ioh. de Kingswood Iur', Qui dicunt quod
tempore dicti aui nostri nulla peramb. facta fuit in com' Surr', sed peramb.
faciend'in forestis nostris inchoand'est apud Weymuth Et abinde semper in
longitudine Tamisie vsque Loderlakeshache vbi tres com' conueniunt, vz, Surr.
Bark and Buck. Et abinde vsque orientale^ corneram parci de Windsore. Et abinde
vsque ad molendmu^ de Harpesford. Et abinde vsque ad Thornhull. Et abinde vsque
Rolnescrouch. Et abinde vsque Wyshemoresdene. Et abinde vsque Brudeford, vbi
tres com' conueniunt, vz, Sur', Bark. and Suth. Saluo semper in omnibus Iure
nostro.
Et quod totus com' Surr. est extra foresta^ and fuit tempore dicti R. H.
proaui nostri. Nos peramb. praed'acceptantes eam pro nobis and hered'nostris
quantum in nobis est ratificamus, approbamus, concedimus and confirmamus
secundu^ metas and bundas praed'imperpetuum obseruand', Saluo semper in omnibus
iure nostro. In cuius rei Testimonium has litt' nostras fieri fecimus patentes.
T meipso apud Wigorn' xxvi. die Decembris, Anno regni regis ij. prim' per ipsum
Rege^ and consiliu^.

Ou la charter demur.
34 Et puis apres la dit comunaltie suy tank a Solyhull en arderne apres la dit
Chaunceller nr' seign' le roy and illok aueyent la Charter double issint que la
primer Chartercy est a seal de vert fere que demoert en la guard en labbey de
Certesey en le County de Sur. Et lauter charter a seal de Blauche sere que
demoert en guard.

35 Et pur ceo que nr' seign' le roy veolt que sa Charter de confirment de la
dit Purale soit lie en pleine count and de ceo proclamation fait que ele soit
firment guard solonque les bounds save per luy quarant iours denchacer ces
bestes a ceo fair maunda so^ brief a viscount de Surr. Nota que le roy voloit
que cest perambul. soit firm guard.
come plus pleignement appiert per le transcript qui ensuit.

36 Edwardus dei gracia Rex Ang. dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquit' vic. Surr.
salute^. Cum nuper in parliame^to nostro apud Westminster. conuocato ad supplic
praelator. Com', Baronum, and coi^tatis regni nostri per litt' patentes
concesserimus qd'peramb tempore domini E quondam R. Ang. aui nostri in forestis
suis tam citra Trenta^ qua^ vltra factae and per ipsum auum nostru^ concesse
and confirmate secundum metas and bundas in eisde^ perambulac' content'
obseruarentur imperpetuum and tenerentur. Et peramb. in forestis in quibus
tempore dicti aui nostri factae non fuerunt per fidel'nostros ad hoc
assignand'fierent sub ea celebritate qua fieri possent bono modo Et quod
peramb. illas cum factae fuerint and nobis returnate sub metis and bundis quas
in eisdem inueniri contigerit pro nobis and haered'nostris confirmari and
approbari faceremus. Ac postmodum ad requisic. coi^tatis com' praed'nobis
suggerentis quod peramb. in forestis nostris in eode^ com' factae non fuerunt
volentes concessionem nostram praed'effectum mancipari. Assignauimus quosdam
fideles nostros ad peramb. rectam in forestis nostris in eode^ com' in quibus
peramb. tempore dicti aui nostri factae non fuerunt, per sacrm^ tam militum
quam aliorum proborum and legalium hominum de eode^ com' per quos rei veritas
melius sciri and peram. ille melius fieri possent faciend'iuxta tenorem chartae
domini H. quondam R. Ang. proaui nostri de foresta, Idemque fideles nostri
peramb. huiusmodi in eode^ com' praetextu assign^ nostrae eis inde sic factae
fecerunt and cas nobis in Cancel. nostra miserint. Ac nos per litteras nostras
parents dictam peramb. acceptauimus and eam pro nobis and hered'nostris
quantum in nobis est ratificauimus, approband'concesserimus and confirmanimus
secundum metas and bundas in dicta peramb. contentas imperpetuum obseruand
Saluo semper in omnibus iure nostro prout in litteris praed'nostris before
continetur tibi praecipimus quod litteras nostras in pleno com' tuo legi and
dictam peramb. secu^dum metas and bundas in eisdem literis nostris contentas
public' proclamari, Note that here are forty days reserved for the safe
return of the wild beasts.
et firmiter obseruari faciatis. Saluis nobis quadraginta diebus a tempore dat'
huius breuis numerand'ad feras nostras in locis extra forestam peramb.
praed'sic posit' existentes ad foresta^ nostram effugand. T. meipso apud
Wigorn. xxvi. die Decembris, Anno R. R. ij. primo. Per ipsum regem and Cons.

37 Et pur ceo que nr' seign' le roy voil que son Conestable de son Castle de
Windsor, soit apris des bounds de la dit Purale, et quil enchase a ses bestes
deins se temps de quarant iours horse de la Purale tank a sa Forest nr' seign'
le roy luy ad maund son brief a ceo fair en garrant come appiert plus
pleignement per le transcript qui ensuit.

38 Edwardus dei gratia Rex Ang dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquit' Constabular'
Castri sui de Windsor vel eius locu^ tenenti salute^. Cum nuper in parliamento
nostro apud Westminster conuocat' ad supplic. Praelator', Com', Baronum and coi^tat'
regni nostri per litteras nostras patentes co^cesserimus, quoth perambul'te^pore
domini E. quonda^ R. Ang. aui nostri in forestis suis tam citra Trentam quam
vltra factae and per ipsum auum nostru^ concesse and confirmate secundum metas
and bundas in eisdem perambul'contentas obseruentur imperpetuum and teneantur
quod peramb. in forestis in quibus tempore dicti aui nostri factae non fuerunt
per fideles nostros ad hoc assignand'fierent sub ea Celeritate qua fieri
ponssit bono modo. Et quod nos peramb. illas cum factae fuerint and nobis
returnat' sub metis and bundis quas in eisdem inueniri contigerit pro nobis and
hered'nostris confirmari and approbari faceremus prout in litteris nostris
before co^tinetur. Ac postmodum ad requisic' coi^tatis Com' Surr. nobis
suggerent' quod peramb. in forestis nostris in eodem com^ factae non fuerunt,
Volentes concessionem nostra^ praed'effectum mancipari, Assignauimus dilectos
and fideles nostros Tho. Tregor, Ioh. de Stonore, Ioh. de Ifeld, and Ioh.
Dabnon ad peramb. rectam in forestis nostris in eode^ com' in quibus peramb.
tempore dicti aui nostri factae non fuerunt per sacrm^ tam militum quam alior'
probor' and legal'hominum de eode^ com' per quos rei veritas melius sciri and
peramb. illae melius fieri possent facie^d'iuxta tenorem Chartae domini H
quonda^ Regis Ang. proaui nostri de foresta. Ac ijde^ Tho. Io. Io. and Io
peramb. huiusmodi in eode^ com^ praetextu assign^ nostrae eis inde sic factae
fecerint and eas nobis in Cancellar' nostra miserint in forma subscripta.
Perambulatio forestae com^ Surr iuxta metas and bundas per inquis. inde capt
coram Thom. Tregor, Ioh de Sonore, Ioh. de Ifeld. and Ioh. Dabnon ad peramb.
illam faciend', assignand. Ac postea fact' per visum praed'Ioh. Ioh. and Ioh ac
per sacrm^ Henr' Huse, Henr. de Monteforti militu^ Rob. le Dol. Hen de Somer
bury, Will. Huse, Ioh. de Bures senioris, Nich, le Bachiller, Ioh. Prodehome,
Will. de Porkle, Ioh. at Stoket, Rob. de Ditton, et Ioh. de Kingsnode Iurat',
Qui dicunt quod tempore dicti aui nostri nulla peramb. facta fuit in Com Surr.
Sed peramb. faciend'in forestis illis nicheand'est apud Waymuth. Et abinde
se^per in longitudine Tamisie, vsque Laderlakshach vbi tres com' conueniunt vz
Surr. Bark et Buck. Et abinde vsque orientale^ corneram parci de Windsor. Et
abinde vsque molendinum de Harpesford. Et abinde vsque Thornehull. Et abinde
vsque la Lee. Et sic vsque Horton. Et abinde per medium la Shete vsque
Gomerichesford. Et abinde vsque Rolnescrouch. Et abinde vsque Wyshemoresden. Et
abinde vsque Brudford vbi tres com' conueniunt, vz, Surr, Bark. et Suth. Et
quod totus com' Surrey est extra forestam et fuit tempore dicti Regis H. proaui
nostri. Ac nos peramb. praed'acceptantes et eas pro nobis et heredes nostris in
quantum nobis est ratificauerimus Approbauerimus concesserimus et
confirmauerimus secundum metas et bundas praedictas imperpetuum obseruand,
Saluo semper in omnibus iur' nostro prout in litteris nostris praed'plenius
continetur per quod praecepimus vic. nostro com' praed'quod peramb.
praed'secundum metas et bundas in cisdem litteris contentas faciat obseruari,
Saluis nobis quadraginta diebus a tempore breuis nostri sibi inde directi
numerand'ad feras nostras in locis extra forestam per peramb. praed'sic positis
existentes, ad forestam nostram effugand', This writ is directed to the
constable of the castle of Windsor, commanding him to fet the Dear that are
in the Purlieus into the Forest
vobis mandamus quod feras nostras infra dictos quadraginta dies a locis extra
forestam sic positis ad forestam cum omni celeritate qua poteritis effugari
faciatis. Et talem et tantam diligentiam in hac part apponatis quod damnum
nobis de feris nostris ibidem per vestri negligentia^ nullaten' generet'. Test
meipso apud Wigorn', xxvi. die Decembris, Anno R. R. ij. primo.

Per ipsum regem and Cons.

39 Per virtue de quel brief apres la Charter lie en county et la
proclamation fait que la Purale serroit fermement guard le Here is to be noted
the manner how the Pur. is granted.
dit Constable del Castle de Windsor enchasea les beasts nostre seigniour le
Roy deins de temps de quarante iours auauntdit horse de la Purale en la Forest
nostre seigniour le roy et deins quel temps les bon gents del County de Surrey
se tyndrent en pees fans rien chacer ou malefaire. Et apres les quarant iours
les bones gents del County de Surrey, vserent lour fraunchise come ateint a
eux solonc la volunte nostre seigniour le roy per sa Charter a eux fait
auantdit et confirm.

40 Iey finist les Process de la Purale de la Forest de Windsor fait en la
Count de Surrey, et suy en la manner come auaunt est dit tank ele fuit
encharter and confirm de la bon volunte nostre seigniour le roy solonc ceo
quil graunta en pleine parliament as graunds et la Communaltie de la terre a
tener et a garder pur luy et pur ces heirs a touts iours par ces letters
Patents come ils fuissent confirms.

FINIS.

