THE HOLY History of King David, wherein is chieflye learned these godly and
wholesome lessons, that is: to have sure patience in persecution due obedience
to our Prince without rebellion: and also the true and most faithful dealings
of friends.

Drawn into English Meetre for the youth to r^^de, by John Marbeck.

AT LONDON Pri^^^d by Henry Middleton, for John Harison. ANNO. 1579.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and his singular good Maistresse, ELIZABETH BARRET,
wife to Master EDWARD BARRET Esquire: I. Marbeck wishes long life and
continual health, to the pleasure of God.
TO RENDER YOU THE CAUSE or rather the causes (Right Worshipful Maistresse)
that first moved me to take in hand the travel of this divine History of the
holy Prophet king David? This, in my judgment, were not so necessary, as it
might prove tedious unto you, and therefore I omit it, saving that thus much I
affirm, that as well in the writing, as in the delivering of it to the press,
I not meanly regarded that such histories as Gods spirit has left and
commended unto us in the sacred Scriptures, might be advanced before, and
infinitely far above those vain, unstable, and most unfruitful devises
whatsoever (so I term them as they are to be compared with the histories of
Gods holy Scriptures) whatsoever (I say) proceeding from the pen of man,
albeit never so thoroughly dipped in the deapth and soundest part of that that
man's reason might reach unto: But much more I intended to the uttermost of
mine ability, to impair hereby the credit as well of all leude lying legends
of unsound Saints, consecrated and canonized in the high Court of Rome, (the
sovereign seat of that purple Whore, whom the Lord with the breath of his
mouth shall shortly destroy to the great glory of the Lamb) as also of all
filthy, fond, and unsavory songs, books, and fancies far unfit and ill
beseeming the eyes of baptized Christians. And the better to bring this to
pass, I have not only endeavored my self to be plain and familiar in all
things, but also (for the more delectation to the Reader) have continued the
history whole and entier of it self, without entermingling any matter or
discourse that might seem to digress from the order of the Story. And now,
having in this sort finished the same, and not finding in my self ability
sufficient whereby to express the thankfulness and entier affection of my
heart, which I would should be manifested unto you (to whom, as to the right
worshipful gentleman your husband, the Lord has granted great measure of
zeal to his truth, and love to his poor Saints) what other shift should I
make, being now, as my years and infirmities tell me, trudging to the end of
my race, but to use this as a pledge of these the premises which the Lord Jesus
alone must make absolute at his coming? This little book therefore, in this
only consideration and respect, I humbly dedicate and exhibit unto you,
beseching you (right worshipful Gentlewoman) that in receiving it at my hands,
you will look into that that my heart has herein behighted, namely that it be
taken as a poor supply of the thing which I owe, but (for want of ability)
can not otherwise render. I leave to be tedious unto you, beseeching that Lord
that has a continual eye to his Church, to preserve you and your right
worshipful husband long time as bright burning lamps to the comfort of the
same, and in the end of your earthly pilgrimage, to clothe you, as he has
already chosen and called you, to wait upon the Lamb, and with him to live
and reign eternally.

Amen.
I. Regum xvi. Chapter.
WHen as the Lord out of his sight
had Saul the king reject,
Unto the Prophet Samuel
his word he did direct,
On this wise saying unto him:
How long will thou lament
For him that I have cast away,
and of his reign repent?
Fill now thy horn with oil and ^ome, for I have great delight
To send thee forth to Isai that ancient Bethlemite:
Because I have provided me a king among his seed
To rule and govern Israel: make have and go with speed.
O Lord, quod he, how shall I go? for I do greatly fear
That Saul shall take away my life, when he thereof does hear.
The Lord made answer thus and said, with thee an Heyfer take:
And say thy only coming is, an offering there to make.
Give warning unto Isai, call him unto the same,
And whom thou shall to me annoint, him will I to thee name.
So then the Prophet took his way, and came to Bethlem town,
The Elders feared much to see his sudden coming down:
Demanding if he came in peace, or what was his intent?
An offering here to make (quod he) the Lord me hither sent.
Do therefore sanctify your selves, and come with one accord,
That we together may go forth, and offer to the Lord.
He sanctifide both Isai, and eke his sons also,
Exhorting them (as he was did) with all the rest to go.
Now, as the people stood before the Prophet Samuel,
He cast his eye on Eliab, whose stature did excel:
Wherefore he began within him self to think, and thus to say,
The Lords anointed certainly is present here this day.
Then spoke the Lord, let not thy mind nor eye be so abusde
With favor nor with comelynes, for I have him refusde.
God does not see as mortal man, nor look on outward shows,
But does behold the heart within, and virtue where she grows.
Eliab in his fathers sight when he repulse had take,
Abinadab was brought to prove if he should be forsake:
But when ye Prophet had him seen, he made this answer plain,
How that the Lord had neither called nor chosen him to reign.
Then Samma was set forth in place to wait the prophets will,
And as his brethren sped before, his luck was even as ill.
Thus Isai seven of his sons he brought forth one by one,
Whereof the Prophet gave to wit, the Lord had chosen none.
Have thou no mo, quod Samuel, of sons then here be told?
I have (quod he) a little one remaining with my fold.
Let him be fet, now out of hand send of thy servant some,
For we will stay and not sit down till he be hither come.
Then was he fet out of the field, and from the shepefold brought
Unto the Prophet Samuel, as God the thing had wrought.
This young man's favor did excel, in whom such beauty was,
That with a special comely grace all other he did pass.
Now said the Lord to Samuel, arise, do him annoint,
For this is he whom I do choose, and unto thee appoint.
The Prophet took his horn of oil, and with aduisement good,
He shed it out on David's head before them as they stood,
And so forthwith returned home to Rama where he lay:
And David to his fold again made spe speed and went away.
From that day forth the spirit of god from Saul to David went,
And unto Saul a cruel sprite in stead thereof was sent,
Which vexed him full often times, and did him so molest,
That for the time of all his wits he was quite dispossessed:
Which grieved sore his men to see, wherefore they began to say,
Behold how this most wicked wight does hau^t thee day by day:
Let there be sought a cunning man, of good and perfect skill,
On harp or other instrument, some comfort bring it will.
Provide me then of such a one, go search both ^arre and nere,
Where that the best is to be had, and bring him to me here.
Then one did say that Isai had a son that did excel
In music, and upon the harp he played passing well:
A strong and valiant man of war, well made of bone and lim,
Exceeding wise in his affairs, and has the Lord with him.
Then sent the king, and made request that Isai would him send
His youngest son, that on his sheep and shepefold did attend.
Who at the kings commandment prepared therewithal
A simple present with his son, and sent him unto Saul.
So David served now the king, and in the Court remaynd,
Where he was well accept of Saul, and gently entertaynd.
His harness bearer he became. The king sent once again
To Isai, that David should with him a while remain.
Then David great atendance gave upon his master Saul,
To be at hand if that the sprite should chance on him to fall,
As now and then it came to pass: then David began to play
Upon his harp so pleasauntly, that soon it went away.
Now after this the Philistines came with a mighty host, Cap. 17.

To war against the Israelites, and pitched in Dammims coast.
Then Saul the king of Israel them to resist he goes,
And camped in the vale of Oak, in sight of all his foes.
The Philistines stood^ on an hill: the Israelites were seen
To stand upon an other hill, a valley them between.
And while the host stood at a stay, a Philistine came down
Into the bottom of the vale, a strong and mighty clown:
His name it hight Goly of Gath, so big and huge a man,
As was in length from top to toe six cubits and a span.
An helmet on his head he had of hard and massy brass,
A coat of male upon his back of passing weight it was:
A shield and boots of brass likewise, which he was wo^t to wear,
And scarsly could a weauers beam well cou^terpeise his spear.
Now having one to bear his shield, and wait upon the same,
Against the host of Israel with voice he began proclaim:
Why come ye out in battle ray? behold I am but one,
Send out a man that dare assay to fight with me alone:
If he do beat me in this place, then we will all be yours:
If I prevail with force and might, then you shall all be ours.
This day the host of Israel I do it all defye:
Send out a man that we may fight and here the matter try.
When Saul and all the Israelites had heard and seen his spite,
They were with fear astonished, and out of courage quite.
Here now to David Isais son our talk returned shall be,
An Euphratite of Bethleem, a man of good degree.
This Isai had unto his sons in number eight in all,
And he himself well stepped in years now in the days of Saul:
With whom three of his eldest sons into the wars did go,
Both Samma and Abinadab, and Eliab also:
But David went not out with Saul, for he was gone before
To feed his fathers sheep again, and came to Saul no more.
His father now an aged man, and of the wars afraid,
Bethought him of his sons with Saul, and thus to David said:
Isai sent David to releue his brethren, but God sent him for ye deliverance of
Israel.
Come forth my son, I Will send thee now into the host of Saul,
To see thy brethren how they fare, and what thing i^ befall:
Go carry them this parched corn, and these ten loaves of bread,
For in their hunger it perhaps may stand them in some stead:
And to their captain under whom their lotte is for to serve,
Present these cheeses in my name, that he may them deserve.
If need have forsoe thy brethren so that ^^ey have gages laid,
Redeem their pledge, and see that all their creditors be paid.
Then David early gat him up, committing all his sheep
Unto an other skillful man, to tend them and to keep:
So going forth, he came unto the host that lay about,
Where as he heard the noise of war, and people make a shout:
For both the hoasts were in array, and stood in others sight,
Each one with weapon in his hand as ready for to fight:
The^ leaving al his gere with one that mo things had in charge,
He ran and found his brethren out, saluting them at large:
And as he stood in talk, comes forth great Goly with his vau^ts,
Provoking still the Israelites with spiteful bitter tauntes:
Whose ugly shape and mighty corpse did so the people fray,
That they durst not abide his look, but ran from him away,
Each one to other saying thus, saw you this fiend of hell?
His coming up is to revile the host of Israel:
Who so can him deprive of life, and master in the field,
To him the king his daughter dear and great rewards will yield,
And furthermore he will also his fathers house to be
In all the land of Israel from tax and payments free.
Now David hearing all the brags the Philistine had made,
His heart was moved so within that he brast out and said:
What shall be done unto the man, what honor to his name,
That beats yonder Philistine to save the land from shame?
For what is this vncircumcisd, what power is in his rod,
That he should thus revile the host of the true living God?
The people said to him again as they had said before,
That so it should be done to him, with praise for evermore.
Which thing his brother Eliab took in such spite and hate,
That he (offended with his talk) began him all to rate.
What have thou here to do? (quod he) go home and tend thy sheep,
Which thou have left in wilderness without a guide to keep:
I know the malice of thy heart, which so in thee has wrought,
That it and pride has brought thee down to see the battle fought.
Then David said, what have I done? there is some cause certain,
And so departing farther of he spoke the same again.
To whom the people, as before, assured him of all:
But some that noted well his words rehearsed them to Saul.
Who caused him for to be fet that he might see the man,
And being brought immediately to speak he thus began:
Let not the king dismayed be, let no man's heart him fail,
For yonder bragging Philistine I shall (God will) assail.
Thou art not able (quod the king) to cope with him in hand,
So far above thy power he is, thou may him not withstand:
Thou art but yet a boy in age, and he a man of might,
Brought up and traded from his youth in war and warlike fight.
Then David to encourage Saul in Gods great power and aid,
Began to declare what he of late had done by him, and said:
Thy servant kept his fathers sheep that they should not astray,
Among the which a Lion came to feed upon his pray,
I ran and caught him by the beard, and shook him by the jaws,
So that I rid him of his life for all his ramping paws.
A Bear likewise with greedy paunch came to devour his pray,
Whom I by strength did only kill before I went away.
And as thy servant now has done to these two beasts in deed,
I doubt not but this Philistine shall have no better speed.
I mind (God willing) to remove the infamy and shame,
And to revenge this wicked talk against Gods holy name:
And as the Lord defended me from Lion and from Bear,
So from this bosting Philistine he will I do not fear.
The king well pleased with his talk, gave leave and bad him go,
Beseeching God to be his guide and shield him from his fo:
And gave a charge to put upon the armor of the king,
His sword, his head piece, and his shield, and every other thing.
Then David did assay himself how well that he could do,
For he had never proved them ne wonted him thereto.
Wherefore he turned to Saul and said, I can not go with these:
So out of all he stripped him to have his arms at ease.
With staff in hand he gat him forth unto a little brook,
Out of the which five pibble stones into his bag he took,
And so from thence he made his way apace unto the man,
No other weapon but a sting he had to fight with than.
The Philistine then drue him near to view him that was sent,
A page before him bare his shield as he to David went.
Now when he saw so young a man so nakedly arrayed,
Disdaynefully on him he cast his eye, and to him said:
Am I a dog that with a staff thou come me to beat?
So cursing him by all his gods he began to fume and freate:
Come on my child (quod he) I will dispatch thee in this hour,
And give thy flesh unto the beasts and birds for to devour.
Then David not afraid of him nor any thing he saw,
Did use such talk as he might see he wayed him not a straw.
Thou co^mest to me with spear and shield wherein is all thy trust,
But in the name of God I come to thee in quarrel just:
The Lord whose name with wicked mouth thou have blasphemed so,
This day will use me as a mean to be thine overthrow,
And minds your very carcasses to scatter so on ground,
That to the fowls and ravening beasts a pray you may be found:
That all the world both far and near may know it very well,
How that there is a mighty Lord and God in Israel:
And eke the whole assembly here shall perfect notice have,
That neither sword nor spear it is wherewith ye lord does save.
For sure the battle is the Lords that rules in all lands,
He will this day confound you all, and put you in our hands.
With that he stepped forth and came with weapon in his fist,
The other began to buckle him his malice to resist:
A stone he had already set and folded in his sling,
Which at his head he hurled out as hard as he could fling,
Which (through the Lord) light full upon ye forepart of his head,
And sanke so deep into his brain that down he fell as dead.
Then David ran the groueling corpse there lying to bestride,
And from the body with his sword his head he did divide.
A sight no doubt that pleased much the Israelites that day,
But so dismayed the Philistines that they did run away.
Then all the host of Israel they shouted at that sight,
Pursuing them with bloody swords, and slew them in the flight:
And chasing them to Ekron gates they gave them such a foil,
That they returned joyfully and brought away the spoil.
Now when as David had (in God) this mighty conquest wrought,
He was by Abner unto Saul before his presence brought:
And standing with the bloody head of Goly in his hand,
The king began say, whose son art thou, give me to understand?
My sovereign lord I am (quod he) the youngest son of all
Of Isai the Bethleemite, most faithful unto Saul.
This said the soul of Ionathas to David did apply, Cap. 18. The immovable
love of Ionathas and David.

And firmly sought to knit with his by secret sympathy:
Whom tenderly he did so love with inward fancy then,
That greater love could not be wished among the sons of men.
The king also for this his act did cause him to remain,
And in no wise would suffer him to make return again.
With David and with Ionathas a faithful bond was made,
That each of them while life did last should be each others aid.
At which time Ionathas did give unto his friend so dear,
Both cote and cloak, his bow, his sword, and girdle he did wear.
Now David so behaved him that all men gave him praise,
So faithful and so circumspect he was in all his ways.
The king so well estemd of him that he put him in trust
To rule and guide his men of war, and lead them as he lust:
His name was praised eury where his honor to enhaunce,
The women also set him forth with timbrell in their dance.
As they the king met at return from slaughter of his foes,
They sung this song of victory in meeter as it goes.
King Saul to his great laud and praise his thousand men has slain,
But David has ten thousand times so many killed again.
With this the king was very wroth and eke displeased sore,
That unto him they gave so much, and to the king no more:
For they (quod he) have set him up ten times above my one,
And what can he have more except the kingdom all alone.
From that time forth he cast an eye on David somewhat strange,
Rewarding all that he had done with hatred for exchange.
It so befell the morrow next the king to be torment
With that ill sprite which oftentimes the Lord had to him sent:
Then David as his custom was to be before his grace,
Stood playing on his pleasant harp to ease him in that case.
The king beheld him earnestly, and to him self did say,
I mind this iauelin here of mine shall rid him clean away.
So in his rage and madding mood at David forthwithall
He hurld the Iauelin in his hand to nail him to the wall.
But David to avoid the stroke as one that was full wise,
Conveyed him self and did escape his danger once or twice.
The king no doubt was much afraid to see his purpose fail,
And David such defense to have that nothing could prevail:
Wherefore he sought all means he could his honor to abase,
Withdrew his charge and him remoud into a meaner place.
This notwithstanding prudently he walked in all his ways,
As one that had the Lord with him for to prolong his days.
The king perceiving how that he in favor daily grew,
Was still afraid that danger might thereby to him ensue:
For Israel and Judah both to David cleaued sore,
And eke their love to him each day increased more and more.
Then Saul attempted David thus: I will on thee bestow
My daughter Merob, whom thou have deserved well I know.
Which thing he spoke of no good will as he did then pretend,
But meant thereby the Philistines might bring him to his end.
When David had considered the offer Saul had made,
Then he again with reverence to him most humbly said:
O what am I, what is my life, my stock or my degregree,
That I so vile and base a wight thy son in law should be?
But how so ere the matter went, when David should enjoy
His wife of Saul, he had conceyud in mind an other toye,
And minded to defeat him clean whom he entised so,
Entending his forenamed child on Adriel to bestow.
Then was it unto Saul declard what favor Michol had
To David, as it did appear, whereof the king was glad:
She shall be his, and by her means he shall be caught in snare,
And fall into the Heathens hands before he be aware.
Pretending then as he would seem his very friend to be,
My youngest daughter thou shall have, and be my son (quod he)
And turning him unto his men, in secret to them said,
Persuade him if ye can to cast his fancy on the maid:
And say to him, behold the king does greatly favor thee,
In thee it lies, refuse it not his son in law to be:
Also his servants love thee well, they wish thee for to stay
Thy self upon the kings request, and to his will obey.
The servants went and all these things they put in David's head,
Whose answer showed he would not be by their persuasio^s led.
Does it, said he, seem unto you so small and light a thing,
For me to be the son in law to such a mighty king?
I am a man both poor and base, of reputation small,
And have no dowry for to give, her to enrich withal.
The men returned back again and made a true report
Of all the answer David gave to them, and in what sort.
Go yet, quod he, and tell him thus, the king does nothing crave,
But of one hundred Philistines their foreskins for to have,
That through his courage to his name immortal praise may rise,
And I upon my deadly foes may be reuengd likewise.
Now Saul's intent was only this, to bring him into thrall
And danger of the Philistines, to loose both life and all.
The messengers to David went and told him how it stood,
What dowry he must seek to give to match in Royal blood.
Now having good occasion given with Philistines to mell,
To be the son in law to Saul it pleased David well.
Not many days were past when he his promise had fulfild,
And slain two hundred Philistines as he thereto was wild,
Whose skins were brought and given to Saul by David and his men,
So that of right he might not hold his daughter from him then.
Wherefore the king did Michol give to David as his wife,
Who loved him full tenderly even as she loved her life.
Now having both the Lord with him, and Michols heart in hold,
It made the king the more afraid of him an hundred fold.
So deep a root had malice caught within his heart and eye,
That unto David he became a deadly enemy.
But David so behaved him with wisdom as it seemd,
That none among the men of Saul above him was esteemd.
Cap. 19.
Wherefore now Saul's hypocrisy which he so long had hid,
Brast out in open cruelty, and caused him to bid
Both Ionathas and eke his men that David they should kill,
Who were full sorry in their hearts, and loath to do him ill.
The first proof of Ionathas fidelity to David.
When Ionathas perceived well his father sought to wreake
His malice on the innocent, with David he did break,
And said: my father means deceit and seeks thine overthrow,
Lake heed therefore, it sta^ds thee on thy wisdom now to show,
Go hide thee in some secret place, and keep thee out of sight:
Until the morrow day put forth the comfort of his light,
And I will stand my father by in field where that thou art,
And do the best I can with him to feel and grope his heart:
And as I find him bent to theee, to kill or eke to save,
Doubt not but I will find the means that thou shall knowledge have.
As Ionathas was in the field and by his father stood,
And having talk of David there, he spoke of him much good.
Let not the king (said Ionathas) against thy servant sin,
For he has not offended thee without nor yet within:
Did he not kill the Philistine with danger of his life,
And brought therewith to Israel great peace in place of strife?
Thou saw it well and did rejoice, now therefore take a pause,
And do not hurt the innocent, nor kill without a cause.
Then Saul gave ear to Ionathas God wot full faynedly,
Although he swore unto the Lord that David should not dye.
Yet Ionathas upon his oath did David to him call,
Declaring how the matter stood, and brought him unto Saul.
With whom he was, and served him as he had in times past,
But envy bare such rule in him that long it did not last.
For now the wars began a fresh, and David by Gods might
Slew many of the Philistines, and put the rest to flight.
The king envying this good luck which God had David sent,
Was through the wicked sprit possessed, again to mischief bent.
For as he sat his full intent was David to have slain,
At who^ he threw with mighty force his Iauelin, but in vain:
For David shund the deadly stroke, and durst not bide in sight,
But gat him home unto him wife, who saved him that night.
For Saul had sent his men of arms to guard his house about,
With charge to see him there dispatched before that he came out.
Then Michol like a faithful wife gave counsel very good, The faithf^nnesse
of Michol to her husband David.

And bad him save himself yt night, for sure they sought his blood.
No other shift she had to make their purpose to prevent,
But at a window let him down, and so away he went.
Who being gone she took and laid an image in his bed,
A pillow stuffed with Gotish here she put under his head:
Declaring to the messengers that came their lord to please,
How that in bed her husband lay not very well at ease.
Of this they made certificate to Saul to know his will,
Who bad them bring him bed and all that so he might him kill.
But when the men were entered in and stood by his bedstocke,
They found not David who^ they sought, but in his place a block.
Then Saul of Michol made demand wherefore she had done so,
Deluding him and all his men to let his enemy go?
Alas (quod she) I could not choose I so enforced was,
He threatened me with present death unless I let him pass.
Thus David being fled away was gone to Samuel,
To whom he had declared all the case; as it befell.
From Rama then to Naioth with Samuel he went,
Remaining there, although that Saul his messengers had sent.
For they with other Prophets mo began now to prophecy,
So that they had no mind to seek for David earnestly.
But when as Saul himself was come to Naioth where he was,
He then for fear departed thence and fled to Ionathas,
^he second ^^ofe of Io^^thas' fide^^tie.
Complaining thus: O Ionathas what cause, give I of strife,
That still thy father and my lord so seeks for my life.
Now God forbid, quod Ionathas, he deal so cruelly,
Expel all fear, pull up thine heart, trust me thou shall not dye:
For well I know my father will no one thing take in hand,
But or he does attempt the same I shall it understand:
And will he now hide this from me? he is not so unkind,
To work thy death so secretly, and show me not his mind.
Oh Ionathas thy father knows, and plainly this does see,
What faithful love and tender heart thou bear unto me,
Therefore perhaps he will it hide as though it were not so,
To stay thy heart from pensiuenes and filling it with woe:
But truly as the Lord does live, and thou do live with breath,
One step there is, and scarcely that between me and my death.
What will thou have me do (quod he) declare to me thy mind,
For both in wealth and bitter woe thou shall me faithful find.
Behold (quod he) to morrow next the king does hold the feast,
Where I should sit at board with him, my room to fill at least,
But let me go into the fields and keep me out of sight,
Till all the feast be done and past: the third day toward night
If Saul thy father speak of me, demanding to and fro,
Say then I craved leave of thee to Bethleem to go,
Where once a year a solemn feast is holden there within,
For all the stock and progeny of me and all my kin.
If he be pleased there withal thy servant shall have peace,
But if he do intend me hurt his malice will not cease:
Then shall thy mercy do me good, and with thy bond accord,
Which to thy servant thou did make and promise in the Lord:
For if in me there can be found offense in all the land,
Then let me never farther go but kill me with thy hand.
God thee defend, quod Ionathas, for if I did it know
That any harm were toward thee, of truth I would it show.
Then David said, how shall I learn what Saul does say to thee,
Or who shall tell me if my lord do answer cruelly?
Come let us go into the field, and so they took their way,
Where Ionathas brast out in words, and began to David s^^^
O Lord the God of Israel, when I have gropen out
My fathers mind, or that all these three days be gone about:
If all things touching thee be well, word shall be brought to thee,
And if I keep not touch therein, the Lord then punish me,
And also if my father Saul do seek thy blood to shed,
I will my self be thy defense, till thou away be fled:
And so the Lord keep and defend thee where so ere thou goes,
And be with thee as he has been with Saul against his foes.
Now this request of thee I crave, which grant thou will I trust,
That I may live my days in peace to make thy covenant just,
And when I have run out my course, the^ for my sake to mine
Thou will not cut thy mercy off when that the sword is thine.
No not even when the Lord above thy foes has all confound,
And left thee not an enemy alive upon the ground.
So Ionathas renewed his bond, and to the Lord he spoke,
That David's foes might it revenge if that the same were broke:
And further swear to keep ye bond that was between the^ sown,
For David's body, life and soul, he loved as his own.
Then Ionathas to David said, to morrow does begin
The feast, whereas the king will spy thy place no man therein:
Therefore go hide thee out of sight till three days pass, no more,
Make haste and get thee to that place where thou was put before,
Even when the matter was in hand, and there remain and ly
By Ezel stone, which does direct the way for passers by:
And I will come and shoot three shafts, and they shall light beside,
As though my mark were therabout where thou thy self do hide.
Then will I say unto my boy go hence and tarry not,
Seek out with speed and gather up the shafts that I have shot:
And if I call and say to him, they be on this side thee,
Then all is well, be not afraid to show thy self to me.
But if I say, they are beyond, why stand thou so still,
The Lord has sent thee then away, and saved thee from ill.
As touching this, and all that we have spoken of before,
Between us two the Lord shall be a witness evermore.
So David hid him self abroad when Saul the feast began,
Where all the lords save he alone were placed eury man.
(...) Saul did note full well and mark, yet nothing did he say,
But thought some one or other let did keep him then away.
But on the next day when he saw his place was void again,
Of Ionathas he did demand the cause of his refrain.
Where is the son of Isai? What is the cause (I say)
He does absent him from the feast both now and yesterday?
Then Ionathas made his excuse, and said that he was gone
To Bethleem town, and asked him leave, for that it stood him on:
For all his kindred there did meet an offering to present
Unto the Lord, and therefore had his brother for him sent.
This is the cause that does him let to come and keep his place,
Among the peers that present be at table with your grace.
Then Saul fell out with Ionathas at board before them all,
The son of his rebellious wife he did him name and call.
I know that thou and David both are joined in one frame,
Which will be thy confusion, and eke thy mothers shame.
For be thou sure so long as he does live upon the earth,
The kingdom thou shall not possess whilst you have any breath.
Wherefore go seek and fet him out where ever he be now,
By force or any other mean, for sure his death I vow.
What has he done (quod Ionathas) with either hand or breath
Against your royal Majesty, that you have sworn his death?
That said, he shook his spear at him with discontented brain,
Which was a sign to Ionathas that David should be slain.
Whose heart did bleed his friends estate and danger to conceive,
No meat could down, and thereupon he rose and took his leave.
So on the morrow which was now his just appointed day,
He made his walk into the field and place where David lay:
And while he tried his shafts to shoot, he bad his page make have
and run and mark them where they light, and gather the^ as fast.
The boy made have, and Ionathas shot out a shaft or two
Beyond the place were David lay, as he did think to do:
And when the boy was at the mark where Ionathas had shot,
He called unto him and said with heavy heart, God wot:
Are not the shafts beyond thee now, make have and stand not still,
The boy with speed them brought to him according to his will.
Then with his bow and furniture away the boy was sent,
Not knowing ought of that was done, or what his master me^t.
The boy no sooner home returned with his artillery,
But David came and to the ground fell thrice upon his knee.
With weeping eyes each other kissed, their hearts did melt and bleed:
They wept so long together both that David did exceed.
Then Ionathas to David said, depart and go in peace,
And let the bond between us two stand fast and never cease.
So David to Abimelech Nobs priest his journey took, Cap. 21.

Whose soden sight appald him much, so that for fear he shook.
And for to know the cause thereof demanded by and by:
What is the matter thou art come, and have so few with thee?
The king (quod) he has secret things committed to my charge,
That none may know, wherefore I have left all my me^ at large.
If thou have any bread or meat, or ought under thy hand,
I pray thee give it unto me, for here I may not stand.
Then he for lack of common bread did with himself devise,
To give him of the holy loaves his hunger to suffice.
Well yet, said David, one thing more I shall of thee require,
My harness have I left behind, my weapons be not here:
If thou have any better store I pray thee lend me one,
The king did send me in such have that I provided none.
Here is (quod he) great Golies sword, and showed him where it lay,
If that may happily serve your turn then spare it not I pray.
(...)etter sure (quod he) then that, and therefore made no stay,
But took it up, and to the king of Geth he went his way.
Whose court did know him by and by, and therefore gave it out
That this was David who was king of Judah round about.
Whose praise the women did set forth above all other men,
Ascribing unto Saul but one, and unto David ten.
Which saying David noted well, and put them in his breast, Now David feigned
him self to be mad.

But yet as one that stood in fear least he should be oppressed.
Wherefore his speech he counterfeit, and played such madding fits,
That all that saw him did believe that he had lost his wits.
From mouth to beard with loathsome sight his filthy spettle ran,
And scrauld about from door to door much like a Bedlem man.
Then Achis said unto his men, ye see it is of troth,
This man to be beside him self, and wots not what he does:
Wherefore the^ have ye brought him me, as though great need I had
Of frantike fellows in my sight so foolish and so mad:
Away with him and get him hence, and trouble me no more,
My pleasure is such frantike men come not within my door.
When David had escapde the king by this devised guyle,
Within Odollams hollow caves he did him self a while:
Who was no sooner there and known, but thither did resort
His brethren with his fathers house, him only to support:
And those that were entangled then with det or else with law,
And such as were disquieted, all such to him did draw:
And those that so had flockt to him four hundred were in all,
And he as capteyne ruled them, they ready at his call.
And from that place with all his men he gat him to Mizpa,
A place among the Moabites, where he with favor lay,
And made request unto the king his good will to obtain,
That under his protection his parents might remain
A while with him for their solace, till he did see and know
What God would do for him and his in their distress and woe.
The king was well content, and glad that David was so bold,
And kept them all the while he lay within the fence and hold,
Where he was warned of the Lord even by the Prophet Gad,
That into Judah he should go with all the men he had.
The^ marching forth came to the wood of Hareth, where he ^^e^d,
At whose approaching Saul began, as one somewhat dismayed,
Some means to seek as he might best his state and honor save,
And leaning to his spear forthwith began such talk to have.
O hear ye sons of Iemini, what have ye take in hand?
Think you the son of Isai will give you house and land?
Will he in office you promote great Capteins for to be,
That ye have thus with him conspirde, and none does tell it me?
And where as Ionathas my son with him has made a bond,
Yet none of you will mourn with me, nor let me understand?
Then Doeg start him up and said, Abimelech the priest
Had helped David in his need against the king most hiest.
Wherefore the king put him to death, with all ye priests each one, The Priests
of Nob are slain.

Save only that Abiathar to David fled alone.
Declaring how that wicked Saul his fathers blood had shed,
For that he had sustained him, and in his hunger fed.
I thought no less, quod David then, but such a thing would fall,
That Doeg would in time accuse thy father unto Saul:
I am the cause of all this death and great destruction,
Thy fathers house by me are brought to their confusion:
Abide by me, and fear thee not where ever that I go,
For he that seeks for my life shall seek for thine also.
It so befell the Philistines their force and might had bent Cap. 23.

Against the town of Keilah, whose utter spoil they meant.
Which thing when David knew, he sought ye Lords good will to know,
Who wild him with good courage fight, and give ye overthrow.
Then said his men, be we not all afraid in Judah here,
How much the more shall we to see the Philistines appear.
He asked then the Lord again, who did him understand
He should go down, for he would give them all into his hand.
So David with his crew of men made have unto the town,
And fought against the Philistines till he had bet them down,
And spoiled them of all their goods, and eury thing they had, David saved the
town of Keilah.

And saved the inhabitants, and made the people glad.
Of this the king was certified, and farther to him told,
How David with his bond of men took Keilah for his hold.
Whereat the king did much rejoice, and made his reckning so,
That God had now deliuerd up to him his mortal fo,
For that he was within a town that was of such a strength
To hold him fast, so that he might dispatch him at the length:
And so prepared him an host of warlike men and stout,
To take his way to Keilah the town to siege about.
Now David being ware of all the mischief Saul had wrought,
Began to call unto the Lord, and thus he him besought.
O Lord the God of Israel thy servant hears report,
That Saul with might and power intends to Keilah to resort,
The same (for my sake) to destroy: good Lord I ask of thee,
Will they that dwell in Keilah to Saul deliver me?
Will he come down, as it is said, good Lord thy servant tell?
He will (quod he) come down and bring the host of Israel.
But will the men of Keilah deceive both me and all?
Yea (said the Lord) they will of truth betray thee unto Saul.
Then David out of Keilah departed by and by,
And sought abroad to find a place where he might safely ly.
At last within the wilds of Ziph he got a place, and lay,
Where Saul for him did hunt about, but yet he mist his pray.
The third proof of Ionathas fidelity.
As David lay with fearful heart within the wilderness,
Came Ionathas to comfort him in his great heauynes.
Fear not (quod he) in any thing, nor trouble not thy mind,
My fathers hand, assure thy self, thy presence shall not find.
Thou shall be king of Israel, and I next after thee,
The which my father knows well, and often has told it me.
And so the band was once again renewed on their parts,
Then each of other took his leave with heavy careful hearts.
Now while that David lay in Ziph, the Ziphits told to Saul,
How that both he and eke his men lay in the thicket all.
Graund mercies (said ye king) my friends, but this you must me grant,
If all be true he lacks no shifts, and therefore mark his haunt:
And search me out his lurking dens the wilderness about,
And him with well appointed men I mind to ferrit out.
But David being ware of this prevented all his foes,
And so unto the wilderness of Maon forth he goes.
Where he had not been very long or that he heard it said,
How Saul was coming after him, or whom he was afraid:
And gat him up unto the rock to keep him out of sight,
The king pursuing him at hand with his great power and might:
So much that they were almost met and of each others seeene,
But that it so fell out by chance a mount was them between:
Which Saul had almost compassed with armed men about,
That neither he nor yet his men could any way get out.
Thus taking thought how to escape his cruel enemy,
The Lord prepared present help in his extremity.
Word came the king should home return with all the speed he could,
The Philistines were in his realm and made what spoil they would.
Then Saul left of to persecute, and David gat him thence,
To wilderness of Engadi, a place of sure defense.
When Saul was come from following the Philistines again, Cap. 24.

And was informed credibly where David did remain,
He took three thousand chosen men and went to Engadi,
To seek out David and his men which lay in rock on hye.
But by the way it fortuned the king to step aside
Into a cave to ease him self, which was both large and wide:
Where in the inward parts thereof lay David and his band:
Behold (said they) thine enemy is now within thy hand:
According as the Lord did say and promise long ago,
That he would give him unto thee, thy will with him to do.
Then David rose with stealing steps and got behind the king,
And from his garment cut a lap, and did none other thing.
This being done forthwith he felt a prick of conscience,
As though against his lord and king he had made some offense.
The Lord (quod he unto his men) defend me from this thing,
And grant that I lay not my hand on Gods anointed king.
As truly as the Lord does live, till God his time has sent,
I will not lay my hand on him, nor yet thereto consent.
So stopped he away his men from doing hurt to Saul,
And would not suffer ought of them upon the king to fall.
When Saul was gone out of the cave, then David did not slack,
But went and cried after him, whereat the king looked back.
To whom with all obedience, as subjects ought to do,
He stouped down unto the ground and spoke him thus unto.
My lord and king what credit has the words of them that say,
How David goes about thy hurt in all that ere he may.
Behold this day thine eyes have seen how yt the Lord thee gave
Into my hands, if that I would, when thou wast in the cave.
Some bad me kill thee out of hand, but yet I did refrain,
And would not lay my hands on him who in ye Lord did reign.
Behold and see within my hand a piece of thy coat lap,
I might as well have killed thee when this to thee did hap:
Therefore thou may consider well no wickedness in me,
And that I never in my life committed fault to thee:
And yet thou huntest after me, away my soul to take,
The Lord be judge between us both, my venger him I make.
But God forbid against my lord that I should once but think,
In subjects hearts such wickedness ought never for to sink.
Then after whom art thou come out to hunt so cruelly,
A dog that has no life in him, or eke a seely fly?
The Lord which is a righteous God be judge and plead my cause,
And keep me from all violence that I offend no laws.
The great gentleness of David compelled Saul his enemy to yield.
What voice (quod Saul) is this that so is come unto mine ears?
Is It thine my son? and therwithall he poured forth his tears:
Thy goodness far surpasses mine, thou have done good for ill,
And thou have put my lot aside whom thou mights easily kill:
For who is he that of his foe that vauntage has to slay,
And yet will suffer him untouched in peace to go his way?
Wherefore the Lord reward it thee, and make thee recompense,
For that thou suffredst none at all to do me violence.
I know full well, and do confess the kingdom of this land
Shall after my decease be thine, and come into thy hand:
And that I may make sure account of thy good will to me,
Swear that my name and that my seed shall not be hurt by thee.
Then David made a bond with him to keep it constantly,
And so departed to an hold from Saul his enemy.
Cap. 25.
And after that he went unto the forest of Pharan,
Where Nabal his abiding had, a rich and welthy man:
Who had a thousand gotes by tale, and eke three thousand sheep,
Which were defended all by him and those that did them keep:
For all the while those shepherds lay by David thereabout,
They mist no goods, nor had no harm by David nor his route.
Wherefore he being in distress and want of things to eat,
Did send to Nabal, shearing sheep, for vittels to entreat.
Of the churlish part of Nabal.
Who then refused churlishly to help him at his need,
And moved David's patience against him to proceed.
Intending to destroy his house, his cattle sheep and all,
And for to leave not one alive to piss against the wall,
Had it not been that Nabals wife Abigael by name,
With wisdom and discretion had well appeasd the same.
In whom he blessed God that day that her to him had sent,
To keep him from his own revenge, and from the thing he meant.
Which woman was of such a grace, and of so pure a life,
That David after Nabals death did take her to his wife:
And took an other of the stock of Israel also,
For Saul upon one Psaltiel his Michol did vestow.
When David had been after this among the Ziphits spid, Cap. 26.

They went to Saul and made report where he and his were hid.
And thereupon he took to him three thousand of his men,
And went unto the wilderness to seek for David then.
And pitched up his tents upon the hill of Achila,
Which lies over Iesimon hard by the common way.
Then David sent about his spies to know the certayntie,
If that the king were come or no with such a company.
The thing now being unto him affirmed to be true,
He made him self a privy spy and went the host to view.
Beholding well his Lord and king and Abner how they lay,
With all the people round about, so gat him soon away:
And asked both Abimelech and eke Abisai,
Who would into the host of Saul go with him privily.
Abisai offered him self and preased forth in sight,
So went they forth as secretly as they could go by night.
Into the host when they had put them selves in hazard deep,
Behold the king with all the rest lay hard and fast asleep.
Then said to him Abisai, God has deliuerd now
Thine enemy into thy hands in form as thou see how.
Give leave therefore that I may give but one stroke with my spear.
And he shall never after this put thee in any fear.
No God forbid (said David then) for who can more or less Of David's
faythfulnes to Saul.

Lay hand upon the Lords anoint, and be therein giltlesse.
As truly as the Lord does live the Lord shall do his will,
In battle or by other means, before I do him kill.
The Lord me keep both now and ay my hand I never move
Against the Lords anointed king, whom I am bound to love.
Then David fair and softly went till he came unto Saul,
And took his spear and water cruse, and went away withal.
No man then saw ne marked it, ne took thereof no keep,
For God had cast upon them all a dead and heavy sleep.
Then David gat him to an hill, where he aloude did call
Unto the people in the host, and Abner most of all.
O Abner Abner hearst thou not how I do call to thee.
Whose that (quod he) that so does cry unto the king and me?
O Abner art not thou a man most chief in governing,
Why have thou then no better kept this night thy lord and king?
For one there was that entered in this night thy lord to slay,
Whose enterprise by weapon strong thou did not seek to stay.
In this ye have offended all, and worthy are to dye,
In that ye have not kept your Lord with more security.
Behold and see your masters spear which at his head did stand,
And eke the cruse of water both, they are now in my hand.
My son (quod Saul) is this thy voice that comes to mine ear?
It is thy servants voice (said he) that lives in great fear.
Why does my lord thus persecute his servant so at large,
In whom there can no fault be found him justly for to charge?
If that the Lord has stirred thee to work me all this smart,
Then let him smell a sacrifice out of a patient heart.
But if from wicked men do come the cause of this discord,
Then they and their devises be accursed before the Lord.
For they have wronged me and seek to dispossess in fine,
Of that which in my Lord my God is due to me and mine.
Seek not therefore to suck my blood, thou seek but a fly,
As he that seeks the seely bird to murder cruelly.
Then Saul confessed his offense and wrong that he had done,
Desiring David to return, and called him his son:
And said he would him hurt no more, nor use extremities,
Because his life that night had been so precious in his eyes.
And that with grief he felt remorse of folly did him touch,
And played the fool, and in his ways had erred very much.
But David knowing Saul to have his promise broke before,
Would not return, his sugared words to credit any more.
But bad the king behold his spear, which he held up full trim,
And wild him send and it should be delivered unto him.
The Lord my God reward each man, and eury man preserve,
As his upright and honest deeds and faith shall best deserve.
For though the Lord delivered thee into my hands this day,
Yet on the Lords anointed king my hand I would not lay.
As I have always pitied thee, and never been thy foe,
Even so the Lord be merciful to me in all my woe.
Then he departing to him self complained inwardly,
And said, no doubt the day will come that he will murder me:
And I no better way can find this mischief to withstand,
Then fly unto the Philistines for succor in their land.
So he from Ziph to Geth that time his journey did address,
To make his suite to Achis king for help in this distress.
Where David with his company and his two comely wives,
Did place the^ selves, and minded there to pass and spend their lives.
But yet misliking to remain in Geth that City great,
Some country place for to possess he did the king entreat.
At whose request he gave to him the town of Zikleg then,
Whereto he went and dwelled there, both he and all his men.
Which town had evermore the name and counted to perteine,
Unto the kings that wonted were in Judah for to reign.
He and his men had there remaynd not fully half a year,
When he played rex, and ouerranne the country eury where.
The Gersurites, Amalekites, the Gersites did he drive
Out of the land, and slew the rest, not leaving one alive.
And kept them so they could not pass to Geth no manner way,
To tell the king how that he did them use from day to day.
And often being lade with spoils to Geth he would the^ bring,
And make presentme^t of ye same in presence of ye king.
Who musing much from whence such store of spoils and prays he brought,
Would ask what country he had roud, and for ye same had sought.
Among the Jews, and such (quod he) as Southwardly are set,
I have bestowd my self the spoils and booties for to get.
Thus making Achiz to believe he hated Israel,
Became his man, and was retaynd with him for aye to dwell.
Cap. 28.
It so befell the Philistines to battle did address
Them selves against the Israelites, and sought them to oppress.
Then Achis unto David said, thou shall go forth with me
Unto the battle, thou and all the men that are with thee.
If thou (said he unto the king) be pleased I shall go,
Then shall thou see and well perceive what I thy man can do.
But when the lords of Philistines the Hebrews saw a far,
Which came behind with Achis men, demanded what they war?
It Is David, said the king, that serud king Saul in Jewish ground,
Who I have long retaynd with me, and very faithful found.
The lords began frown and much mislike, and said he should not go,
least he in fight would give the slip and be their mortal fo.
For why? he could devise no way in all the world so good
Saul's love to win, as to embrue his weapon in their blood.
Cap. 29.
Is not this he whose fame they sang in daunces heretofore,
Ascribing somewhat unto Saul, but unto him much more.
Then Achis called David forth, and said to him his mind,
As truly as the Lord does live I found thee ever kind:
So honestly thou have thy self behaved aye with me,
That from the first day hitherto I can not burden thee.
But so it is, those lords of mine such favor do not bear
As I would wish they did to thee, but somewhat stand in fear.
Wherefore our pleasure is thou shall return with all thy men,
And take thine ease till we appoint thy service where and when.
What have I done (quod he again) what matter can thou bring,
That I may not to battle go to aid my lord and king?
Of truth (said he) I have thee tried to be a man upright,
And as an Angel of the Lord I take thee in my sight.
Yet since my Nobles toward thee do bear a burning heart,
A greater mischief to prevent we will that thou depart.
Then David and his men with speed unto his home returned,
And found what hauock there was made, and al their city burnd,
The Amalekites had rushed in of malice and of spite,
And all the people in the town by force had taken quite.
When David saw their cruel spoils and fury to be such,
Their wives and children led away, it greeud him very much.
And being then it doubtful plight what he might best devise,
For that the people ready were against him for to rise,
And seek to stone him unto death, unto the Lord he drue,
To know if that his pleasure was he should those men pursue.
Yea (said the Lord) pursue them all, and make no longer stay,
Make speed, thou shall them overtake and get again the pray.
So in pursuing after them he chanced for to find
A certain sick Egyptian left in the field behind,
Who being well examined did utter all he knew,
And told him when and where he might Thamalekites pursue.
And brought him just unto ye place where they were laid along,
Dispersed abroad and making there, with dancing and with song.
Then David did bestirre himself, and ere the morning light
He slew them all, save that a few escaped in the flight:
And did recover all his goods, his people eurychone,
His men, their wives and children al, so that there lacked none:
Beside the spoils that they had got by this their bloody fall,
Whereby and that abundantly they were enriched all.
Thus then returned he gave rewards, and sent about his gifts,
To all his friends that him releeud when he was put to shifts.
This victory upon his foes when David had obtaynd, 2. Regum. Cap. 1.

To Zikleg he him self retirde, and there two days remaynd.
Behold to him the third day came one from the host of Saul
With mourning weed, and at his foot before him then did fall.
The king forthwith asked what he was, and bad his message tell?
I am (quod he) escaped from the host of Israel.
What news (quod he) are stirring there, and how do matters go?
Both Saul (said he) and Ionathas are slain with many mo.
How art thou sure that Saul (quod he) and Ionathas are slain?
Uouchsafe (said he) O king to hear, and I will make it plain.
As I by chance unto the mount of Gilbo took my way,
With mazed mind I found king Saul upon his spear to stay:
Then he demanding who I was, and I confessing plain, Here Saul is slain.

Besought me to dispatch his life, and rid him out of pain.
And thereupon I slew him straight, and took away with me
His crown, his bracelet on his arm, which I have brought to thee.
Then David rent and tore his clothes, both he and all his men,
For sorrow that the Israelites had such misfortune then.
He did abstain from meat that day, and mourned for king Saul
And Ionathas, that now had lost their lives their men and all.
Then David did command the man yt had these tidings brought,
To tell what country man he was, and to dissemble naught.
I am my sovereign Lord (quod he) as one to Israel sworn,
And yet of truth an Amalekite in country bred and borne.
How is it then (quod he again) thou wast not sore afraid
To kill the Lords anointed king as thou thy self have said?
Then David gave his men a charge to rid him out of breath,
For that this heinous fact of his deserves justly death.
For he had with his mouth confessed that he the king had slain,
Wherefore of right blood asked blood to be reuengd again.
This done the kings surpassing grief did not at all relent,
But did for Saul and Ionathas thus bitterly lament.
O noble king of Israel thus murthred on the mount,
Thy mighty capteins overthrown of who^ thou made account.
Let neither Gath nor Askalon be told this heavy chance,
Lest that ye daughters of ye heathen triumph with song and dance.
On you ye mountains Gilboa your lord and king is slain,
Upon your fields be no increase for lack of dew and rain.
The shields of all the mighty men are cast down for a spoil,
The shield of Saul, as though he had not ben anoint with oil.
The bow of Ionathas my frieud it never turned back,
Nor yet the sword of Saul my lord of pray did never lack.
How lovely were they in their lives, how pleasant to behold,
And in their deaths they never were divided nor unfold.
More swifter then the Eagles foul to fly upon their pray,
And stronger then the Lions were to bear the spoil away.
Ye daughters now of Israel bewail your Lord king Saul,
Who clothed you with scarlet robes, with purple, and with paul.
His power, his might, his strength, his life, and all is gone you see:
O Ionathas my dearest friend my heart does bleed for thee.
Thy friendly love and faith to me so wonderful it was,
That all the love that women have it did surmount and pass.
O Lord how are the mighty men orethrowen in Israel,
Their warly weapons all destroyde that pity is to tell.
When David had lament the death of Saul and Ionathas, Cap. 2.

He went and asked of the Lord his pleasure what it was:
Demanding whether that he should to any City go,
Or place that were within the land of Judah, yea or no.
The Lord said unto him, go up. And whither Lord, quod he?
To Hebron (said the Lord again) this answer take of me.
Then David went with his two wives, the one a Iezralite,
The other Nabals wife that was the welthy Carmalite.
He took the men also with him that of his troubles felt,
Who with their households al within ye town of Hebron dwelt.
Then came the men of Judah forth to him with one accord,
And did annoint him for to be their king and sovereign lord:
And told him of the faithfulness of Iabes done of late,
In burying Saul as did become a prince of high estate.
Then David sent Ambassadors the Iabites to commend,
For their great love and kindness showed to Saul at his last end.
The Lord (quod he) do bless you all with mercy for your fact,
And I will do the like to you for this your godly act.
Therefore now let your hands be strong, and turn your hearts to me,
For Saul is dead, and Judah has me chose their king to be.
So Judah only claue to him, the rest of Israel
To Isboseth the son of Saul they stacke to him as well.
Now David Ioab did appoint his general to be,
And Isboseth did Abner choose his men to ouersee.
The wars between these houses two increased more and more, Cap. 3.

But David had the stronger hand, the other weakened sore.
For Abner went from Isboseth upon displeasure take,
And with king David secretly a faithful band did make:
And Michol he brought home again, the kings beloved wife,
Whom Psaltiel did never touch by way of spotted life.
But or he could the rest all bring about effectually,
He was by Ioab murdered, and that most Iudasly.
Which sore agreeued David's heart, as one that giltles was
Of Ioabs shameful wicked act which he had brought to pass.
Wherefore to Ioab then he wished, that for his small regard
Both blood and plagues on him and his might fall for his reward.
And that he should go with the rest and bring the coarse to grave,
In sackcloth and in mourning wede, he strait commandment gave.
Him self all full of heauynes, with sad and heavy cheer,
Came after Abner as he went, even next unto the beer.
And as they laid him in the grave according in Hebron,
The king and people all they wept to see the earth put on.
But David mourned most of all since treason did him kill,
And knowing that by natures course he might have lived still.
Now when the people came to feast, as they were wont to do
At burials, the king to eat they could not bring unto.
By that they knew that Abners death the king had never meant,
But Ioabs grudge did work it out without the kings consent.
Cap. 4.
It so befell that Baana and Rechab sought the way,
How they their lord king Isboseth might craftily betray.
The mean was this, they faynd the^ selves great merchants for to be,
Came to ye palace of the king his corn and grain to see:
Here Isboseth is slain traitorously.
Where they by chance found him a sleep, and slew him as he lay
Upon his bed, and brought from thence his head with them away
To Hebron, where king David was, and said, behold and see,
Here is the head of Isboseth thy mortal enemy.
For through the might that god has given in working of this deed,
Thou art avenged both of Saul and also of his seed.
Then David said unto the men that brought to him the head,
As truly as the Lord does live ye are as good as dead.
As you do now so one did once Saul's death to me report,
And made account such news as those should please me in like sort,
And looked for some great reward for ye good news he brought,
But all the matter went awry against his mean and thought:
For he was slain and put to death for his most wicked prank,
And so he lost both life and all his labor and his thank.
So shall the wickedness of you which have the righteous slain
Upon his bed, be recompencd with blood for blood again.
Then having feet and hands cut off for eury man to see,
Were hanged over Hebrons poole as other felons be.
As for the head of Isboseth the kings good pleasure wild
It should in Hebron be entombd, with Abner that was kilde.
Then came the Tribes of Israel to David flockingly, Cap. 5. David is anointed
king.

As to their king and sovereign lord, with him to live and dye.
So being now the lord and king of all the Israelites,
He gat him to Jerusalem, and to the Iebusites:
Who bragging much upon their hold of Sion where they dwelt,
By force of arms he wanne the same, as many of them felt.
The Philistines now hearing tell of David's power and might,
Came to the vale of Raphaim against him for to fight.
Who then demanded of the Lord to know his will therein,
And whether that the Philistines or he should honor win.
Go up (said God) and linger not while they be in thy land,
For I assuredly will give them all into thy hand.
So David went him forth and came to Baal Perazim,
Where that he smote the Philistines as God had said to him.
Then began he say, O Lord my God thou have mine enemies all
Divided them, as waters do divide them when they fall.
The Philistines for have do leave their Idols all behind,
And David and his men do burn as many as they find.
Yet once again the Philistines came forth to fight with him,
And brought their army whole into the vale of Raphaim.
Now compass the^ behind (said God) and watch the^ well, and when
They come against the Mulbery trees the onset give you then.
So David then obeying God a conquest did obtain,
From Geba unto Gazer town the Philistines were slain.
Soon after this the king prepared to fet the Ark of God, Cap. 6.

With thirty thousand chosen men of Israel and od.
And so out of Jerusalem he went his men with him,
To set and bring away the Arc from Kiriath Iarim.
And that he set with careful heed upon a Charret new,
And from Abinadab his house he decently it drew.
Two of his sons drove forth the same, Vza and Ahio,
The one before, the other behind the Chariot did go.
The king and all the Israelites made melody, and played
Triumphantly before the Lord as they the Arc conuayed.
But when the king did see the hand of God on Vza light,
And strike him dead, because he touched the Arc yt went not right,
He was aferd, and durst not seem to drive it as before,
But left it Edom for to keep till he had learned more,
Where it remaynd about three months, whereby both him and his
The Lord of hoasts with great increase abundantly did blis.
Then was it told to David how the Lord had Edom blessed
And all his house, since that the Ark of God had been his gest.
Then David went and brought the Ark of God from him away,
With all the triumph and the joy that could be had that day.
For as the Levites bare the Arc and had six paces gone,
An Ox and eke a fatted beast was offered up alone.
And David daunst before the Arc as it was driven there,
And had a linen Ephod on upon his other gere.
So all the house of Israel brought forth the Arc with shoute,
And trompet blowing as they went, the noise rang all about.
Michol despises David for dancing before the Arc.
But when as Michol David's wife saw him so dance and spring,
She grew in great disdain thereat, and did mislike the thing.
Yet notwithstanding when the Arc was settled in his place,
He made his offerings to the Lord of mercy, peace and grace.
Which being done and finished, the people he did bless,
And to them all of banquet meat dealt something more or less.
Then he dismissing all the folk assembled in that place,
Returned home unto his house to bless it in like case.
Where Michol meeting him could not forbear, but thus did say,
Good God how glorious was the king of Israel this day,
Which seemed in thy maidens eyes uncovered like a sot,
Whereby of them and other mo great hatred thou have got.
It was before the Lord (quod he) that I did dance and sing,
Who overthrew thy father Saul and chose me to be king,
And made me ruler over all the people Israel,
Rejecting Saul and all his house, as thou thy self can tell.
And yet if my humility be grievous in thy sight,
I will be meek in mine own eyes before the Lord of might,
And of the maiden servants here which thou have spoken of,
I shall be had in honor great, when they at thee shall skoffe. Cap. 7.

When God had settled David's reign, and him and his had blessed,
And with all Princes round about had given him peace and rest,
Gods glory to advance he sought, and bended all his heart,
And to the Prophet Nathan then his mind he did impart.
Behold (quod he) how that my house is buylt with Cedre trees,
And yet the Arc has nothing else but curteins as thou sees.
The Prophet said, do what thou have determined to do,
For God which has respect to thee will set his hand thereto.
Thus Nathan spoke before he knew what Gods good pleasure was,
And did receive a cou^termaund before ye night did pass,
That wild him go unto the king and do him understand,
That Solomon should buyld Gods house and he not takt in hand.
When David being certified what God him self did say,
He sat him down before the Arc and thus began to pray.
O Lord my God what great account of me and mine have thou, David's prayer.

That to such Royal dignity have me exalted now?
And yet O Lord I know thou art of such a power and might,
That greater things to bring to pass is nothing in thy sight.
Thou spakest of thy servant house a great long while ago,
Which unto men does not perteine, but unto thee I know.
To keep thy word and promise sure, and make it to be known,
Not for thy servant David's sake (O Lord) but for thine own.
Thou art (O Lord) the only God that evermore have been,
None comparable to thy self was ever heard or seen.
And what one people in the earth or nation who can tell,
Is better and beloved more of thee then Israel?
Thou wentest and redeemedst them out of captivity,
That they might magnisie thy name and make it great to be.
With mighty signs and tokens out of Egypt thou have brought,
Thy people from the nations and from their Gods of naught.
Thou have elect and chosen them to be thy people ay,
And art become their only God to serve thee and obey.
And now (O Lord) the word thou have of me thy servant spoke,
And of his house, make thou it good, let not the same be broke.
So shall thy name be magnified, and eury man shall say,
The Lord of hoastes he is the God of Israel for ay.
For thou Lord God of Israel have thus reueald to me,
And said, I will now buyld thy house and make it sure to be.
And therefore has thy servant found now in his heart to pray
this simple prayer unto thee to be my help always.
Let all thy words therefore be true that thou thy servant told,
And keep thy promise unto him which thou have made of old.
And let it please thee for to bless thy servants house with grace,
That it for ever may abide and stand before thy face.
For thou my God have spoken it, let it be done therefore,
That thou thy servant David's house do bless for evermore.
Cap. 8. The victory that God gave to David over the Philistines and other
strange nations.
Now after this the Philistines he vanquished by strength,
And thereby rid all Israel from bondage at the length.
He smote also the Moabites, and meat them with a line,
And cast them flat upon the ground, and made the rest incline.
And being thus subdued to him, to him they tribute paid,
In token that they were his men his Majesty to aid.
He fought with Hadarezers host, and made a number fall
As well of horsemen as on foot, beside his Charrets all.
The Syrians which aided him and came his part to take,
Of two and twenty thousand men a slaughter did he make.
Thus David by the might of God did conquer all the land,
So merciful was God to him in all he took in hand.
Now after these great victories the king of Hamath sent
His son to David with great gifts, therewith him to present:
For that he had Hadarezer his enemy subdued,
Who oftentimes with him and his had open war renewed.
As for the spoils that he did get of silver, gold, or brass,
He gave it to the house of God what ever thing it was.
Thus David having got a name through honor he had won,
Sat in his seat, and judged right to eury mothers son.
And calling now to memory the bond that he did make
With Ionathas the son of Saul, thus openly he spoke.
Cap. 9.
Does any yet remain (quod he) of all the house of Saul,
That I for Ionathas his sake may him to honor call?
One Ziba then his servant old was brought unto the king, The restoring of
Miphiboseth the son of Ionathas.

That he by talk might see what he could say to eury thing.
Of whom the king demanded then if Ziba were his name?
Yea sir (quod he) thy servant is the self and very same.
Is there (quod he) yet any left of Saul his line or blood
To whom I may show mercy too, or do him any good?
Yea, Ionathas (quod he) has yet a son alive I know,
But he is lame upon his feet so that he can not go.
And where is he (quod David then, hide not if thou can tell?
He is (quod he) in Machirs house the son of Amiel.
Now then when that Miphiboseth was brought to David's sight,
He fell to ground, and so did make such reverence as he might.
Then David said, Miphiboseth be not afraid of me,
For I will for thy fathers sake be merciful to thee.
Thou shall enjoy thy fathers lands that did to Saul perteine,
And at my board thy food to eat I will thee enterteine.
Miphiboseth fell down and said, what is thy servant Lord,
That thou will look on such a dog, and set him at thy board?
Then David said to Ziba thus: the lands and rents of Saul
Unto thy masters son I give, both vineyard, fields and all.
Therefore thou and the men with thee do husband well the ground,
That food for Micahs maintenance with plenty may be found. Micah was
Miphiboseths son.

For now thy lord Miphiboseth shall eat his bread with me,
As though he were one of my sons, and be no charge to thee.
Now after this it so befell king Ammon for to dye, Cap. 10.

A friend of David's in distress that showed him curtesye.
Wherefore he thought it reason good to recompense his son,
In this respect for that he had his reign but new begone:
And thereupon an Embassy to this young king he sent
To comfort him in heauynes, and for no worse intent.
His Lords and his Nobility suspected David's men,
And therefore came unto the king and said unto him then:
What? do thou think that David does intend to thee none ill,
Or to thy father that he does this honor of good will?
His meaning is thy land and strength to search with privy spies,
And thereupon with might and maine thy kingdom to surprise.
The king gave credit to their talk and thought it verily,
And thereupon devised how to work them villainy.
And so for spite and open shame to David and his land,
The one half of their beards he shaues, and lets the other stand,
And did their garments all to cut accordingly with tools
Hard to the buttocks of the men, and sent them home like fools.
When David heard this misdemeane he willed some to go
And meet his me^, who were ashamd that any should the^ know.
So they abode at Jericho until their beards were grown,
And then returning home again it was no farther known.
This spite could David not digest for ought that they could do,
But sought revenge by open war and did perform it too.
Cap. 11.
The next year Zibba to besiege he sent his soldiers pressed,
But he within Jerusalem abode and took his rest.
David commits adultery and homicide.
It chanced so that on a time with some delightful sightes,
He walked upon his house above to recreate his sprites:
Where he a passing goodly wight espied from above,
As she was bathing of her self, with whom he fell in love.
And thereupon he sent his man and bad him word to bring
What was her name, whose wife she was, and eury other thing.
Word was returnde it was Bethsabe and one Vrias wife,
Who in the warfares of his grace was ventring of his life.
He sent for her, and when she came his heart was so inflamd,
With her to join in filthynes he nothing was ashamd.
And she returning to her house by David thus defilde,
Did send him word of certentie how that she was with child.
Then David to avoid the crime which he apparent saw,
Devised means her to defend from rigor of the law.
To Ioab straight he did dispatche a post, and bad him tell
That he should send Vrias home, to make the matter well.
And when Vrias came before the presence of the king,
And had discoursed of the wars and eury other thing,
The king did will him to go home and with his wife to rest,
To wash his feet and recreate him self as he thought best.
Vrias took his leave and home as David thought he went,
Who for his service in the wars a recompense him sent.
But yet in deed Vrias did not move one foot away,
But for that night before his gates upon the ground did stay.
Which thing when David knew he asked what was the cause, and why
He went not home unto ye house, and with his wife did ly,
And rest him there a while with her and eke his friends among,
Until he had refresht him self upon his journey long?
Vrias said, our sovereign Lord, the Arc of Israel,
The tribes of Judah, they also in tents and boothes do dwell.
My Captain Ioab with his men in open fields they lie,
Abiding hard adventures there in wether wet and dry.
And shall I now go to my house there for to eat and drink,
And have the pleasure of my wife? I did it never think.
I make an oath even by thy life, and by thy soul, O king,
So long the Arc does lie abroad I will not do this thing.
Then David wild he should remain and tarry one day mo,
And on the morrow should have leave for to depart and go.
That night he made Vrias drunk, him to provoke thereby
To have a mind unto his wife, and with her for to ly.
But as before, so now again upon the ground he lay,
And would not go unto his house what ever he did say.
Upon the morrow David wrote to Ioab his intent,
Which lettor sealed surely up he by Vrias sent:
The sum whereof was only this, he should Vrias train
Unto some piece of service there where that he might be slain.
Which thing of Ioab being done and David thereof told,
He thought him self now safe enough and that he might be bold.
Then sent he for the woman home, and she became his wife,
But God was very sore displeasd with this his sinful life.
Now David being wrapped in sin the Lord his Prophet sent, Cap. 12. David is
reproved for his adultery and homicide.

Who did propose this parable to make him to repent.
Two men (quod he) upon a time within one town did dwell,
The one but poor, the other God had blessed very well.
The rich man had exceeding store of cattle, ox, and sheep,
The poor man had in all the world but one poor lamb to keep,
Which he had fostred and brought up with him from day to day,
Till it grew up and with his babes began pleasantly to play.
It eat and drank with him at home, and in his bosom slept,
And as a daughter dear to him he causde it to be kept.
Unto the rich man's house there came a stranger as a gest,
Of all his sheep he would not let so much as one be dressed:
But took the poor man's lamb away, who had no mo but one,
And so prepared it for his gest, and let his own alone.
The king was moved with this talk, and grew in choler than,
And thought no pain or punishment to much for such a man.
And made an oath that vnreuengd that man should never go,
But should fourefold repay to him whom he had wronged so.
Thou art (said he) the very man, even thou thy self art he,
The Lord therefore has bid me come and say thus much to thee.
He made thee king of Israel, and of his people all,
And did also deliver thee out of the hand of Saul:
And gave to thee thy masters house, and eke his wives also,
And gave thee Judah, Israel, and might have given thee mo.
Why have thou the^ so soon forgot the Lord his power and might,
And fearing not what great offense thou do before his sight.
Thou have Vrias murdered, and spoild him of his wife,
And think now by marying her to cloak thy sinful life.
From thee therefore and from thy house the sword shall not depart,
And thou shall see and feel those plagues, and rue the^ with thy heart.
And furthermore he will stir up of thine own stock and race,
Such as shall take by violence thy wives before thy face,
And give them to thine enemy, who shall in thy despite,
Misuse them to thine utter shame, yea openly in sight.
Thou did thy sin most secretly to hide the same from me,
But I will do this openly that all the world shall see.
Here David with repentant heart his wickedness confessed,
And prayed God to send him grace to rectify the rest.
Then Nathan being at his hand, said to him by and by,
The Lord has put away thy sin, be sure thou shall not dye.
Yet since by thee and thy default thy God sustayneth shame,
The child that now is borne to thee shall dye and bear the blame
And Nathan so departing home the child did sicken sore,
Whose pain and grief in eury place increased more and more.
Then David fasting for the child besought ye Lord with tears,
To give it health and life withal to run his race of years.
Great mourning made he for ye child, and none could him entreat
To rise from ground, but there he lay absteining from his meat.
The seventh day came, and then the child did end his fatal thread,
But none durst signify so much or tell that he was dead.
For all the while he was alive he would not hear them speak,
And now to tell him of his death would cause his heart to break.
But David through the whispering he saw among his men,
Perceived well the child was dead, and asked of them then,
If that the child did live or no? who told him how it was,
How God had wrought his will in him from life to death to pas.
Then from the earth he lift him up and washed all away,
Annoynting him and putting on apparel fresh and gay,
And gat him first unto the house of God to give him praise,
And being turned home to eat his servants to him says.
We marvel why thou did lament thy child while it was here,
And now that he is gone from hence to be of so good chere?
So long (quod he) as it had life I did both fast and weep,
For this I thought, yt God always does mercy with him keep.
And who could tell if that he would his mercy to him show,
And save the child from cruel death if that his will were so?
But now he is departed hence it booteth not to fast,
Nor yet to weep, for nothing here on earth is made to last.
I can not bring his life again, but rather I shall go
To him then he shall come to me, no doubt the truth is so.
Then David knowing Bethsabe to be in heaviness,
Went in to her and sought the means her sorrows to redress.
Who at her time brought forth a son one Solomon to name,
Whom God appointed to him self his temple for to frame.
While Ioab Rabba to besiege with all his army lay,
He sent to David messengers, thus willing them to say,
How he had take the chiefest place of all the City strong,
Where that the palace of the king and Condites lie along.
Wherefore he willed David now to come and give the fall, A rare example in a
Captain.

That he might have the praise him self, and Ioab none at all.
Then David with an army went to Ioab his true man,
And joining both the hoastes in one the City so he wanne.
When he had now the City got and eke the king in hold,
He took the Crown of from his head a talent weight of gold,
The ingratitude of the Ammonites punished.
And therewith crounde him self as king to the^ who^ he did foil,
As for the riches of the land his soldiers had the spoil.
And calling to his mind ye shame which to his me^ they wrought,
By all the means he could devise a just reward he sought,
And plaged them with sundry deaths for to increase their woe,
With sword, with saw, with fire, with rope, and many torments mo.
Now David as a conqueror returned with his pray
Unto Jerusalem, the place where most he made his stay.
Cap. 13. Ammon rauisheth his sister Thamar.
Now after this the Lord began to stir his sons to strife,
And him to plague for his offense commit with Vries wife.
For Ammon with his sister fair whom Thamar they did call,
Did fall so far in love that he was very sick withal,
And could no manner way devise his purpose to obtain,
For that within her fathers house she always did remain.
Ionadab was ye son of Simeah David's brother.
Then Ionadab a friend of his and one of subtle wit,
Came unto him and counsel gave for such a purpose fit.
How comes this to pass (quod he) that thou art wasted so
With inward pensiuenes of mind, and will not let me know?
Then Ammon said, O Ionadab I am in love so sore
With Thamar, as no earthly man can be with woman more.
Why then (quod he) do feign you sick, and keep your chamber to,
And when the king your father comes to see you how you do,
Then ask him leave that Thamar may on you attenda^ce give,
And dress good meats to nourish you, if he will have you live.
This counsel his good friend did give, and he did like the same,
And so he lay and kept his bed until his father came,
Whom he in humble wise besought his sister might take pain
To dress him some good pretty meats to get his health again.
The king did grant, and did command the maiden so to do,
And bad her dress such wholesome meats as he had phansy to.
So Thamar came unto his house and took a little paste,
Wherewith she made him deinty meat that had a pleasant taste,
And came and brought the same to him where he was laid alone,
For he of purpose order took that eury man was gone.
Then Ammon said, come lie with me good sister I thee pray,
No man is here that can us see, thou shall not say me nay.
O good my brother force me not, that were too foul a fact,
And never yet in Israel was heard of such an act.
This would be such a blot as I should never purge the same,
And thou likewise a great reproach shuldst purchase to thy name:
Yet rather speak unto the king we may in wedlock dwell,
And live according to the law, and then it will be well.
But Ammon strove and would not cease until that he had got
His filthy pleasure satisfied, would she or would she not.
And after this ungodly fact all fansy began abate,
His love was not before so much but more was now his hate.
For when he had defiled her he made no longer stay,
But in a fume and chasing heat he had her pack away.
This spiteful usage of thy part is very much (quod she)
And is as ill as was thy force, and worse if worse may be.
He gave no ear unto her talk, but like a Bedlem brain
He turns her out, and locks the door least she return again.
And so poor soul away she goes as one without relief,
With ashes cast upon her head and crying out for grief.
Then said her brother Absalon, has Ammon been with thee,
Well, grieve thee not but tarry here and bide at home with me.
Now when as David understood of Ammons wicked part
Which he with Thamar did commit, it grieud him to the heart.
And Absalon bare it in mind although he nothing said,
But thought to have a just revenge when al ye wind was laid.
Now after two years run and past it chanced Absalon
To sheare his sheep, and did inuit his brothers eury one:
The king with smiling countenance he did inuit also,
That with his sons for company might please him for to go.
Not so my son (quod he again) thine offer is too large,
All may not go, least that we should put thee to too much charge.
Yet Absalon requested sore, and lay upon him still,
But he would not, and yet he gave him thanks for his good will.
Then Absalon pretending love to Ammon, did entreat
That he might go for company more then for any meat.
So many needs not (said the king) thou shall be but oppressed,
Yet since thou will, our pleasure is that he go with the rest.
Now Absalon had given a charge unto his waiting men,
When Ammons heart was most in mirth to fall upon him then.
Ammon is slain.
And so they slew him at the board, the rest were all aghast,
Who rose and gat them to their mules and fled away in haste.
Then tidings came unto the king how Absalon had slain
All David's sons, which he alive should never see again.
Whereat the king his garments tore, and to the ground he fell,
His men amazd, and what to do not one of them could tell.
Then Ionadab said to the king, let not my lord suppose
That they have slain the young men all, the rumor falsely goes.
But Ammon (this my lord is true) thine eldest son is dead,
For that in heart of Absalon was long determined,
Because his sister he misusde and did such shameful wrong,
And therefore thought to have revenge though he deferd it long.
Therefore my lord (I think) may well assure him self of this,
He shall his sons all safe receive, and none but Ammon mis.
Thalmai was ye king of Gesur, and father to Maacha Absolons mother.
It was not long (as Ionadab had said, but they came thither,
And told the news, and did lament the king and they together.
But Absalon was fled and sought assurance to procure,
And three whole years with Thalmai king remained safe and sure.
Cap. 14.
The heart of David somewhat lay to Absalon his son,
Which Ioab saw and did invent a way to have him won.
Which was, a certain witty wench well spoken in her speech,
Should mourningly come to the king and humbly him beseach,
To grant a pardon to her son which had his brother killed,
As they by great misfortune were a fighting in the field.
In fine the king smelt well enough her talk and her intent,
And asked her if Ioabs head did not thereto consent?
She said it was true, yet quit her self so well before her lord,
That by her means fair Absalon was home again restord,
Who falling down before the king he openly him kissed,
In token that all former things were quite and clean remist.
But Absalon soon after this ambitiously began Cap. 15. Absalon aspireth to
the kingdom.

For to prepare him self a king, with Charrets, horse, and man:
Alluring eury where abroad the people as he met
With fawning spech, so that they began on him their hearts to set.
When he the hearts of Israel from David had withdrew,
To him he goes and frames a tale, and not a word was true.
The sum was this: Such time as he in Gesur did remain,
He made a vow if ever that he should come home again,
He would serve God accordingly, his suit therefore is now,
He might to Hebron go with leave and satisfy his vow.
The king was very well content. So he did then depart,
And wrought such treason as was hid within his hollow heart.
And being there foreslows no time, but sends throughout ye land
To all the Tribes of Israel, by writing of his hand,
That when they hard the trumpet blow the^ each man should accord,
That Absalon of Hebron soil should be the king and lord.
Yet many of a simple heart with Absalon went out,
Not knowing of his treason wrought nor what he went about.
But through the fear and counsel of Achitophel thereto,
They were persuaded for to join and do as others do.
For he was very popular and bore a mighty sway,
And by his means to Absalon great strength grew eury day.
Then David being certified how that all Israel
Did join them selves with Absalon and eke Achitophel,
Did will his men for to prepare them selves unto the flight, David flies from
his son Absalon.

For other means he knew of none for to escape his might.
Make have (quod he) least that they come upon us unawares,
And smite the City with the sword to bring it full of cares.
They said to him, what ere thou shall thy servants point unto,
With all our hearts and minds we are most ready pressed to do.
Then went he forth with all his folks, save that he let remain
Ten Concubines to keep the house while that he came again.
So going from Jerusalem unto a certain place,
One Ithai with all his men did follow him apace. The fidelity of Ithai the
son of Achis king of Geth, as some do write.

And when the king saw Ithai he said unto him thus,
O Ithai my faithful friend why come thou with us?
Return unto Jerusalem and with the king abide,
For thou art but a stranger here, do for thy self provide.
Thou camst but yesterday my friend, should I disquiet thee?
I am not sure, nor know what ill or good may hap to me.
Therefore return, both thou and al thy soldiers, and be gone,
The mercy and the truth of God be with you eury one.
As truly as the Lord does live (quod Ithai again)
I will not hence nor yet dpart, but with my lord remain:
For in what place the king shall be to venture life or death,
There will thy servant eke appear so long as he has breath.
Come on (said David) let us go, we will not here abide,
So went he forth with Ithai and all his men beside.
The country wept all as they went, the people mourned sore,
To see the king so pass in fear the brook of Cedron ore.
Sadoch follows after David with the Arc, and is sent back again.
Then Sadoch with the Levites came out of Jerusalem
Unto king David where he was, and brought the Arc with them.
Who would it not as then receive, but bad that Sadoch should
Go set it in his place again, let him do what he could.
For if the Lord do favor me heel bring me home again,
And set mine eyes upon the Arc and Tabernacle plain.
But if the Lord do plainly say, I have to thee no lust,
Then let him work on me his will, for he I know is just.
In secret sort then David said to Sadoch, whom he knew
To be a very secret priest, and faithful, wise, and true.
Return thou and Abiathar, you and your sons also,
And in the City there remain till we do further know:
And I will tarry in the fields within the wilderness,
Until I reap some friendly fruit of your two faythfulnes.
Then Sadoch and Abiathar as David willed them,
Returned with the Ark of God unto Jerusalem.
Then David full of grief and care as one that was distressed,
Upon the mount of Oliuet went weeping with the rest.
With bared head and feet unshod, and tears that trickled so
That they bedewed all the place as they went to and fro.
As they and he did thus lament, a messenger does come
With heavy chere and heavy news, whereof this was the sum.
Achitophel had ioynde him self with Absalon as than,
And of his counsel and devise was now his chiefest man.
O Lord (quod he) let be thy will in this my great distress,
That all this traitor shall devise may turn to foolishness.
And being now ascended up unto the mount on hye,
He worshipped the Lord his God in faith unfeignedly.
There came to him immediately, but as a man forlorn,
With clots of earth upon his head and garments all to torn, Chusai comes to
David who sends him to Absalon.

One Chusai a faithful friend, and with well meaning heart
Made offer in this time of need his service to impart.
If thou (quod David) should remain and tarry here with me,
It would be but a charge to both, as I do plainly see:
But if thou will return and go to Absalon the king,
And make as though thou did me not regard in any thing,
But say thou will him only serve as thou his father did,
And that thy faithful heart to him at no time shall be hid:
Thy wisdom and thy secretnesse may stand me in good steed,
And be a mean their practices may not at all proceed.
But Sadoch and Abiathar thou shall before thee find,
To who^ as to my faithful friends thou may disclose thy mind.
And whatsoever thou shall hear determined in hand,
That I with all convenient speed may thereof understand:
For both their sons Ahimaas and Jonathan no doubt,
Give their attendance for to come if any thing fall out.
So Chusai departed there as David had him sent,
The wickedness of Absalon and treason to prevent.
When David was a little past the highest of the hill, Cap. 16. Ziba comes to
David to deceive Miphiboseth his master.

The false and flattering Ziba came with heart all bent to ill
Against his Lord Miphiboseth, with presents that he brought,
His master to defeat of all was his intent and thought.
Now as the king beheld him well and stood himself to ease,
I pray thee Ziba (then quod he) what meanest thou with these?
I have (quod Ziba) asses brought thy men thereon to ride,
With bread and meat for such as are with thee to eat beside:
And where as many of thy folk be fayntie as I think,
To quench their thirst I have here brought good wine for the^ to drink.
Then David minding Ionathas and pleasures to him done,
Did ask of Ziba suddenly where was his masters son.
Then Ziba falsely began accuse his master to the king,
How in Jerusalem he lay in hope of some good thing.
This day the house of Israel I heard him say (quod he)
The kingdom of my father shall restore again to me.
Then David blinded with the gifts that Ziba to him gave,
Bad take to him his masters land, for he the same should have.
Whose swift and hasty judgment might have better been deferd,
Then so to credit Zibaes words the other yet vnherd.
But Ziba now had that he sought and fell upon his knees,
With giving thanks that he had found such favor in his eyes.
Semei curses David.
Now when the king was past the hill to go to Bahurim,
A kinsman of king Saul's came forth and all to cursed him,
Whose name was called Semei, a spiteful railing man,
Whose hands and tongue ran all at large, and out of order than,
Not only railing to his face with bitter crooked talk,
But also hurling stones at him as he and his did walk,
And said: Come forth thou bloodshedder, thou man of Belial,
The Lord has brought on thee the blood of all the house of Saul:
Whose kingdom thou vsurpest yet, but long you shall not reign,
For God has gin it Absalon to whom it does perteine.
And so thou like a murderer art into mischief brought,
Because that thou have heretofore the blood of many sought.
Abisai so moved was with this his railing tongue,
That he could not withholde him self but to the king he flong,
And asked leave that he might go that varlets tongue to tame,
So foul a mouthed Curre to bark to suffer was a shame.
But David full of patience in no wise would permit
That any should gaynsay his talk, or that he should be smit:
And said, that railing tongue of his the Lord him self had sent,
And therefore no man ought repine or he be discontent.
And see you not how Absalon my son is set on strife,
And seeks means to take away my kingdom and my life?
If that my son dare this to do, what marvel is to see
The son of Iemini to curse and rail so sore on me?
Therefore I pray you suffer him to rail and curse his fill,
For so the Lord has bidden him to execute his will.
It may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction,
And do me good for this his curse and malediction.
So David going with his men forth still upon his way,
The spiteful tongue of Semei would never stint nor stay,
But cursed him, and took up stones and dirt and earth to fling,
And void of order, fear and wit, he hurles them at the king.
So David being with his men all weary, thought it best
Within the town of Bahurim to stay and take his rest.
And in mean while came Absalon unto Jerusalem
With all his route, Achitophel for his part ayding them.
Then Chusai the Harachite to Absalon does go,
And pressing near unto his seat he began salute him so:
God save the king, God save the king. And is it (quod he) even so?
Is this the kindness that thou will unto king David show?
Why do thou now forsake him thus, and come and cleave to me?
Why do thou not stick to thy friend that sta^ds in need of thee?
Not so (quod he) for whom the Lord and all the people choose,
I will obey and serve with heart, and never him refuse.
To whom if not to thee his son should I my duty vow?
On thee my service to bestow I mind God willing now.
Then Absalon to counsel went, and first he said unto
Achitophel, declare thy mind what we were best to do.
Go take (quod he) the Concubines that David left behind, Achitophels counsel
against David.

And keep them to thy proper use, and use them to thy mind,
Then will thy father thee abhor, and those be firm to thee
Which take thy part, when they perceive you two do disagree.
This counsel pleased Absalon, and he perfourmd the same,
And used them in open sight unto king David's shame.
And well it was allowed off of all men more and less,
Because they saw it commonly to have so good success.
Grant me (then said Achitophel) twelve thousand me^ of might,
And I will after David go and fall on him this night.
I will upon him suddenly while that he lies at rest,
Who is but weak, and all his men with wearines oppressed.
So shall thy father be afraid, the people will be gone,
Then shall I rid him of his life when he is left alone,
And bring again the people all to thee with one accord,
Who when they find him dead will come and serve thee as their lord.
This saying pleased Absalon, his father should not live,
The rest they thought no man on earth could better counsel give.
Yet let us hear (quod Absalon) what Chusai will say,
It may so fall that he perchance will take an other way.
Chusai overthrows the counsel of Achitophel.
And when he came he brake to him Achitophels intent,
And bad him freely speak his mind and he would then consent.
Forsooth (quod he) if I may speak my phansy from the rest,
The counsel of Achitophel at this time is not best.
For as thou know thy father and his men be very strong,
And being chafed in their minds, as they have been so long,
Are now become like cruel bears all robbed of their whelps,
So that their fiersnesse will not pass on thee nor on thy helps:
Thy father is a man also well practiced in wars,
He will not tarry long in place for fear of soden scarres,
And for my life he lies hid, within some cave or den,
Or other place, where is with him a number of his men.
If some of those he left behind at first be overthrown,
Yet that thy men have got the worst it will abroad be blown.
So shall the ftoutest of thy route when they thereof do hear
Be faint and shrink, as though they were all out of heart for fear.
Wherefore my counsel now is this, from Berseba to Dan
That all the people may be pressed in armor eury man,
So shall thy men as far exceed as does the seaish sand,
And when thou comst into the field he fall into thy hand.
For we shall come on him as thick as dew upon the ground,
So that there shall not one of all his men alive be found.
And furthermore if that he be in city or in town,
We shall with ropes and strength of men pull all that city down,
And draw it to the river side, and cast it stone by stone
Into the sea, until we have not left remaining one.
This counsel pleased Absalon and all the other well,
Who thought he gave more sound advise then did Achitophel.
To Sadoch and Abiathar then Chusai does come,
And of Achitophels devise he utters the sum.
But thus and thus did I (quod he) his counsel overthrow,
And therefore wish some messenger to David now did go,
And bid him get away this night out of the wilderness,
And pass the water, otherwise he will be in distress.
Then Sadoch and Abiathar herein had great respect,
How that their sons might know of this ye matter vnsuspect.
Wherefore the message they commit unto a wenche that goes
To Rogels well, as though she went to water there her clothes,
Where that their sons Ahimaas and Ionathas did lie,
That none within Jerusalem should see or them espy.
So they receiving of the maid the message to them sent,
Made have and tracted not the time, but forth away they went.
Yet of a ladde they were espied, who told it Absalon
That such two men were passed forth and out of Rogel gone.
But they before the messengers that he sent out from him,
Were got into an house within the town of Bahurim,
Whereas their host to save their lives within his well them hid, Ahimaas and
Jonathan are hid in a well.

And made his wife to cover it that they should not be spid,
Who took a cloth and spread it forth upon the well on hye,
With wheat thereon, as though it were set out abroad to dry.
And when those came that after them did narrowly pursue,
And made enquiry where they were, and bad her answer true,
They are (quod she) gone ore the brook but even a while ago,
If you make speed and follow them they cannot escape I know.
The men with this delusion went forth and sought in vain,
Who in the end not finding them returned home again.
This being known the messengers were let out of the well,
And came to David and began their message for to tell.
Go get you ore the water brook as quickly as you can,
Achitophel is purposed to kill you eury man.
Then David being certified of all was done, and what,
He slacked not but hasted forth and over Jordan gat.
So going forth he came unto the town Mahanaim
Belonging to the tribe of Gad, where he refreshed him.
And lying there his very friends whom he had tried long,
Came in to see and visit him, and for to make him strong:
Who brought him beds to lie upon and presents meet for kings,
With erthen vessels for the use of other needful things.
Of barley flower and parched corn, of beans and also wheat,
Of honey, butter, sheep and cheese, for all his men to eat.
For weary, hungry and a thirst, was he and all his train,
And their intent was to refresh and ease them of their pain.
Cap. 18.
Now Absalon with all his men, as ye have heard before,
Pursued David, and was come the water Iordane ore.
Achitophel hangs him self.
But destitute of his chief stay and staff Achitophel,
Who hanged him self when that he saw his counsel go not well.
And being come within the coast and land of Gilead,
He camped there, and Israel with all the men they had.
Preparing in a readynes his army in that coast,
He made Amasa governor and Captain of his host.
And David also now began his numbers to divide
Into three armies several, with Capteines them to guide.
The first to have in governing to Ioab he commit,
The second to Abisai to take the charge of it,
The third he put under the hand and rule of Ithai,
Who never would forsake the king but live with him and dye.
Thus when he had in order set his armies for to go,
He told the people he him self would go with them also.
Thou shall not go, the people said, for if we chance to fly
They will not care nor greatly pass, because they hunt for thee,
Nor yet regard us any whit though half or more were flayne,
So long as thou art not in reach their labor is in vain.
Wherefore in City do abide, for thee it shall be best,
And if we need do succor us, of God thou shall be blessed.
Then said the king, look what ye will in this thing have me do,
I am content to frame my self according thereunto.
Now as the king stood in the gate to see the people pass,
For disobedient Absalon his heart full heavy was,
And as the Capteins passed by unto them all he spoke,
Entreat the young man Absalon most gently for my sake.
The people heard what charge ye king unto the Capteins gave
Concerning Absalon his son, how that they should him save.
So forth to battle all they went out of Mahanaim,
And began the field to fight within the wood of Ephraim,
Where David's host a slaughter made of twenty thousand me^,
That took the part of Absalon against his father then.
And by the wood and such mishaps as in the wood did light,
As many did miscary as did perish in the fight.
And Absalon when that he could not make his party good
With David's men, was put to shifts and fled into the wood,
Where he was hanged by the hear upon an Oken bow,
His horse was gone, and to unloose him self he knew not how.
A man of David's riding by and chauncing him to see,
Told Ioab how that Absalon was hanging on a tree.
And why (quod Ioab) did not thou dispatche him at a blow,
Ten sicles should be thy reward if thou had done but so.
I do (quod he) much more the kings commandment regard,
Then all the sicles which thou would give me for my reward,
For if to me were given so much as any house could fill,
Yet would I not stretch out my hand king David's son to kill,
For I did hear unto his men when he did say thus much,
Beware ye hurt not Absalon nor yet the young man tutch:
and if I had I know full well it would have cost my life,
Yea thou thy self would first of al have slain me with thy knife.
Then Ioab said, I may not here with thee thus trifling stand:
and so he gat him forth apace with three darts in his hand,
and thrust them into Absalon as he came underneath,
and other ten did lay him on as long as he did breath.
Then Ioab blew his trompet up the people for to spare,
and pitied them for that he saw how they seduced were.
The bloody corpse of Absalon they threw into a pit,
and laid thereon an heap of stones to be a mark for it.
To Ioab came Ahimaaz he knowing of this thing,
^et me (quod he) I pray thee go with news unto the king.
Thou art no man (quod he again) this tidings now to bear,
Thou shall thereby displeasure get as I do greatly fear.
But Ioab said to Chusai, go thou and tell the king
Of this conflict, and make report of this and eury thing.
He thanked him with reverence, and as a joyful man
Departed thence with his dispatche, and unto David ran.
Ahimaaz to Ioab said, I pray thee heartily
That I may at this time also run after Chusai.
And why (quod Ioab) will thou run? it is not worth thy pain,
For neither thanks nor yet reward thou shall receive again.
Well what so ere befall (quod he) yet let me go I pray.
If thou (quod he) wilt needs be gone I will not say thee nay.
Ahimaaz a nearer way had found, and ran so fast
That he gat ground of Chusai although he came out last.
Now as the king sat in the gate even of Mahanaim,
With other mo such as he had appointed there with him,
The watchman watching ore the gate at last he spied one,
Where he came forth apace apace, and running al alone.
With that the watchman cried down and told it to the king,
Who said it was some person sent him tidings for to bring.
The watchman saw one other come, and thereof gave a sign,
Who said, it is some messenger with news of me and mine.
The watch again said to his grace, me think the foremost man
Does seem to me as though it were Ahimaaz that ran.
The king which had experience of his fidelity,
Began say, he is a godly man and wishes good to me.
Then came Ahimaaz and said, to thee (O king) be peace,
That many days and years thy life in honor may increase.
And falling down unto the earth, he says, the God of might
Be blessed now and evermore which puts thy foes to flight,
And shuts them up into thy hand as birds within a net,
That now I trust my lord the king security shall get.
But is the young man Absalon (quod he) all safe and well?
Ahimaaz said somewhat then, but would not plainly tell.
When Ioab bad thy servant come both Chusai and me,
I can no more but thus much say, a tumult did I see.
Well (quod the king) then stand aside, and turning him he stayde,
And thereupon came Chusai, and thus to him he said.
Good news my lord, good news I bring, the rebels of thy land
Which rose against my lord the king are fallen into thy hand.
But is the young man Absalon (quod he) all safe and sound?
Both he and his confederates lie dead upon the ground.
Then was the king so much agreeud that up on foot he stepped David mou^^neth
for his son Absalon.

Into his chamber, where alone for Absalon he wept.
And being but upon the steps his tears for grief burst out,
O Absalon my son my son, resounding round about,
Would God (quod he with sobbing voice) for thee I might have dyed,
O Absalon my son my son, still blubbering he cried.
Then was it unto Ioab told how David much bewaylde Cap. 19.

The death of Absalon his son, which nothing him auaylde,
Whereby the day of victory when they intended most
To have rejoiced, did become a mourning to the host.
The people went and stole away as men in dangers deep
Do fly in battle, and bethink where they may safely creep.
The king by this time hid his face and cried out amayne
As one yt would give up the goast, because his son was slain.
Then Ioab standing in some fear his men would all away,
He boldly pressed unto the king and thus to him did say:
Thou shamest all thy men of war and make them to muse,
Whose faithful hearts for thy defense no dangers did refuse.
Thou live, and thy sons do live, and we do live thy men,
Thy daughters, wives, and concubines, what means this mourning the^?
It seems that thou love them who sought thine overthrow,
And wayest not thy friends a whit that stuck unto thee so.
For this thy mourning does declare that thou regardest not
Thy princes, neither yet the men that honor have thee got.
If Absalon had escaped death, I do perceive and see,
And we thy men our lives had lost, that had well pleased thee.
Up, get thee forth abroad in sight, and do thy servant cheer
With gentle and with loving words, or else by God I swear,
Thou will not have a man this night, for they will thee forsake,
And be against thee eury where with all that they can make.
Which will be worse then all the harms that yet upon thee fell,
Even from thy youth, or since thou wast first king of Israel.
Then David gat him down to show him self among his men,
And they that stepped before aside came flocking to him then,
For all the Tribes of Israel among them did contend,
Who first should bring king David home unto his journeys end.
Then such as by the crafty means of Absalons aspire
Seduced were by simpleness, and knew not his desire,
Began thus to reason with them selves: full well we understand
That David has preserved us, our wives, our goods, and land,
And that he has in our defense withstoode our mortal foes,
And for our better quietness has given them overthrows,
And that he is our lawful king whom we did once annoint,
Whom Absalon of life and realm did seek to disappoynt:
Since Absalon is dead therefore, why take we not the pain
To wait upon our Lord and king, and bring him home again.
The people reconciled thus, the king to Sadoch sent
And to Abiathar the priest, declaring his intent,
Which was, to go and seek with those of Judah to persuade,
Who joined themselves with Absalon in his attempts he made,
And say to them, why haste ye not king David to restore,
As do the men of Israel who ready are therefore?
Ye are by nature kin to us, our brothers as ye know,
Why do ye linger last of all your loyalty to show?
And thus much say to Amasa, of all that may be found,
He is the nearest kin I have that lives on the ground,
And that I swear by God above I mind he shall succeed
And be my Captain general to rule in Ioabs steed.
This talk of theirs did so persuade with Judah, that they went
And granted him their present aid, and that with one consent.
And thereupon they sent him word to let him understand
That he and his might safely now return into that land.
So David going with his train even toward Iordane shore,
All Judah met him by the way for to conduct him ore.
And Semei who had the king reviled to his face,
Came now with Judah for to seek his mercy and his grace:
Who coming out of Bahurim with Judah for to go,
A thousand of the Beniamites he brought with him also.
And Ziba of the house of Saul with all his sons fifteen,
And twenty servants in a row, was there among the^ seen,
Who gat them ore the water brook of Iordane, to abide
The speedy passage of the king, to meet him on that side.
The king now being passed ore but even a little while, The wilines of Semei.

There came before him Semei him self to reconcile,
And falling flat unto the ground in mild and humble plight
Besought him pardon for his faults and his great oversight.
Impute not now the wickedness that then thy servant did,
And lay it not unto my charge, but let it all be hid,
I did misuse full wickedly my lord king David, when
He from Jerusalem went out and fled with all his men.
I do it know, and now confess that I have done amiss,
Beseeching thee my lord and king to pardon me for this.
And now behold I am the first of Joseph's house this day,
That am come down to meet my lord and bring him on his way.
Abisai with grudging heart offended at his word,
Said to the king, shall not this dog now dye upon the sword?
That matter does not apperteine to you (quod David than)
I say this day in Israel there shall not dye a man.
For I am king I know it well, therefore to Semei
He spoke and gave him gentle words, and said he should not dye.
So forth he went until he came Jerusalem unto Miphiboseth meets the king in
Jerusalem.

Where that Miphiboseth him met as well as he could go,
Who neither trimmed up his beard nor yet did wash his feet,
until the king in quiet peace returning he did meet.
Then David said as soon as that he cast on him his eye,
Miphiboseth how chanced it thou wentst not out with me.
O my most dear and sovereign lord my servant was unjust,
For falsely he deceived me that put in him my trust.
I wild him to prepare mine Ass and all things for the same,
To ride upon with thee my lord thy servant being lame,
But with his subteltie he has thy servant sore abusde,
And unto thee my lord and king unjustly me accusde.
My lord thou as an Angel art that can judge all things right,
And therefore do as thou shall think most meetest in thy sight.
For where as all my fathers house was worthy for to dye,
For that with thee and thine king Saul did deal so cruelly.
Yet was thy mercy unto me thy servant then so great
That at thy table with thy sons thou set me to eat.
But seeing mine inheritance by thee is given away,
What right have I to come before the king, or more to say.
Thou need no more to speak (quod he) we will that this ye do,
That thou and Ziba shall divide the land between you two.
Since that my lord (quod he again) is now returned in peace,
Let Ziba take all to him self and make his best increase.
Berselai meets king David.
From Roglim comes Berzelai to meet the king also,
In well appointed wise to wait and with his grace to go,
Who for the space the king did lie within Mahanaim,
Did friendly of his store convey all needful things to him:
For God had blessed him very well with riches and with wealth,
And he wished David great increase of honor and of health.
The king requested that he would go with him if he might,
And he would by all means he could his courtesy requite.
I have not long to live (quod he) and needful it is that I
Should not so much for honor seek as learn how well to die:
For I am stepped so far in years that I have no good skill
To judge or yet discern between the good and that is ill.
My stomach is so weak it can away with little meat,
Thy servant has no taste at all of that which he does eat.
In music I have no delight, nor yet in skillful man,
Why should I to your majesty be such a burden then?
Thy servant will a little bring the king forth on his way,
And will beseech my lord that then return again I may
Unto the land where I was borne, and there to lay my bones,
Even with my parents in the grave among the gravel stones.
But if it please my lord the king Chimham my son shall be
Thy servant, unto whom thou may do what it pleases thee.
Then said the king, and for thy sake I will him so reward,
That thou shall well perceive I do thy kindness much regard.
So all the people passed forth, the king with all his train,
Berzelai then took his leave and turned back again.
When Judah and half Israel were passed Iordans banks,
And had ye king to Gilgal brought as men most worthy thanks,
Then came the rest of Israel to David and began say, A strife between ye men of
Israel and the men of Judah for king David.

Why has all Judah stole thee now so secretly away,
And brought the king with all his house past Jordan river thus,
And made not privy thereunto so much as one of us?
Then Judah hearing Israel this great complaynt to make,
Did shape an answer out of hand to them, and thus they spoke:
The king is near of kin to us, we have him therefore brought
Of love, and not for great reward or honor that we sought.
They said again, our part in him is ten times more the^ yours,
And being ten to one we say the greatest part is ours.
Ye did not well for to despise our counsel in this thing,
Ye might have made us privy of restoring home the king.
Thus they debated to and fro this quarrel of some grudge,
But Judah did prevail therein as eury man might judge.
But now a man of Belial, one Seba called by name, Cap. 20. Seba makes an
insurrectio^ against David.

Had got to him all Israel, and began it to proclaim
How they no part in David had the son of Isai,
Nor yet inheritance in him, and spoke it scornefully.
So when as Seba blew his trumpe each man gat to his tent,
All ready for to follow him which way so ere he went.
But Judah stuck to David fast, and not a man did mis,
From Jordan to Jerusalem were full and wholly his.
Now while this gear a working was with them of Israel, David shuts up his
Concubines.

King David in his house at home not finding all things well
Among his women Concubines, who had offense commit
With Absalon while he was out, began now to punish it:
Yet not with death as was the law, but shut them all up fast
In prison close, allowing food so long as life did last.
Then hearing of these mutinies and stirs in eury place,
Sent out all Judah to prepare, and that in three days space.
And gave that charge to Amasa, but when he brake his day
He grew in fear of some mishap, and thus began to say:
Now Seba in this faction shall hurt and harm us more
Then did my dear son Absalon in his attempts before.
Take thou therefore Abisai of Ioabs men a band,
And press on Seba least he get some succor out of hand.
And Ioab took with him also his men the Corethites,
With many from Jerusalem beside the Philethites.
And as he marched on his way this Seba for to get,
Even at the stone of Gibeon with Abasa he met,
Ioab slew Amasa. some think he did it for that Amasa took part with Absalon,
and that David had made him captein general in his stead.
Who brotherly saluted him as nothing were amiss,
And made as though he would him take about ye neck to kiss,
But suddenly he smote him in the belly with his knife,
That all his bowels gushed out, so ended he his life.
Then Ioab and Abisai who were together met,
To follow Seba at the back away apace they get,
And came to Abel, where he was got in with all his route,
Which City Ioab with his host besieged round about,
And thrusting at a certain place to overthrow the wall,
A prudent woman came and began aloude to cry and call
Unto the people, praying them they would it not defer
Their Captain Ioab so desire to come and speak with her.
Who being come she him beheld and asked him if twere he?
I am (quod he) good wife the same, say what thou will to me.
Then hear thine ha^dmaide what she says, He said, I hear thee well,
And will give good atte^tiue ear to that that thou shall tell.
It was the use of old (quod she) and Marshall law I know,
Before a peace be offered no town to overthrow.
The City here that I am in which called is Abel,
Has always kept fidelity with kings of Israel,
And yet thou go about with power a City to subvert,
Who as a faithful mother peace does nourish in her heart,
O Ioab this thy tyranny with right does not accord,
So to destroy the heritage perteining to the Lord.
God shield (quod he) I should attempt this Cities overthrow,
It never came into my thought that cruelty to show.
But this it is, there is a man, one of mount Ephraim,
One Seba who remaynes with you, our quarrel is to him,
Who does rebel against my lord king David forceably,
Deliver him and we will then depart hence quietly.
Then let my lord but stay a while and I will forthwithall
Provide (quod she) ye shall receive his head cast ore the wall.
Then she with wisdom of her words among them in ye town,
Did cause his head be smitten off and hurld to Ioab down.
A trompet then he made to blow and from the City went
With all the host he brought with him, each man home to his te^t.
And Ioab to Jerusalem returned to the king,
And told him of his good success, and eury other thing.
Now after these seditions the king new order takes
Among his chiefest officers, and first of all he makes
Ioab the son of Zaruia chief captain of the host
Among the men of Israel to lead in eury coast.
Banaia a warlike man and one of perfect skill,
The Corethites and Phelethites to guide it was his will.
The tribute which he had among the nations won with fame,
He did commit to Aduram to gather up the same.
Now Iosaphat Recorder was to note up eury thing,
And Seua Scribe to write all that perteined to the king.
But Sadoch and Abiathar were priests of high degree,
And Ira was chief counselor and great in dignity.
Now after this an hunger great the people fell among, Cap. 21. The dearth that
fell in David's time.

Which dured in king David's time the space of three years long.
The king enquired what ye cause of this great plague should be.
The Lord made answer, it was for Saul and his great cruelty
Which he had showed ye Gibeonites, with who^ duke Joshua made
A covenant both of peace and life, and bound them to a trade,
Which trade they did observe, and yet he sought their overthrow,
Both Judah and the Israelites he sought to pleasure so.
None of the seed of Israel were now the Gibeonites,
But were a certain remnant left of all the Amorites,
Of whom then David did demand what he for them should do,
Or what atonement shall I make that ye will gree unto?
We will (quod they) no silver have nor gold of thee at all,
Nor any man to dye for us but of the house of Saul.
Look what ye will (quod David then) have me for you to do,
Disclose your mind and you shall have me ready thereunto.
We do request that of the line and kindred of king Saul,
In Gibeah before the Lord seven may be hanged for all.
The king had great compassion on Ionathas and his,
And would not for his oath of old his son should do amiss,
And was exceeding glad because they did no mo request,
That he might save Miphiboseth from hanging with the rest.
From Rizpa her two sons he took which she did bear to Saul,
Miphiboseth and Armoni, these two and they were all.
From Merob other five he took, which she by Adriel
Had in her life, and after were by Michol brought up well.
Thus plaged were the sons of Saul even for their fathers sin,
Who did destroy the Gibeonites and had delight therein.
But Rizpa that was wife to Saul made speed without delay,
To pitche her tent upon the hill to keep the beats away,
And would not suffer beast nor foul to touch her sons at all
From harvest time, till God did make his rain from heaven to fall.
The king when he did understand her motherly intent,
Their bodies to remove away he caused one be sent.
The bones of Saul and Ionathas he likewise brought away
From Iabes, who did stealingly from Bethlem them convey,
Where they had by the Philistines been hanged up on hye,
That day that Saul did loath his life and willing was to dye.
And so the seven that hanged were and eke the bones of Saul,
With those of Ionathas his son, he did convey them all
Into the land of Benjamin, and put them in a pit
Where Cis the father of king Saul lay buried in it.
When this was done as David did command and give a charge,
The Lord withdrew the plague of derth, and plenty sent at large.
Now after this God gave to him always the upper hand
Of all his foes the Philistines, which warred in his land.
He bet them down in battles four, and slew the Giantes stout,
Which to his praise and honor great was noysed all about.
Cap. 22. David for his victories prayseth God.
Then David for the victories which in his latter days
God gave to him, he thus began to give him laud and praise.
O Lord thou art my rock and fort that do me well defend,
My only safe deliverer from those that ill pretend.
God is my strength, in him I will put all my hope and trust,
For I do find him unto me both merciful and just.
He is my shield, the horn of health, my tower that is so strong,
My refuge and my savior from taking any wrong.
I will on him call day and night who worthy is of praise,
Not doubting then but that I shall preserved be always.
The pangs of death gat me about and griped me full sore,
The flowing floods of wicked men did fray me more and more.
The sorrows of the hell or grave me compassed about,
The snares were set to trappe me in that I should not get out.
Then in my trouble did I call unto the Lord on hye,
Who from out of his holy place gave ear unto my cry.
God being wroth he made the earth to tremble and to quake,
And all the bottom of the mount to totter and to shake.
A smoke out of his nosethrils came when he to wrath was bent,
Consuming fire with kindled coals out of his mouth he sent.
He bowed heaven as he came down mine enemies to confound,
The misty clouds beneath his feet made darkness on ye ground.
He rode upon the Cherub and the Cherubin also,
And on the wings of all the winds his flight was to and fro.
He framed darkness as a tent him round about to be,
With waters gathered into clouds that no man might him see:
But when he list his presence show and to appear in sight,
Then with the hail and flashing fire the clouds he makes bright.
God with his sundry thunder claps and fyrie darts sent out
With soden lightnings, makes them to fear him all about.
O Lord the sea uncovered was, whose surges rise and fall
At thy rebuke, and at a blast thy foes were drowned all.
The Lord has from the heaven above his help to me sent down,
And drawn me out of waters great which came on me to drown.
He by his might deliuerd me from all my foes each one,
When I was weak and not of power to cope with the^ alone.
They went about me to prevent in my most heaviness,
But yet the Lord so wrought therein they could me not oppress.
He brought me forth in open place to have my scope at will,
And of his favor and his love preserved me from ill.
And as I was a giltlesse man and void of all offense,
So to the cleanness of my hands I gave no recompense,
For that I kept the ways of God and walked in the same,
Nor did not speak against my Lord nor yet his holy name,
But had an eye unto his laws to keep them in my heart,
His statutes did I not cast off, nor from them once depart.
An upright life the eyes of God delights much in it,
From wickedness I did refrain, and would it not commit.
Therefore the Lord requited all my doings done aright,
According to my righteousness appearing in his sight.
The Lord with him that godly is will godly be also,
And with the man that is upright uprightly will he go:
With those that are elect and pure he will with them so be,
And with the froward he will deal with them as frowardly.
The meek and simple man of heart thou will not see confound,
As for the proud and lofty man thou pullest to the ground.
Thou art (O Lord) my light and guide to walk in all thy ways,
Thou will my darkness make to shine as clear as ye noone days,
For by thy help an host of men I shall them make to fall,
And through my God shall batter down the hard and stony wall.
The ways of God are vncorrupt, his word must trial have,
and to the steadfast faithful man he is a shield to save.
For who is God except ye Lord which made both heaven and earth,
There is none other God but he that gives life and breath.
He is the God that girdeth me with strength to go to war,
And makes plain the way and path that I may see a far.
My feet he makes like the hindes in swiftnes for to go,
And sets me upon my place as pleases him also.
My hands he teaches for to fight, mine arms he makth strong
To draw and break a bow of steel in compass short or long.
By thy good sure protection and by thy saving health,
And by thine aid and mighty strength I do increase in wealth.
Thou have enlarged all my steps in stretching them awide,
And eke my treadings made so plain my foot it can not slide.
My foes I fiercely did pursue, and turned not again
Until I had put all to flight, and many of them slain.
I bet and wounded so my foes that in no manner wise
Once under foot, they could again be able to arise.
Thou did me girde about with strength in battle for to fight,
And have dispersed all my foes abroad out of my sight.
The necks of mine ilwillers (Lord) thou did bow down and bend,
That I on them might work my will and pleasure in the end.
They looked round about for help but no man did appear,
To God they cried in their distress, yet would he not the^ hear.
I bet them still as small as dust that wind does blow away,
And trod on them as men do tread upon the mire and clay.
O Lord thou have deliuerd me from all seditious bands,
And made me to be governor and head of diverse lands.
A people strange and eke unknown will humbly me obey,
Where as mine own will overthwart and stubbornly say nay.
Now blessed be the living God and praised be his name,
The God of my salvation that worthy is of fame.
It is the Lord that gave me power revenged for to be,
And brought the people all into subjection under me.
He saved me from all my foes, and set me up aloft
Above the wicked cruel men that rose against me often.
I will therefore praise thee O Lord among the Gentiles all,
And sing unto thy holy name, and thereon daily call.
Thou have for thine anointed king such mercies great in store,
And them to David and his seed have given for evermore.
When David had now ended this his Psalm of thanks and praise,
He speaks certain sentences for to conclude, and says.
King David which is called the son of Isai has said, Cap. 23.

And the anointed man of God whose kingdom sure is laid,
The holy spirit of the Lord my speech he does it guide,
For to my tongue his sacred word is fast and surely tide.
The Lord my God of Israel has this by promise made,
That in his fear and love I shall the just men guide and aid.
As morning light when sun is up and void of cloud and rain,
So shall my house in shining bright and clearness still remain.
For by his everlasting bond it shall so stand always,
That it may grow, but not as grass that has his quick decay.
But wicked and ungodly men shall be like thorns that prick,
Plucked up and not be suffered within the ground to stick,
But yet the man that touches them he must be in that case
Desenced well, that he may take and burn them in their place.
Here David numbreth his people.
It came now into David's mind his people for to sum,
To see what number in his land would rise thereof and come,
Commanding Ioab for to go throughout all Israel,
And take a view of all his men that under him did dwell.
The Lord thy God increase (quod he) thy people in thy land,
But what does move my lord ye king to take this thing in hand?
The king would not be turned from his purposed intent,
And therefore for to view his men his lords abroad he sent.
And passing over Jordan brook unto the vale of Gad,
They went and summed eury man from thence to Gilead,
From thence to Iaan, and so forth to Sidon and to Tire,
The Heuites and the Cananites their numbers to enquire,
And so from thence to Judah land which in the south is plaste,
And therein made to Beerseba their progress at the last.
Now when they had been thus abroad nine months and twenty days,
The^ home unto Jerusalem they turn again their ways,
Where Ioab unto David gave the sum of Israel,
Which were eight hundred thousand men as he did count and tell,
All fighting men, besides all those which Judah well could yield,
Which were five hundred thousand men all able for the field.
When this was done, within his heart the king conceived then
A great misliking of his deed for numbering of his men.
Wherefore with heavy heart and voice unto the Lord he cries,
That he would pardon this offense committed in his eyes.
That night the Lord commanded Gad the Prophet for to go
And break with David for his fault, and tell him so and so,
And when thou have in eury point these plagues before him laid,
Then will him for to make his choice as I to thee have said.
When Gad was come unto ye king, the Lords will is (quod he)
That of such plages I shall recite thou make thy choice of three.
Will thou have hunger seven years space to ouerpresse thy la^d?
Or else three months to feel the smart of wars and mighty hand?
Or with the plague of pestilence be visited three days?
Choose which thou will, and I will make report of that thou says.
Hard is the choice O Lord (quod he) yet Lord let be thy will,
That I may fall into thine hands to save or else to kill.
Then did the Lord for three days space a pestilence provide,
Wherein of David's whole account a seventy thousand dyed.
But when upon Jerusalem the Angel now began
To smite and to destroy the same, the Lord repented than
Of all the former faults commit, and bad him hold his hand,
For he would have compasson and pity on the land.
Then David with a sorry heart laments that grievous case,
And to the Lord with tears he calls for mercy and for grace.
The people sinned not (O Lord) to have this plague of thine,
These sheep (alas) what have they done? the sin (O Lord) is mine.
Let not the harmles innocent be plagued now therefore,
But me and all my fathers house destroy for evermore.
The Prophet Gad to David came, him willing in this case David is plagued for
numbering his people.

To go and rear an Altar up in Ornans threshing place.
And when that Ornan saw the king and all his men so nigh,
He met him, and with reverence fell down upon his knee,
And said to him, why does my lord come unto me this hour?
In sooth (quod he) it is to buy of thee thy threshing floor,
To make an Altar to the Lord, and pray to him for peace,
That this great plague of pestilence may from the people cease.
My lord (quod he) take what thou will, and do as seems good,
Take Oxen, Charrets, and with them the instruments for wood,
I freely give them to my lord, and do beseech thy God,
That he accept thee in his sight and do withdraw his rod.
Not so (quod he) I will it shall be truly sold and bought,
I will not offer to the Lord the thing which cost me naught.
So David bought the threshing floor and Ox for sacrifice,
And gave to Ornan for the same as they agreed of price.
Then offering up peaceofferings upon that Altar now,
The plague did cease, and God the same did very well allow.
Now David being old and weak with years and troubles past, 3. Regum Cap. 1.

Could not in bed get any heat with clothes upon him cast.
His servants then did counsel him some young and tender thing,
Whose lively blood with pleasant heat might cherish up ye king,
Should lie by him upon his breast, not meaning any harm,
But raise a vital heat in him and make his body warm.
And so they made a careful search throughout all Israel,
And found at length one Abisag in Sunam that did dwell,
Who being brought unto the king her service did employ,
To call again that lively heat which years and age destroy.
Adonia aspireth to the kingdom.
And now began Adonia for to aspire on hye,
As had his brother Absalon before usurpingly.
And began all things for his estate both horse and men to seek,
His father did not seem at all with any thing mislike.
The Captain Ioab took his part, and eke Abiathar,
As chief of counsel eury way his matters to prefer.
But faithful Sadoch that good priest would never take his part,
Nor Nathan, nor Banaia, would that way bend their heart.
At Rogel was his sacrifice and all provision had,
And there unto his brothers all and Judah to he bad.
But Nathan nor Banaia nor other mighty men,
Nor yet his brother Solomon he called with him then.
And hereupon to Bethsabe the Prophet Nathan goes,
And what he sees, and what he hears, to her he plainly shows.
Have thou not heard what wicked seed Adonia has sown,
And yet unto our lord the king his purpose is unknown?
But if you love your own estate or Solomon your son,
Then mark what counsel I will give, and see that it be done.
Go get thee forth unto the king and thus unto him say:
My lord O king did thou not make an oath to me for aye,
That Solomon my son should sit upon thy kingly seat?
And now thy son Adonia thereof does him defeat.
And while thou talkest with the king about thy son alone,
I will come after and confirm thy sayings eury one.
So Bethsabe to David went into his chamber bold,
Where Abisag was ministering because the king was old.
She bowing down with reverence and great humility,
He then demanded what the cause of her repair should be?
My lord (quod she) you did long since unto thine ha^dmaid swear,
That Solomon should after thee as king the scepter bear.
And now behold Adonia he is proclaimed king,
And thou my lord unto this hour not privy to the thing.
His Oxen are all offered up, his sheep and cattle fat,
And has both Ioab and his priest Abiathar thereat.
And all thy sons be there with him save Solomon alone,
With many other mighty men that unto him are gone.
And now my lord the eyes of all the people Israel,
Who^ thou will have succeed do look yt thou thy self should tell.
For else when that my lord does rest, both Solomon and I,
We shall trausgressours counted be as worthy so to dye.
And while she thus stood with the king debating to and fro,
The Prophet Nathan comes in his pleasure for to know,
And when he had with reverence obeisance duly made,
He told his tale, and with the king began wisely to persuade.
My lord O king have thou command or so ordained it,
That after thee Adonia upon thy seat shall sit?
For he has made his kingly feast, and thereto has he bid
Thy sons and Capteins of the host, which thing to thee is hid.
Abiathar with many mo in bankets cheerfully,
God save our king Adonia, God save our king, they cry.
But me and Sadoch that good priest, nor Solomon thy son,
Nor yet Banaia they called to this they have begone.
Is this the kings good pleasure now and made to me so dim,
That of my lord I may not know who shall reign after him?
Then David called Bethsabe and thus unto her swear,
As God does live who has me rid from trouble and from care,
Assure thy self that Solomon thy son shall after me
Sit on the seat of Israel, and thereof king shall be.
The Queen then yielding hearty thanks and bowing him before,
To God she prayde that he might reign and live for evermore.
The king did call Banaia and Sadoch to him than,
And Nathan to, and then his mind to break he thus began.
Go forth and take with you my men, and set up Solomon
Upon the mule whereon I rid, and lead him to Gihon,
Solomon is proclaimed king.
And there let Sadoch him anoint with tru^pets blowing brave,
And then with trumpets do you cry, king Solomon God save:
Then come you all and follow him, and set him on my throne,
For I have sworn and do appoint he shall be king alone.
Amen then said Banaia, the living Lord permit,
That on thy seat a happy king he many days may sit:
And as the Lord has been with thee, so let him give his strength
Unto the seat of Solomon, and stretch it more in length.
So they departed from the king, and set up Solomon
upon the Mule as they were bid, and brought him to Gihon,
Where Sadoch then anointed him, and up the trumpets blow,
God save our lord king Solomon the peoples voice does go.
And coming after him with pipes they joyfully do sing,
Whose sound of voice and instruments made all the earth to ring.
The voice was such that it did come to Adonias place,
And made his gests to turn and change the color in their face.
But Ioab began to stir, and said, what means this passing noise
Of trumpet blowing in the town, and sound of men and boys?
He had no sooner spoke the word but in came Jonathan,
Who in the presence of them all to tell him news began.
Our lord and king assuredly upon some weighty thing,
Has caused Solomon his son to be proclaimed king:
They have him brought on David's Mule to Gihon regally,
Where Sadoch has anointed him our king and lord to be.
Where at the people shoute for joy that he shall ore them reign,
Which is the noise and sound ye hear of him and all his train.
And furthermore the people has given thanks to David great,
And pray to God the son may pass the father in his seat.
The king likewise has praised God whose mercy brought to pas,
That in his seat before he dyed his son invested was.
Then all the gestes Adonia had feasted that same day
Were sore afraid, and made great haste to rise and get away.
And he him self as one that feared the sight of Solomon,
Did flee and catch the Aulters horns to save him self thereon.
Then one comes unto Solomon and humbly does begin
To tell the danger and the fear Adonia is in.
Add makes request that he would swear and promise by his word
That he would not his servant put that day unto the sword.
If that he may (quod Solomon) to me be faithful found,
No hair that is upon his head shall fall unto the ground,
But if I find untruth in him or wickedness espy,
He may make his account thereof that he shall surely dye.
So being brought to Solomon he did him self submit,
And home was sent unto his house there quietly to sit.
Now came the time that David should pass from this world away, Cap. 2.

Wherefore he called Solomon and thus began to him say.
My time draws on for me to dye and pass an other way,
Show thou thy self a man therefore and on the Lord thee stay.
Keep thou his watch with careful eye, and walk in all his ways,
That thou in all thy good attempts may prosper all thy days.
So shall the Lord make good his word and promise firmly laid
Unto his servant long ago, when thus to me he said:
If that thy children take good heed and guide their steps aright,
And walk before me in the truth with all their heart and might,
Then shall thou never want a man to sit upon thy throne,
To rule and govern Israel when thou art dead and gone.
And furthermore thou know right well how Ioab served me,
And with a couple how he dealt far better men then he,
How Amasa and Abner to he falsely did betray,
And shed their blood most cruelly, and cast them both away.
Deal thou therefore with Ioab as thy wisdom shall increase,
And let not his hoar head be brought down to ye grave in peace.
But let the sons of Berzella be at thy table fed,
For they came to me when away from Absalon I fled.
Thou have with thee one Semei a man of Bahurim,
Who cursed me all the way I went unto Mahanaim,
But yet at my return he came and brought me home again,
Whereas I made an oath to him that he should not be slain,
Yet shall thou not him giltlesse count, but by thy wisdom good
See yt his hoar head down be brought unto ye grave with blood.
Thus now when David in his reign had run out al his race,
His soul departed unto God and left his son in place.
FINIS

