The book of Merchants, very profitable to all folks to know of what wares
they ought to be ware of, for the begilyng of them* Newly perused and augmented
by the first authoure well practiced in such doing.

Read and profit.

Ad libelli Repertorem.

(...) sine mercatu Merces Mercator inen^^^^
^olle tibi, Merces has tibi sponte damno.
Anno. 1547.

The prologue of the author.
THe purpose that we presently intend, is as me morable and worthi to be
known as any other that may be spoken of, and also y^ matter there of is so
evident, clear, and ue rytable, that all people may easyly understand it, yea
truly small children in all countries, and lands what soever they be, for there
be many merchants and chapmen in every place whereby the trade is the more
evident to be known To be brief in all the sayeyng of this book is not one
spytefull difficulte, but only some abuses (over manifest) showed and bryefly
touched, because that they may be eschewed in time coming. And therefore I
pray al the^ that shall have this book to read it diligently, For of troth if
it be well understood there shall come inestimable profit to the poor
world, by the healp of god, which eternally be praised and magnifyed.

Amen.
Here begineth the Merchants book
He estate of Merchandise (for the time of this mortal life) is so necessary,
that without it we can stant ly leave, it is so alowable and profitable.
Provided that it be faithfully maynteyned.

That it is necessari, lively experyence shows it openly, for of truth it is
necessary that the haboundance of one country healp to satisfy that which
lacks in an other. And thereby al labouryng persons by dilligent industry are
requisite for the mainteinyng of the co^mo^weale the which without fraud or
gyle ought to distribute co^uey, change conserve and transporte all sorts of
wares from one place to an other according to the exigence of the time, and
behouf of y^ people. The which is behouffull to all faithful merchants, as
good and trusty servants of the commonwealth with moderate gaynes and profit of
their wares without dyssemlyng in maynteninge their estate, of their person
and household so that they occupy in all troth without circumuention and
damage of their neybour with out be gylynge or any deceyt. For if These. i.
fydelyte and enteyer veryte be not found in them, they be not marcha^tes but
rather wi ly thieves, and cautelous gallants.

By similitude of this estate Jesus Christ has taught his children. To
multyply, en crese, and do profit with the talentes and gystes of God, which
are dealt to every one according to his good will, sai yng thus* Occupy until I
Luke xi^.
come, And at his coming again punished the slouthful and ill servant that did
not his devour to bring y^ fruit of the gift that he had received, doyeng us
to wite that we should not be idle and not to receive the gifts of God in
vain, or else we cannot escape y^ punishment of God. And it is to be thought
that he spoke these words of bodi marcha^dyse. For of truth as this estate
whereof I speak is honorable botth in temporal and civil things: even so is
it cursed and detestable in spiritual things. And therefore saint Paul in the
virtue of God forbids every man that wylbe a minister, and servant of
spiritual things, which is the administration of y^ holy word of God, and
the ordinances of Jesus Christ, that he appl^ him not to temporal and seculer
ii. Tim. ii.
chafferinge, and netheles, God has permitted in his ^uror that in stead of
good pasters, and veritable ministers of the said word, to chance in the
church I say not alone li gross chapme^ but furious thieves, and insaciable
rauenyng wolves.

Should not he be iuged a begyler and these, which sells the thing yt is not
his own, or that by subtle means in sted of gold and silver sells tyn and
bras? And should not the byer be begylled and deceived? Thus certainly (long
ago) to the great detriment of souls, of bodies and goods of the poor
people is chanced to us, that in stead of faithful seruannts of God that
should led and teach y^ poor world to the way of salvation, be entered, not
by ye door John. x.
which is Jesus Christ, but by violence have clymed in by another way as false
impostores, and as. S. Peter says, i. Pet. ii.
falls masters, liars, teaching sects of perdition, forsakyng the Lord that
has bought the^, blaspheming the way of troth, the which in avarice by
feined words of our seyde merchants have occupied, for such workers of
iniquytie, have forgotten nor left nothing where with by cautelus inventions
they (...)ht occupy at their pleasure* and will,

And to say the truth they have set all thing to sale eue^ to cry, Paradyse
is to sell, by Paradyse by. There is no spirit that can comprise, nor tongue
declare all the marketes of these chapme^, and so great a swalow and prodigious
multitude. Some points we must declare, leauyng ye resydue to be thought of
pepole of more subtyl understanding.

The merchants that we speak of be marvelous wyly. And have increased their
wares so gratly with their workmanship, that they have not left town nor
vilage. hill nor valey but they have filled the^ with their shoppes.

There were never slyer foxes, for they have ramped all under their paws. And
the better to lead their trade they cause y^ people to believe that it is a
great wealth, and yet is it neither mornor less tha^ as the false Iesabell
painted iiii. Re. ix.
her eyes ye and all her face with ruddy colors and other hewes Ier. iiii.
for to seem fair and esthew the fury of Iehu. Thus likewise these coueytous
of glory ^uaricians merchants paint their works, at trybuting it to them ^el^s
that belongs to God. As righteousness virtue, sapience, pardane, mercy, re^i
ion of syne, haucuing ever in their month. Lord God thanks to God, in the
named. God, of the authory of God, of. S. Peter of saint Paul. etc. behold
here the trompe the painted gloss of their malycyousnes, for they know well
that other wise they should not be set by, and their trade soon be distroed.
In bieynge and selling must be good faceyng and disguisyng among the^, having
their heads al most al plucked, shorn or clipped, therefore it is written, y^
none may do as they, biey nge and selling, but he have the name or mark of
the beast.

They chepen, they chop, changeand sell, they bye and sell again, they
barginge to gyther on the best fas you, for parsonages curats, and do hoke
benyfyces, and the better to do they teach each other their vacatio^ and
craft. Their time of barganing is ever redi, and have so^tim great fayres as
time and season requires, and always on high feast days, clean contrary to
the other Merchants. When Ester, witso^tyde, halowmas, Christemas and such
other come, which they them selfs have ordained, all Marcha^ts cease save
these.

For there is nonne handycraft but when they lust they cause it teaue of,
because they a lone make sale and works, and all the other do homage unto them
because it serves greatly to their gaynes.

Of this in or time we have seen an example meruelously to purpose, that was of
a crosey generally made and publissed almost over all the earth. And God knows
by what means. God knows by what supposts by what work men by what
croseidiers, such a work was handled. They constreyned all them whom the
would, to obey to their desires. They threatened al the that in any wise
gaynsayed their lies and abuses.

There was never seen agreatter market, hell and heaven were openned, for to
take in, put out, or keep still all that came at their pleasur, so that they
brought any present, for without that a man could not speed of these galantes.
We did make holidayes, asse^bles, feasts and processions, altogether at they
minds and ordinance, and not so hardy to say, nay

They griped, they plucked, rauyssed, slax, woul, yarne, thread, butter, chese,
oxe^, caulue^ sheep, gold and silver, al things were saleable. And than they
ruff^ed, they dra^ke, (...)led and played, I dare not ^^ye whored, for eury
thing went forward with them.

And to say the truth, these merchants be different from the other, for it is
not lightly seen but they be content with some one trade, some with cloth, other
with cataile, some with sylke or metal, other with corn or wine. etc. but these
woluish grossers, gross up all at once and rauysh every where, to set all
things on sale, it is a world to se their trade, nothing scapeth them, but
at their plasures they occupi it, yea me^, women, childern, now borne and
unborn, bodies, souls of the quick and dead of goods visible and invisible,
heaven, earth, and h^lle bread, meat, time and days. Marriage, vestimentes,
rasures, shauing, anointinges, clo things, bulls, pardons, indulgences,
remissions, bones other relykes and rogacions, expectyues, dispences,
exemptions, sacraments, and holy works of god. Of bread, wine, oil, towe,
milk, water, salt, fire, fumigations, encensynges, ceremonies, songs,
melodies, wod and stone, of brotherhodes, inventions tradicions, deceptions,
laws and without nombre of such tryfetrafe, whereby they ca^^ meruelously well
draw money to them, whereby the por^ people are so vndertrod, gna wen,
devoured, and so strau^ ged for y^ knowledge of God that it is not possible to
believe it.

And who ever would have thought y^ which they have devised, that by over
great subtyltie they have so abeastad the people that they makthe^ kiss a
trenchor or a small platter of gold, silver, or lead: which they name the
platine, sometime their fyngers ends that is to wit their nails, or some
dead bones of dead folk, which they call relikes whereby they have gotten so
many gifts and presents. Luk xxi^.


The Byshopes of Jerusalem gave money to Judas for to kiss a precious and
worthi thing, a thing a live and fair, which was ye precious and worthy
face of our savior and rede^ptor. Jesus Christ.

But these are more wyly, and by their fraud do other wise, for by their falls
babelynges and cautelous ways, they have so punished almost al people, in
making them to kiss bones and other unlawful dead things. And receive therefore
plenty of money every where not passing where, so they may have it*

I leave the kyssyng of the capmerchants shoo or slipper for the kiss of baudy
Thais was never so dearly sold as that is, or the kissinger of his minions.
But for bicaus that here above we have spoken of bones and other trashe of
dead things vnlafull: it shall be behouefull to se and read a lyttel treaty
ingeniously and profitablye compiled but late by a right docte and learned man
named M. John, Caluyne, of the abuse of relykes entitled the vtile
aduertisment, of the great proffyte that should come to Christendom, if an
inuentory were made of all the holy corpses, and relykes in all regions the
beginning whereof is this.

Saint Austyn in a book that he intiled, of the labor of Monks lamenting
certain bearers of rogations, which already in his time exercysed vilayne and
dyshonest fayres and markets, bearyng hither and thither the relikes of
martirs. Add yea, if they be mertyrs.

By the which word it singnifieth that as than begone the abuse of tropery,
berynge about bones gathered here and there. Making the simple people believe y^
they were saints bones.

Sith the begynnyg hereof is so ancient, it is no doubt but they have greatly
increased all this long while also seeing that the world is so merueillousli
corrupt since that time, that is declyning still in appayringe till that it came
to the extremity that we see it in now.

For certaynely by such master liers, workers of wickedness, people
effeminate, the word of verite is hyd, let ted: corrupt and blasphemed, to
exalt, a^aunee, and publysh and utter their most falls and aduou^erous wares not
with out dear sale of the^. For never the words of an aduo cacite, at torney,
orator or phisitio^ were so dear, as the words of such patriarchs.

Need it were that y^ great pastor i. P^^. 1.
our savior and redemptor Jesus Christ that bought us not with gold and
silver, or any corruptible thing: but with his precious blood, should come with
power and drive away these great mastyfhrigant Marcha^ts, wyly changers, and
abusers, which occupy the temple of God the which by figure was sometime made
in the cite of Jerusalem, and when his good John. ii.
pleasure is in the virtue of his holy name, by the wepon of his holy word,
and spirit of his mouth: make an end of such a miserable work.

Alas, when shall we se the time accomplished that our Lord has promised by
his ^a^h. xiiii.
prophet zacharye sayeyng. There shall no more be merchants in y^ house of our
Lord God in these days.

Oh how these good merchants will grene and frown when they may no more sell
their wares and works? as it is written. The merchants of Apo. xviii.
the earth shall weep and wayle because that none shall bye their wares any more.
And after y^ letter, this is spoken of those marchantes of whom we speak.
Right happy they are and shall be y^ may se y^ time and day so desirable. And
truly it is great wonder that the world can suffer and sustain so horrible
and outrageous fardelles. For there is no desolation upon the earth, but that it
is come by these most fearful and fallatious merchants.

And although the doings be so merueylous that it is impossible to know it,
or writ it fully, yet must we somewhat touch their nimblenisse and
gentylcastes of their wiles. In their practyke they be sowple and slight,
without doubt more than I wene.

I sit not a great actiuite, to sell well, and in selling to be well paid:
and at the lenth the byer has but the sight thereof? Scantly any It alian or
Lomberd ca^ do it, but these can do it welmough Every man sees that it is so,
but every man does not perceive it they have so s^ombred, blinded, and
abeasted the probatu^.
poor world.

Among good and true marcha^ts it has not ben seen that ever they sold the
only sight of their wares. For they say cominly the sight shall cost you
nothing but all these iackes like i^gelers, momers or tomblers have well
learned to play their pageants for with out cease they can sell and resele
derely y^ only sight of their baggadge. This y^. I say is best known in
good towns. For if any be called of god by death suddenly these merchants do
enquire of the friends or executers if they will have the best cloth the next
or ye least, y^ best crossed, or the next for to bring y^ corpse to the church,
and thereto according for to pay, where in the pore people be sore abused for
all well considered, it uayleth asmoche to the dead person as to the byer and
all a like. Of the corpse it is certain cover it never so well, yet will it not
sweat, nor saugh nor stier at the beauty of the cloth nor at the riches of
the cross. As to the folysh byer, it is well seen that he may pay well for he
has nothing but the sight there of. And on the morrow it shall be sold lykwise to
another. Thus can these masters pollers uymbly unfold and show their wares,
and properly fold it and bear away their tools.

Moreover is it not an actyuite to sell wares more dear after the rate of the
grame^ts where with the marchante is arrayed yea though the ware be never the
better. Such things were never seen in other merchants but these, yet with
out cease they do it and yet no body does perceyus it nor think thereon.

I would wit of you, if y^ mass (as they do say) of a Chanon be not dearer
tha^ of a vicar, of an abbot than of a monk of a bishop than of a dean and so
of the other, And yet they say them self that the mass of a naughty priest
is as much worth as another which we believe well mough

Wherefore I would wite of them where of comes such diuersyte of price of one
manner of marchandyse as for answer they have none, but by the diversity of y^
vestiments, where in they be like to a harlo^, that seeks her fylthynes more or
less after the sort of her rayments.

In this passage these great harlo^ (...)gers will love me better and be more
pleased to compare them only but to an harlot, and that in this I would not
compare them to the traitor Judas, as one of their books does, named, Stella
clericorum.
Stella clericorum, where the fair book says thus.

Qui missa^ celebrat pro pecunia, videtur mihi dicere cum proditore Judah. Quid
vul^is mihi dare, et ego e^ vobis trada^?

That is to say. Whosoever celebrateth mass for money, he says with judas the
traitor. What will ye give me, and I shall deliver him to you? Here be terrybel
merchants that this do sell their God. They sell God and devil nothing scapeth
them.

They conger, they charm the wether, the hayle, y^ tempest. They make salt
watres and vintage. To be brief they play wunders in all things and ar a great deal more five than musterd.

Is it not a great sleyght to sell one piece of ware al hole to mani folks at
once in one self hour and instant, with out knowledge either of other, and of
each of them to take and receive the hole payment and money. They name them
self angeles because of their offices but angeles make not the people blind
for all their brightness, as these dark angels do. If they were but angels only
the^ were this great meruel, but by their own sainge* they be gods and half
gods, great gods, and litel gods doing all at their will in heaven in earth,
and in hell. And therefore they may (as it is said) as it pleases them sell
their wares easyly al at one chop to sondri people, but the wilyste is oftimes
taken.

That it is so the practyse shewth, as it is ope^li sen wha^ there is great
prease, as wha^ the kings court is nygh to them, or any other great assemblyng
of noble men.

The mother is, the better the practice is handled, and namely when the
Marchante is esteemed and that he can stoop and nod, or hang his head ^n y^
one side, and make a sad countenance. The case may be thus.

Some great Lord comes to a conuente of fryres, be they greay or blake, the
one is as good as the other, saying to one of them shall we have a mass? yea mi
lord, another comes to the same fryre, and asks for a mass also, yeshal
have my Lord. Yet an other comes for asmoche, ye my Lord, and so come as
many as will, he refusteth none.

Than comes the goodly Domine, and dispatcheth them all at ones, and the
gentylm^ go their way well pleased, the marchante is paid and paid again,
both go their way laughing, as well the byer as the seller. Is not this a great
habilite? is it not well wrought? Of such wares their store houses are full, and
these be called, store house masses, or salted masses. That god of his gracious
goodness right soon vnsalte and water it.

Truly they be so apt and pro^pte, that few or none can do their beans.
Among other things they be almost all merchants of war but in all the world
is no appoticary nor cha^ldeler that can work in their manner.

Some poor, fool comes to the tempel, devoutly (as they say) and stycketh up
a candell upon a pyller, and our merchant anon snatcheth and puffs it out,
and for y^ price sellethe it to an othere, that sets it up in the same
plase. And our marcha^t that watches for it, is still redye to snatche and to
blow, and sell it to an other that anon will set it up again, so that by
snatchyng and by pouffeyng our marchantes ceas not to gatherin al day, whereby
they are rich anon for as ye se al retorneth to them both ware and money.

A little war does the^ great case, be the merchants great or litel for comenly
they use it all. The little ones sell it wrought in candells, and the great
merchants selle by lumpes tacked upon paper, or at the tail of parchement.
This that I say is well known, at the least way to offycyals, scribes
notaries, secretaries of abbayes, proctours chancelers of Bishops, archbyshops,
cardinals etc.

The great Gargantua. I say the high provost of these merchants that is the
most feared and dred the wylest of the^ al keeps his bank under exchang to
all people converting lead into gold. In this world was there never seen
such an alcumyste, that under lead (by him and his) could find such a vain
of gold. The which the good marcha^t Pauorme has not hid in his writi^ges.
Wha^ by elegant ceremony, or at least: Pauorm super pri* prin^^* de electione,
in glossa prima in fine.
wai barbarie^, he wrate thus.

Di^^nt aliqui quod nuncii pape non sunt deaurati sed plumbati: sed dic
ni^ilominus quod possu^t di^i deaurati: quia dant plu^bum et reportant autum.

That is to say. Some say that the popes messagers be not gylded but leaded,
but nevertheless, say thou, they may be called golden, for they give lead
and receive gold. This may be called an easy bodyly work. To such a work man
all things are proper to cheapen and steal. And y^ better to close his matter,
the name of Sanetissimu^ receives it.

Albeit that he is but a hat maker yet he is a hatseller to, The hat maker of
Rome.
and there was never hat maker that sold hats so dear, and acordyng to the
color he makes the price for if they be read they be the derer, and also the
buyers matter is the better, wytnes of Christofer of Forlinio, of thetytle of
Aracclie the spaniard of Angloys, with his great cord. Also T. Wolsay of the
tytel of. S. Cicelie and other who^e I leave for all the world does know them.
And when these gentyl buyers be thus coyffed and wrapped with their read hat tes
of this great capper, they go fro town to town, fro place to place, specially
to the courts of Princes and Kings to make their mustres, and stall their
merchandise, or else it may be to practice some buttin for this read hat is
full of great virtue, to them that know it first fro the time y^ he is
covered with all, he is at leyser to do all what he will, to keep as many
benifyces as he can catch, whither they be (as they say) compatyble or
vncompatyble, less or more, al serves the kechin.

Secondly he is affrau^chesed and fre fro the vnanites, that is, for any
benefice that he catches, he owes no vacation, which is a ioly practice.
Thirdly he is already in the way and nygh to be himself the great hatmaker, or
souerayn haberdasher.

^ee not these goodly privileges. This is it that makes the derth of such hate.

Than at the example of the^ there be cappers y^ likewise are sellers of
bonets. The sellers dyne very well at the exspences of y^ buyers, y^ which
folyshe buyers be so mad and folyshe that they brybe and strive in many places
for cap pes and hooddes with tails styckinge on them, who shall have the
first, the second or third. etc. Not with standing that they be al alyke of
order. Other there be y^ seek for such byggynnes (I would say bo^etts) wherein
they have nether more nor less knoledge, thowgh that they will not for get
their liripypies, I mean their peltry capperons.

Now I am in thought of a matter new inought, that has comen in times past.

And I pray al you that shall read this present treatise to pardone me if ye
know it. ^t is of a chapman that keeps in Rome, y^ rowme of y^ great ^la(...)a.
marcha^t. For as Platina writes in the book of the life of the byshope Ione
the.viii. of that name the.Cvi. bishop was a woman which held and possessed the
pontifical syedge two years, a month and.iiii. days.

At the end of which time (and she being pope, or that Question pregna^s
I do not lie popesse) she childed a young popy. I would wit than if she were
chosen. Via Spiritus sanc^^. And if her marchantdyse were sale worthy, and as
good as of a man? And when she gave absolutyon, or that she gave or sold any
Croyse, Miter, or Hatte.

Or that she ordained any Byshopes, Prestes, or Deakenes, what comes all
this gear to? Item whereby came the sacerdotall Carecte, and many other things
which for this time I let pas if ye can say any thing to this, do all swear
me, for as for me I understand nothing else, but that it was very gallyardde
and pleasant.

Whereby I return to my merchants, of whom truly some be wilier tha^ some,
and al together to the wilynes of the kechin. For albeit that in France
Norma^di and Picardi* etc. be maruaylous wyly, yet have they not as touching
this wrought so fineli, as they of the country of Santonge, and of Towrain.
That where fro Christemas to the feast of candelmas as they call it, at every
time y^ these marcha^ts sing euensong, when they come to an anthem that they
name. De fructu. If they do spy Of fruterers.
hapely any fruytfull person.

I mean fruitful, if the purs be well stored to whom they knele, and stowpe
allow to begin the De fructu, and tha^ the poor simple kneler gooth full
sympelly to sing the De fructu on the best fashion, and than the marchantes
chau^te, cry and howl, to the end, and afterward all the evening laugh,
toye, play, God knowethe how they fare. And as these marcha^t fruters fructifi
for the profit of the table al together I say to profit of their gaynes, and
damage of their neighbors that hyer and find them, and yet the good simple
folk hold them content with their knavery.

This fruitful people be in france and other regions but in England I
think be but a few, for thanked be god many of there il tres be plucked up by
the rotes and felled and their wicked merchants fruiterers be well steyed, and
shall be God wyllyng more.

Thus can these fine merchants by wyls and trewan^ise fructify at the expenses
of other. In singing and playeng nymbly for their own wealth like falls futers.

In deed their singular halilite is very euydent that they having nothing have
multitiplied and increased to so great goods, that al most they have usurped
and obtained all the richesse of the earth, as Realms Dukedo^es, Co^utyes
Principalites, Baronies Towns, Lordships, Herita-Rentes, Housynges. Fruits, and
all that is possible to say.

Truly I am ashamed to think on it, they have swalowed al together. They have
disheryted Princes, Kings, Lords, Macha^ts, Burgeses and people of all
estates and al because at their beginning they in hypocrisi could feign their
pope holiness.

But now they be so rich and mighty, that by force they do wytholde, and
rather would mengyle and melt the skies, the earth and ye see, and all that is in
them, than any thing should escape their hands.

And therefore they reise and* move wars, debates stryues and troubles, they
brynne, they slay, they persecute, they ^nprisone, and to their power drive
away al them that gain (...) them. They have no need of books of holy scripture
for to mayntene their feats but ^pholde them by strength, as brigants and
murderers do for to resyst verite their is no thing with the^ but force and
violence.

O peasant wolves, wolves insatiable, that have spared nothing but ye have
plucked it under your paws How Act.xx.
truly spoke saint Paul of you, when he wrote thus. I know that after my
departing rauishinge wolves shall i. Timo.iiii.
enter that will not spare the floke. Of such merchants it Ezechiel. xxxviii.
ii. Pet. iii
is written to Timothe in the first, In Ezechiel and diverse Jude. ii.
other passages.

If there were ever matter of iniquite, there was never ye like unto this. For
good marcha^ts, only persent their wares exposing to them that will bye a
reasonable price, and constrayne no body to bye or take thereof. But these
wicked do the contrary, for boystously they constrayne the people will they or
not to pass thorough their cruel hands, and without respite, to bye their
falls marchandises at their own pleasures, or else pronounce the^ heretics and
who that has no money must go seek for some, and make shifte though nothing
should remain.

The case is thus. Some poor man dies charged with wife and small children.
This thing is pitefull and requires mercy. And for to confort the pore widow,
certain almesses ought to be dealt unto her, to confort her and her household.
But in stead of kind providence, these unkind i. Tim. iii
and cruel marchantes of her lytelle come to make an end of all, and they by
force or right will have y^ they do demand, bread, drink, offrynges,
candelles, ox or cow gown, kirtell, Iaket, bed, shetes, good fare, or money,
and put* her from all under shadow of.

Requiem, Fundis, and Libera.

And sith we are in this purpose, there was never such iniquite known among
any merchants but in these. The which openly without fear or shame sell that
the which is nothing theyrs, and yet they sell them to the persons to whom
they do belong of right. Yea, and that worst is a. M. times and mo they sell
one self thing.

Answer to me. Who caused to make the belles of the church? whose be they?
dydthese falls merchants bear the^ thither? likewise the ground in the church or
churchyard, whose is it fro whens can it? Is it of their fatherly heritage? It
is not certaynely.

But belongs to the peopel and paryshiens. I would wit of the^ fro whe^s came
such a boldness to the^ so for to sell y^ sown of the belles, which they caused
not to be made, and also tak not y^ pain to ring the^, for they be to dilicate
minstrels, and so for to sell and resel ye ground that is not theyrs. Truly
after their accustomed facion it is a very dear ground, that so often Of
buriynges.
times is so vniustli pa^ed for. For it is ever to begin. They will answer me (I
know well) y^ it is y^ right of their church, Prop(...) quar to modo.
which easyly I agree to. For properly y^ right of their church is to cach,
flei, ravish steal and polle, which is never don in the church of Jesus Christ
and therefore consider pore people on whose side those merchants be. Jesus
Christ commands Math. x.
to give for nothing that which he has given. And these merchants engrosse it
outragyously, and so become Merchants, sheweynge thereby appertly that they
have nothing common with Cananea^s and negotiator ide^
Jesus Christ. Showing the^ also to be wors tha^ the other Cananeans, wha^ good
Sara took her rest in God, for in their right of their sepulcher they would
take nothing of Abraham.

But he which before y^ death (...) ii.
of his wise posseded never in ^ said ground, would have had some right
therein, prefiguring that some day by the pormise of God it should be his own
truli, he would have given some money therefore to Ephrom the son of Seor,
Genesis xviii.
for a very possessyon, where as a sepulcher was in a dowble field, the which
possession was entierly given and adiugged to him in heritage with y^ vsufruits
of the tres growing there. And herby it is certain that this pore painime took
no money of Abraham for nothing, but take him a fair heritage, which these
falls merchants do not to the pore people. For without ceas they take much
money. Alas they do not know wherefore. But for a pastyme is it not a good
sight to se sometime a sort of disgised and countrefet gala^ts openly feyght
for to have a dead corpse of some body.

The gray a against the gray. Frauciscans a gaynst the dominicans? The
augustines a gaynst ye Carmelyts. Black against white. The pyed against the
Crossed. Priests a gaynst Monks. Curates against Chanons, and al such sorts
of cauellers, which ought to be driven away as mastyfes, as raueus, and
cormorants This that I say is manifest, and yet it can not be remembered of what
spirit these marcha^ts were driven abroad, who moeued the^ thus so shamefully
as to re^ne after they pray as wolves and foxes after caryon but the desire to
norishe well their potage or soppes, their rybawdry or (as they say) their
estate, that is to say, their gormandyse and over licarous kitchen, for they
think on none other thing.

There of comes if there be any mocyon of a benefyce that always, they enquire
of the proffytes thereof by year ferme, by pencion, by residence Corban. Corban.
how much the church, advantage is, that is to wit, the Mar. vii
baptysmes, maryages, offringes, kissynges, lyghtes, oblacions, pilgrimages. If
there be any Irefull saint that wylbe feared, and above all, if there be much
people because of mortuaryes, burynges legaries anniuersaries, and such fine
me^tions, and huge charges upon the poor people, for as they say in right
fair laten. Vbi oues, ibi pelles. That is Vbi oues ibi pelles.
to say, where as sheep is there is wolle, which truly they can well sheare
and gather.

And in deed they be all of one craft and can none other so well as this. That
is, they be al shearers, deuoures, sleyers yea and that so near that they
suck ye blood, and the sweat.

And of such rapine they uphold each other iolily, it is plainly seen daily,
without any remedy.

And they be not only merchants, sellers and occupiers but also the most
part are covetous sellers again. Or the better to understand what I say, a
seller again is he that byeth for to sell again to another, for proffite and
gaynes Act. viii.
by it as also Simon Magus would have done, whereof it is spoken in the Aacts of
thappostles. And. S. Austin upon the Cxxx. Psalm, after his manner of rekenyng
in speaking of the said Simon says thus, The power of the Apostles pleases
him more than the goodness of the Christians, in asmoch as he saw by y^ leing on
of y^ apostles hands God gave the gifts of the holy ghost in such manner that
the Christianes spoke new languages, he would have done as they did, But he
would not be faithful as they were and be a good servant of Jesus Christ, but
because that he would be seen mighti and somewhat hie and therefore he offered and
would have given money to have such a power as they had, and truly he would
have derely bought that which he knew w^ll afterward. The felawes of this
said Simo^ be al miserable biers of benefices and eccleciasticall officers,
which are excommunicate by the authority of God, and not one lie of God, but
also by the authoryte of the decres and ancient cannos, as pestilent people,
by who^ the church of God is robbed, wasted, and desolated, y^ reformation of
the church let, and the salvation of y^ people withdrawn.

O Lord God what a book might be made of this matter if tym would suffer it,
but I remit it al to the Judgment of those persons which love and dread the
almighty lord.

What do you noble and Romans xiii
virtuous Princes, Lords and Ladies, why have ye no regard over these
merchants, and notwythstandynge that by their pride they will not be visyred of
you, yet will they or not, ye have authority over the^. And to you and none
other it belongs to castyse, to correct, and represte the great excess of
such thieves.

Do it than, to the end that it be not uerified of you that is voken in Esaye.

Such princes are infidels E^le. i.
companio^s of thieves, but rather that in y^ presence of the living God, of
whom ye bear E^o him
the name, which has given you the pour of the sword, for to use it to his
honor, defending innocents punishing al male factors, be ye found faithful
and veritable, Consenting to all godnes resystynge euylle with all your
power, for his good will, for by him ye are committed there to, and he alone may
exalt you or put you down in this present life, and the life to come, and hereof
ye may be sure, if ye seek his honor, he will honor you. If ye exalt him he
will exalt you.

By his wisdom kings do Pro viii.
reygne, and Lords do ordein ordinances of Justice. And the mysprision of the
dyuine will and wisdom is cause of al euyls over Kings, Princes, Lords,
cou^tres and nations ii. Regu^. xxiiii.
Which may be sen in David Solomon, Ezechi, Achab, Manasses iii. Re, xi.
and other. And let no man take fear in forthering the honor of God, as the
simple Sedechie did. Fearing more the princes of Judah and of Jerusalem, the^
y^ only God. Not beleueyng y^ good counsel Jeremy. xxxii. et xxxix.
of Ieremi. The which Sedechie nevertheless afterward found true that which the
prophet had told him. And was put fro the goods y^ were ordened for him. For
it is not in y^ power of men to put Kings fro their crows but it belongs
Danie. i.
to y^ only god, which tra^s ferreth kingdoms as it pleases him. The which if
he be with you: who ca^ be against Romans viii.
you? Oh God if ye were as prompt and ready to procure the honor of God as these
auaricyous marcha^ts are apt and diligent about their business, that nothing
escape the^ O Lord how every thing should be well.

It is no need to speak of there study and diligence, for every body seth it.
They have a. C. eyes ever open to watch as the cat for the mous. Argus saw
never clerer before and behind, no more did Ianus with his dowble face. If the
belles ring in any place (as they say) for an obit than our gentyl gallants
trudge apace but our Lord knows what a drage there is of them.

If the master or the dame of a house be seek, so that they be any thing rich,
for of the poor they pas not, and that they have any token of death our
merchants togo thither a pace a pace to put in their minds to remember their
shoppes, their byldyng their church, their brethen, and for to have some
aniuersari foundation, or other testamentary gift. Do what ye will, out of the
house ye get them not till they have some pray, or else they will say that he
or she be Lutherien heretykes:

God knows what wily wrinches, what subtle fallaces they do commit fro day
to day. Think who will on the household, on the famuly, on of the children,
rent or detts al is one to them so they may have their asking they care not.
If any bridales be, thither rene our merchants to fare well, and to bliss y^
bride bed. If any woman lie in childbed, they togo, to say gospels ano to be at
the syttyng up and chirching.

To be short be it at life or death, our marcha^ts be ever practisyng some
bribles, they never make an end. And the better to dyspose the matter after
their sort not one of them will mary, because they may the better use their
byt cheri at their ease to pass the time, and to live without thought.

For to conclude it is to be noted that among so great a felowshyppe of
merchants there be two sorts, yet none of them both do live in pureness of
chastity, of the which some of them govern them self in course and rude
tyranie, the other in fair hypocrysy.

The first be they that openly constrain the people to by their wares, and
there is no remedy but pass that wyae, or else to be flayne and murdered of
them, or at the least excommunicate in their sinagog.

The other that could not come to usurp the power to command, can by an
other mean, that is to wite in the appearance of poverty bering walets all
upon their shulders full simply faining a lowting cau^tenance selling them
sellfe as the Essians, Saducians, or Pharisians did.

Sometime they would give their own habit to the pore, pretending some holiness
the which afterward was paid a. C. times dowble. Thus can they work subtylly
in they marketes and fayres. Than is there anothor sort of fine bestial frires
lowtes, lowting their heads by the way bearing great beads like father
Robert of Islyngton, Merchants of their own works and merytes, as if they
hade some in store to sell again.

And openly they have made to believe that all the benefactoures of their orders
have won heaven by the merits of these holy beaupers, quentchyng the faith
thereby, and putting the holy name of Jesus Christ in darcknes, blasphemeynge
openly the grace and mercy of the Lord God, the which is not wone by work or
merit, or else grace should not be grace, howebe i^ by such dreamyng lies,
and fayninge, these arrogant supersticious fat trewa^ts have sed their
miserable bealyes with the labor of the simple people.

I may say miserable west inoughe, for there was never so many ungracious
sorts of people upon the earth.

They do disfigure and fatten them selves, they extermine their faces as
hypocrites.

They torment and punish them sefes for to appear to the world such as they
be not. Truly they tak great pains to go to the Devil.

And often times when they se a young child come^ of a good stock and rich
kindred, they will so entyce him as much as they may to catch him in limetwyges
and snare to make him like unto them. To such folks Jesus Christ gives his
curse, when he says woe Mathei. xxiii.
unto you hypocrites that compass both sea and land, to make one your nouice,
and when he is made he shall be dowble wors than you. This is their Consolacio
mise^orum.
joy and consolacion to draw any to their estate. Whereby it is very veryt
able, that the delight of a wicked person is to have the^ that be like unto
him. This is true that I say. And it is not said of a desire or affection to
missay any person: but to the end that the sheep of Jesus Christ may keep
and delyuere them self from such deceivers, that out ward seem to be simple
Mat. vii
sheep, and in ward be very raue^ing wolves. And by the healpe of their great
and very shepeherd Jesus, they may be preserved, and that of the^ and al other
that are in darcknes and error be entierly verified y^ which S. Pet. says
you have i. Pet. ii.
ben as lost sheep, but now ye be returned to the pastor and bishope, of your
souls. And we iii. Regu^. xx. xviii. et xix.
must not in this point stay at y^ great number, at y^ multitud, or at their
riches and pouer. For it is much better to here Miche alone, tha^ the. iiii C.
falls Lu^. ii.
prophets, Helie alone than all the sacryficers of Baal.

The good and simple. Simon and the ancient wydow Anne tha^ all the Pharisiens,
sacrifiers, Scribes, and docters which hade made a dene of murderers of the
house of God. Of whose successors I pray our Lord right soon to give
knowledge to al princes and Lords, men learned and of authoriti, y^ they may
make such prouidens and remedy that the vengeance of God do not fall on the
poor peopel, and on all y^ earth. For they commit so mani detestable wyles and
gyles that it is not possible to think it, wytnes y^ falls feigned spirit, that
seth. xx. years was gylefully and maliciously mente by the gray fryeres of
Euereus in y^ convent of Normandy. And of late time such another by the gray
fryeres of Orliance.

To the great sclander not only of the realm, but also of all other Christen
nations. This was in France.

I pray you was there no The translatour.
such folysh feigned triflyng deceit in England I report me to the^ that have
seen and herd of them as of rodes and other geugaus, which mockage is true,
evident, and come^ly known of al me^ of every degree, which as now to speak
of any more I will leave of abiding to se y^ there shall be done such justice that
it shall be example to all the world.

For if any partyculer person be punished for a folysh or little fawt that he
does, how much more ought such hypocrites for to be punished extremely, the
which under the sight of holiness abuse the poor people in such wise to the
great blasphemi of god and diffamatio^ of their neighbor. All the world than
may be sure that if the Lords of Justice cause not punishment as is
apperteyneynge for it, that y^ Lord God will take so terrible reuengeaunc that
all the world shall tremble for the hyd^ousnes of it.

Likewise of the wyles of these croscrepers which faynyng multitude of prayers
with multitude of pardoned prayers, and beads: think the sooner to begyle the
people kneling ever in one place daly, and lycking of pyllers, kyssing of y^
images fete, to seem more holy, and among themself very detratores of God.
And yet they fear to displease one the other for fear of accuseme^t. O
dissimbling folishnes and foul hypocrysy.

There be mani other things which as now I report me y^ I could ^ay of a
truth if I would but I will absteyne me fearyng to offend the weak.

Now after that I have spoken of these will foxes and cautelous Merchants with
whom is comprehended here mites and recluses.

It shall be good to speak of a great flock of Chap women as much or wylyer
than the merchants which be of them selves named Mo^kesses, Abbesses,
Prioresses, Chanonesses, systers of al colors, recluses, and many such other
sorts of vermyne, but I reserve this matter (the which truly be not very
clean) tyli some other time.

For this present season i^ I have said il or little, I put it all to the
judgment of more wise and fayethful lovers of verite to whom humbly I require
to encreas, amplify and set forth that which I have willed to pas bryefly,
fearing to anoy y^ readers by mi rude speech.

It has suffysed me for to show somewhat of y^ evil that hurts us so sore,
oneli for to give occasion to people of good desire here after to devise some
what more, finally trusteyng by the bou^tie of the father of mercy, of some
goood delynerau^ce, the which of his grace deliver us all fro y^ darkness of
error, fro deceiful living, fro Idolatry and infidelite.

Wherein we be myserably fallen, in asmoche as we have lest his pure and holy
word, following our own opinions ii. Cor. xi.
and folyshe fantasies, for Satan y^ te^ptor, enemy of our salnacion by
cautyle transfigurynge him into an angel of light, under shadow and color of
veryte always came against y^ will of God, like as among other things it is
Deu^^r. xxxiiii.
certain that y^ body of Moses the which God did bury, and unto this day never
ma^dyd find his sepulcher, allthoughe that the devil has Jude. i.
enforced him to reueyle and show it. but ye angel of God resysted him,
always calling for healp to the Lord. For truly this false serpent would have
abused and deceived us with the body, bones, and relykes of the said holy
prophet teching to reyse some house of devotion, some fair pilgrimag, and a
pleasant and new manner to serve God, other tha^ that which he has commanded.
The which thing the prophets could not have condemned afterward nor
reproved it, oneles they should have been accused of infidelite and malyse:
seeing the holiness and great excellency of y^ same, whereby God had done so
many admirables. For the folysh men without Judgment beholdynge the works of
saints only, do forget him that by them does such works. In good soth under
such appearance and color of goodness, the devil should greatly triumph in
that place as he has done sith, and daily entend eth to do in mani places as
it appeared here in this land and does yet in some other countrees, with other
in finite abusions.

Alas what an horror has spread through the universal world by that means.
The merchants have scraped well, pilled well, heaped well, and looked well throught
that hole. And where is any spirit that ever could recite, or tongue declare, all the viage, all the wild and new pylgrymages that by little and little have been
inverted? There be as many manner of saints as of people and beasts.

As. S. Loye for horses S. Anthony for swine, S. Loup for sheep. S. John for
lames S Hubbert for dogs. One for gotes an other for kien. S fereioll for
gees, and so forth of y^ remenaunt. And for people there is great plenty. For
there is no member upon man, nor any disease reygnynge upon him, but it has a
particular phisitio^. S. Job (that never thought on it (heals y^ great
pockes. saynct Appolin the tethe.

Howbeit that I have meruayled of tentyms, that these good workeme^ gave not
that office to. Saint. Christophre, which had so great and long tethe that
Cobrande was no thing like. Probacion.

In a certain place of Fraunc called Beaunoys is a little abbay of. Sain.
Christopher, where as the reuerends there do show a to the which as they say
is one of. S. Christophres. The which to the is so bygg and long that if he had
had but. xii. in his mouth, it should have been wyder than the greatest ouens
mouth in all paris, what a fellow were he y^ had. xxiiii. or. xxx. such in his
mouth atones? Truly this goodly toth in bread is more than agreate half foot,
and byg accordyngly. O intolerable irrisyon. And yet it serves a monge these
good merchants.

And to come to our purpose Saint Quintin heals the Cough. Many heals the
fevers, but there is so many of the^ that they let each other S. Clare helps
read eien. S. Aduertyn the head ache of women. S. Mayn of the scab. I leave.
saint. Gyles in Co^stantin that often helps women to have children. Such
saints inow are found at the fryres and monks. S. Mor heals the gowt when he
is at leyser. S. Syeth fyndeth lost things, another serves to go. Another to
come. One to begin, an other to make an end. Never was seen such work men.
Nor never was seen such afyre. But above al other y^ can be devised, there is
none Iolier. S. Maturin that heals all them with empty heads as mad and
abstraught people, which be thy der brought, God knows How they be handled.
The measur of old fathers cannot serve. They shallbe rubbed, horscomed, and
whipped that it is pity, and yet never the wyser, but when they have done, they
must have money and wine, and so he is feign to run a way lustyly.

Were it not agreat alms by charity to have whypped and scourged a gallant
naminge, him self an aulmosiner, I wotte not frowhens, which a while ago in
the cite of, Abeuile in Pycardy played aprety gewgaw.

And the better to understand his ga^bawed when the Queen made her enter there

She being with her asistantes in the church of. S. ^oulfra^e this holy father
after his mass said, he made a supersault and willyngly as a tumbler fell
down as in a sown, feining to be ravished, or to se so^me heavenly vision.

And in deed the good gen, tylman would have persuaded the simple people that
he had seen the virgen Mary accompanied with certain saints. As. S. Peter and.
S. Paul which had showed him some divine secrets.

The which thing anon was publyshed for certain and true by the vpholders
of his degree. I mean valiant pillars of ye church, although it was but a lie
and deceyt.

As himself sith has confessed, saying that he did it only to be esteemed the
more holy man, and by cause more credet should be given to his words. This was
the invention of such a work man, which had nofeare to lie, and in his
mockery offended God greueously, for to accomplish his knavery.

How be it. S. Paul has expressly written that the verite of God has no need
of our dreaming lies, and that Romans iii.
none ought to do any evil, to thend that goodness may happen him. But what
thought take such folks for. S. Paul or of his wrytynges? Wherefore such a
Jack above all other yt could be thought or spoken of as a fool with his
like fellows ought to be led to the god. S. Maturin and there as a holy bodi to
be reised up, and pleasantly have his head rubbed, horscomed, brushed handled
tormoyled and whipped, to make him know what it is to be folyshe or wise,
specially in mattiers of great weight.

For above all y^ folyes that can be done, said or thought, the greatest is to
counterfeit any thing belonging to god

O Lord God how ye world by such minions and falls menes has been in times
past, and yet is enpoysoned with great error and sedicion.

There be other saints for artifycers or handy crafts, every one in his
occupation and faculte. S. Crispian makes shoes. And saint. Rock cobbleth
them. S. Cosme hea leth soores and wounds. S. Iuy keeps process in y^ law. S.
honory makes matches.

One goes on fot, another rides, one is naked, another well clothed. One is
armed another with a single wepon It is wondrous to think on it. And in good
sothe if I would delate, work set forth and amplify all y^ is hyd under this
feigned shadow I had need to make agreat book by it self a lone.

Wherefore I differ this purpose till another time, abiding the help of the
Lord. The which for ever b^ praised exalted, and manyfied his only best
beloved sone our Lord Jesus Christ, which with his blood has purged us who
be blessed In the world of worlds

Imprinted in London and ar to be sold by Richard Judge, at the North door of
Pouls.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


