THE SICKE-MANS Comfort, against Death and the Devil, the Law and Sin, the
Wrath and Judgment of God.

Translated out of French into English, by I. E.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1590.

The sicke-Mans Comfort against Death and the Devil, the Law and Sin, the
Wrath and Judgment of God.
THe life of man stuing in this vale of misery, is environed and compassed in
round with mountains of infinite calamities and tribulatio^s: whereof some are
but incident to some particular men, other more common and general to all: as
Death, and diseases, which hasten and procure men to die; which amate us so
much the more, when they come upon us, by reason they are so dangerous, and by
reason that we cannot avoid them: for albeit that Kings, Emperors, Princes,
and other Potentates may preserve themselves for a while from the danger of
diseases, and prevent hem by the help of God, using such good and lawful
means, as he has given them for their comfort and preservation: yet without
exception not one, no not one is found amongst them, that can save, or may
exempt himself, but he must die: first or last, either in battle by the
sword, or in his bed, by sickness: or else, by such accident, as the divine
providence of God has set down before he was borne. David could tell us
this, in many places: in the 82. Psalm, where Psalm. 82.
he speaks of Princes: I have said, ye are Gods, and ye are all children of
the most high. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes.
And in another place: There be some that put Psalm. 49.
their trust in their goods, and boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches. But no man may deliver his brother, nor make agreement with God for
him: for it cost more to redeem his soul, so that he must let that alone for
ever: Yea though he live long and see not the grave. For he sees that wise
men also die, and perish together as well as the ignorant and foolish, and
leave their riches for other, who^ they have not known. And in another place
he speaks of the end and condition of all men in general: What man is he,
Psalm. 89.
that lives, and shall not see death, and shall deliver his own soul from the
hand of Hell? And again in the next Psalm following: Thou turnest man Psalm.
90.
to destruction. Again, thou say, come again ye children of men. We see then,
that it is Gods decree and ordinance inviolable, that all men that come into
the world, come but conditionally, not to make any long tarrying, as the Trees
which are fastened deep within the earth by the roots, and have a long time of
abode granted them: but to pass away swiftly, as does the Current of a
running River, and to be gone, as soon as it 2. Sam. 14.
shall please the Lord to call them away again. And for all that (as the
Prophet says) we seek to come to composition with Death, or to have some
days of truce and respite to delaie his coming: yet we see daily our date is
out, and the day of our assignation is soon expired, when we must appear
before the dreadful Judge at a certain hour, and at the same instant we
must hear from his own mouth the sentence definitive, Psalm. 62.
either of life or Death, for ever irreuocable. What shall we then do? we must
first and chiefly have a care, not as Aza 2 Chro. 16.
had, to seek out skillful Physicians, to take the potions and drugs that they
shall minister, to save us from sickness, which otherwise would be incident unto
us: nor as Mithridates had, to keep in store many preservatives and medicines,
for fear of empoysoning by our familiar friends: we must not provide a brave
and goodly Horse, a sword of the Psalm. 38.
best and trustiest making, an armor of proof, to put our trust therein, as
though these could save us from the hazard of the battle. For all this
cannot infringe the ordinance of God, nor once save us from his anger, nor any
jot turn away from us the effects and execution of his divine will. But the
chiefest care and consideration that we must have, if we either mean to
prevent the mischiefs, which may be fall us hereafter, or remedy those which
are happened unto us already, is humbly to desire, and diligently to seek for
the grace and favor of God, which is the most soueraign and readiest remedy
that men may find for the speedy redress of all calamities and adversities,
where with they shall be afflicted. Now for that I am earnestly entreated by some
of my brethren and friends to select and set down in writing certain places
of holy scripture, for the comfort of such as be sick, to strengthen them
against the horrors and apprehensions wherewith they are commonly saised, as
well of their sins and offenses, as of Death, of the Devil, and of the
displeasure and judgment of God, which are more horrible a great deal, Romans
13. 1. Cor. 13. 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
then all the other. Finding my self bound hereunto by Christian charity, by
the band whereof all the members of Christ's body are firmly linked together:
and knowing besides that it is a piece of the charge, that God has laid on
the necks not only of the Ministers of the Gospel: but also of the
Superintendents, which are joined with them for ayders and fellow-helpers: I
would in no wise make refusal, to satisfy my brethren in this their request:
although I know well enough, that many of my fellow laborers, on whom God has
bestowed greater talents, might be better spared, and were fitter to be
employed in this business, then my self: nevertheless, seeing that the members
in what rank or degree so ever they be, ought not to refuse any labor or
service for the body, if it lie in their power to do, I will attempt by the
help of God, to do that I am able, by his grace, to content and satisfy them
in their desire. Omitting then many other kinds of afflictions, by the which it
pleases God to chastise and keep under his children, let us speak here only
of Sickness and Death, and set down summarily consolations fit for the purpose,
to instruct and keep men in ure, to abide patiently their sickness and
diseases: the which are not casual things, and matters of mere chance, now
happening to one, now to an other, by rash and unadvised rencountre: but we
must think that they are al sent upon us by the providence of God.

And although the ends and occasions of Sickness be diverse, yet the Author is
always one, and is the same, who is the giver of all health and welfare. For
from the mouth and ordinance of God (as says Jeremy) proceeds good Lament.
3. 38. Amos. 3.
and evil, which is contrary to good. And there is none evil (as Amos says)
be it within the City or in the field, but it comes from God. So then as
peace and war, poverty and riches, liberty and imprisonment are from God:
so in like manner are health, and sickness. David in all his anguishes confesses
this: For in the sixth Psalm he says: O Lord Psalm. 6.
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy sore displeasure.
Acknowledging that the anguish and sickness wherewith he felt himself so
grievously afflicted, was the very pricking and working of Gods displeasure,
whom he knew he had sore offended. He says as much in another Psalm: Thine
arrows Psalm. 38.
have light upon me, and thine hand lies upon me. And in the two and thirty
Psalm, Thy hand is heavy upon me day and night. And again in the 39. Psalm,
I was dumb and spoke nothing, I kept silence even from good, and my sorrow was
more stirred. My heart was hot within me, and while I was musing the fire
kindled, etc. Ezechias Isay. 38.
and Job likewise do attribute their sickness to none other but to God. And Job
said, that in the very stinch that Job. 1. and 19
came from his flesh halfe-rotten, and in the multitude of loathsome worms that
issued from his body, he still beheld but one hand of his Savior to touch
him, to the end he might heal him again with the other. The very Heathenish
Infidels have sometimes acknowledged that their Sickness and diseases proceeded
from none other cause but from God, who then punished them because of their
offenses. As Pharao and his family Genesis 12. Exodus 9.
in the days of Abraham, the Egyptians in the time of Moses, and the
Philistians in the time of Samuel, when they kept the Arc of Covenant captive
and prisoner in their own country, after they had taken it in the war, wherein
they vanquished the children of Israel. We must then conclude, that diseases,
and generally all afflictions and adversities do come from God, who does
nothing but with great justice and by Psalm. 33.
his heavenly wisdom. For all his actions are so well directed, that nothing
may be found in them, but is done with weight, number and measure, and for
great reason, although the cause thereof be sometimes unknown to us. As then
the Goodness, the Power, the Wisdom, the Justice, the Equity, Constancy, and
verity, which appear in all the works of God, are the motives and causes why
we allow of them and praise them: So confessing all these virtues in our
sickness and other adversities, which are the handyworke of God and of none
other, ought we not to take them in good part, and to arm our selves with this
faith and holy cogitation against the impatience and murmuring of our heart,
which does prick and provoke us to stomach, and be angry with God, yea and
sometimes to blaspheme his holy name horribly, when he will not do as we would
have him, and fulfill the wicked and disordinate desires of our sinful flesh,
which if he should do, he should become like unto Psalm. 50.
us, who are but flatterers and dissemblers of our own vices and
abominations. Contrariwise to become holy, good and virtuous, we must labor
to be like unto him, and to submit all our desires and will unto his will. For
otherwise we are indeed but hipocrites, and although that in our prayers we
crave and desire that his will be done, our Mat, 6.
heart does secretly make our mouth be found a liar, and does by and by tell
us in our ear: ha, hipocrite that thou art, if thou might choose, thou
had rather have thy own will to be done, then Gods will. When a man speaks
to us of Gods providence, and asks us, if every thing that God does, be
good, and well done, we can tell him by and by, it is: and so we say to our
neighbors and friends, when we see them in any anguish or affliction, to give
them the best comfort and counsel that we can, and for the best and speediest
remedy, we tell them then, it proceeds from the providence and will of God.
But when it comes to the point to apply it to our selves, we do as
Physicians, who can minister good medicines, and give skilful counsel to
others, but will follow none themselves. Nevertheless there is nothing so
needful and wholesome for us, as to occupy our selves daily in meditating of
the providence of God, and to acknowledge that it guides, governs, and
disposes all things: to the end, that beholding always the workman in his
workmanship, we may by and by like of it, and allow it, knowing that he
lets nothing go out of his shop, before it be thoroughly polished, well
trimmed, perfect and accomplished, as it should be in all points. And if we
give such credit to cunning Artificers, to accept of their workmanship, so
soon as we see their mark, shall we do so great injury to God, as not to
allow and esteem of his works, wherein we see the marks and prints of his
bounty and justice so evident and apparent to the eyes of all men?

Uery true it is, that that which does come directly from his bounty, pleases
us better, then that which proceeds from his rigor and justice: as is seen
in the works of Nature, some seem more pleasant and delectable then other
some: the day is more comfortable to us then the night, the summer more
pleasant then the winter, the sunshine and clear weather makes us a great
deal gladder, then the black, pitchy, dark, rainy, and stormy season does.
So when God smileth upon us, and shows us the light of his countenance, and
by his mild and gracious dealing toward us, does cherish and make much of
us, embracing us with his mercy on every side, multiplying without cease his
graces upon us, and every day endewing us with some new benefit (as the Prophet
Psalm. 89.
says) that without doubt is far more acceptable unto us, then when he
shows us his stern and frowning looks, and makes us feel the rigor of his
wrath, and the sting of his Justice. Did not David Psalm. 89.
take greater pleasure in hearing the goodly and large promises that God made
Psalm. 18.
unto him, to establish him in his kingdom, and to give it to him and to his
children for ever, to give him victory over all his enemies, the which were as
thick in every corner, as the dust in the Psalm. 132.
market place, to make his fame and renown to fly and resownde in all
quarters amongst strange Nations, to hear God with his own mouth say, that
he 1. Sam. 13. Psalm. 78.
had found him a man after his own heart, to consider how God took and chose
him even from his sheep, to exalt him above all the houses of Israel, and how
God, did (as it were) degrade altogether the house of Saul, to enrich and
adorn him with their spoils, having none other reason to do all this for
him, but of his mere grace and good will. I ask you then, whether these so
great and evident tokens of the bounty and mercy of God toward him, were not
far easier to be disgested, then the grievous reproaches that he made him of
his ingratitude after his fall? And the fearful threatenings 2. Sam. 12.
that he used to discover and publish openly all his offense? to make murders
and bloodshed abound in his house? and that the honor of his wives should be
stained by his own son? And yet notwithstanding such executio^s of gods
justice were very hard, and a burden for him almost insupportable: yet did he
endure all things patiently, and submit himself wholly to the will of God,
assuring himself of his mercy (of the which Ab. (...). 3.
he remembers himself always in his judgments) that the burden, which he
would lay upon him, should not be to cast him down utterly. We have one
notable example of his patience and humble obedience that he resolved to
yield unto God in all his adversities, when with so modest and mild a spirit
he suffered ye vile and opprobrious injuries wherewith Semei reproched him,
when he was constrained to fly in all have, and to forsake the City of
Jerusalem, to save 2. Sam. 16.
himself from the conspiracy that his son and all his people had wrought
against him. For the principal cause, that made David so mild and patient,
was, that he did refer all the presumptuous insolency, and sawcines of this
little Puppy, to the providence of God, who had raised him up to greet him with
these injurious words, to make him humble, and to make trial of his patience
and virtue. And what was the cause wise, that Job after so manifold and Job.
1. and ^.
great losses of his goods and children, and finally of the health of his body,
did bless and praise God so sincerely and heartily, as ever he did before in
time of his prosperity, and even then when he had his hearts desire, but a
special care that he had of the providence of God, the which he did
contemplate and behold steadfastly in all his miseries, that he might receive
them from his hand as his blessings and special favors, that he bestows
upon his dearest and best beloved children? The^ it is not enough that we
believe that all sicknesses and diseases are sent from God: but we must believe
that all their circumstances come from him also: as if they be grievous and
tarry long with us, if they be loathfull and full of pain and languishing, and
sometimes if they be incurable, so that by reason of their contagion, they
cause our friends and kinstolke to refrain from visiting and comforting us,
and insomuch that we can have no remedy, no more then had the poor woman,
which had an issue of Mat. 9. Luke. 5.
blood for the space of twelve years, and the poor man that being saised and
benumbed Ioh. 5.
with a palsy all over his body, kept his bed 38. years, and in all that
space could never get any remedy. We must then attribute all this unto God,
and think that he is just and free to disperse the goods and evils, which he
takes out of his treasury, to bestow them where he thinks best, and in such
portion and measure as pleases him, so that no man may complain justly of
him, or demand of him by any reason, wherefore he does thus or thus.

After that we be fully resolved in our minds, that not only all sicknesses
and diseases, but also all other harms and evils whatsoever do proceed from
God, who pleases by his providence to send them for our chastisement, having
already gathered some comfortable sayings to encourage us withal: now for our
better comfort we must consider, who this God is, that does send us these
afflictions, and how near us he is: for it is not such a God, as these Gods
are, who^ Psalm. 96. Psalm. 115.
the foolish Heathen people do adore, and are nothing at all indeed, unto
whom they address themselves, they cannot see at all with their eyes, nor
hear with Act. 14. Heb. 1 Esaias. 40. Psa. 147 R^m. 4. Apoc. 1.
their ears, nor smell with their noses, nor taste with their tongues, nor
speak with their mouths, nor take or give with their hands, nor walk with
their feet, and to be short, they can neither do good nor harm: For they are
not so much as mortal, as are men and beasts, but things altogether dead, which
have in them no sense, no understanding, no moving, no feeling, or force at
all. But the God, in whom we believe, is the Creator of heaven and earth, who
makes by the only powrable virtue of his word all things that are in this
world to live and die, and to breath again: who with one of his fingers does
measure the earth, and hold it up with the tip thereof, as it were with a
fishooke: who knows the number and the names of all the stars, who calls
the things that are not, as if they were: who carries the keys of life and
death, who is infinite in himself, and all his virtues are infinite: for his
bounty, mercy, wisdom, justice, and verity, are so incapable and
incomprehensible, that their longitude, can no more be fadomed then their
largitude, nor their largitude can no more be measured then their profunditie,
which are past all length and largenes, all height and deapth, all count and
capacity.

Now this good and great God, is not 1. Cor. 3. Psa. 5. Psa. 17. 7. Cor. 6.
far from us, neither by his presence, nor by his affection: he is in us as
in his own Temple to sanctify us, he is about us, to guard and keep us with
his favor, and to hyde us under the shadow of his wings. He is dwelling in
us, as in his own house to guyd and govern us, to enrich us, to garnish and
deck us up: our thoughts and hearts are his galleries wherein he walks and
takes his pleasure, there talking with us by holy thoughts and inspirations,
that he does put in our minds. And although that he fill both heaven and
earth, and that the love that he bears to all his creatures, be the Psa 148.
Job. 3. Ephesians. 6.
cause that he aid and assist them, providing al things necessary to nourish
and preserve them: Nevertheless herein is his tender love most of all seen, in
that he has so much honored us, and born us so great good will as to espouse
us, and to comoigne and unite us so vnseperatly with himself, and by the means
of such an union to receive us into his fellowship to be partakers of all his
graces, gifts, and benefits for ever. Even so then, as a woman which
perceives her self entirely beloved of her own husband, need not fear
that he will at any time misuse her: so ought we to assure our selves, that God
who does love us above measure, cannot do or suffer to be done to us any thing
that shall not be for our benefit. For if then when Romans 5.
we were enemies (as says S. Paul) we were reconciled to him by the death of
his son, much more being already reconciled we shall be saved by his
life. Is there any thing to be imagined more absurd, then to think that GOD,
who is the sovereign good, can be the Author of any evil? Or Iam. 3.
can we have from one Fountain or spring, both salt water and sweet water?

The heretics, as Marcion and the Manichees, to show that they had such
blasphemy in horror and detestation, would establish two principles: the one
of life and light: the other of death and darkness, persuading themselves by
Psa 68.
no means, that from God, who is the fountain of life and of all felicity,
might proceed any misery or affilction: wherein they were not deceived, but in
this only, that from a good Maxim they drew a naughty conclusion: For in
truth, the good in so high degree as God is, that is to say, sovereign and
infinite, cannot produce any evil, no more than fire can any thing that is
cold: light, darknen: or life, death. And the reason is, because God, after
that he had created the world and all that therein is contained, and considered
thoroughly all the workmanship of his hands, bear witness that they were all
perfect good. And this is not simply to be understood of all things that God
created and made, but it extends also to all things that God does, without
any exception.

For seeing that God is always like Psa. 102. Iam. 1.
to himself, and that in him, as Saint James says, there is no changing at
all, no not the least shadow of alteration: and as his bounty is eternal, so
at all times can it produce nothing but good works, and do those things that
are good. And this is the reason which he gave, aunswering by his Prophet to
the people, who complained of the grievous O seas. 13.
calamities that did ouerpresse them: that he was by no means the causer
thereof: as for him, he only had procured their benefit and safeguard, but that
they were cause of their own ruin, and of all the desolatio^s that happened
to them in their country. For as the fire kindles Similitude.
but fire, and other things semblably do produce things of their own quality
and nature alike, so does God to, from whom can proceed none evil because he
is perfectly good. But then will some man say: why, sickness and diseases,
famine, poverty, dearth, and wars, are not these evils and plagues that God
does send upon us, and is not he then the author and causer of them? God
sends them in deed, as well upon the good as the bad: on the one, to punish
their sins, which is a very good deed, and a deed of Justice: on the other
to try their patience, or to bring them to repentance. Thus if we would be
good servants and fitly apply these sicknesses that God does send amongst us,
referring them to their right end, we should reap thereby much profit and
many goodly instructions. First then there is nothing so needful, as to know
our own sins, the corruption and vice that is in us, to the end we may
humble our selves before God, and dispose our selves to beseech and seek his
grace and favor, the only mean whereby they may be remitted covered and hid
before him, that so we may avoid and escape his judgment, and the
condemnation which otherwise shall be appointed for us, if our sins be not
pardoned. But we are so naturally blinded in our own judgment, by reason of
the excessive selfeloue that we have in our selves, which does blindfolde our
eyes that we cannot perceive nor discover the malice, hypocrisy, false
dealing, pride, vanity, defyance of one another, injustice, impiety,
idolatry, inhumanitie, and all this lump of wickedness which lurketh in our
heart from our birth, and hatcheth every day more and more, as occasions shall
serve to commit evil. For although we seek to keep close for a while the
malice which we have conceived in our hearts as women do, which say they are
not with child, till their belly begin to swell, and til the day of their
delivery draw near, and then they must needs confess that which before
they stoutly denied: So do we never confesie our sins until we be by
manifest proofs convinced, and yet then we stand to debate and diminish still
some thing from the enormitie of our faults and offenses, whereof we have a
notable example in our first Parents, who when they stood before the face of
God (from whom Genesis 3.
nothing may be concealed or hidden) their own consciences accusing them, yet
they sought by all crafty means they could, to counterfeit and lay one from
another the fault that they had committed, and could not be induced, neither
by the fear and reverence of God, who being present spoke unto the^, neither
by the accusation and witness of their own consciences which urged them sore on
every side, but to confess clearly and without any doubling, their
disobedience, their ingratitude and ambition, by the which they were cast
headlong from the happy and blessed estate wherein they were a little before.
Whereby we may see how hard a matter it is for men to acknowledge and confess
their sins sincerely and without hypocrisy. We may see also by the
Patriarchs, who Genesis 42.
dissembled all their wickedness, and cruel, and inhumaine-conspiracie that
they had wrought against their poor brother, which they never acknowledged til
they were constrained by the anguish and distress, into the which God brought
them, to make them remember and call to mind. And how long time was David a
sleep in his sin, and never once thought upon it, till he felt the hand of
God touch him so sore, and that he found himself almost intrapped of his
enemies, as he confesses himself: Thy hand is Psa. 3^.
heavy upon me day and night, and my moisture is turned into the drought of
Summer. Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity:
for I thought I will confess my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou
forgauest the punishment of my sin. And Saint Peter, after that he had so
often times denied his master, swearing and cursing himself if he ever had
known him before: had he not perseuered still in his sin, and abandoned
himself wholly from the Church of God, as Judas did, and many other Apostataes
which do so daily, if Jesus Christ had not cast his eye upon him, and by his
looking upon him, pierced so deep within his conscience, to make him feel and
bewail his sin? And likewise S. Paul, Luke 22.
who like a mad and raging beast, ran about every where, seeking to kill
and slaie all the poor Christians he could come by, in what case had he been
if he had not repented him of his sins? But contrariwise had he not persisted
in his Act. ^.
obstinacy and hardness of heart to waste and scatter the flock, had not the
strong and mighty arm of the shepherd, w^o watched carefully to save his
flock, stopped him of his journey and kept him short, by force, making him to
acknowledge and perceive the great hurt and injury he did to the poor sheep.
By these few examples we may easily perceive, that men, although they beouer
whelmed and filled with an infinite number of sins, yet they cannot
acknowledge them, or have feeling of them, if God do not give them the grace to
set them before their eyes. And this is the reason that in many places of holy
Scripture Repentance (which partly consists in the knowledge and displeasure
that man conceaueth of his sin) is called the gift of 2. Tim. 2.
God. For as we cannot know God, nor those good things which we ought to
seek in him, and to hope for from his bounty: if first we be not lightened
inwardly by his holy spirit, and outwardly instructed by his holy word: So we
cannot well know our selves, nor thoroughly sound out the vice and mischief
which lies lurking in our hearts, if the spirit of God do not give us eyes
to behold our selves in the mirrhour of his Law. For to behold our selves
perfectly, and to see what is within us, we cannot do naturally, no more then
the old foolish woman Lamia could, whom Fables report to have had once two
eyes, but because she would see nothing in her house she pulled them both
out, and cast them both out of doors, to go spy and mark all that was done
at her neighbors houses. And to this agrees very well the Fable of Esope,
who said, that every man carries a Wallet upon his shoulder, and in the
hinder part we put our own faults, to the end we may never see them: and
in the former part, we carrye our neighbors faults, to the end that by
seeing of them we may find some matter to speak ill of them and slander
them.

But it is a meruaylous thing that our sins should be diseases so grievous,
so dangerous, and so mortal, and yet that they should be so little
perceived and regarded of those that are infected therewith: For we see how
Idolaters, hypocrites, ambitious, auaritious and voluptuous persons are merry and
frollicke without any sign or conceit of sorrow to complain in any wise of
their malady. And more then that, the Idolater never takes greater pleasure,
then when he beholds, kiss^th and adoreth his Idol. Again, the hipocrite is
never better content, then when by the show of some counterfeit virtue he can
come to in^nuate himself into the good opinion of some, and so get reputation
and fame to be virtuous and godly. And others think themselves never more
happy than when they have the full fruition and peaceable possession of the
honors, riches and pleasures of this world which they desire so much: and the
cause of all this is, that they feel not their sickness, the which is by so
much more dangerous. For as among the diseases of the body none are more
pernicious than those which bring least dolor and pain, as are the Palsies,
Letargies, apoplexies, and other cold Cathars and tetters: for they are for
the most part incurable. This made an ancient father say, that he desired not
to be sick at all: but if it chanced that he were sick, he desired also to
have some feeling of his disease, giving us to understand thereby, that there
is nothing more dangerous then to be sick, and not to perceive or think it.
What shall we then say to our selves, who never think that we are so vicious
as we are, and yet we can think well enough that we are far more virtuous
th^n we be either? For we never balance and wey our vices and our virtues, but
with false weightes and measures. For when we weigh our own vices we take a
very light weight, but we take one that is somewhat heavier for our virtues,
the which we esteem always to be greater then they be, by reason of this
furious fantasy or self love which dimmeth our eyesight and judgment. And
even as the mistes and vapors which rise from the earth toward the evening
or morning, being opposite between the Sun and us, make the Sun to seem
a great deal bigger then it is: So when we do contemplate our own virtues
clean through this self love of ours, which does so blind the eyes of our
judgment, we suppose them to be far greater and per fecter then they are in
deed. What must we then do to correct and amend this false judgment of ours,
whereby we esteem our selves to be more virtuous and a great deal less
vicious then in deed we be. We must learn to know our selves, and therefore
must meditate in the law of God day and night, directing by it all our
thoughts, our affections, our words, our deeds, and in sum, the whole
estate of our life, as by a right and true rule, by the which we ought to
measure the same. But for that we are Treuants and negligent scholars, and for
that we do not our de^oyre wholly to apply our selves to this study, God as a
good scholemaster, careful for the profit of his children and scholars, is
feign to take his rod oftentimes in hand, to awake us and set us forward,
and by sickness and other mortifications of our flesh, to make us know the
vile corruption that lies hidden within us. For there is nothing that holds
us better under the obedience of Gods holy will, then good discipline (as Esaias
says:) Let men learn righteousness, when the judgments of Esa 26. Psa* 119.
God are upon the earth. And David says: Before I was afflicted I went
astraye, but now I keep thy law. And by and by he says again: It is good for
me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes. It is then
very expedient for us to have some sickness and adversities if we can tell how
to use and apply them well: for they make us know and feel our sins, as on
the contrary side, health and prosperity do make us clean forget them: for
then, when in the flower of our age we are healthful and lusty, and all
things laugh and smile upon us, we think upon nothing but skip and fetch
gambols as young Fawnes and other beasts do. If any man would come near us to
give us good counsel, he should loose his pain: for there are none more
backewarde, more untamed, more highminded, and more intractable than men tytled
and favored by Fortune, and ^uffed up by her prosperities. That which God
reproched the people withal by his Prophet: How often Ier. 22.
have I spoken unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou would never once Pro.
1.
hear: and this has been thy fashion from thy youth upward. And Solomon
speaking of the property of the foolish, says that, it is their ruin and
undoing. Certainly it is very hard (as Xenophon says) that a man should be
wise and wealthy all at once, and that being lifted up to the top of honor,
and a bounding in riches and pleasures, to confess himself to be dust and
ashes, as Genesis 1^. Psa. 39.
Abraham did, or to be nothing but vanity, as David did: but far from this
God wot, the rich men when they are in the prime of their riches and
prosperities, they think themselves to be some Gods or else demie Gods: so did
Sennacherib, Nabuchodonozor, Antiochus, Esa. 16.
Theus, Xerxes, Alexander, king Herod, and Domitian, who became so proud,
presumptuous and high minded, because of their prosperity, that they would
make themselves equal with God. Phillip king of Macedonia considering this, to
the end he might not by the happy success of his affairs fall into any such
insolency, commanded a groom of his chamber to say unto him a loud every
morning as soon as he waked, (Phillip) Remember thou art but a mortal man. And
sure he did very wisely, foreseeing how slipperie a thing prosperity is, which
does make men straight drunk, and lulleth them fast a sleep, sooner then any
sweet wine, when they drink it, or the noise of a soft wind that blows
within their hearing, when they are ready to fall a sleep. The sicknesses
then, which do awake us and make us confess what our estate is, and that sin
is the chiefest cause that does engender them, are very wholesome and
needful for us, and we ought to take them for warnings that God does send, to
make us remember him, and to do our endeavor to seek for him, and such things
as appertain unto him, which thing we shall do, if we confess first before
him our faults from a contrite Psa 40.
heart, altogether humbled and brought down with the inward feeling of his
anger, and with a deep displeasure that we have offended him so grievously,
after so manifold benefits, graces and favors received at his hands, in so
great abundance that we cannot so much as number and count them, much less
comprehend them. Here is then lively to be touched and pricked with the
apprehension and feeling of our own ingratitude, we must call to mind, how
that being created after the image and likeness of Genesis 1.
God, and by this means honored above all the other creatures of the earth,
without having any respect to the honor and dignity, wherein he had placed
us, we have not only blemished and changed his image, but almost altogether
defaced and quite blotted it out, Ioh. 1.
wholly swaruing from Justice, holiness and verity, which are the virtues, by
the which we may resemble him, for to follow the errors and vanities of this
world, the foolish desires, and inordinate lusts and concupiscences of our
flesh, to follow our own ways, and to be brief to represent in all the
course and state of our life, the very portraiture and image of the devil.
After that he had taken us out of the darkesome pit of ignorance, wherein we
were buried, and made shine over us the brightness of his face by the lively
preaching of his Gospel, and by the knowledge and understanding that he had
given us of his son, that we might follow him, who is the light of the
world, and John. 1. Ephesians. 5.
have no more to do with the works of darkness. But leaving our guide, and
quite forsaking the way that he had traced for us to follow, we have strayed
and gone wrong a thousand and a thousand ways, and as poor blind men, having
no body to conduct us, and set us in the way but our own appetite and
foolish fantasy two other blind guides, we have been often at the pittes
brinke in danger to fall in, and to be lost for ever, had it not pleased this
good GOD, by his bounty to surmount our malice, and to remember John 5. Heb. 2.
us then, when we had clean forgotten him.

Moreover, he had delivered us from the bondage of the devil and sin, which
was far more intolerable and cruel than that slavery of Egypt or Babylon
could be, and made us free, to the end that we should hold fast our liberty
which he had purchased so dearly for us by the death of his only and
well-beloved son. But how often have we looked Genesis 19.
behind us as the wife of Lot did? and not only repented and been sorry for
coming out of our Egypt, but also taken the way back again, to yield our
necks into the same yoke of slavery, out of the which we were made free,
choosing rather to live with shame and ignomie most miserably under the
tyranny of the devil, of the world, and of our sinful flesh, then to live
happily and in honor under the kingdom of the son of God. Likewise, how
have we acknowledged this great grace and unspeakable favor that he has
showed us, when he is come to find us out at the very brothelhouse of our
sin, whether we being transported and carried headlong by the spirit of
fornication, we run out of all square and order, and give our selves over
wholly to the devil, who is our bawd in every corner where we meet his
portraiture and image, committing villainy and abomination with him publicly,
and cannot withdraw our selves by no fear, shame, or reverence of God, who is
beholder of all this our filthy and slinking dealing, and yet for all that he
has taken us into his own house, to marry us and join us to him by a knott
and bond of love, which cannot be undone or broken, asking none other dowry
with us but chastity and pudicitie, promising us to forget all our life
passed, so that hereafter we will be true to him, and keep our faith and
loyalty that we have vowed unto him?

Now considering how often, and by how many means we have defiled this marriage
bed, committing fornication with the world and the concupiscences of our flesh,
making our God, some of their riches, some of their bellies and pleasures and
others of their estates and honors: worshipping our own passions and
pleasures, which we have placed in our heart, as it were upon an high altar, and
in the highest place of the Temple of God, which therewith we have profaned
and polluted, and by consequent, have deserved to dye the death, that is, to be
clean scraped out of his favor, and blotted out of the book of life for
ever. And what a shame and confusion is this, for us to be chosen and elected
out of the wicked race of this world: and of the children of wrath Ephesians. 2.
that we were naturally, to be made the children of God, to this end that we
should live and dye in his service, and vow for ever unto him a love, a fear,
an honor and obedience from the bottom of our heart, and the uttermost of our
power, and yet in all our conversation we have always showed our selves
rebellious, licentious, perverse, and stiffenecked, rejecting all good
discipline, stopping our ears as the serpent does, for fear lest we should
hear the sweet enchantment of the Gospel, taking again our sto^ie and
uncircumcised hearts, to this end that we might not engraue the promises and
laws of God therein? How often Mat. 23.
has the sheepeheard assayed to gather us under his wings, as a Hen does her
chickens, and we would not? How often has he knocked at our doors, and we
would never so much as once open to him? How many times has he stretched Esa.
65.
forth his arms to embrace us, but we were stubborn, and would not be
touched? When he sought us, we hid our selves, when he called us, we would
not answer at all. When he commanded us to get up and follow him, we were
straight weary. When he has smitten us, we were hardened as the smithes
Anuell with the strokes of the hammer. When he made much of us, we flattered
our selves. Whether he Matt. 11.
would allure us by fair promises, or make us afraid by menacings, we have
still hardened our selves not to believe the one, and to make but a mockerye of
the other? To be short, what means so ever he has used to catch us, like
wilye and crafty foxes, we have kept our Esaias. 5.
selves still aloof off him. Likewise we were his vyneyarde, wherein he took
all his delight, wherein he spared no cost to prune and trymme, and to bring it
to all perfection. He had planted in it a passing good young Uine, made it
clean, cast a ditch about it, hedged and enclosed it on every side, hoping to
have some good fruit in due season: but alas, he is greatly disapointed for
whereas we should bring him forth good raisons, we have brought forth nothing
but wild and sower grapes, doing all that we could, to make him cut us off
from the stock of his vine, and like old and withered vine branches, to cast
us an hundred Mat. 21. Psa. 1.
and an hundred times into the fire to be burned for ever. And what is the
reason likewise that being barren and fruteles trees in these acceptable days
and season of our salvation (as the Prophet says) Jesus Christ finding no
fruit in us, has not cursed us the same hour, that he did the withered figg
tree? for how should we be able to excuse this sterilitie and barrenness? were
not we planted along the clear currants of the rivers of the word of God, by
the which we were daily watered? and yet have we brought forth no more fruit
than briars that grow upon heathes, or thorns that grow in hedges. And
seeing that the Axe is laid to the root of Mat. 3.
the tree which brings not forth good fruit: who is he that has saved us
from being cut up by the root, and from being cast into the fire of Hell, to
be burned there for ever? We cannot deny but we have been as unprofitable
straw, and that often times we have laid nothing but stubble and straw upon
the precious foundation of our selves and of the Church. Who let then that
we 1. Cor. 3.
had not been carried away clean with the wind, and that the fire had not
consumed us and all our building. The Ier. ^.
Prophets they reproched Judah, for that she had justified her sister by her
licentiousnes a dissolutions, unto the which she had abandoned her self more
than her sister had: But we may well confess that we have justified them
both, for what kind of wickedness have we omitted or forgot to put in
practice? as impieties, blasphemies, profanation of the true and sincere
service of God, contempt of his word, injustice, oppression, violence,
rebellion, disobedience, hatred, envy, murder, fornication, whordome,
detraction, have they not, and do they not still reign amongst us? If we may
judge the goodness of the earth by the good fruits that it brings forth, Heb.
6.
being well filled and well watered by rain from heaven: what may we judge
to the contrary of that which has had all costs, both trimming, tilling and
watering, and abundant and infinite of blessings from above from the father of
lights, and yet brings forth nothing but nettles, thorns and thistles?
What Iam. 1.
endeavor have we done, or what duitie or diligence have we showed, I do not
say of children, servant, or friends (as we are accounted) and as we ought
to be: but I mean of the least and simplest creatures that are in the world,
the which contains themselves every one in the obedience of their Creator,
never changing their rank and place, wherein he has appointed them to be, and
never being awearie to do and execute his will and commandment? Our fathers
have seen, and we also have seen after them, that the heaven, the Suune, the
Moon, the stars, the Elements, all living creatures, the plants and trees
have contained themselves within the compass that God limited them after
their creation, and kept the same measure in their diocesses in all their goings
and moouings that God had given them to observe, never going out of their
ranks, nor troubling the order that God had appointed in the universal world.
But men have been irregular and heteroclites, and now we are more than ever
before: and that which is worse than all the rest, we see many at this present
day, who to fill up the measure of all their other wickedness, add thereunto a
certain impudency and shamelesnes, stopping their ears at all good Esa. 3.
lessons, showing in all their behavior and gesture the very shameless forhead
of an impudent harlot. Where is become at this day among sinners, that
shamefastnes Dan. 9. Luke 18.
and confusion that was seen in Danie^? Where is the poor Publican, that durst
not cast his eyes up to heaven for shame he had so offended his good God? What
is become of that flood of tears that distilled Luke 7.
from Marie Magdalen, that suffised to wash the feet of our Savior Christ?
Where are these eyes now turned into fountains of waters, as were those o^ the
Prophet Jeremy bewayling the Ier. 9.
sins and miseries that are in this world? Where is the bitterness of heart
wherewith S. Peter was seized so soon as he remembered his own sin? Where is
Luke 22. Act 2.
that compunction and sorrow, that the people showed to have after the good
lesson that S. Peter gave them concerning his wicked consenting to the death of
our Savior Jesus Christ to satisfy the appetite and envy of the
Sacrificatours? Where is that sorrow and inward grief of heart wherewith
David was so sore disquieted in mind when he groaning and sighing said: I
fainted in my mourning: I make my bed every night to swim, and water my
couch with tears. And in another place saying: Psa. 8.
I know mine iniquities and my sin is always before me? Where is become
the sackcloth and ashes wherewith the Ninevites did show their repentance to
be sincere and unfeigned: by Ioh. 3.
the which they shall without all doubt condemn at the day of judgment all
this masq^ed ra^le of Penitents which we may daily see in I^alie and in
A^ignon? Where may one of them be found at this day, that for the great
heaviness and displeasure that they take to have offended Esa 22.
God, pull their hair and rent their beard from their chinne, as the Prophets
required in their time of those that they exhorted to repentance, to turn
away the displeasure of God from them, when they were threatened, and to
appaise it when they were punished? Where shall we find one whose soul is
pierced with such sorrow and heaviness, whose heart is humbled and brought so
low, as the Prophet Joel requires, with a Joel. 2.
conscience almost desolate and comfortles, with a deep displeasure void^ of
all dissimulation and hypocrisy, presenting himself before the majesty of
God, to make him a true confession of his sins, and in all humility to
beseech and require his mercy and pardon? Hereby may we perceive what is the
hardness and contumacie of our hearts, the little feeling we have of our sins,
the little fear we have to offend God, the little love and reverence we show
unto him, and the little obedience and homage that we yield unto him. And
being Act 10.
such (good God) what good faith or belief can we have in thee? Faith (as
says Saint Peter) purifieth our hearts. What faith then can they pretend to
have, who have their hearts yet full of filth and corruption? Who have them
puffed up and swollen with ambition, pride, avarice, pleasures, impatience,
revenge, hatred, envy, and other like passions and affections of the flesh
altogether disordinate and without all measure. Faith does regenerate us, and
make us new creatures: of earthly, it makes us heavenly: of carnal men, it
makes us become spiritual: of the children of wrath and darkness, it makes
us children of light and grace: and to be short, of very devils it makes us
Angels of heaven. Who so ever then has his heart tied to earthly things, and
thinks nothing or little at all on the things which are Galat. ^.
from above, who joins not himself with the spirit in the battle, to
fight against the flesh, but being assailed and set upon by his own
concupiscences, gives them place straighte, and makes him self his own
slave and prisoner, he abuses the grace of God, and in steed of retaining
it, and keeping it still with him, living in his fear, and in the obedience of
his holy will, turns it clean away, and drives it far from him, by
licenciousnes of life, whereunto he does give over himself, under a vain
confidence that he has to find it always at his pleasure: ready to excuse
and cover all his sins. So he deceives himself much weening to be faithful,
and yet has no better faith than the very devils: neither can his faith
assure him at the day of judgment more than theirs can.

Likewise, does not faith exempt Ioh. 3. and 5. Romans 8.
us from the judgment and condemnation of God, as Jesus Christ says: He that
believes shall not come into judgment at all. And Saint Paul says: That
there is no condemnation to them Ibid.
which by faith are graffed into the body of Jesus Christ: but they which live
after the flesh, and stand in no awe to do those things which God has
forbidden: and contrariwise to omit and neglect those things which he has
commanded to be done? how can they escape the judgment of death, and of the
curse pro Ioh. 3. Psa. 44. Romans 3.
nounced in the law against all them that transgress it, seeing that they do
it weetingly, willigly, and of deliberate purpose? If their conscience condemn
them, God who is greater than their conscience, who knows and sounds the
depth of their hearts, how shall he forgive them? Likewise: faith, when it is
a true faith does inuest us with Justice and the spirit of Jesus Christ,
which are so linked together, and do so follow one another, that the one
cannot be found without the other. Seeing then that the spirit of God cannot be
resident in us, but must needs work his effect, that is to say, must
illuminate, sanctify, quicken, guide and govern us in all our counsels,
thoughts, affections, words and actions. What faith, I pray you, do we think
we have, if we do not Gall. ^. Ephesians.
show it forth by an holy and laudable conversation, mortifying and
crucifying our flesh with all the lusts thereof, putting off our old man with
all his affections, flying and detesting all kind of sin, and embracing all
kind of virtue: These. 5. Matt. 10. Ezech. 33.
abstaining not only from evil, but also from all that which has any show
or appearance of evil. And to conclude, continuing this holy exercise without
any interruption unto the end of our life: For if any one shall (as the
Prophet says) do the best he can to live well for a while, and after shall
come to wander and go aside from the right way, before he be arrived at the
end of his journey: God shall have no remembrance of any good deeds that he
had done before, and shall not allow him so much as one of them, when he shall
come to hear his count: For he promises not salvation and life everlasting to
those that shall begin to do well, but to those only who shall courageously
and with an invincible heart persevere to the end. And he gives not the price
and 1. Cor. 9.
crown of immortality but to those that run out to the end of the lease,
and have truly combated all the time of their life. For what avails it a
merchant which sayleth into India to rigg his ship with some rich
merchandise, if after he has escaped many perils at Sea, and sailed
fortunately 14. or 15. Months together, he then come to strike against some
rock and suffer shipwreck before he ever come to his iurneyes end. All those
which departed out of Egypt under the conduct of Moses entered not into the
land of Canaan, for the greatest part were left behind and dyed by the way,
and were shut out of the rest that God had promised to their fathers, because
of their infidelity and other vices, which the Apostle names in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians. So we 1. Cor. 10.
must never hope to enjoy that life everlasting, and most blessed and happy
estate that he has promised and reserved for his elect, if we do not persevere
unto the end in the faith of his word, and in the obedience of his holy will,
which thing to do is granted to very few persons. Romans 10.


Moreover, faith, when it is true and lively is it not accompanied with a
certain zeal and dehemencie of the spirit, which brings it forth, to
confess the name of God publicly, to sing Psalms to him, to set forth and
tell of all his wondrous works, and to make also public profession of Jesus
Christ and of his gospel, and without all fear, shame, and dissimulation, to
maintain and defend the truth constantly against all those which resist and
withstand the same? But if we will examine thoroughly, and without all
flattery, truly judging of all our actions, we must needs confess and
acknowledge that in the most of us, there has been a marvelous great slacknes
of duty herein, for that we have been wonderful cold and fearful, when
we should oppose our selves against the wicked, and have endured to see and
hear them blaspheme the holy name of God, of Jesus Christ, to speak ill of
religion, of the Gospel and of the truth, holding our peace and suffering in
our presence the honor of God, not only to be dishonored and spoken ill of,
but also to be trode^ under foot without ever opening our lips in speaking one
word in defense thereof. What zeal have we showed also, to restore the
Tabernacle of Jacob which was thrown down to the ground? What pity and
compassion have we had seeing the ruynes and horrible desolations happened so
long time together to the poor city of Syon? Is there any one amongst you
that can truly say, he has labored as much as in him lies by all means
possible to build again the Temple of God, and to make up again the breaches
that the enemies had made in every side of his church? How Agg. 1.
many may be found amongst us, that may not justly be reproched for seeling
and trimming their own houses, and yet let Gods house lie wast? For in deed
few there are that have such a care and zeal as appertains by right to the
pure and sincere service of God to restablish it, when it is corrupted and
profaned, and to maintain it when it is in perfect estate. And for all that
we be so cold and careless to labor to reduce the state and order of the
Church unto her former dignity and splendor, that God might be preached.
known, and adored in spirit and truth, as he requreth in his word, yet is
there not he amongst us, who thinks not himself to be as faithful and as
good a Christian as the best, although he seek the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof, but when he has leisure, and when he has dispatched all
his other business. Yet to be short, the surest judgment that one may give of a
good tree, is by the goodness of the fruit. We may also judge of our Matt. 6.
faith that it is good, when it sets our consciences at rest, and when we
neither feel fear, mistrust, scruple, remorse, doubt, pain or torment which
may vex us before God: but we are altogether resolute and assured to be
acquitted in his judgment, and cleared from al crimes and accusations that the
devil can lay against us, by means of the ransom that Jesus Christ paid by
his death and blood for our sins, and by this payment satisfied fully for us
to Mat. 20. 1. Tim. 1. Romans 10.
h^s own justice. Likewise, when it does incite us to pray continually, be it
in prosperity to thank and bless him, or be it in adversity to prostrate
our selves before him, humbly beseeching him that he will deliver us, or if it
please him to set down otherwise, to mitigate and assuage our adversity, and
on the other side so to strengthen us, that we may conform our selves wholly
to his will, to abide and bear all patiently, so long as it shall please him.
If to conclude, it inflame and kindle the love of God and of our neighbors in
our hearts, so that we burn with a fervent desire to serve and honor God, to
inuit and Gal. 5.
bring every one to know and glorify him, and that nothing displease us more
then to see his holy name dishonored and blasphemed: and for our neighbors
that we love them as our own flesh and blood, as members of the same body
with us, as our own brethren, and as children of one the very same father that
we and they have together in heaven, and that we make demonstration of the
love that we bear unto them by all means possible, desiring their welfare,
ease, honor, quietness, preferment, and profit, as our own proper good,
helping them in their necessities with money, counsel, favor, frindes,
labor, good word, and without any exception, with all that shall lie in our
power to do. But I pray you, who is he amongst those that have best
profited, and proceeded furthest in the knowledge and fear of God, that dare
vaunt himself to have such a faith, the which shall be able to fight against
the devil, and against all the gates of Hell, and make us invincible against
al temptations wherewith we may be assailed, and shall fetch all our cogitations
from earthly matters, and ravish us, and carry us up aloft above the heavens
by a certain hope of immortality and of the happy life that God has
promised and prepared for us: and this hope shall straight make us forget the
world and all the glory thereof, all her pompes, pleasures, riches and
magnificence, and to make no more account of these transitory and corruptible
things, then of dung, by reason of the pleasant taste that it shall give us of
the sweetenes of the joys in heaven, by the which she shall blott out and
extinguish by and by all feeling and remembrance of all other pleasures, as it
happened to the Mat. 17.
three Disciples, in whose presence our Savior Christ was transfigured in the
Mount. For scant had they had but the least taste of the blessed and happy
estate, but even then at that instant they lost clean the remembrance of all
things in this world: desiring nothing else, but the only continuance of
that happy estate wherein then they were.

Seeing then that faith, hope and charity, which are the three principal
virtues whichought to shine in all our lives, and in all the actions of a
Christian man, are in us very imperfect, and God wot, but weak, and that in
the perfectest and purest men that live in the world there are found so many
doubts, such vnbeleeue, vain fears, cares, presumption, hatred, malice,
choler, and other infinite like passions and desires, the which as staynes do
blot out all the luster and beauty of the virtues that are within us?

We must, when we come to present our selves before the face and Majesty
Confession of the sick.
of our* God, with the sick persons whom we will comfort and give some good
instruction, begin to make an humble confession of our sins: first
acknowledging our ingratitude and great negligence, to hear, read, and
meditate in his word, to put it in practice, to take some profit by the
singular gifts and graces, that he has bestowed upon us, to consider and
have still before our eyes the end and scope of our vocation, to refer and
direct the whole estate of our life, to walk in his fear, not to stayne his
Image, which is renewed and graven again in us by the fountain of our
regeneration, to keep the faith and loyalty that we promised him in the
holy covenant that he made with us, to live and dye to his glory: to offer
up our bodies to him in sacrifice, living holy and agreeable to his will: and
not to fashion our selves like unto this world, to live and walk in the
spirit: not to accomplish the desires of the flesh, to walk as becomes
children of light: Romans 12.
to keep sure footing in the liberty, into the which he has freely set us:
to take heed we be not brought again under the yoke and servitude of sin,
to fight valiantly against the lusts of our flesh: to resist the devil: to
have a care that sin rule not over us: to rule the whole course of our life
so well, that we may be free not only from sin, but also from suspicion of
any crime, to Gal. 5. Romans 6.
take diligent heed, that our liberty be not an occasion that our flesh grow
too inordinate, and that we commit none act that may scandalize our neighbors,
or may in any wise induce our adversaries to blaspheme the name of God and of
Jesus Christ, and to defame the religion that we profess: to seek nothing but
those things which are from above: and to have our heart, our understanding,
and all our affections fixed in heaven, to keep always our lamps burning,
Col. 3.
and our raynes gyrded up, to watch for the coming of our Savior and to be
ready to follow him, and to do by his grace, all that he should please to
command us: to pray and praise God incessantly: to depend wholly upon his
providence: to refer our selves and all our affairs unto him: to resign our
will wholly unto his: and finally, to love him with all our heart, with all
our soul, and all our thought, and to love our neighbor as our own selves.
Then after we have proposed unto the sick person the faults that he has
committed, to make him affeard, and by this means to prepare him to require
and receive the grace of God: we must set before his eyes, what he has justly
deserved by his sins, that is, to be swallowed up by the anger and
displeasure of God, which he has heaped up unto himself perseuering in his
sins, abusing so long time the patience and long sufferance of his mercy,
and likewise to be overtaken by his judgment, which (as the Apostle says, is
ready for all them which disobey God, Romans 2.
and especially for those his servant which know his will, and being thoroughly
instructed of their duty, neglect and make none account thereof. Likewise,
that all the curses contained in the Law, set down for the transgressors
thereof, fall upon his head: for that he has not only once or twice by reason
of ignorance and fraylenesse behaved himself lewdly, but has violated the
holy ordinances of God, as often as he has been provoked thereunto by the
Romans 5. 1. Cor. 15.
instance of the devil, and of his own concupiscence: likewise, that he is
banished and shut out from the kingdom of heaven, for that the flesh, after
the which he has lived cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven: For if our
first parents were chased shamefully out of Paradise, wherein they were placed
after their creation for one only disobedience: What does he deserve now that
does suppe up and drink daily so many rebellions and iniquities as it were
water? Likewise, that he is condemned to death eternal, and appointed for
ever to the ^ire of Hell, with devils and the reprobate, for that is the
reward and hire of sin. And to be short, that he has deserved to go
straight down to Hell, and there to be buried, and to suffer in the
unquenchable flames such ^ormentes as the wicked rich man did, for having
disdayned the poor in their affliction, and neglecting to succor them in
their need, not vsinge such humanity toward Luke. 10.
them, as he desired of others, being driven to the same necessity himself.
When he have laid all this to the sick man's charge, and in the Law as in a
Mirror we have set before his eyes to behold his judgment and sentence of
condemnation: When we perceive him wounded and pierced to the heart with
sorrow, we must then lay to his wound some asswaging medicine, and do as the
Masons do when they hew their stone: first they give great blows with their
hammer, and make great pieces fall off, and then they poolish it over so with a
plain, that the strokes are no more seen: so must we do, after we have handled
the sickpatient roughly, and thrust him down to hell by the rigorous threats of
the law: we must comfort him, and fetch him again by the sweet and amiable
promises of the Gospel, to the end the sowplenes of this oil may assuage the
nipping sharpnes of the law: for the good tidings and news, that he shall
hear of the grace of God shall make Col. ^. 2.
him clean forget all the sorrow and desperation into the which the law had
before driven him: showing him first, that the handwriting that is against us,
which was contained in the law, is clean torn in pieces, abolished and hung
upon the Cross of Jesus Christ: and Gal. 3.
that Jesus Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he became
cursed for us himself: For it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on
the tree) and this he suffered, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon
the Gentiles, and that we might receive the promise of the Holy Ghost by
faith. And that Christ is the end of Romans 10.
the law in righteousness to al believers: who by the perfect obedience that he
showed God his Father in fulfilling all his commandments in every point, not
missing one jot, forsaking not the cursed death of the cross for our sakes,
(for such was the will of his father) he has purchased us a pardon and
general abolishing of all our sins, and a release of all our debtes and
obligations, the 1. Pet. 1.
which he has paid for us, not in gold, silver, or precious stones, but with
his own blood, which is a price and ransom incomparable to be spoken of.
Having purchased us besides a righteousness, the which he allows unto us by
our faith, and the assurance that we have by his word and sacraments, whereof
his holy spirit does bear witness within our hearts: we ought to cast away
all fear and conceit of our sins, of death, the devil, of the rigor and
curse of the law: and finally, of the anger and curse of God. For to begin
with our sins, we being clothed with the righteousness Romans 4.
of Jesus Christ, must assure our selves, that all our sins are so hid and
covered, that they may not be perceived or discovered before the eyes and face
of our God: but being altogether wyped out as with a sponge, and scattered as a
cloud with the wind and Esaias. 43. Esaias. 1.
the Sun, and although they were as redd as Scarlet, yet shall they be as
white as snow (as Esaie says) and before him David: Purge me with Hysope,
and I shall be clean: Wash me, Psa. 51.
and I shall be whitter then snow. And it skilleth not what, nor in what
number they be: so that they be not sins against the Holy Ghost: neither
skilleth it in what manner they have been committed, be it by ignorance,
infirmity, or deliberate malice: for sin cannot so abound, but the grace of
God which is our means and mediator by the death and righteousness of Jesus
Christ, must needs abound more. And albeit the sin which is committed
against the Majesty of God, which is infinite, be therefore reputed infinite:
yet that argues not that the blood of Jesus Christ which by the eternal
spirit is offered up to God himself without any spot, does not purge and make
clean our consciences from dead works, to serve the living God, as the
Apostle writes to the Heb. 9.
Hebrews: For the divinity being inseparably united with the humanity in the
person of Jesus Christ, is cause by his omnipotency, that his death has an
infinite virtue to redeem us, and his righteousness an infinite power to
sanctify us, and his life to quicken us, and to make us happy, immortal and
blessed: for that being God, as he is stronger than the devil: so also are his
works more of force to save us, than are those of his enemy to confound and
destroy us. His righteousness, has more force and efficacy to justify us,
than sin (whereof the devil is author) has to condemn us. His innocence
and pureness, to wash us and make us clean, then this unclean spirit has
filthiness and uncleanness to polute and defyle us. His light is clearer to
lighten us, than the darkness of the prince of this world, to make us blind.
His truth to instruct us, then the lies and errors of the father of lies to
deceive us. To be brief, his life has more virtue to raise us up to life
again, then the enui^ of the murderer and manslayer has to kill and slaye
us. Wherein we see that the son of God, as Saint John says, is not come
into the world, but to destroy the works of the devil, and that in his blood
all our enemies, that is to say, all our sins have been drowned, as Pharao
and the Egyptians enemies of the people of God, were discomfeted and swallowed
up in the red Sea. This is the stronger man whom S. Luke said, came upon
another strong Luke. 11.
man, fought with him and overcame him, and took from him all his weapons and
armor wherein he did trust, that is, sin, death, and the law: leading Ephesians.
4.
with him Captivity captine, when he ascended up into heaven: so that the
devil being now disarmed, has no power to hurt us any more, neither by our
sins which Jesus Christ has washed away in his blood, nor by death, which
he has overcome and swallowed up in dying for us: nor by the law, which he
has fulfilled and satisfied fully, submitting himself for us to the curse
which was to light upon our heads. And although the devil be always our
adversary, and that by the envy that he bears us, and the malice that he
owes us, to do us a mischief, and to hinder us for ever attaining to that
felicity, from the which he was cast down headlong by his pride, he runs
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may 1. Pet. 5.
devour: yet we may resist him well enough standing firm in our faith, and
anchoring in the assurance that we have of the remission of our sins, the
which is perpetual, as is the virtue and efficacy of the death of Jesus
Christ, by the which it has been obtained for us: this is the freedom of the
Church, within the which all the faithful must retire themselves when they are
pursued by their own consciences, and followed with other Sergeants of Gods
Justice, whereunto the Prophet David does exhort us: Let Israel wait on the
Lord, Psa. 130.
for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is great redemption: and he shall
redeem Israel from all his iniquities. And in another place: The sacrifices of
Psa. 51.
God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and a broken heart the Lord will not
despise. And Jesus Christ the sovereign Physician of our souls, who is come
into this world but to seek that which was lost, to cure and heal that which
was sick, (and as the Prophet says) to bear our infirmities and langours
upon him, shall he have any greater pleasure, then to see us run to him to
be disburdened of our heavy sins? has he at any time refused a sinner or
publican that has come unto him? He is (as the Prophet David says) The Lord
is full of compassion and mercy, ^say 53. Psa. 103.
slow to anger and of great kindness. He will not always chide, neither keep
his anger for ever. We may see that clearly by the examples of the Publican,
of the poor woman sinner, of the Mat. 16.
prodigal son, of the good thief, of David, of Saint Peter, of S. Paul, and
the Steward that owed his master ten thousand Tallents, which were forgiven
him as soon as he by acknowledging and confessing the dett, had desired his
master to have pity on him. Tell me, for what end has the father sent his
son into this world? Wherefore Esaias. 6.
was he anointed with the holy Ghost? was it not to tell the poor Captives,
that he was come from heaven, to pay their ransom, and to fetch them out of
captivity: and to tell the poor prisoners, that he was come to set open the
prison doors unto them: to tell those that were endebted unto him, that he
would forgive them all: and to the sick, that he would heal them all.

The Apostles that he sent into all parts of the world, what did he give them
in charge? was it not to publish the glad tidings of the Gospel, that was the
remission of sins, to all In the name of Jesus Christ? If then their labor
were not in vain, and in like manner, the labor of all the true and faithful
ministers of Jesus Christ, that have been since their time, we must assure our
selves of the remission of our sins.

And more over, if our sins be not pardoned by believing in him, the birth,
death, resurrection, ascension, intercession, and in sum, all the mystery of
Jesus Christ and our redemption should be nothing worth, made of no efficacy
and valor, and 1. Cor. 15. Matt. 1.
all our faith but vain. Likewise, how can we believe that he is our Jesus
and Emmanuell, if he do not save us from our sins, and so take away the
enimitie that is between us and him, which let him that he cannot join
himself unto us? And what assurance should ^s. 59. Heb. 8. Ier. 3.
we have that the new aliance and covenant that he has made with us, has
been good in law, and ratified by his death and blood which he has shed for
us, if he had not forgotten quite all our iniquities, and written his laws in
the tables of our hearts by his holy spirit, seeing that those are the
promises and conditions upon the which it was bargained and agreede upon? What
profit should we have by his priesthood, if the Sacrifice that he offered to
his Father for our redemption, if we abide yet in our sins? And what shall
it avail us, John. 2.
if he were not the propitiation and agreement for our sins, and not only
for ours, but also for the sins of the whole world? How can we assure our
selves that he is our advocate and mediator, and under this assurance go to
the throne of Grace to obtain mercy and favor to help us in time of need?
We must not then doubt of the remission of our sins. And as David says: As
Psa. 103.
far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our sins from
us. How can we stand in doubt of this, seeing that we bear the mark and print
not only in our hearts and consciences, but also in our bodies of the two
great broad seals of the Chauncellor of the kingdom of heaven: that is to
wit: Baptism and the Holy Supper of the Lord. Let the sick man then assure
himself if he believe in the forgiveness of sins, he obtayneth it by and by:
For God deals with us according to our faith. Saint Ambrose writes, that all
that we firmly believe we obtain: for we can believe nothing but that which
God has promised us, who is most faithful, and so true in his promises, that
the very infidelity and vnbelife of men cannot make him a liar. And albeit
the Romans 3.
wicked rejecting and contemning the word and promise of God by their contempt
and obstinacy make it, that does not produce the effect, in showing the virtue
that it would have to save them, if they did believe it: yet that cannot bring
any prejudice unto others that do receive it and obey it: and cannot hinder
that they believing and by faith apprehending it in their hearts, be not
quickened: no more then a man that would shut his eyes in the day, and would
see no light, can hinder him that holds his eyes open and beholds the
light. For the light and couller are the objects of the eye, the which being
open, sound, and of a quick fight, apprehends by and by things object unto
it: So the promises of God be the obiectes of Faith, which causes a man to
receive them incontinent, as they are announced unto her, so that the spirit
of God have touched and prepared his heart before. For otherwise, if it remain
in his stony nature, the spiritual seed which is sown can take no root at
all, nor fructify no more then the seed that is sown upon stones, or upon
ground that is not tilled. The sick man being resolved then of remission of
all his sins, may not doubt but that he is in the favor of God, and that
thereby he must look for life everlasting undoubtedly, and all the blessedness
that God has promised to his children: for there is nothing that may shutt or
debar us from it except only sin, the which being not imputed unto us, but
covered and blotted out clean, what may now hurt us, or bring us out of Gods
favor? And if by faith we be united inseparably Ephesians. 3. Psa. ^6.
with him, who is the fountain of life, and the fullness of all good, what can
we desire, but we shall straight find in him? What mischief or misery may
we fear being in his favor?

Now being assured that he will continue toward us the good will that he
bears us for ever, and that there is no creature in the whole world that can
alter it from us, as Saint Paul Romans 8.
says to the Romans: I am assured, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of god, which is in Christ Jesus.

And a little above this place, says he: What shall separate us from the love
of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? Every man then that has once been graffed in
by faith into the body of Christ Jesus, and by consequent is the adopted son
of God, and received into his grace and into his house, as his child,
departs not from thence Romans 5.
any more: but even as he is assured of his election by his calling and
justification, which followed the one the other: so is he also of his
glorification which is the conclusion, and as it were the crowning of his
salvation: for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. That which
the Apostle writes most evidently to the Romans: Those whom Romans 8.
he has predestinate, he has also called: and those whom he has called, he
has also justified: and those whom he has justified, he has also glorified.
And although we have yet many vices and infirmities in us, and that it chance
that we fall grievously sometimes, as it happened to David, S. Peter, S. Paul,
and almost to all the Saints: yea, to the perfectest that ever were: yet there
is one point, upon the which we must rest, and be well grounded, whereby we must
comfort our selves greatly, and hold out against all the assaults and
temptations of Satan: this is it, that 1. ^o. 3. and 5.
Saint John says, Who soever is borne of God, sins no more, (that is to
say) the sin unto death: for the seed of God remains in him, that cannot
sin, because he is borne of God That which he declares better in another
place. All iniquity (says he) is sin: But there is a sin which is not
unto death. We know that whosoever is borne of God sins not, but he that
is borne of God, stands upon his guard, that the tempter touch him not. For
by this he gives us enough to understand that faith and the word of God,
which are the soul and the foundation, be never wholly and altogether plucked
up and banished from the heart of the elect, and therefore they cannot sin in
that sin that Saint John calls, to death. For although that faith be
sometime as it were buried in them, having no moving or feeling, no more then a
dead thing. Yet it is not altogether extinguished, no more then fire covered
with a few cenders, albeit it show not the flame and heat: nor no more dead,
than a tree in Winter, when all the sap is got into the root, and it
brings forth no blossoms, nor leaves, nor fruit, as though it were not
alive: the sap nevertheless remains at the heart hidden within in the
root: and this is the reason why David speaking of the faithful man says:
Though Psa. 37.
he fall, he shall not be cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand. And
in another place: I will keep my promise that I have sworn unto him, and
show my favor unto him for ever.

And in the four score and nynth Psalm: I said, Mercy should be Psa. 89.
set up for ever: Thy truth shall thou establish in the very Heavens. I have
made a covenant with my chosen, etc.

And in another place more plainlye: I will not fail David: his seed shall
endure for ever, and his throane shall be as the Sun before me. He shall
be established for ever more as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in
Heaven. But if his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments:
If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments? Then will I visit
their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes: yet my
loving kindness will I not take from him, neither will I falsify my truth.
My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips. And in the 23 Psalm: Doubtless, Psa. 23.
kindness and mercy shall follow thee all the days of thy life: and I shall
remain a long season in the house of the Lord. And in the thirtieth Psalm:
He endures but a Psa. 30.
while in his anger: but in his favor is life. Weeping may abide ar evening,
but joy comes in the morning.

Likewise in the 65 Psalm: Blessed is Psa. 65.
he whom thou choosest, and causest to come to thee. He shall dwell in thy
courts, and we shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thine house, even of
thine holy Temple. And last of all, in the 119 Psalm: I pray thee that thy
Psa* 119.
mercies may comfort me according to thy promise. These and other like places
of holy Scriptures must we allege unto the sick pacient to strengthen his
faith, and to arm him on every side, for the venomous darts and arrows of
Satan, that on what side soever he assail him, he may find no place unarmed,
where he may wound and hit him. For no doubt the devil will do what he can by
all the treachery he can devise, to shake the foundations of our faith, and so
to overthrow us quite. But to defend and save our selves, we must always
keep our selves within our fortress, and never depart from the promises of
God, whatsoever he allege to the contrary. Let us set before him that which
Esaie says: Israel shall be Esa. 45. Esa. 51.
saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation, and we shall not be ashamed
or confounded world without end. And in another place: The Heavens shall
vanish away like smooke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and
they that dwell therein shall perish likewise, but my salvation shall be for
ever, and my righteousness shall never fail. And lest the great signs that he
shows us often times of his anger and displeasure should breed in our hearts
too great a fear, and so we should fall to despair of his promises, let us
hear what the Prophet says in his 54. Chapter, Esaias. 54.
speaking to the Church in the name of God: For a little while have I forsaken
thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee. For a moment in mine anger
I hide my face from thee for a little season, but with everlasting mercy have
I had compassion on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer. For this is unto me as
the waters of Noah: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no
more* ouerflowe the earth, so have I sworn that I would not be angry with
thee, nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall
fall down, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
covenant of my peace fall away, says the Lord that has compassion on thee.
To the same purpose God speaks by Oseas the Prophet unto his Church: that he
will marry her unto himself in righteousness, and in judgment, and in mercy
and compassion: showing thereby that the aliance and covenant that he will
conclude with her shall be firm and inviolable, and that he will establish and
ground her in himself, that is to say, in his mercy, truth and Justice,
requiring only that she would walk uprightly before him, and that in all her
ways she would follow him in all perfect integrity, keeping her self as
much as she can from all counterfaiting and hypocrisy. This must be
diligently marked: For the devil, to make us afraid, and to make us doubt of
the effect of the promises of God when we are ready to appear before his
judgment seat are cyted, and our cause ready to be called: If he see that
we stand fast, resting upon the word of his Gospel, wherein he does offer
unto us his grace, he will grant us, that all that God says is tru^, and
likewise that he offers us freely his grace, and life everlasting by his
promis: but forsooth, that he cannot perform that which he has promised by
reason of our indignity. For that we having so often offended him, since we have
been lightened and regenerate by the knowledge of his truth, and had so much
favor at his hands, besides, as to be received into his family, and to be
adopted his children. Bb our own ingratitude we have made our selves incapable
of his benefits, and unworthy to have the promises performed that he has made
unto us. Therevppon to repulse this temptation, which is the greatest of all,
and more dangerous then any, wherewith we may be assailed. We must first note,
that as the good will and pleasure of God has bin the first motyfe to stir
him up to make this alliance and covenant with us, and to offer us freely the
promise of salvation, by the which he declares himself to be our God, and
receives us to be his people: as also his grace is the only means to induce
him to perform it toward us. And this was the cause why Saint Paul said:
that the reward of sin is death, but the gift of Romans 6.
God which is his grace is eternal life. Whereas if he should have drawn an
argument directly from the Countries, me thinks he should have said, that as
life is the reward of our righteousness, so death is the gu^rdon of our sins.
But to give us to understand, that life which is the effect of the promise, is
as well given to us gratis, as the promises which does offer it to us, he has
attributed it wholly to ye grace of God, making no mention of our works or
virtues. This is confirmed by the 4. to the Romans, and in 32. Psalm, where
David declares that the blessedness of man consists in this, that God
allows his righteousness without works saying: Happy are they whose iniquities
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Happy is the man unto whom the lord
shall impute no sin. Seeing then that the life and blessedness that God does
offer us by his promises, are not granted unto us in lieu and favor of any
merits or virtue, that is in man. But by the only grace of God, it follows
then, that as the price and dignity of our works cannot purchase us life
everlasting, so also our unworthiness cannot hinder us from attayning to the
same. For it is the more gift of God, which he bestows upon whom it pleases
him, according to his mercy, and not according to the merit of our righteousness
which are not only imperfect, but also polluted with much uncleanness, because
that our hearts from whence they proceed, cannot be so well cleansed in this
world, but still there does remain some stains and corruption, whereby they
are defiled. Which is the cause that the prophet prays to God so fervently,
that he would not enter into judgment with him. Saing: Enter not into judgment
with thy servant, for in thy sight shall none that lives Psalm. 143.
be justified. And also where he says: If thou O Lord straightly markest
iniquities, Psalm. 130.
O Lord who shall be able to stand? And that Saint Augustine in his confessions,
has this excellent and memorable sentence: Our righteousness shall be cursed, if
it be examined and judged without his mercy. But nevertheless that can not let
us, why God should not give life everlasting, as he has promised us. So that
we acknowledge, feel and confess our own unworthiness. For nothing can make us
more capable (and if it may be said also) more worthy of the favors and
blessings of God, then the knowledge and feeling, that we have in our selves to
be altogether unworthy. What worthiness might the Thief have that hung upon
the Cross hard by our Savior Jesus Christ, who had continued in his theeuing
and wickedness, till the last hour of his life, never acknowledging his Savior
Jesus Christ, til the very hour that he should render up the Ghost. And yet he
had no sooner opened Luke. 27.
his mouth to confess himself sincerely, and to ask mercy and pardon of Jesus
christ, but he heard by and by, this day shall thou Luke. 16.
be with me in paradise. What worthiness might the poor Publican have, who for
the great shame and horror that he had of all his life before past, durst not
lift up his eyes to heaven, nevertheless, as soon as he began to confess the
pitiful and miserable estate wherein he was, and prayed God to have compassion
upon him, all his sins were pardoned him, and he went justified and righteous
home to his own house? What worthiness, I pray you, was found Act. 9.
in Saint Paul at Damascus, when transported with a rage and fury to give
information according to his Commission, that he had obtained of the high
Priest, for all them that confessed the name of Jesus, to bring them bound and
manacle^ to Jerusalem, there to endict them and to condemn them to death? and
yet for all that he was so horrible a blasphemer and persecutor of Jesus Christ
and of his Church, and therefore not only unworthy to be numbered amongst his
Apostles (as he himself confesses) but also amongst his sheep. God
forgetting in a moment all the injuries that he had done unto him, and unto his
Church, made him a special instrument, and a chosen trumpet amongst all his
companions to publishe his Gospel throughout all the world. Who would say that
he had any respect unto the merit and worthiness of his gestes and actions, when
he did advance him to so great honor. Loving him as much or more then he
did any of his fellows? Seeing that he himself does so highly commend the
grace of God, to the which he does attribute what good thing soever he did
either think, or speak or do in all his life. It is then the only grace of
God which is the foundation and mean of life everlasting, that we hope for:
as it is also of the righteousness and holiness of life, by the which we attayn
unto it. This Jesus christ did teach, when speaking of his sheep he says:
that they John. 16.
hear his voice, and follow him, and yet for all that he gives them eternal
life. Signifiyng thereby, that it is freely given them, and of a pure gist and
not in lieue or respect, that they have heard his voice and followed his
traces. This may also be gathered, Exodus 20.
out of the words of Moises, in the 20. of Exodus, where God promises to show
mercy upon thousands toward them that love him and keep his commandments:
Whereby we must note, that he does not promise his servants any other
recompense for their good deeds, but to show mercy toward them and their
posterity. And as much may we observe in the 24. Psalm. Where the Prophet
speaking of those, that went up to the hill of the Lord, says, that it
shall be. He that has innocent hands and a pure heart, Psalm. 24.
which has not lift up his mind unto iniquity, nor sworn deceitfully: and a
little after he says: He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and
righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them that
seek him, of them that seek the face of the God of Jacob: to give us to
understand that whatsoever we have done to obey God to wash our hearts from
all wicked thoughts and affections, and our hands from all wicked works, to
humble our selves under the hand of God, and to presume nothing of our selves
nor of our own virtues, notwithstanding all this we cannot go up into the
hill of the Lord, but only by the gracious favor that he shall show unto
us, and by the merciful dealing that it shall please him to use toward us. And
this is the best thing to comfort us withal, and to put our hope in full
assurance: that it be grounded upon his mercy and truth, which are firm and
immutable, and not upon the merits and worthiness of our works and virtues,
which are very imperfect. Now if we perceive the sick man to be fully
resolved of the remission of his sins, and that in his mind there remain no
fear or conceyte of them, that may trouble his conscience: then must we go
further with him, to strengthen him against the horror and apprehension that
he may have of death, showing him by the word of God that it is vanquished and
swallowed up by the death of Jesus Christ: who, speaking by the mouth of his
Prophet, he says unto death. O death I will be thy death and destruction: For
seeing that the stinge of Osee. 13. 1. Cor. 13.
death is sin, and the power of sin is the law, Jesus Christ fulfilling
the law for us, has by that means taken away the sting of death. So that it
cannot hurt us any more, and has overcome and vanquished the power of sin,
so that it cannot condemn us no more. And although it be a certain decree and
ordinance of god, that all men shall die, and that coming from dust, they
shall return to dust: nevertheless to speak properly, the separation of the
body and the soul in the faithful, ought not to be called death: So Jesus
Christ, speaking to his disciples of Lazarus, who was dead, said, that he
slepte. This phrase of speech is very usual in the old Testament, to signify
the death of the John. 11.
Fathers. Saint Paul uses it likewise writing to the Corinthians and
Thessalonians, 1. Cor. 15. 1. These. 4.
of those that should depart this life before the day of the resurrection, whom
he calls sleeping. But he gives it a more honorable title in his epistle
to the Philippians, where he calls it a dislodging or departing of the Soul
from the Body. Which agrees well with the words of Jesus Christ, who
aduertising his Disciples, Phil. 1.
of his death that was at hand, told them that the hour drew near, in the
which he should pass out of this world to God his father, calling the death
of his body, but a passage, by the which we go out of this vale of misery, to
enter into possession John. 13.
of Paradise: that is to say: of a place of assured tranquillity and rest, and
full of all delight and pleasure. The ancient Greeks called death Thanaton:
which is as much to say: (...): in english thus: From hence to God: or (...):
which signifies consecration, as one should say: a solemn Ceremony, by the
which, the faithful are wholly dedicated unto God, never afterward to do any
thing, but sing praise to him and sanctify his holy name. Math. 20.
And also our Savior has also called it baptism, for that by death we pass
as it were through a gate, and as it were over a water, to go to a place of
rest and pleasure, whether we purpose to go. And if the body which the Greeks
call (...), to show that it is as it were the grave and sepulcher of the soul,
which they call with a name very near unto the other, called (...), wherein it
seems in this life the soul is buried, when it pleases God to fetch it from
thence, it is not, as though he should make it come forth of the grave and
raise it up again: What is the occasion then that men may have to fly from
this corporal death, and to have it in such horror? Seeing that seperating
the soul from the body, sets the soul out of prison, and sends it to
enjoy liberty in heaven, there to be made much of in the bosom of Jesus
christ, and to enjoy with him and with all the happy souls, the eternal
comforts promised and reserved for the elect people of God? The body on the
other side liethe in the earth, as in a bed, there to sleep and take his rest
at his ease, being never wake or troubled in his sleep, neither by fearful
dreams nor cares, nor fears, nor cries, noyses, or any thing else that may
disquiet the same, sleeping there til the day of the resurrection, when it
shall be waked 2. Cor. 15*
by the sound of Gods Trumpet, and knit again to the Soul, having left behind
in the earth his mortality, dishonor, and weakness, having put on his robes
of glory, power, immortality and corruption. Whereby we may see, that it is
without curse, that men fear so much this corporal death: the which does but
separate for a time the soul from the body, for y^ great profit of the one
and of the other. For the body is by this means out of all danger, not only
of sin, and of the miseries that wait thereuppon, but also of all
temptation, remaining and resting in the earth, in certain hope of the
resurrection, and of the life everlasting. And although it seem to be
altogether deprived of life lyinge in the earth, because that the soul being
departed from it, leaves it without any mo uing or feeling, and it putrifieth
and goes into earth, yet being always accompanied with the spirit and infinite
power of God which quickens all things, it is not altogether void of life as
Saint Paul says: If the spirit of him which raised Jesus Christ up from the
dead, dwell within you. He also which has raised him up, shall also quicken
your mortal bodies, because of his spirit which dwells in you. This is the
reason, why in another place, drawing out unto us the portrature of the
resurrection of our bodies to come, he brings in an example of the seed, which
is cast into the earth, the which has life in it, although being in the
Garner, it semeeh to have none, and holding it in our hands we cannot judge,
but that it is a thing dead and without life. Yet when it is cast into the
earth, where a man would think the life, if it had any, would be smothered and
taken away, it shows it self and grows, as it were, from the rottenness
from whence we see the ear comes, which nourishes and grows afterward,
showing plainly by evident tokens the life that was hid in it before it was
cast in the earth. So God in the holy scripture Math. 22.
caleth himself the God of Abraham, long time after Abraham's death, and says
that he is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Then it follows, that
not only the soul of Abraham, which he redeemed by the death of his Son, is
yet living, since it has been separated from the Body: but that the body
which is partaker of the same redemption, which is knit and incorporate to
Jesus Christ to be one of his members, and has been consecrated and sanctified
unto God, that he may dwell 1. Cor. 3.
therein as in his holy Temple, is not clean without life, although it be
putrified in the bowels of the earth. For so much as it is always accompanied
with the grace of God, and jointly with the soul comprised in the everlasting
covenant, that he has made with his people, which covenant is a fountain and
vain of life, not only to the souls, but also the bodies of all the faithful.
And if as Saint John says, they be Apoc. 14.
most happy and blessed which die in the Lord, and that no blessedness can be
without life: we must needs conclude the one of these two things: either that
no blessedness can come to the body, or else if it may come, that the body is not
deprived and void of all life lying in the earth. For although it be putrified
and have no sign of life in it at all, yet retayneth it in it self, as it
were a seed and stack which shall appear at the day of the resurrection, when
the spirit of God pouring out his infinite virtue on our bodies, shall raise
them up again, and shall make them shine with the glory and brightness that
he has promised his elect. And even as in an egg, there is a chicken, and a
certain life which is evidently perceived, when the hen has heated and hatched
it by her heat: so immortality and life everlasting, whereof both our souls
and bodies are called to be partakers, from the time that we have received the
Gospel of Christ (which is a word of life and a seed incorruptible) shall
shut up till the last day by the power of our God, which shall then make us
new 2. Pet. 3.
again, as he shall do the Heavens, the earth and all other creatures, which
then shall fully be delivered from the bondage of corruption,. Whereof we are
also assured Romans 8.
by the baptism that is given us in the name of the Father, of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost. For the water which has been poured upon our bodies, which
the Scripture calls the lauer of Regeneration, is not only to assure us,
that our souls are washed and purged clean by the blood of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of our sins, but also our bodies, And that being both together
covered and clad with the righteousness and innocence of the son of God, and
besides sanctified by his holy Spirit, they are by and by put in possession
of life everlasting, and altogether made free and delivered from the slavery of
death, which has no power, as we said, but only where sin reigns, which
is the only cause of death. The holy Supper of our Lord in the which taking by
faith bread and wine, which are given unto us by the hands of the minister,
we are received to the partaking of the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ, and so
united and incorporate John. 6.
with him, that for ever (as Saint John says) he dweleth in us and we in him,
does it not assure us also that being inseperably joined with the life, and
with him that is cause of life, we can neither die either in soul or body, by
reason of this vnio^ which is common both to soul and body? The death of the
body ought not to seem so hor rible, and hideous, as it does unto others, who
are frighted as little children with a mask or false vizard. For if the mother
should come to her child with a monstrous and ugly face to be seen, he would
be afraid and run away from her, crying: but so soon as she should have
plucked off her false vizard, he would run unto her and kiss and embrace
her. So must we do, to be delivered from fear and frighting of death,
wherewith we are naturally faised, we must pluck off her mask and vizard,
and must behold it with that form and face that Christ our Savior did, when
he ouercam death. For eue^ as by his Cross he has discharged us of the curse
under the which we were, and has turned the curse into a blessing: So by his
death has he not only mortified, but also quickened our death, so that now
it is become an haven of health, and a door to enter into the kingdom of
heaven, and to take possession of that blessed life, which God has promised to
his elect children. That which does cause us to fear, is that we do behold
it, in the mirror of the law, where it does show it self unto us under a
most terrible shape to behold, and like a Sergeant armed with the anger of
God, and with all the threats and curses set down in the law against those
that do transgress the same, who comes to execute his office and to cite us
to appear presently before the judgment seat, and to hear the sentence of
the last and sovereign Judge, by whom we are sent unto everlasting fire,
without any hope of comfort, or ever to have any other company, but with Devils
to torments us. Which imagination if it come in our mind when we are ready to
die, it cannot be, but we shall take such a conceit and apprehension, that
shall be enough to overthrow us clean, and cast us down into the pit and gulf
of desperation, if it should continue long with us. But to get it away, we
must do as they who have their eyes dazeled by looking too long of one couller,
that is twinkling and glimmering. To get their sight again, they must cast
their eyes upon some other couller that is more lively for the recreation. So
when we feel our selves brought into so dangerous a case, by reason of the
fear and apprehension that the law causes us to have of death, we must
behold her face in the mirror Act. 2.
of the Gospel, where Jesus Christ setts it down to be more sweet, well
favored, and most amiable, where as Moses in his law had made it most ugly
and horrible to behold: It has now never a sting to prick us, neither any
cords, chains or bands to keep us under her jurisdiction: For Jesus Christ
being risen from the dead has broken them, as Sampson by a marvelous strength
did break (as man would break a threade) the great cords and cables
wherewith the Philistines thought they had bound him so sure, and so manicled
him, that they thought he would never have escaped their hands. Yet they
were deceived, for when they came upon him with great fury and violence, then
they perceived he broke them all a sunder as easily, as a man should break a
little string half burned a two. So death thought when she had made Jesus
Christ to die, she had overcome all, and subdued all things under her power,
and that she had set her Empire in so sure estate, so that it could never
decay: yet she found her self vanquished and throne under feet, that she
shall never be able to rise again.

For so writes the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1^.
that death has been swallowed up in victory, that is meant of that which
she thought to have gotten, when she made Jesus Christ to die. Death then is
not to be feared, for these reasons that we have already alleged, but rather
to be desired for some that I will allege hearafter. For first it sets our
souls at liberty, and makes them free from torments, anguishes, fears,
desperations, cares, coueteousnes and other lusts, whereby they are cruelly
tortured, mean while they are penned in this loathsome prison of our vicious,
mortal and corruptible bodies: It delivers likewise ou^ bodies from
innumerable dangers, whereunto they are opposed as well on sea as land, as in
any other place wheresoever they converse. From many kinds of sicknesses and
sores, which do undermine and bring us to our end, with intolerable pain
and (...). Likewise from necessity and pain of working and laboring, unto the
which we are subject, by reason of sin, and lastly from a great care, that we
have continually, to get and seek out all means to nourish, cloth, get us
abiding places, and al other things that are needful to maintain this
miserable life. But all this is nothing in respect of the good it does us,
putting us out of al danger of sinning any more, and of being temted of the
devil, of the world and of our own proper lusts and concupiscences, which
never cease to stir us up to do evil, and provoke us every hour to offend
God, and so to procure upon our selves all the curses that he threatens in his
law to all those that transgres and disobey them. With what zeal and
vehemence? with 1. Co^. 12.
what sighs and groans did the Apostle ask and beseech of God to deliver him
from the body of sin. From this angel of Satan Romans 7.
which did buffet him? And after this long and lamentable complainte that he
made of the law, which he saw in his members contrary to the law of his
understanding, which made him captive to the law of sin, which was in his
members, at the conclusion of his discourse, what a loud cry he made from the
bottom of his heart? Alas, wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from
this body of sin? See then what piteous moan this holy personage made to see
in himself the tyranny of sin, and to see himself so forced and constrained
to do that evil which he detested, and to leave undone the good which he
desired and coueted to do with all his heart? O most hapy death the which does
bring us out of so cruel and irksome* slavery: who will then consider what a
misery it is to live in the midst of the Church amongst 2. Tim. 3.
the barbarous people, and such as the Apostle did prophecy should come in
these latter days, that is to say: men that should love themselves, auaricious
persons, vanters, proud, backebiter, disobediente to father and mother,
ungrateful persons, despisers of God, without any natural affection, false
accu^ers, immodest, cruel, hating those y^ are good, traitorous, rash
ambitious, lovers of wordly pleasures, rather then of God, having but an
appearance of godliness, but observing no form thereof. And on the other side to
be environed and compassed in round with the professed and mortal enemies of
the Gospel, and of Jesus Christ, and of his Church, which made dogs and wolves,
which made men, which care neither for God or his grace, curious persons, over
hasty, outrageous, profane, blasphemers, having neither ^aith, law, fear, or
conscience to repress there malice and malignity. Who shall but regard what a
trouble and vexation it is, to live in this wicked and perverse world, and be
forced to see so many abominable impiety and sacriledges committed, and to
hear so many execrable and horrible blasphemies, that they spit out without
any fear or shame against Heaven, against the throne and majesty of God: shall
he not lament his life so long in this world? and say with the Prophet David:
Psalm. 120.
Woe is me that I remain in messhech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar: my
soul has too long dwelt with them that hate peace. I seek peace and when I
speak thereof they are bente towarre.

Ely seeing the people of Israel had 1. Kings. 16
forsaken GOD, and had given themselves over to Idolatry, and perceiving the
strange cruelties on the other side that Achab and Iezabell did use against the
Prophets and servants of God, being a weary of his life, got him into the
desert under a Juniper tree, and there he prayed unto god, that he would take
him out of this life, that he might not behold any longer that he did then
behold and see: so also is it not possible for a man, be he never so strong
hearted, seeing the disorder and confusion that reigns now a days in the
world, and how every where (except in very few places) Piety and Justice are
altogether overthrown, faith and the fear of God, virtue and verity are clean
banished from the company of most men, but he shall feel in his heart strange
pangs and passions of sorrow, and that to turn away his eyes from such
pitiful sightes he shall desire with all his heart, that his soul might
dislodge quickly from this earthly Tabernacle, to take up and have a new
dwelling place in Heaven, where we have a permanent Cittye, and an habitation
well fenced and fortified against all dangers, and that then shall be fully
accomplished that which the Prophet says: Psalm. 121.
The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, he shall keep thy soul. The
Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from henceforth and for
ever. And besides, this will greatly increase our desire, for that dislodging
from this world, we shall be suddenly transported up into Heaven, where we shall
see God face to face, and Jesus Christ in his glory: by which sight the Angels
af heaven, and all blessed Spirits are so ravished, that they desire and seek
none other thing at all for their contentment and pleasure, as Psalm. 16.
says the Prophet. In thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand
there is pleasure for evermore. The Queen of Saba having seen Solomon and
heard 1. Sam.* 10.
his great wisdom by the answer that he made to all questions that she
demanded, having moreover considered and remarked the order and pomp of his
Court: being as one ravished and in an estasis she began to cry: O how happy
are the servants of thy house, that may behold thy face every day, and
understand thy profound wisdom, that comes from thy lips? How much more
happy then they shall we be then, seeing fully the glorious face of our God?
all the divine treasures of his heavenly wisdom being opened unto us. If
Moses thought himself happy and was accounted one of the greatest Prophets of
the world, because he had seen on ly the hinder part of God, what shall w^e be
when we shall see him face to face, as he is in all his glory? Many kings and
prophets in the time of our Fathers, have greatly desired the coming of Jesus
Christ, and would have thought themselves most happy, if they had seen God
manifestly in the flesh as Saint John Baptist, Simeon, and the Apostle did, how
happy then may we think our selves at this present day, when by our death we
have this prerogative to se him in his glory and majesty, clothed with his
royal robe, sitting at the right hand of God his Father, having auctority and
power in heaven and earth, to govern and dispose all things according to his
good pleasure, treading upon all his enemies, as upon a footestoole under his
feet? When he transfigured himself in the mountain, Peter, John, and James,
seeing but a little beam of his glory, were so soddenly ravished in
themselves, that forgetting all other things, they desired for all felicity,
but that they might continue still in that joy and pleasure, wherein they were
at that hour. Now let us think if never so little taste of the life to come,
has been able so to ravish these three Disciples, how shall it be with us,
when according to the good hope that we have, we shall have the whole precious
stone and drink our fill in this stream or rather in this Sea of pleasure and
al perfect contentment. When this everlasting joy whereof the Apostle speaks,
shall be poured upon our heads. And this joy shall be doubled, when with Jesus
Christ we shall see this noble and glorious company of Angels, Archangels,
dominions, powers, patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martirs, and generally all
the triumphant Church of the blessed souls, which do nothing but sing
incessantly, the praises of God: crying: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty,
who wast, art, and art to come for ever. Likewise to him that ^poc. 5.
sits on the throne, and to the Lamb, be honor, praise, glory and power
for ever and ever. It was merueilous pleasant in old time to behold the
solemn meeting of all the Tribes of all the people of Israel in 2. Sam. 23.
Jerusalem, when Salomou having finished the Temple, did dedicate it with an
infinite number of burnt offerings and other sacrifices, with sweet parfume
and incence, with prayers and thanksgiving, and such mirth and melody of all the people that the like was never seen nor heard off before. There was
likewise two other notable assemblies in Jerusalem, which are 1 Samuel ^. 2.
Chro. 30.
very famous in holy Scripture, the one in the reign of Ezechias: the other in
the reign of Josias: when these two good princes moved with a zeal of godliness
and the service of God, that before had been pitifully corrupted by the
idolatry and impiety of their predecessors, with an heroical and magnanimious
heart, undertook to pu^ge y^ holy land, of al filthy and stinking abominations,
wherewith both the bodies and souls of diverse were infected, taking clean away
y^ stews and Idols of all the county of Iudaea, and abolishing clean all the
false services that their hipocritical fathers had invented and established
against or clean beside the word and ordinance of God, having no warant for
it at all. And to renew the covenant of God, which was almost forgotten, and
clean defaced out of the peoples heart, assembled all the inhabitants of the
Country, with whom after the law was read publicly, they solemnised the
Easter with great solemnity, then ever was seen or heard of before. And who
was he amongst that company think ye, that seeing such an assembly gathered
together for so good an end, whose heart did not leap in his belly for joy,
seeing God present in the midst of his holy people, hearing the agreement that
was renewed between the parties, and the solemn promises and protestations,
first that GOD made respectiuelye to his people, assuringe them of his favor
for ever, and then that his people made unto him, promising him never to go
from him, but to keep his covenant for ever, and never change his true service
ever hereafter honoring him only, and sanctifying his holy name. And sure such
assembles of y^ militant church, whereof some steps we have seen in this latter
age, if Antichrist and his adherents did not disturb them would be an
excellent thing, and most to be desired of all earthly treasure: Psalm. 26.
as the Prophet says. O Lord I have loved the habitation of thine house and
the place where thine honor dwells. And also here he says: As the heart
braieth Psalm. 42.
for the rivers of waters, so pants my soul after thee O God: my soul
thirsts for God, even for the living God, when shall I come and appear
before the presence of God? And in the 92. Psalm: It is a good thing to praise
the Lord, and to sing to thy name O Psalm. 92.
most highest: To declare thy louinge kindness in the morning, and thy truth
in the night. These places and infinite other do show sufficiently what
accounte we ought to have of holy asse^blies, which he did prefer before all
worldly pleasures. And to say the truth, every man which knows and feels in
himself, what is the love, bounty, sweetenes, mercy, goodness, wisdom,
faithfulness, patience, truth, power greatness, majesty, justice, liberality, and
other sovereign and infinite virtues of God, can never content himself
sufficiently to think upon them, to declare them to others, to admire and
adore them, and to inuit not only the angels and all the holy company of
Heaven, but also all the elements, al living creatures, al plants yea all
creatures without life to magnify his holy name, and to be filled with joy,
when he shall hear it exalted, and glorified. Albeit the praises and
thanksgiving that men yet living do sing unto the Majesty of God, cannot be
so holy, or well directed, but they want somewhat: for being always imperfect,
as we are, unto what degree of faith and charity soever we have attained: and
having besides this flesh with us which does fight continuallye against the
spirit, and keeps it in bridle, and pulls it back when it would lift it
self up unto God, it is impossible that we should hear the word of God with
such zeal and attentiuenes, as we ought, neither that we should make our
confessions, prayers and thanksgiving, with such humility and affection as is
required of us. Yet when we hear in the midst of the assembly, the Psalms and
spiritual songs resound from the mouths of the faithful, although they be but
weak, frail, poor and miserable sinners, we rejoice and are ravished with the
joy that we feel inwardly in our hearts. What may we then think of the
pleasure and joy that we hope to receive in Heaven, when our souls being
departed out of our bodies and ascended thither, shall hear the sweet music
and harmony of Angels, and other blessed spirits, singing together the praises
of God, with so melodious a tune, that ^he contentment and pleasure that they
shall take thereby, shall make them in an instant forget not only all other
displeasure, but also all other pleasure that ever they felt? As a pale of
water being cast into the sea, is by and by no more perceived, and as the
brightness of the stars appears no more as soon as the Sun begins to
shine, and to cast his glorious beams over the face of the earth. Moreover
when we die in the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, at that very instant we are
blessed and most happy, that is to say: we have no more thoughts and desires,
but such as are pure and holy, and at the very hour of death have their full
periode. Which is no small felicity, for we have the flesh no more contrary to
our spirit, our appetites no more rebelling against reason, nor the law of
our members no more repugning the law of God: but all tumultes and troubles
being assuaged in our hearts, we have a soul spiritual, calm, peaceable,
living to God altogether, which does always cleau so fast unto him, that it
can no more by any temptation, or any otherwise be withdrawn from his love,
or his service, nor from beholding of his face. Is there any thing more
pleasant to behold then a City governed with good policy, where all the
Citizens and inhabitants are so loving one to another, firmly joined together
with an unfeigned bond of amity, which commits no wranglinges, strifes,
debates, quarrels, partiallities, divisions, tumults or seditions to arise
amongst the^, they do hold so together, and live all in amiable love and
concord. Is there likewise any thing more to be desired, then to see a family
well ordered, where the father and mother, the children, and servants, do live
together in the fear and obedience of God, and do contain themselves within
their duty, and do not let slip or go beyond in any thing, the rule and
measure that God has set down in his law? Saint Paul in many places does tell
us of the wonderful Romans 12 1. Cor. 12.
harmony, which is between the members of man's body, of their mutual
communication, faculties and powers, not one envying the dignity of another,
or despising his companion for his baseness: by this comparison teaching the
Church, what fraternity and just proportion ought to be between the members
thereof, for the health and preservation of every member in particular, and of
the whole body in general. What goodlier sight is there, then this to be
seen amongst men? And what better melody can there be, then a Lute well
tuned, and well touched? But what heavenly harmony is there in the soul, when
it agrees so well in all her powers, that our understanding thinks on
nothing more then on God, and our will loves, desires, and aspireth to
nothing, but to him: our memory has nothing to remember but him, for so is it
with her, when having left this body, she is received into Paradise. For then
she is filled with GOD, who is in her. From ^. Cor. 15
thence forward all things (as the Apostle says) that is to say, all her
thoughts, all her love and desire, all her cogitation, to be brief, all her
good, all that ever she has, all her wishing and contentation is fixed in
God. Seeing then that by death we do atchieue so great a benefit, that in
all this life in what estate so ever we be, we cannot find the like: for
there is living in this miserable world neither King nor Caesar, noble man of
mark, or merchant, lawyer or labourer, who complains not of his estate
often, and has just occasion so to do, when his affairs fall out contrary
to his desire, hope, and expectation: are not we then greatly beholding to
death, that in the twinkling of an eye, does give us the fruition of the
sovereign felicity, which does consiste in the perfect tranquillity of our
souls, and in the full satisfaction of all our desires. The which vain men
seek in vain to have in this life in the transitory trashe and treasure of
this present world.

There is yet one thing more which should make us embrace death willingly, when
our hour is come: which is, that it does set us in possession of all the
goods, that Jesus Christ has purchased for us. For while we live in this
world we are not saved (as the Apostle says) but by hope only. But when by
death we depart from hence, then we enjoy life everlasting, and that
pleasure which is so great, that neither eye, ear, understanding, or heart of
man may conceive or apprehende the greatness thereof. It was a joyful thing I
think, for the people of Israel, after their long and irksome slavery
wherein they were detayned in Egypt, after so long wandering, and many
unhappy reencounters, that they had in the deserts of Arabia for forty years
together, when at the last they saw themselves arrived at the banks of
Iordaine, and had but to pass over the river to enter into the possession of
the land that GOD had promised to their Fathers, which they had so long waited
for before.

A young man that has been many years ward under a rigorous and severe
Tutor, who has misused him, and dealt very hardly with him, keeping him short
of those things which were necessary for him, has he not great cause to
rejoice, seeing the date of his wardship to draw out, when he shall have all
his goods at his own pleasure, and he at no man's controlment any more.

The children that descend of any noble family, that are brought up under the
king, or in the house of any great Prince or Signiour, to wait upon them,
being brought up under the hand and correction of a sharp and cursed squire,
who does keep them in, with a severe and rigorous discipline: are not they full
glad, when they are out of their waiting office, free from the fear and
seruilitie wherein they were so long and rigorously detained? The young maidens
that have all their youth bin straightly kept within their fathers and mothers
door, they rejoice greatly when they hear they shall be married, and a great
deal more when they are betrothed, but their greatest pleasuxe and joy is,
when they are married and given into the hands of an husband, whom they love
and like well of. For so they have their hearts desire. We also that here on
earth, by the preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and by faith which we
have fixed in his promises: have as it were betrothed our selves unto him, what
cause shall we have to rejoice, when our souls departing from our bodies,
shall mount up into the heavens to espouse him, and there to solemnize the
feastifal day of our marriage with such joy and gladness, as shall never have
end, and never be interrupted or troubled, neither by death, disease, or any
other accident that ever may bechance. Then will our spouse coming before us
say unto us that which is written in the Canticles: Come he there, my sweet
one, enter into the closet of thy love. The winter is passed, so are also the
rain, the snow, the hail, the cold and frost, and all the sharp and bitter
season which thou have been feign to endure hitherto with great pain and
sorrow. And now the spring, into the which thou art entered shall endure for
ever, and the pleasures that she brings with her shall never have any end.
Enter then my sweet one into the joy and rest of the Lord. Then shall be
fulfilled the saying of the Prophet. They Psalm, 126
that sow in tears shall reap in joy. They went weeping and carried precious
seed, but they shall return with joy, and bring their sheues with them. So
being out of our wardshippe, and taken from under the hand and discipline of
our Tutor, we shall be set at full liberty, and in possession of that
inheritance that GOD our good Father has promised us, and appointed us, when
he adopted us for his children, and heirs of the inheritance of eternal
life, and of the kingdom of heaven, which we may well hope for whilst we
are here, but to say or think what it is, it is impossible for any tongue
or eloquence, be it never so singular: for the greatness thereof far
passes all humane capacity.

Man having built this fortress against the fear that the sick man may have
of death, we must also set down some thing against the fear of the devil,
Heb. 2
who is Emperor of the kingdom of death. For he is the enemy that gives the
last assault, that plants all his artillery, and employes all his engines
against us, to make us yield. But we being under the defense and safegarde of
our shepherd, who is careful and vigilant to keep us, and stronger to defend
us, than this John. 10
ravening woulfe or furious lion can be to assail us, we ought not to fear
at all. For who can take us out of his hands, seeing that he and his Father
(who is greater then all) are but one essence, power, glory and majesty? We
are then assured, that as there is no subtlety or fetch that can surprise or
go beyond his wisdom: so is there no force sufficient to encounter with his
puissance. Let us keep our selves then under the shadow of his wings, and
assure our selves that he will keep us safe, that neither the devils nor
any other creature shall be able to hurt us: as the Prophet says: Who so
dwells in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of the
almighty: I will say unto the Lord, O mine hope and my fortress. He is my
God, in him will I trust. And after that he had named some dangers, by the
which he assured the faithful they could never be hurt: in the end he comes
to the devils, the ancient and mortal enemies of mankind, and speaks on
this wise: Thou shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe, the young Lion and the
Dragon shall thou tread under feet. Because thou have loved me, therefore will
I deliver thee, I will exalte thee, because thou have known my name, etc.
Where we may behold the victory which he does promise us of the deuilles. And
the example of the Apostles, unto whom Christ gave power Luke. 9
over devils, so that they were constrained to acknowledge the power, that he
had given the Apostles over them, obeying unto those things that they did
command in his name, may put us in good security, that fighting against them,
so that we be furnished, with the same weapons that they were, that is to say,
with faith and the word of God, we shall be sure to have the victory of them,
and by the buckler of our faith to break off their fiery darts. Your aduer
sarie the devil (says 1. Pet. 5
Saint Peter) walks as a Lion, roaring round about you, seeking whom he may
devour, to whom you must resist being grounded in the faith. And Saint 1.
John. 2 Mat. 16
John says, Ye are strong, and the word o^ God remains among you, and ye
have overcome the wicked spirit. And Jesus Christ speaking of faith, did he
not promise that the gates of hell, that is to say, all the counsel, craft,
fetches, means and power that the devil is able to devise and make, are not
able to encounter with her, and cannot resist the word of God. That which we
see clearly appear in the example of Jesus Christ. For the devil Mat. 4
being come to assail him, and having assaied all means possible that he
could, to make him fall in distrust of God, he could bring nothing to pass,
but lost his labor, for he found him so well armed on every side with the
word, that he was glad to forsake the field, and was glad to be gone with
shame leaving him. If we then be also well armed, we need not fear, what he
can hurt us, nor stand in doubt but we shall be couquerours both of him and
of ^. Cor. 10.
all our other enemies. As Saint Paul says, The weapons of our war are not
carnal, but mighty through God to cast down holds, casting down the
imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God. Whosoever then would stand in fear of the devil, being armed with says
and with the word of GOD, should show thereby, that he knows not what is
the force of the one or of the other, nor what is the power and might of him
who conducteth us, and knowe^h Luke 11. 5 John. 12. 1. John. 3 Apoc. 12
not under what standarde we fight. For has not our Captain broken the
serpents head? Has he not dispossessed the strong man of his fortress, and
taken all his armor from him? Is it not he that has cast out the Prince of
this world, and destroyed all the works of the devil? Is it not this grand
Captain Michael, who already has got the victory against the Dragon and his
Angels, and has them in chase, till he have defeated and vlterly
overthrown them for ever. But to take better heed of him, we must note two
special points of policy in him, whereby he thinks to ouer-catch us, if
he see us virtuous, to puff us up with a vain presumption of our selves, of
our own works and virtues. But on the contrary side, if he see that we are
vicious, and that in this life we have been licentious and dissolute, then
will he lay before our eyes as much as possibly he can, the grieuousnes and
enormitie of our sins, that he may thrust us hea^long into a desperation of
the grace of GOD. These are the two halters, wherewith (as Saint Augustine
says) this hangman of mankind does use to strangle men. But we have
already showed how we may avoid these temptations. And as for our good
works, we know that they are al so filthy and imperfect, y^ we can make no
more account of them before the face of God, then of old and unclean rags.
And again, y^ our sins cannot be so great, but ye mercy of God does surmou^t
them, nor so unclean, but the righteousness and blood of Jesus Christ is able
to wash the^ clean, and make the^ as white as snow. Nor finally, so damnable,
but in confessing them with humility and contrition, God ^. John. 1
will show himself faithful to pardon and forgive them every one. It rests
now that we set down some assurance to comfort the sick man against the fear
that he may have of ye judgment of God. For when we see our selves cited by
sickness to appear quickly and personally before his tribunal seat, if we
have in us but the least spark of grace, we shall call to mind that which is
said in the holy Scripture: that is to say, that it is an horrible thing to
fall into the hands of the living God.

First, that there is no partiality or exception of persons, that is to say,
no respect unto greatness, dignity, noblenes, riches, beauty, knowledge,
parentage, alliance, Romans ^
to no such matter, which is of account and much regard among men, causing them
oftentimes to swerve a little, and go awry in their judgments from the true
rule of justice, but it is not ^o in the judgments of God, which being
immumutable and impassible, can nothing at all alter his will. By reason
whereof all his judgments are measured by the rule, and pronounced according
to the rigor of the law. Then that all our thoughts, affections, words,
deeds, and actions, and generally all the course of our life from the
beginning to the ending is unfolded and sifted out thoroughly. That the books
and registers are brought forth, wherein are noted all the faults that ever we
have committed by thought, word or deed, with all their circumstances.
Likewise that judgment shall be given without mercy: and to be short, that no
virtue of ours is allowed of, nor any righteousness accepted that is not pure
and perfect in all points. I say then, when we come to set these things
before our eyes, concerning this fearful judgment, the which we can by no
means avoid or escape. And on the other side, when we come to set these
things before our eyes, the vice, the corruption, and imperfections which are
in us, and y^ infinite number of sins that we have committed against the first
and second Table, that is to say, against God and man: it must needs be that we
remain greatly astonished and forlorn: considering that we have so many
adversaries and accusers, which will not cease to persecute us extremely, that
is to say, the devil, the law, and our own consciences: which produce
against us a thousand and a thousand informations, seeking to condemn us,
considering the quality of the crimes whereof we are convinced. And these
things cannot we withstand, nor any wise escape the rigor of the judgment of
God, but in confessing our debts first, and then next to have recourse to the
death of our savior Jesus Christ to be forgiven. For it is otherwise in the
judgment of God then in the judgment of men: by the which a person accused is
condemned as soon as he has by mouth confessed himself to be guilty of the
offense: but contrariwise the confession of our offenses is one of the means
whereby we obtain remission, and are absolved and justified before God, as
says Saint John. If we 1. John. 1
confess our sins, God is faithful and just to pardon them, and to make us
clean from all iniquity. And David says: I acknowledged my sin unto Psalm.
32
thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: for I thought, I will confess against my
self mine wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my
sin. After the confessing and acknowledging of our sins, we must have
recourse unto Jesus Christ the just, who isour advocate to God the Father, and
the propitiation for our sins, and repose our selves wholly upon him,
referring our cause unto him: for having put it into his hands, it cannot
choose but go on our sides. For when we appear before the judgment seat of
God, we cannot be condemned, what accusation or crime so ever be brought and
alleged against us by our John 3. Luke 21
adversaries. He which believes in me says he, comes not into judgment at
al. And in another place to comfort his disciples, he exhorts them to have an
eye to the last judgment day, and seeing it draw nigh, to lift up their hands
and to rejoice, for that the full and perfect redemption is reserved unto that
day. And S. Paul confirms the same in his Epistle to ye Romans, with a
marvelous grace and magnificency of speech. Who shall co^mence any Romans 8
accusation against the elect of God? god is he which justifies, who shall the^
be able to condemn? Christ is he which is dead, and who is moreover rise^
again, who is also at the right hand, and does make intercession to God for us.
We must the^ conclude, that which he says in ye beginning of the Chapter: That
there is no condemnation to those that are now in Jesus Christ, that is to say,
which walk not according to the flesh, but after the spirit, And that as Jesus
Christ their head cannot be saved but with those that are his members: so they
cannot be condemned, but he should also be condemned with them, by reason of
the inseparable union which is between the head and the members.

Moreover, that Jesus Christ being dead for us, has suffered the punishment
and curse which was due unto us, because of our sins, and by consequent has
fully satisfied the justice of God, we need not fear that he will exact of us
any more the payment of debts, the which he has forgiven and acquitted us:
for that were to go against the justice not only of God, but also of man, to
demand to be pardoned debt twice, having then yielded our selves wholly and
referred all our matters into Romans 8. Hebr. 9.
the hands of our Souiour Jesus Christ, let us not fear to be overtaken by
the iugdement of God, where the Son is continually before the face of the
Father making intercession for us, carrying us upon his shoulders and in his
breast, as the high Priest did in old time carry ye names of the twelve Tribes
of Israel, to present them before the Lord, although he entered into the
Sanctuary with a plate of gold upon his forehead, wherein were engraven these
words. The holy one of the Lord. To the end he might make them acceptable to
the Lord, which was a type of that which Jesus Christ our high and everlasting
Priest after the order of Melchisedech did exhibit and represent in very
deed upon the Cross, when offering himself in sacrifice for us to God his
Father, he did sanctify and make us acceptable unto God for ever. We must not
then fear that being in state of grace as we are, having an Advocate toward
God, in whom he is well pleased, he can or will condemn us, when we shall
appear before him in judgment, and shall be clothed in these goodly long
garments, whereof is spoken in the Apocalippes, the which are dyed and washed
in the blood of the Lamb, and shall bring tustification with them. When we
shall thus have exhorted the sick man to take a good heart and not to be
afraid, neither of his sins, nor of death, nor of the Devil, nor of the
judgment of God: if we see that he be loath to leave the world: and that
his honors, riches, pleasures, case, and that he bears yet to these earthly
and corruptible things, does make him loath to forgo them, and troubles his
mind wonderfully, that it cannot resolve to m^rch merrily whether 1. Ioh. 5. 2.
God does call it. Then first must we make relation unto him, that this world
is altogether set upon wickedness, and drencht in sin: that it shall pass away,
and quickly be faded away with all her concupiscences: that it does not know
God at all: that we are no more children of this world: that God has taken
us clean out of this (...) Cor. 11.
world, to the end we should not be condemned with it: that we cannot love
this world, but we must needs be enemies unto God. That the Devil is the
Prince of this world: and that by consequence, we Gal. 5.
cannot love this world, or the things that be in this world, but we must
needs be vassals and slaves of the prince of darkness: That we cannot be
faithful, nor true members of Jesus Christ, but the world must be crucified
to us, and we to it. That by the example of the Apostle, we make no more
account of the world, with all his glory, pomp and superfluity, then of the
dung of the earth, or of a flower that is faded and withered: that we are here
but as passengers and strangers, and cannot make any long time of abode, as in
a City, and habitation that shall last for ever: but we lodge here as in an
Inn, and must be ready to gird up our loins, and dislodge betimes in the
morning, to be trudging still outward, till we come to the place where we
mean to take up our lodging and rest for ever: that is to wit, in heaven,
wherein we ought to have our hearts, our thoughts, our desires, and all our
affections, altogether fixed already, and there, as the Apostle says, should
we have all our Phil. 3.
conversation. For being raised up from the dead with Jesus Christ, and united
unto him unseperably, although our bodies be far separate and distant from his:
yet ought we always to be present with him in our spirits and souls, and to
forget clean the world and the earth, seeking after and thinking on nothing
more then of those things which are from ahoue. Our heart should it not be
where our treasures are? and where are our treasures but in heaven, where Jesus
Christ is in his glory? who has our lise Co^loss. 3.
hidden in himself, and not only all the treasures of the knowledge and
wisdom of God: but also of all the gifts, graces, honors, riches and
blessings, that God the father has given him to bestow upon his Church whilst
she is here militant in hope, and when she is alone triumphant, she shall
enjoy the full fruition thereof, when our souls leaving these filthy,
stinking and obseure prisons of our bodies, shall be carried, as was that of
poor Lazarus, into the bosom of Abraham, by the Angels there to rest and
rejoice for ever, as it is written: The children of thy servants shall continue,
and Psalm. 102.
their seed shall stand fast for ever in thy sight.

If then we do but languish in this world where we live as poor strangers
in exile amongst a number of barbarous and rude people, ought we not to be
full glad, when God calls us away to reclaim us into our own country, where,
with our brethren, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, Apostles, and Martirs, and of
all other blessed spirits, we shall peaceably enjoy together the glory, honor,
trust, rest, and all that perfect felicity that he promised and prepared in
his kingdom for all his elect. A marvel then that men, yea the faithful
themselves, who are not only instructed by the word of God, but also by daily
experience, they find that all lusty and glory of this world, are but mere
vanities, illusions and dreams, which pass away quickly, do suffer
themselves so to be bewitched and enchaunted by their flatteries and
delicacies, that at the last they became senceles beasts, as were the
companions of Ulysses, by the charms and enchantments of Cirre. For is not
their judgment corrupt and simple, that being loath to leave this world, to
go up into heaven, and preferring the things that are mutable, uncertain,
transitory and corruptible, which ask infinite pains to get them, and as
many cares to keep them, and more greeses and sorrows to forgo them, before
the blessings which God does promise us in his kingdom, which are certain,
immutable, incorruptible, eternal and assured, which cannot choose but bring to
them which possess them a true and perfect contentment of the mind. Wherein
we do, (as our first fathers did) for one Apple, forgo, not an earthly, but
an heavenly Paradise, where are such delights and pleasures, as are not to be
imagined. For one mess of pottage we sell our birthright, and all that
belonges thereunto, as Gsau did. We desire rather Garlike and Oynions of
Egypt, then the holy land, with all her abundance and blessings. We had
rather with the prodigal child live with Hogs with draffe, and washing them
to be nourished and brought up in the house of our heavenly Father, with bread
of Aungles.

And lastly, after the example of Lots wife, we cannot forgo the infamous
pleasures of our Sodom, but we had rather perish with them, then to be saved
in forsaking them. So lamentable is our case, that we may say of our selves
with the holy Prophet: Understand ye unwise among Psalm. 94.
the people, and ye fools when will ye be wise? For what makes us make so
great account of this world, and that which is in it, but a damnable desire,
the which does b^nde us so, that it makes us often times take light for
darkness, and darkness for light again, sour for sweet, and sweet for sour
again? To the end then that we be not deceived in our own judgments, we
must not ground them upon any outward appearance, nor vppn the common error of
men, who being sensual, approve and reject all things as they are agreeable
and contrary to their sense and appetite.

But we must judge all things, as the Apostle says, by the word of GOD,
which is an infallible rule to discern truth from falsehood, and not to follow
in our own judgments our own reason or carnal wisdom, the which is enemy
to God, and does for the most part justify that which he does condemn. Let us
now see then what the word of God does teach us concerning the world, and those
things which are in the world. Love 1. John. (...).
not the world, (says Saint John) nor the things that are in the world: For if
any man love the world, the love of God remains not in him. For that which is
in the world, to wit, the concupiscence of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes,
pride and presumption, are not of God, but of the world: See then what the
Apostle does teach us of the world, that we must not love it, if we will that
God love us.

And Solomon when he speaks of it, says, that after he had long time with
great diligence considered the estate of this world, the variety and
inconstancy of humane spirits, the diuexsitie of studies whereunto they apply
themselves, the mutabilitie and sudden change of their counsels, the simple
judgment that they have to praise or dispraise, to esteem or neglect, to love
or hate, to purchase or disdain or let slip those things which were set
before them in this world, he knew not only by reason, but also by
experience, that the desires of most men were but only foolishness and
vanities, which they do as it were, worship, moved thereunto by the rashness
and temerity of their own appetites, the which for that they are blind, and
will not be directed by any good reason, are easily carried every where,
whether pleasure and the Devil does prick them forwards: some ambitiously
purchase the honors and promotions of this world, and in climbing unto them
violate all law and right, forget all piety and humanity, care not what
trouble and confusions they make, stir up, favor, and enterleague with the
wicked, hate and reject the good and virtuous, war upon the country wherein
they have been begotten, brought up, and suckled, deprive it of liberty if
they can, and by a cruel tyranny which they use, bring into a miserable
slavery, as Julius Caesar did his, and before and after him many others: does
not this plainly show, that there is nothing more true then that which, Jesus
Christ said unto such ambitious fellows: That which is highly esteemed Luke 16
among men, is for the most part abominable before God. And how can they
please him seeing the gretest part believe not in him nor in Jesus Christ? As
it John. 5.
is written in S. John. How can ye believe, seeing ye seek glory one of an
other, and seek not the glory that comes from God alone? And in another
John. 9.
place, the Pharasies and chief rulers of Jerusalem condemning themselves
said, is there any of all the Princes that has believed in him, meaning Jesus
Christ? And in Saint Matthew, I thank Mat. 11. 18
thee O Father Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from
the wise and men of understanding, and have revealed them unto babes. We must
not then be loath to forgo the honors and promotions of this world, which
causes us for the most part to forget God and our selves, and do distract our
minds from the study and exercise of virtue, which persuade us rather to
seek our own glory then the glory of God, make us disdain our neighbors,
and forget that we are but dust and ashes, and lastly bring us to worship
the very Devil, and make us senseless as brute beasts, as says the
Prophet: Man is in honor he vnerstandeth Psalm. 49
not, he is like to beasts that perish. And a little before he speaks of
the driftes and foolish imaginations of these ambitious hearers: They think
their houses shall continue for ever, even from generation to generation, and
call their lands by their names: but man shall not continue in honor, he is
like the beasts that die. Now as we ought not to be heavy and sorrowful to
bear the honor and great estate, that we have in this world, for those
reasons which are already set down: so must we not be sorrowful for riches
and temporal goods, when departing this life we are constrained to leave them
behind us. For to speak properly they are not the true riches of Gods
children, nor the inheritance that their father keeps for them, and that
Jesus Christ has purchased for them. For his kingdom, (which is the riches
that he has promised us) is not of this world, but heavenly. So the glory,
power, estate, riches, honor, pleasure, counsel, peace and all the felicity
of this kingdom is altogether divine and spiritual. Jesus Christ, who is the
king, what temporal goods has he possessed or purchased being in this world,
where he was not master of so much as the little birds or the foxes are, that
is to say, of a nest, a cave, or a hole to hide his head in? And the Apostles,
who were the Princes of his kingdom, what revenues I pray you, or great
possessions had they in this world? Saint Peter said, speaking to the people
Acts. 3.
which lay at the gate of the Temple begging an alms, gold and silver have I
none, but such as I have, I give thee: in the name of Jesus of Nazareth rise up
and walk. And S. Paul says, we are as 2. Cor. 6.
poor men, and yet we make many rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing
all things. We see then hereby that the goods that God will enrich his children
withal, are not earthly and corruptible goods which are subject to thieves,
to rust and mothes: but spiritual goods, certain and permanent, which cost
nothing, neither to get them nor to keep them. For God of his free bounty
does bestow them upon us, and keep them for us, and there is none that can
take them from us, but he himself, that which he does never but by constraint,
either through our ingratitude toward him, or else by abusing them in
applying them to some other end, then he appointed when he bestowed them upon
us. The goods that we ought to make account of and purchase, and to take heed
that we loose them not, are the heavenly riches, as the grace of God, our
adoption, faith, the word of the Gospel, hope, charity, patience, humility,
the peace and tranquillity of our consciences: and especially the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is the fountain, from whence do spring
and flow to us all the graces, favors and blessings of God. For so much as by
it, and by the partaking there of we are reconciled and reunited unto him, kept
in his favor and grace, whereby we conceive a hope certain and infallible of
life everlasting, which is the very heap and fullness of all good, and of all
the true felicity that we can desire. It is thither then that we must
always aspire, thither must all the thoughts of our spirits, and all the
desires of our hearts reach: this is our sovereign good, and the mark of our
blessedness, and not this transitory trash that makes the possessours
thereof nothing at all the better: but is occasion that they become oftentimes
the worse, if they take not good heed as the Apostle says, making them 1.
Tim. 6.
to be puffed up with a vain presumption, and to be proud and stately, to put
their confidence in the instabilitie of their riches, not to be sociable or
affable, but insolent, arrogant, and outrageous, as the Psalmist says: Their
pride is as a chain unto them and cruelty covers them as a garment. And
speaking of the confidence that they have in their riches, he says in an
other place, Some boast in their goods, and boast Psalm. 49.
themselves in the multitude of their riches. And by and by mocking them he
says: Yet a man can by no means redeem his brother: he can not pay his
ransom to God. And in an other place where he speaks of both together that
is to say, of the violence and oppression that these rich men, and the mighty
ones of this world do use toward the poor, and of their vain hope, he
says: Trust not in oppression or robbery, Psalm. 62.
e not vain, if riches increase set not your hearts thereon. This is the
reason why our Savior Jesus Christ, calls riches, the riches of iniquity,
not Luke 16
that they are not the creatures of God, and good, when men can tell how to
use them well, and to employ them as God has commanded: but for as much as
every man almost does abuse them, using them after his disordinate lusts: and
as Saint Paul says, the Devil serves his turn with them, as with grinnes
and nets to entangle men, to make them fall into many foolish desires, which
lead them to destruction, yea and sometimes make them swerue from the faith,
and become Apostates, as we see many now a days, who being reprehended for
that they are revolted and gone out of the Church, have none other answer to
excuse themselves and to color their Apostasy withal, but that they will
not loose their goods, having rather to perish utterly in keeping them a little
while, then be saved for ever in forgoing them. Wherein they show that they
are far from following the counsel of Jesus Christ, and from being any of
his disciples, whom he counseled that if their hand or foot offended them
they should by and by cut them Mat. 19
off and cast the^ from them, for it is better to go into the kingdom of
heaven halt and maimed, then having two hands and two legs to be sent into
everlasting fire: and likewise the eye is a part of the body which we account
dearest, if it make us offend, we must pluck it out, and cast it away: for it
is better to be blind, and to enter into life with one eye, then having two to
be cast into hell fire. What should we then do with these temporal goods,
when we perceive that by them we are withdrawn and holden back from
following Jesus Christ courageously? Is it not more expedient and safer for us
to break through these snares, which hold us so fast, and to escape away,
then to tarry, and being taken, to fall in to the hands of Fouler? Crates the
Thebaile perceiving that the goods he did possess did withdraw his mind from
the study of Philosophy, and that the care that he had to look after them,
would not suffer him to have any leisure or liberty at all in spirit, took
them and cast them into the sea: saying merrily, he had rather they should be
drowned, then that they should drowned him. And if a poor Pagan had done this
for a desire he had to attain the knowledge of moral virtues and
Philosophy, that he might order and govern the state of his life well: what
should we do that are Christians, instructed by the word and spirit of God,
who have the promises, and certain and assured hope of life everlasting, and
of the kingdom of heaven, whereof we do not doubt to have the full sruition
at the last. Let us leave then the goods of this world to worldlings, and to
those that have no other hope, nor other Paradise but in this world. If we have
any goods let us possess them as though we had none at all, and let us take
but as much as will serve our turn, that is to say: for our food and
clothing. That which Jesus Christ taught his disciples in the form of prayer
that he gave unto his disciples, where he teaches them to demand nothing
but their daily bread. Condemning thereby all delicacies, excesses,
licorousnes, wantonness, sumptuousness, riot, and all other vain superffuities
of this world: for the world as it is corrupted and excessive in all things,
does not think it self rich but in superfluous things only: but the children
of God must be contented with things needful for the body, and must think
themselves rich when they have but crustes of Barley bread, or a few little
fishes roasted, as our savior Jesus Christ and his disciples had: or a little
cake baked in the cynders, as Elias had: or Locusts as John Baptist had, to
nourish himself withal, and to cloth himself with a rugge coat made of
Cammelles hair. In any case they must possess riches, and must not suffer
themselves to be possessed by them. They must rule over them, and not be in
subjection to them. To conclude, whether God give them any, or whether he take
them away, they must be as ready to leave them, and to bless and praise the
name of God as well for the one as for the other, as that good man Job did. The
third concupiscence that is in the world, and is the most dangerous of all, is
the concupiscence of the flesh, which Solomon sets down at length in the
book of the Preacher, to show y^ it is most usual, and the very spring from
whence all other vanities do flow. For there are few men in the world or none
at all, who seek not the pleasure and contentment of the flesh. Some delight
in building sumptuous houses to continue their names for ever, as the Psalm. 49.
Prophet David says: They think their houses and habitations shall continue
for ever, even from generation to generation, and call their lands by their
names. But man shall not continue in honor, he is like the beasts that die.
Some take great pleasure in having goodly gardens, orchards, closes, and fine
smooth allies bordered round about with roses and sweet flowers, to have
shadow and fresh air in the Summer. Some in clothing themselves gorgeously,
and others do spend almost all the day in combing and curling their hair,
in beholding their faces in glasses, in setting their ruffes, in perfuming
themselves: many delyght to have their houses furnished with rich and
sumptuous household stuff, to adorn their halles and parlers with goodly
hanginges of Tapistrie, with fair painted Tables, with costly seelings of
beds, with exquisite couertures, with chains of gold, and the richest
imbrodery that they may find, with bedsteads of Iuorie, and abundance of silver
and gold plate. Others would have their tables covered with the rarest and
most dainety dishes that might be gotten for money, and the finest robes that
might be come by, to dress and season their meat. Some delight to pass their
time in good company, to laugh and be merry, to dance, to leap, and to do
the things which are not decent to be written or named. And what is all this
but the marks, monuments, and trophies of the excess, dissolution and vanity
of Christians. And we may say of these, as it was said of the golden image
that Phryne a famous strumpet in Athens, caused to be erected in the midst of
the City, with this goodly superscription, Here are the triumphs and spoils
of the dissolute, infamous, and lascivious Greeks. That was done then, but in
one only City of Greece to tax the licentious living of the Citizens. But at
this present day amongst us Christians, there is no house in the Cities, no
village in the Country, where we may not behold the armouries of the world,
and of this unclean spirit who is Prince thereof set up, even upon the
blessed Sabbath day, which God has reserved to him self, that in the same
all the world should think upon nothing else, but sanctifieng and blessing
his holy name. But GOD knows, of the seven days in the week, there is none
so much profaned and blasphemed, as the Sabbath day, which now seems to be
made for to invent pastime for the devil, for the lusts of our flesh, dancing,
feasting, and such other disportes as the flesh and the devil desire. Who can
then with any reason be sorry for these pleasures when they take their leave of
us, the which bring nothing with them but shame and dishonor, spoil and loss
of goods, thousands of diseases both to the soul and body, ruins and
desolation of whole famylies, Countries and Kingdoms, contempt of virtue and
all honesty, hatred of God and all true religion, both which these swines have
such in horror, y^ by their good will they would never hear any talk of God
or religion. They do not only make us dull blockish and effeminate, but also
make us like to brute beasts, and bring us oftentimes to our destruction. Let
us then take heed not to be seduced by their flattery and fair face. Their
beauty* that is apparent outwardly, is alluring and deceives them, who takes
not heed of the poison that lies secretly hid underneath. As the silly bird
and fish are caught with the hook, enticed unto it, and deceived by a bait
which covers the same. Let us then take heed unto them behind and not
before, as Aristotle most wisely does admonish us: for as pleasures before
seem as fair as Sirens, but if you look behind them, they draw after them
a long tail of an ugly serpent, the very sight whereof would make a man
afeard. Is any man able to count the floudes of mischiefs and miseries that
are arrived unto us, by that little pleasure that our first parents had in
eating the forbidden fruit? What was the cause that God who is so patient and
so slow to anger, sent that great deluge of waters, by the which he defaced
every living soul from the face of the earth, reserving alive but only Noe
and his family, and the living things that he took with him into the Arc?
Were not the filthy fornications that did reign at that time among men, who
took all women and maids which pleased the^, to use them, neglecting the order
and honesty which God had commanded, in instituting the holy Sacrament of
marriage in the beginning of the world, the occasion of that so horrible and
fearful judgment of God? What was the cause semblably of the subversion and
utter overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha, but their infamous abominations and
filthy pleasures* that they took in banqueting and all kind of excess?
Wherefore was God so angry with his people in the wilderness, where at once
he made three and twenty thousand die, and a great number beside, but because
of the filthy abominations that they committed with the Mad^anites? And the
Quails that they had to satisfy their gluttish appetite, whereof God would
eternize the memory, commanding the place where they had lived so delicatly to
be called The sepulcher of Concupiscence. What fell out afterward in the house
and City of Hemor, because his son Sichem had ravished Dina, the only
daughter of Jacob? And in the house of David, for having entised to wickedness
the wife of his se^uant Vrias? And in that of Solomon his son, who was so
wise, and had received such honor and favor of glory, riches and puissance,
and at the end of all this so many excellent and goodly promises of God, that
by good right he might be called a pearl far exceeding all other Kings and
princes of the earth? And yet for all that, the voluptuous pleasures of this
world handled him so, that they took clean away his understanding even in
old age, when he should have had the staiedst wisdom and setledst judgment
of all, and made him not only to forget God and his bounden duty toward him,
but also to sacrifice to Idols, as a man clean berefte of his wits, only to
please his wicked concubines, who were strangers, with whom he acquainted
himself against the express commandment of God, whereupon a thousand
plagues fell upon his house and his posterity. The house of Ahab, was it not
utterly subverted because of the great abhominatio^s that did reign in it?
What was the cause of those lamentable Tragedies written of the ruin and
desolation happened to the house of Priamus, a King renowned for his riches,
treasure, greatness, pomp and wealth amongst the greatest and most ^mightie
monarkes of all Asia, was it not the foolish love of Paris and Helen? Did not
the like fall out in the Court of great Agamemnon, after he was returned
conqueror of his enemies from Troy, so famous and rich with the spoils, that
he got thereby the impudence and unchaste behavior of his wife Clytemnestra and
her adulterer Aegysthus. The spoils that were done in the Province of Ionium
in Cyrus time, and all the miseries and distresses that ouerflowed all that
Country, which was the most pleasant and fruitfullest territory in all Asia,
(as Herodotus recites) were occasioned in the same manner. But what is he
that can reckon up all the mischiefs and inconveniences that this cursed
fleshly concupiscence has already bred, and does breed daily? Well did
Plato term it a bait of al mischiefs and enormities. And the Emperor
Aerianus did portraite it out properly, comparing it to a pill that his gilden
on the out side, to swallowe it down with more ease: but when we come to
digest it, then we feel the bitterness thereof, and this is the difference
between them, that the pills do purge and void the infections and gross
humors which are in the body, to recover health: but the pleasures on the
other side increase and procure them, and do corrupt altogether the good
disposition both of the body and the soul. When we are debarred from these
pleasures, and have the use of them no more, by reason of death, diseases.
penury, old age, or by any other means, we should rejoice as much as if we
were escaped out of the hands of some cruel and outrageous tyrant. For there
can be no tyranny more cruel then that of these voluptuous pleasures (as
Cicero faith) for that the one can but hurt our bodies and goods, the other
does rack and torment our souls and consciences in a strange manner.
Whosoever then does desire a freedom and quiet of conscience to possess his
soul in tranquillity without any disturbance or trouble of mind, which is
the most sovereign good that is in this world may be sought or found, he must
bid adieu to all worldly pleasures, and be glad with all his heart when they
take their leave for altogether, as they do at the house of death. These
things must we set before the eyes of the sick, who shall feel themselves
tied fast by the leg to their ease and the vain and deceitful pleasures of
this world. And again, we must show them the pleasures that tarry for them
prepared in the kingdom of heaven, which are so great, that the very sent and
taste that the Apostles and Martyrs felt, have made them straight forget this
world with all her vain delights, before they ever departed from her out of
this life. How great a joy shall it be then to us when we shall drink our
fill of the river of these pleasures? When we shall see plainly the face of our
God and savior Jesus Christ, when we shall sit at his table with the
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? When we shall hear the melodious
music of Angels singing continually, To the holy, holy, holy, great God of
hosts be all praise, glory and honor for ^euer? God shall wipe the tears
from the ^ies of his children, and then bring them into full fruition of his
joys and rest? when he shall make them sit near unto him upon seats, that
long since he caused to be built and prepared for them, to be judges
altogether of the world and the devils. And lastly, when in stead of the Sun
and Moon he shall make a perpetual light shine over them comforting them for
ever. This pleasure shall be (as Jesus Christ said) no momentarie thing, but
a pleasure and joy that lasts for ever, and not as the pleasures of this
world which fade away in time, and loose quickly their savor, be they never
so great and dainty at their beginning. This we see in many men daily by
experience, who covet and desire many things eagerly and very vehemently,
which when they have once obtained, and have had their pleasure a little while,
then this great heat begins a little and little to quench and diminish, and
in the end is altogether extinguished. And so it falls out oftentimes with us,
when we have had our pleasure oftentimes of that which we have with so great
affection desired, we disdain it afterward, and repent with great displesure
with our selves, whereof we have in the Scripture a notable example in Amno^
the son of David, and his sister Thamar. 2. Sam. 13.
But the true pleasures that the blessed souls enjoy in the kingdom of heaven
are of another nature. For in satisfieng us, they leave us always in appetite,
and in filling us, they leave us always hungry: they quench our thirst, and
yet we are always thirsty: so that in contenting and satisfying all our
appetites, they leave us still desirous to abide in the same estate always, so
that we are never a weary thereof. These are then the true plesures which we
ought always to desire and seek after, and not the pleasures of the world
which are al^ but scuruie things. For as those which are full of the itch,
whilst they are scratched have some pleasure, and feel some ease, which
lasts but a little, whilst they are in scratching, and by and by upon it
there follows a pain which vexes them grievously: so the voluptuous men have
never no pleasure but it is mixed with a thousand griefs and sorrows. And
their pleasure is much like that which they feel who are tickled, which has a
certain vexation and fear which makes them forget it and hate it by and by.
There is yet one grief more which may much torment the sick person, whereof
he may be eased: that is, he fears to be separated by death from the
company of his wife and children. The consolation that must be given him, and
the remedy that must be used for this, is to allege unto him the promises
that God makes to widows, that he takes them into his own protection, and
promises the^ to have especial care over them, to defend and uphold them
against those that would oppress them, and to take a fearful vengeance upon
those y^ should offer any outrageous injuries toward them. Likewise we must
allege unto the^ although that their wives be forsaken of their mortal
husband, whom they have espoused in this world: yet they have another husband
in another world who is immortal, who is Jesus Christ, that shall never abandon
them no more then all the rest of the faithful that remit themselves to him, and
rely wholly upon him, who being so good a Tutor as he is, they being left unto
his protection can want nothing. Then must we show him, that going out of this
world, it is as if he and his wife should undertake a voyage together, wherein
the one should go before, and the other follow soon after. And lastly, as in
y^ beginning of their marriage, he was not sorrowful to leave Father and
mother, to join himself to his wife: so now he should not be more sorrowful
to leave his wife to go to God, who should be more dear unto us, then either
fathers, mothers, wives, children, or any other thing. And as for his
children, he must think upon the promise that God made unto him and them,
that he has sealed and confirmed the same in the Baptism of the one and the
other: that is to say, that he will be their God and the God of their
posterity. And that must assure him, that the graces and favors that God has
bestowed upon him, shall be continued unto his posterity, as he does promise
expressly in Exodus, that he will show mercy and compassion unto thousand
generations, to them that love and fear him, and shall be careful to keep
his commandments. What then can be wanting unto those children, who being
imitators of the faith and piety of their parents, are assured by the promise
of God to be always environed and guarded by his grace and bounty, which grace
is the fountain from which all prosperity and blessings do flow unto us?
Moses Deuteronomy. 9.
says, that man does not live by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of Gods mouth. Which is not to be understood of food only,
but of all rhinges necessary to man's life. The fathers that leave this word to
their children, should not be careful of their finding and clothing, or
maintenance for them. For they are certain by the word of God, that in
seeking his kingdom and the righteousness thereof, they shall have all things
that are necessary for this present life. For being their shepherd, as he
was of their fathers, how can he forget them, or let slip the care that he has
of his sheep? David speaking of the providence of God, and exhorting every
man to rely and trust upon it, Psalm. 2^
as he did, says: The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want any thing. And
in another place where he compares the state of the wicked with the godly, he
speaks thus of the godly: The upright men shall not be confounded in the
perilous time, and in the days of famine they shall have enough. But the wicked
shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be consumed as the fat of la^bs,
even as the smoke shall they consume away. He goes* further. The wicked
borrows and paieth not again, but the righteous is merciful and lends.
For such as be blessed of God shall inherit the land, and they that be cursed
of him shall be cut off. And a little after. I have been young and am old, yet
I saw never the righteous forsaken, or his seed begging bread, but he is ever
merciful and lends, and his seed inioyeth the blessing for eue^. Let then
the sickman leave his children to the safeguard and protection of God. For he
cannot procure them a better or more faithful guardian. He need not stand in
fear of them, so they contayn themselves within his obedience, and walk in
his fear, uprightly in all singlenes and simplicity of heart. Hitherto have
we spoken of those things which we must set down unto the sick patient, as
well to instruct him, as to comfort and exhort him to do his endeavor: and
also of the means that he must use to fortify himself against the
temptations by the which he may be assailed in time of sickness. It rests
now that we make a recapitulation of all this discourse, that the Reader may
comprehend and note briefly the sum of all that we have spoken in this
Treatise, and so use it to the comfort of the sick, as he shall find it most
expedient.

Solomon says, It is better to go in to the house of mourning, then into
^ccle. 7
the house of feasting, because this is the end of all men, and the living
shall lay it to his heart. Teaching us thereby, y^ the chifest study and
exercise y^ a man should use in this life, is to meditate of the srailenes,
misery, shortness, inconstancy and uncertainty of the same, always setting
our end before our eyes, that is, death, which is ready at every stride that we
take, to tread on our heels, and never makes us privy neither hour nor day,
when he comes to call us like a door keeper before our judge, to give account
unto him of y^ whole cour^e of our life. It is very good then for us to have it
always in memory, that we may gird up our loins, and keep our lamps
always burning in our hands, least we be surprised by the quick coming of
our spouse unlooked for. But let us be ready to receive him when he comes,
and go with him into his rest. But forasmuch as the love of this life, the
sweetness and pleasures of this world do cast us in a sleep oftentimes, and
distract our minds from remembrance of these things, to awake our selves, we
cannot do better, then to frequent the houses of those that are visited by the
hand of God, and the hospitalls and houses of God, not only to see and behold
on every side the examples and images of the corruption and mortality of our
poor nature, to this end, that we may humble our selves, and contain our
selves within the bounds of modesty: but also to put our charity in ure in
comforting and making strong the poor languishing and afflicted members of
Jesus Christ.

First, then we must show them that all our diseases come from God, who sends
them, sometimes to correct us and bring us back from our wickedness, sometime to
prove and make trial of our virtue. Giving us by this means matter and
argument to make demonstration of the faith and trust that we have in him, to
crave his mercies by our earnest prayers and sorrowful sighings, to
acknowledge and confess our faults and offenses by our grief and
displeasure. And to bring the sick person so far, to cause him to make an
humble and true confession of his sins, we must first set before his eyes
what is the spring and principal cause of all diseases, as well corporal as
spiritual, and how that to heal them up, he must take away the causes that
enge^der them: that is to say, our sins, from the which we cannot otherwise
be delivered, but by the remission and pardon that God does give us through
his grace, so that as S. 1. John. 3*
John says, we do confess them unto him, and be assured, that Jesus Christ
is our advocate and propitiation to Godward, by means of his justice, by the
which he does hide and deface them, so that they shall not be laid to our
charge at the day of judgment.

And for that the love which by nature we bear unto our selves, does so
blind us, that we cannot see, or think our selves to be so vicious and corrupt
as we are, we must pull away this veil from before the sick man's eyes,
setting before him the law of God, wherein as in a glass he may view and
behold all the course of his life, to make him know, that by the same, not
only all our actions, but also all our nature is condemned to be abominable,
naught and vicious.

For proof and confirmation hereof, we must allege unto him in general,
that we are conceived in sin, that we are all borne the children of wrath, that
we are but flesh and vanity, that we are sold under sin, that in us there
dwells no good thing, that our righteousness is like old rags, and filthy
clothes. And to conclude, that we are altogether nothing but dust and
rottenness. Then must we discourse unto him all the commandments of God, and
show him particularly, that when he would examine himself thoroughly, he should
find none of them, but he has oftentinms transgressed, and beginning with
those of the first table, to call to his mind.

1 That he has not done his best endeavor, to inquire after God, and to seek
to know him.

That he has not loved him with all his heart, with all his strength, and with
all his soul.

That he has not always put his trust in him.

That he has oftentimes doubted of his promises, and mistrusted his aid and
succor.

That he has trusted to the strength of the flesh, and such means that men
might provide, rather then to the succor and aid of God.

That he has not looked for all his prosperity and increase, from the only
favor and blessing of God.

That he has not always called upon him in all his actions, with full
assurance and hope to be heard and helped of him.

That he has not always dreaded and reverenced him, as appertains to his
high and sovereign majesty.

That he has not thanked him, and blessed his holy name, for all things at all
times, and as well for his adversities as prosperities.

2 Then next, that thinking upon GOD, he has imagined him to be under some
humane and bodily shape.

That he has not conceived him to be a spirit incomprehensible, infinite,
invisible, immortal, impassible, immutable, sovereign in power, in bounty,
mercy, justice and verity, as an example and myrrour of all virtue and
perfection, the spring of all life and light, the fountain and fulness of all
goodness, the heap of all happiness and blessedness, the beginning and end of all
things, who is all in all, and by his only word does cause all creatures to
breed and subsist.

That he has not served and worshipped him in spirit and truth, as he
requires of us, and commands us in his law.

That he has been more curious of ceremonies and exterior shows of piety,
then of pity it self, and rather to seem a good Christian, then to be one in
deed.

And lastly, that he has not always thought in his mind, that the true and
lawful service of God does consist in the only obedience of his will,

That speaking of the name of God, it has not been with such respect and
reverence of his majesty as is meet.

That he has never studied and given his mind to sanctify and glorify his
holy name as he ought.

That by wicked life and conversation he has been cause that the ignorant and
infidels have blasphemed his name.

That he has not heard, read, and meditated the word of God with such
attentiveness, desire, fear and zeal as is requisite to honor the Lord
which speaks by it, and the name of him of whom it is announced.

That he has not always spoken of the works of God, nor acknowledged in
them the greatness of his power, wisdom and bounty, with such praise and
admiration as they deserve for their abundance and magnificence.

That being at the table of the Lord, every time that the holy Supper has
been celebrated, he has not used such humility, devotion and contemplation
of the holy mystery, nor has not lifted up his heart on high t^ heaven, where
Jesus Christ sits on the right hand of God the father, as he should do.

That in the days ordained to abstain and rest from profane and bodili^
works, to apply our selves wholly to the sanctifieng of his holy name, he has
not given himself at al to the meditation and exercise of spiritual things,
thinking upon and seeking nothing else but only those things which are from
above.

That he has been oftentimes more careful for his worldly affairs, then to
seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, preferring by this
means this transitory and corruptible life, before the eternal and blessed
life: the care of this body, before that which he ought to have of his soul:
the service of the world and his flesh, before that wherewith he ought to
honor God above all things.

That upon small and light occasions he has absented himself from the place
of Conuocations and public assemblies, there to make public confession and
protestation of his faith, to show his devotion and the fear of God that is
in him, to edify the congregation by his good ensample, and to make known to
every man without any shame, fear, dissimulation and hypocrisy, the religion
that he will follow and keep, resolving to live and die in the same.

That he has not labored to instruct and catechize his wife, his children,
his servants, and all his family, as a good Christian ought to do, calling
them morning and evening to Prayers, exhorting them to read and meditate the
word of God, to sing Psalms, hymns and spiritual songs in his praise, and
to confer among themselves of holy and godly things, and never to mind any
thing more then that which may advance and increase daily the knowledge and
fear of Almighty GOD among them.

That after these spiritual exercises to the which he ought chiefly addict^
himself on the Sabbath day, as to hear Sermons and Exhortations with fear
and reverence, to be assistaunt in all humility at the confessions, prayers
and thankesgiuings that are made to GOD for all the assembly, he has not
employed the rest of the time to visit prisoners, to comfort the sick, to
inquire after the poor, and help to relieve their necessity.

Then when we have briefly discoursed unto the sick person the faults that
he may have committed against the commandments which are in the first
Table, we must go unto the second, and do also in the like manner.

5 First, that he has not yielded such honor and reverence unto his
superiors, nor showed his obedience so dutifully and readily: nor lastly, had
so great fear to offend, as God does command in his law. And if at any time
he has performed his duty toward them, then it has been rather slightly,
and more for fear of punishment if he should have neglected it, then for any
respect that he bare them in conscience, or desire that he had otherwise to
obey unto God therein.

That he has not always prayed so duly unto God for their health and
prosperity to direct them by his holy spirit in all their counsels, and give
them grace so to order themselves in all their actions, by his holy word, and
generally to bless and guide them in all their ways, as he is bound by the
express commandment of God.

That he has not spoken of them at all times reverently, as his duty is: and
if in his presence some have spoken evil of them, he has held his tongue, and
answered nothing for them at all.

That he has not thought so reverently of his Pastors, who have had charge of
his soul, to give unto it the spiritual food, that he has always respecte^
their authority, hearkened to their voice, taken their good lessons, obeyed
unto the true doctrine that they preached, and bended his neck willingly under
the sweet yoke of Jesus Christ, that they have laid upon him in his name.

6 That he has not loved his neighbors as himself, desiring and procuring
their good as well as his own.

That he has hated them, when he thought to receive some damage or injury
by them, desiring their death and some ill hap to befall them.

That he has desired and sought means to be revenged of his enemies, little
regarding how God has forbidden it, reserving unto himself the appeal and
vengeance of all injuries done unto him, his children and servants.

That he has not taken pity of the poor, nor done what he could to help
with his goods to nourish, cloth, and harbor them, and to aid them with
necessary things for their comfort and solace in their miseryes and
calamities, wherewith they are compassed in round about.

That he has not resisted the wicked and ungodly which did oppress them, and
employed all his power and means that he could make, to defend them from the
violence and outrage that is offered them.

That he has not rejoiced at the prosperity of his neighbors, but has bin
icalous and envious of their felicity: when he has seen God has blessed
them, and preferred them in any higher degree then himself.

7 That he has not kept and possessed his vessel: that is to say, his
body, in honor and holiness, as he ought to do, nor considered that it was
the temple, the which God by his holy spirit had consecrated unto himself,
and that he ought for this regard to keep it from al filthiness and pollution.

That he has not kept his eyes from wanton looking so carefully as he
ought: but in stead of curning them aside, to avoid such sightes, he has let
them gaze and run after their own lusts and wantonness.

That he has not so chas^ned and brought his flesh under, as he ought, to make
it obedient to the Spirit in all things.

That he has fed himself to dainty, and has not always used such
sobriety and abstinence, as is requisite to repress his passion, and to
quench the heat of his concupiscence.

That by devises, letters, presents, laughters, lookings, dauncings, iesture,
and immodest moving of the body, he has made attempt to defile the chastity
of his neighbors wife, daughter, or maid servant.

That in his fashion of apparelling himself, he has sought rather to trim
up the outward man, thinking thereby to please the world, then by a modest
show and behavior of himself in his manners and apparel, to edify the
Church of God.

That he has not been carfull enough to keep the chastity of his ears and
tongue, neither to speak or hear any dissolute or dishonest purpose.

8 That he has coueted to enrich him self siby nister means.

That in the trafique and affairs that he has had with his neighbors, he
has not always used that upright dealing, justice, sincerity and equity,
that God commands, according to the rule of humane society, that God will
have kept and observed amongst all men.

That he has been ready in time of dearth and famine to enhance the price of
his wares and merchandise, and so to make his own profit by the public
miseries and calamities of many.

That he has reserved and locked up in his coffers, caves and garners the
surplus of his goods, that God has given him for the maintenance of himself
and his family, being due unto the poor, robbing and defrauding thereby those
unto whom it did of right appertain.

That not considering at all that godliness with a contented mind (as the
Apostle says) is great riches, and therefore it should suffice us to have our
clothing and food, and that only which is needful for our bodies, he has
not thought himself to be rich, if besides this he have not many superfluous
things.

That he has not been liberal, nor ready to give of his goods to whosoever
should ask him, considering and believing that it is a more blessed thing to
give then to take.

That he has not paid his work men every day their wages, but has made
them stay till the morrow.

9 That he has not loved the truth in word and deed, doing nothing foolishly
and unadvisedly, but showing a gravity and sincerity in all his affairs,
customs and countenances, which should be worthy a man of truth and
sincerity.

That in him there has been false shows and disguising, to exalte and
magnify his virtues, or else to hide and excuse his vices by some counterfaite
colors.

That he has not been so constant to confess and defend the truth against
the blasphemers and enemies of the same, nor so valiant to fight against those
that by lies and errors seek to impugn the same, as he ought to be.

That upon envy and malice he has gone about to backbite and speak evil
of his neighbors, falsely condemning them in their actions, that are not
blameworthy, seeking by false accusations to obsure the glory of their
virtues.

That he has delighted to hear flattering tongues that do nothing but gloss
with him, and make him believe that he was more virtuous and less vicious,
then his own conscience could witness and accuse him in secret.

10 Lastly, to shut up his confession, we must show him that all his nature, as
also that of all other men that live here on the earth, is most vile, vicious
and corrupt, and that of himself he can bring forth but bad fruit, as a bad
tree does: that is to say, all wicked thoughts, all inordinate affectiens, all
filthy and dishonest talk, and all things contrary to the will of God:
leaving undone all that is conformable to his will, and expressly commanded by
him.

Then when we have showed unto him in this manner his faults, to make him have
a better feeling of them, and to conceive in himself a greater displeasure and
sorrow for them, we must aggrauate them unto him by the circumstances of place,
time, and person, where he has committed them.

And then by feeling them, if we perceive him to be humble and contrite, we
must lift him up again, and comfort him, in denouncing unto him the remission
and pardon of his sins, and to assure him of it in the mercy of God.

Then must we discourse unto him the reasons contained in this treatise, to
take away the fear that he may have conceived of death, the devil, the
judgment of God, and lastly the sorrow that he may have to forgo and leave
this world, and the things that are therein, in lieu of the hope and desire
that he ought to have of those heavenly and incorruptible blessings. This done,
we must kneel down our his knees, and pray unto God for him and all the
assembly in this manner.

A Prayer.
O God the Father of all consolation, who have promised to hear all those that
call upon thee in sincerity and truth, and to reject none that comes to
prostrate himself before thy Majesty with a sighing soul and sorrowful
heart, humble, contrite, and repentant, with the remembrance and feeling of his
most grievous sins, we beseech thee altogether in the name of thy son
Jesus Christ our savior and redeemer, that it will please thee to extend thy
mercy upon us all that are here assembled together, and specially upon this
our brother, whom it has pleased thee to afflict and visit by sickness, and
by the same to cover, forget and forgive, and clean to blot out all his sins
by the which he has so grievously offended in all his life. Beseeching thee
that (...) would please thee of thy great grace and favor, to seal and
confirm in his heart by the holy spirit, the forgiveness that thou do grant
unto him by the promise, of all his sins, That he may feel in his
conscience, and that with joy and full assurance he may make himself ready
to appear before thee, when it shall please thee to call him out of this
world: assuring him that there is no condemnation, neither for him, neither for
all those which by true faith are united and incorporate in thy son Jesus
Christ. That not his sins, death and the devil, nor any other creature
whatsoever shall be able to separate him from thy love, or cast him out of thy
favor and grace, and that thy throne is not a throne of rigorous justice, but
an haven of health, a throne of mercy, a sanctuary, and a place of liberty
and freedom for all the faithful. Good God strengthen and increase his faith
herein, so that he may cover him self as with a sheeld, and be by this means
made strong and invincible against all temptations, wherewith he may be
assailed, and that rejecting all other confidence, he rely upon nothing but
the sole righteousness, obedience and sacrifice of thine only son, to assure
him against the day of thy judgment. And now we heseech thee good God, to
give him grace to pardon and forgive from the bottom of his heart all his
neighbors, who have by any wise offended him: to the end that he being
united by true charity with all the members of the body of thy Church, may
also be knit and joined with thee who art the head thereof. Lastly, we beseech
thee that it would please thee to give us also grace so well to look into the
person and disease of this our brother, that seeing how short and uncertain
the course of our life is, we may think betime of our own selves, and
retiring our minds from the vanities of this world, we may bestow that
little time that we have to live here in learning the wisdom of God, that is,
to believe firmly, and to trust in his promises, to show our obedience in all
things that he does command, and to take diligent heed to fly and avoid all
things, that he defends us in his holy word.

FINIS.
A SHORT CONsolation for the sick, taken forth of the holy Scriptures.
Whosoever is of God, John. (...) Mat. 7 Heb. 1 Esa. 40 Romans 5.
hears Gods word, and does not only hear it, but keeps and follows it
also: for all things shall have an end and wax old as does a garment, but the
word of God abides for ever. Now seeing it is so, that by a man sin is come
into the world, and by sin death, and thereupon by consequent Romans 7
all afflictions and adversities do depend: very well may the life of man be
termed a continual fight here upon earth, where the flesh does fight against
the spirit, and the spirit against the world, the flesh and the devil, who
are the deadly enemies of our souls. But following the counsel of the Apostle,
to get the victory in the spiritual battle, we must resist and strive
against them constantly by faith. 1. Pet. 5. 1. John. 5. Heb. 11.
For the victory which overcomes the world, is our faith, the which is an
assured knowledge of the love of God toward us, by the which he declares in
his Gospel to be our Father and savior, by the means of Jesus Christ his
son. Having then such a firm faith for our prinicpall foundation,
acknowledge and confess your self before the majesty of God, to be a poor
and miserable sinner, conceived Psalm. 51. Luke 17.
and borne in sin and corruption, ready and apt to do evil, unready and
unapt to do any good, and that by your vice and sin you have transgressed
without measure the holy commandementes of God, so that you have purchased by
his just judgment utter ruin and perdition upon you. Yet you have great
sorrow in your self to have offended him so grievously, condemning your self
and your vices with true repentance, desiring that the grace of God would
succor you in this your great calamity. Pray you then with a firm faith, if
you cannot with your mouth, yet from your heart: That God our most merciful
Father, would Psalm. 51. Psalm. 142.
not enter into count or judgment with you, but that he would take some
pity on you, in the name of his son Jesus Christ our Lord, and that he
would blot out our sins and stains by the merit of the death and passion
of the same Jesus Christ, in whose name you present unto him this holy prayer
the which he taught us, saying from the bottom of your heart:

Our Father which art in heaven, etc. Mat. 6.
Then do acknowledge from the bottom of your heart your unrighteousness, be
sorrowful for your sins, repent your self unfeignedly, and the kingdom of
God Mat. 3 Tit. 3
will draw^ nigh unto you. Confess that there is no righteousness, no
innocence, no good works, neither of yours, nor in you: but that as the
child of wrath, conceived Ephe. 2. Psalm. 51. Romans 8
and borne in the sin of old Adam, you merit eternal death and damnation.
And yet all the sins in the world, when you shall have committed them all,
are not able to make you afeard. For Jesus Christ the very son of the eternal
God, became very man, conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Marie,
to sanctify you Romans 2 Luke 1. Math. 1. Phil. 2. Act. 3 Mat. 27
and make you clean from sin. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, many
afflictions and injurious torments, making him self a slave and a captive to
set you out of captivity. Jesus Christ was crucified, as one accursed, upon the
tree of the cross, to deliver you from the eternal curse. Jesus Christ was
dead and shed his precious blood to wash you, to redeem you, and to deliver
you from death, hell, and the power of Satan. Jesus Christ was buried in the
grave, to bury all your sins with Esa. 53. Apoc. 1 Heb. 29. 1. Pet. 1 Romans 6
Act. 2. 1. Pet. 2 Mar. 16 1. Cor. 15 Act. 1 Col. 3 1. Ioh. 2. Heb. 7. Mat. 25
Psa. 61 Romans 8.
him, the which he has borne and blotted out. Jesus Christ descended into
hell, in suffering an extreme anguish to deliver you from all the pains and
dolours of death. Jesus Christ is risen up again from the dead to make you rise
again in your own bodies resplendent with glorious immortality. Jesus Christ
is ascended up into the heavens, that after him you should ascend also. Jesus
Christ sits at y^ right hand of God the father almighty, being your
advocate and mediator to him and the propitiation for all your sins. We look
that he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, to reward every man
according to his works. But to the faithful that believe in him he shall not
impute their sins, for having justified them by his grace, he shall make them
reign with him for ever in his heavenly throne.

N. Such is the great mystery of our Mat. 25
redemption, the which by the grace of the holy Ghost you ought firmly believe
to have been wrought for your salvation. Doubt not then at al, but by the
merit of Ephesians. 1
Jesus Christ, the head of his Church, you are incorporate and engrafted a
member into the same, thanking him in all humility, that it has pleased him
of his great grace, that you have lived in the communion and fellowship of his
faithful people, nourishing you with his word, and with Mat. 4 1. Cor. 11
his body and blood, confessing assuredly the great mercy of God by the
forgiveness of all your sins, the which he has vouchsafed you thorough
Jesus Romans 5. 1. Cor. 15
Christ, who shall raise you up again at the last day, to make you reign
with him in life everlasting, the which he has promised to all those that
believe in him, being baptized in his name. Mark. 16


Now N. seeing that you have this faith, doubt not but to receive the promise
of faith: for God is true of his promise, he is no liar, as men are. First
heaven and earth shall pass, but the word of God abides Romans 3 Math. 24. Esa.
40 Genesis 1 1. Tim. 12 Math. 9 1. Tim. 2. Math. 9. Mark. 2 Luke 5 Tit. 3 1. Tim.
1. Act. 4 Apoc. ^
for ever. God he is your father and creator, you are his creature and the
workmanship of his hands. He has not made you to destroy you. For he is the
savior of all men, and will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn
from his wickedness and live. Wherefore I announce unto you in the name of God,
that by his great bounty and mercy he does freely give unto you full pardon
and remission of all your sins, by the only merit of his son Jesus
Christ our savior, in the shedding of his most precious blood, for it is the
propitiation not only for our sins, but also for the sins of the whole 1.
John. 2
world.

N. Jesus Christ says by his own mouth, that all things are possible to him
that believes. Believe then without all Math. 17 Romans 8.
doubt, that Jesus Christ inuesting our flesh is become very man, and died for
us, having borne all our sins in his own body, to wipe them out and deface
them. Present unto God the precious death of Phil. 2. 1. Pet. 2
his son Jesus Christ, and by the merit of the same death and passion ask
him mercy and forgiveness, saying with great humility and repentance from the
bottom of your heart.

Lord God Father almighty have Romans 3. John. 14
mercy upon me a pore miserable sinner, for the love of thy dear son Jesus
Math. 26 Psalm. 30.
Christ my Lord and Savior: and by the merit of his death and passion please
to receive my soul, the which I commend into thy hands.

N. You must have a firm belief and Romans 8
trust in God. For if he be on your side, who can be against you: for Jesus
Christ who is the immaculate lamb, has overcome all for you. He has offered
himself Esa. 61. Heb. 7. and 9
once for all, and by that one oblation has defaced all our sins. He has
raced out our folly and unrighteousness, abomination and the obligation that
the devil had against you, and with this good Lord and master Jesus Christ God
the father has given you all things.

N. Fortify your self then in Jesus Christ, who calls and inuiteth you by
his Proohets, Apostles, and Evangelists, Romans 8
to come freely unto him, saylng: All you that thirst come to me and drink
your Esa. 55 Mat. 11.
fill. Come io me all ye that travail and be heavy laden, and I will
refreshe you.

N. Believe assuredly that Jesus Christ 1. Ioh. 5
has acquitted and discharged you from all your sins, and has reconciled you
to God his Father, unto whom with great humility and repentance say from the
bottom of your heart. Romans 3. John. 14. Math. 26 Psalm. 30


Lord God Father almighty have mercy upon me a pore miserable sinner, for the
love of thy dear son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior: and by the meri^e
of his death and passion please to receive my soul, the which I commend into
thy hands.

N. Have then a good hope, for certainly he will receive your soul as his
own, for the love of his son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the Savior
Mar. 16. Deuteronomy. 8 Psalm. 2
and redeemer of all those that believe in him. Moses and all the prophets have
witnesses, that all Nations shall receive salvation and blessing from Esa. 55
Genesis 3. 2^ Math. 9 John. 10
Jesus Christ. The Apostles and Evangelists witness, that Jesus Christ is
not come to call the just, but sinners to repentance, and to give his life for
the redemption of many, for he has shed his blood for the remission of
sins. Believe then and doubt not in any Heb. 1
case. For Jesus Christ has purged and washed you clean from all your sins,
having promised that all those that believe in him and his Father who sent
John. 5
him, should have life everlasting, and should not come into judgment, but
pass straighte from death unto life.

Now N. be of good cheer in Jesus Esa. 53. Apo. 1
Christ, for he has loved you dearly, and washed you from all your sins
by his blood. Have then a strong faith and valyant resolution to encounter
courageously with your adversary. You need none other buckler to defend you,
but the precious blood of Jesus Christ, the which Romans 5
by the virtue of his death and passion has reconciled you to God the father:
unto whom with great humility and true repentance you must say: Romans 3. John.
14. Math. 26 Psalm. 30


Lord God Father almighty, have mercy on me a pore miserable sinner, for the
love of thy dear son Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior: and by the merit of
his death and passion vouchsafe to receive my soul, the which I commend into
thy hands.

N. Have a good hope and firm faith that this good God full of mercy and
compassion John. 10. Act. 4.
will receive your soul as his own, into his hands for the love of his son
Jesus Christ. For there is none other mean under heaven given unto men, by the
which we must be saved, and no other salvation but in Jesus Christ. Arm your
selves Romans 8.
then with this Jesus Christ, for he has done all for you. He has
accomplished the law for you. He has vanquished all your enemies that fight to
overcome you. Romans 10


Now N. rejoice your selves in God, stand firm in this lively faith. Follow
and imitate the holy Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, who are all saved in
Heb. 11
this faith, who assured you that your adversary cannot any way hurt you.
For John. 5 1. Ioh. 2* Psalm. 22
your process is gotten by Jesus Christ, who is both your judge and your
advocate. Wherefore you may boldly say with a steadfast belief, When I should
walk in the shadow of death, I shall fear none evil, for thou Lord art with
me. Then good N. be never a weary, saying from the bottom of your heart in
all true humility and repentance.

Lord God Father almighty, have mercy on me a pore miserable sinner, Romans 3.
John. 14. Math. 26 Psalm. 30
for the love of thy dear son Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior: and by the
merit of his death and passion vouchsafe to receive my soul, the which I
commend into thy hands.

A very godly Prayer for one that is grievously afflicted by sickness, and
ready to die.
ECCLESIASTICVS. 18. Use Physic before thou be sick, examine thy self before
thou be judged and in the day of visitation thou shall find mercy.
God does admonish us to pray continually, Math. 26
but especially when we are touched with his rods of correction. Wherefore all
the kindred and faithful friends who visit the sick person, ought not only
to Math 6. Math. 4.
visit and have a care of his body, but also seek some spiritual medicine
for his soul. And this must be done by good prayers, confession of sins,
and Christian exhortation, according to the word of God, without the which no
man can live. And that all things may be done orderly and zealously, the
assistance must prostrate themselves before the majesty of GOD saying: Our
aid is in the name of God. And then say the general confession of sins,
and after that this prayer as follows.

LOrd God almighty, and Father of mercy, we that are assembled together in
the name of thy well-beloved son Math. 18 Ioh. 14
our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, trusting upon his grace and favor, we
have bin so bold as to come before thee to call upon thy holy name, making our
only refuge in thy sovereign bounty, ye which James. 5
we desire not only to feel and taste in our selves, but also in y^ extremity
of thy poor creature, who is grievously afflicted with 1. Cor. 11.
sickness of body, affliction and calamity of mind. We know Lord, that thou
do Psalm. 78.
justly visit and chastise him with thy rods, to make him understand and feel
thy fatherly affection toward him. But thy great mercies which thou wast wont
to use toward our Fathers, are not yet at an end, and clean forgotten. For
thou art that great God eternell, full of pity and compassion which never
changest. Thy Math. 26 Psalm. 102
holy word does teach us plain, that the earth is full of thy mercies, the
which do far surpass thy justice. Wherefore O Lord, appease thy wrath
toward this thy creature. Have pity and compassion on John. 14
him for the love of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord. Look not upon his
sins, but look upon the face of thy Christ, who has fully satisffed for
him in offering to Heb 7. and 9.
thee the great sacrifice of his body upon the cross. We beseech thee then
most gracious and merciful ^ather, make him ^eele thy grace, the which thou
have never ^efused to give unto any of thy ch^ldren. And because thou art our
Father for ever who always know what is necessary Mat. 6
and expedient for our salvation, we do not pray and beseech thee to prolong or
abridge his life, for we rest our selves wholly upon thy holy will, the which we
desire only to Romans 11.
please. Thou art wise enough without any other counsel to dispose of thy
creature according to thy good pleasure. But if it please thee to call him
away, who is he Romans 8.
that is able to resist? Or if thou will restore him his health again, who is
he that can or dare reprehend thee? For all things are in thy hands, and
nothing is done without John. 1 Esa. 22
thy holy will and providence. Although Lord, if of thy favorable grace thou
prolong his days, thy rod shall serve for a chastisement to amend him and turn
him to thee, and we with him shall yield thee thanks and praise. But if it be
thy determinate will to let him pass into a better life, we beseech thee for
thy son Jesus Christ his Apoc. 1. Mat. 16 Psalm. 3^.
sake, to forget all his sins and offenses, the which thou have (...) out and
washed away by the (...) of his most precious blood. Let it please thee by the
merit of the death (...) passion of thy son, to receive his soul into thy
hands, when thou shall call him out of this world. Lord God despise Psa. 137
Psa. 129 Psalm. 51.
not the work of thy hands: for see here thy poor creature almost at the last
gasp, which calls unto thee from the depth of all his languishes and
miseries, presenting thee with his sorrowful and penitent soul, with an humble
and contrite heart, the which we beseech thee to accept of for the love of John.
14.
thy son Jesus Christ our Lord: in whose name thou have promised to hear our
prayers. Wherefore Lord, we beseech thee to take us into thy tuition, and to
illuminate our hearts and understandings, that we may still come to thee and call
upon thy holy name, as thy son Jesus Christ our savior has taught us to
call upon thee in all time of our need, saying: Our Father which art in
heaven, etc.

Lastly, most merciful and gracious God and father, may it please thee we
beseech thee, to uphold us always by thy grace and power, that by the
infirmity of our flesh we do not stumble and fall, and for that we of our
selves are so weak, that we cannot stand steadfast one minute of an hour,
strengthen us by thy holy spirit, and so arm us with thy spiritull gifts and
graces, that we may constantly persevere in the faith, without Heb. 11
the which it is not possible to please thee. Strengthen us then day by day in
the same faith, whereof we will make confefsion unto thee with heart and mouth,
saying: I believe in God the Father, etc.

Then may they look how the sick person does, using gracious and Christian
speeches unto him, but if no sign of amendment appear, soon after they may
find out a fit time^to ask of him if he would willingly here to speak of
God, and to hear his word, whilst he is in perfect sense and memory: then
may they begin this little Catechism which follows.

A SHORT Catechism to refresh the memory of the sick person in points of
Christianity, and to make him chiefly understand the mystery of our
Redemption.
The Minister.
N. BRother, every man who Genesis 1 Psalm. 51. Ephe. 2. Romans 5
knows himself well, and sees of what condition and quality he is, must
surely confess, that albeit he be created after the image and likeness of
God, yet that he is conceived and borne in the sin^e of old Adam, and so made
a poor and miserable sinner, ignorant, unconstant, and full of all iniquity,
and by consequent, subject to all miseries, afflictions, and adversities, and
finally to death. Of all which, sin is the cause, the which God will not
suffer to be unpunished, but afflicts us therefore daily and does plague and
punish us in this world, least he should condemn us with the world.
Wherefore dear brother N. have patience in your sickness and affliction, and
you shall possess your soul in 1. Cor. 11 Psalm. 31
spiritual joy. Confess your sin, and accuse your self before the majesty
of Godvnto whom you must cast up your eyes to contemplate him by faith:
confessing your faith with heart and mouth before all this assistance of your
faithful Brethren. For it is written, With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and Romans 10
with the mouth man confesses to salvation. Hearken then to these questions
that I shall demand of you, and answer to them faithfully, according to the
understanding that God has given you. But if you cannot answer by reason of
your Math. 10.
feebleness, I will answer for you, and it shall suffice us very well to
understand your meaning, and the constancy of your faith, in the which you
must live and die.

Now I must first ask you, wherefore and to what end were you created in this
world.


The Sick. To know God. Cen. 2.



The Minister. Was it necessary for you to know God?


S. Yea verily: for seeing that he is my Psalm. 16. and 17.
sovereign God, without the knowledge of him, sure I had been more miserable
then the brute beasts.


M. Seeing that you know God, you know well that he is power, wisdom, Genesis 1.
Ioh. 1. Luke 1. 1. Ioh. 5. Genesis 18.
and infinite bounty, one God in three persons, the Father, Son, and the
holy Ghost. The only God that A braham, Isaac, and Jacob have worshipped in
spirit and truth. The only eternal God, who has created heaven and earth,
and all things therein contained. Is not the knowledge that you have of God,
such?


S. Yes.


M. But so simple knowledge of God, is it sufficient to bring you to life
everlasting?


S. Uery hardly. For it is life* everlasting, Ioh. 18.
to confess and to know one only God, and him whom he has sent, his only
Son for ever, our Lord Jesus Christ.


M. Wherefore is it necessary for you to confess and know the Lord Jesus
Christ?


S. Because I must recover in Jesus Christ, all that I lost in my self, by the
Romans 5 Psalm. 51.
sin of old Adam, in the which I was borne and conceived, therefore it was
meet for my salvation, that Jesus Christ very God, and very man, inuesting
our flesh, should give me of his grace and favor Luke. 24 Psalm. 21. Romans 11.
again that which I had lost in Adam.


M. Uerie well said. And therefore Math. 1 Luke. 1 Ephe. 2 Psalm. 51.
was Jesus Christ, conceived of the holy Ghost and borne of the virgin Mary, to
purge and sancttifie you, but you for your part, were conceived and borne in
sin, and of sinful parents. Wherefore you must confess, that without Jesus
Christ you had remained a poor Romans 8
and miserable sinner, judged to eternal death.


S. So in deed I had. But I firmly believe and confess, that this good Jesus
Romans 5
Christ has reconciled me to God his Father.


M. But how has he reconciled you to Math. 26. Heb. 7
God the Father?


S. By his death and passion in shedding of his most precious blood, for to
deliver me from everlasting pains. This good GOD Jesus Christ Act. 3 Math. 27
has suffered for me under Pontius Pilate many afflictions, injuries and
tribulations. This Jesus Christ was crucified for me, as one accursed, upon
the tree of the Cross to deliver me from the eternal curse, unto the which
Adam had made me subject. This my Savior Jesus Christ was verily buried, to
bury with him all my sins, to the end that they should not be imputed
unto me before God. This is my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Act. 2. 1. Pet.
2.
who descended into hell, suffering an extreme anguish and pangue for the
time, to deliver me from eternal pains of hell.


M. All this that you have now confessed Esa. 53. Math. 26.
of Jesus Christ, is it sufficient to save you?


S. No: for the holy scriptures must be in all things fulfilled. For what
had this profited me, that Jesus Christ was borne, crucified, dead, and
buried, and gone down into hell only for me, and if he Mar. 10. 1. Cor. 15.
had not rose again? Wherefore I believe and confess that my Lord my head
and Savior Jesus Christ, is risen from the dead, to make me rise again with
him, as one of his little members, into everlasting life.


M. Consequentle it is written, that he Act. 1.
is ascended up into heaven, sitting now at the right hand of God his Father.
But what profit get you by his ascension?


S. My Lord, my head and Savior Jesus Christ, is ascended up into heaven,
Col. 3. 1. Ioh. 2.
to make me ascend after him: for where the head is, the members are also, and
I constantly believe, that sitting at the right hand of God his Father, he is
mine advocate, intercessor, and mediator toward him, assuring me that nothing
may hurt me, he being both mine aduocat Romans 8. Ioh. 5.*
and Judge. Wherefore I need not to fear the day of his judgment, when he
shall come to judge the quick and the dead, for I believe and confess with a
Mat. 25.
steadfast belief, that there is no judgment Romans 8.
or (...) for them that are faithful members in Jesus Christ.


M. Who has given you the grace to understand and do these things*


S. It is by the grace of the holy Ghost, Ioh. 5.
one only God, with the Father and the Son, by whom we receive all these
gifts and graces which are offered unto us in Jesus Christ.


M. Seeing y^ you have already confessed, y^ you are one of ye members of Jesus
Chrst, it follows then that you are incorporate also into his church, the
which you must beliue to be holy, catholic, and universal.


S. I believe verily the holy Church Ephe. 5.
universal, to be washed and made clean in the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, and I give him most humble thanks that he has given me grace, to be
a little member Mat. 4. 1. Cor. 11.
of his church. And being baptized in his name, has made me live in the
communion, unity, and charity of the same, having taught and instructed me
by his holy word, nourished me with his very body, and given me his most
precious blood to drink in hope of eternal life.


M. Seeing you are so surely grounded 1. Cor. 10.
upon the corner stone, which is Jesus Christ, in knowing your self pefectly,
you must also acknowledge the principal good that you have received of this
good God Jesus Christ.


S. Not without good reason. For I will not be ungrateful to acknowledge
Psalm. 51
the gifts and graces which I have received at Gods hands. Therefore I
confess that I am a poor and miserable sinner, who have grievously offended
the bounty and justice of God, having transgressed L^k. 17.
his most holy commandments. wherein I have deserved eternal death and
damnation. Nevertheless appealing to the mercy of God, I ask him
forgiveness: and believe and confess without all doubt, that he has given
me 1. Tim. 1. Act. 4. Apoc. 1. Math. 26. Heb. 1
full and absolute forgiveness of all my sins, by the only merit of the death
and pass^on of my Lord and savior Jesus Christ, in the shedding of whose most
precious blood, I assure my self sufficiently and thoroughly to be washed and
made clean which is the greatest benefit and contentment Math. 10
that I could ever receive. This is my faith in the which I will live and dye by
the grace of his holy spirit.


M. Seeing that you have received so great a benefit at Gods hand, by the
means of his son Jesus Christ, it is meet also that you should do that
which Mar. 1^
he commands you. For even as he has pardoned and remitted all your sins,
so likewise must you pardon from the bottom of your heart, all those that have
at Math. 5.
any time offended you, for otherwise you walk not in Gods commandments.


S. Herein I acknowledge the law of Jesus Christ to be most holy and
perfect, Math. 9.
commanding us to love our neighbors, our friends and enemies, as our selves.
Wherefore I beseech all those whom by word or deed I have offended to
forgeeue Luke. 23
me, with as good a will as I forgeeue all those that by any means have ever
offended me, wishing with all my heart that I might do them as good service and
pleasures as unto my best friends and dearest brethren.


M. Seeing that it is the ordinance of God that all men shall die, we cannot
resist his ordinance. But we must always conform our selves to his most
holly will. Wherefore dear brother, you must not think il, if I speak unto you
y^ which y^ holy prophet Esaias told unto king Ezechias, having his message from
God: Set thine house in order, for thou shall dye and not live This good
counsel should move you to have a great care for the spiritual disposing of
your conscience: that is: first to turn your self unto the Lord, and bewail
your sins, as this good king did: crauin^ pardon and pity at his hands,
and crying him mercy for your sins, say from the bottom of your heart: Lord,
God have pity and mercy on me a poor wretched sinner, for the love of thy
dear son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Secondly, you must not forget
your family, which by your last will and testament you must set in so good
order, that after your decease it may be in peace and quiet without strife,
contention, or going to law. Then must you s^ order your family, that every
one have their own, without defrauding any person. Leave your wife, your
heir* your children and kinsmen in good love and charity one with an other,
that there arise afterward no division amongst them. This done, you must so
forget all cares and sorrows of this wicked world, which shall pass and (...)
away, with all the (...) thereof. But he which does the will of God shall abide
for ever. As for your children, you are but only their natural Father for a
time: but God is their spiritual Father for ever, who has then in his timely
and holy protection, to keep, nourish and preserve them from all evil, so
that they will walk in his ways. Moreover, being that you are a Christian,
borne a new in the holy Sacrament of Baptism, you know long since, that we
have here no abiding City, but we look for a better dwelling place that
shall continue for ever. Therefore I beseech you in y^ name of God, not to be
sorry to ^orgo any thing in this world. For here we are all but strangers as
our fathers were. If it please the Lord God then that you shall dislodge and
come before him, are not you ready to obey his will and commandment* Or if he
see it more expedient for your salvation to prolong your life, as he did to
this good King Ezechias, will not you be content with that which it shall
please him to do with you? Yes surely. For he is your Lord and ma^ter, you are
but his servants: he is* your creator, you are but his creature, and the
workmanship of his hands. So then you must dispose of your self at his will,
unto the which only you must conform and submit your self, saying from your
very heart.

Lord God, thou know my necessity before I ask, if it be thy will to
prolong my life, thy will be done: if it please thee to call me to thee*ward,
thy will be done also: for thy creature Lord, has none other will but thine.

Now dear brother, comfort your self in the Lord, who if he have ordained to
call you, your calling shall be most happy: for you must believe and hope with
a strong faith, that he will raise you up again in ^. Cor. 13
your own body in a glorious immortality, the which is already purchased
and given Apoc. 1
unto you gratis, by the virtue and efficacy of the precious blood of our
Lord and savior Jesus Christ. In the name of which Lord and Savior, God
bless you and keep you, and make the light of his countenance to shine upon
you, and be merciful unto you. Therefore God turn his cheerful face toward
you, and keep you in good prosperity for ever. So be it.

This done, if the sick person do not amend, but draw toward his end, in
the agony of his death they should read unto him aloude the Christian
Consolation, which is before, and begins, Whosoever is of God, etc. And God
no doubt shall give him his grace to die his true and faithful servant, like a
good Christan and member of Christ Jesus. So be it.


FINIS.

