A plain Path to perfect Virtue: Devised and found out by Mancinus a Latin
Poet, and translated into English by G. Turberuile Gentleman.

Ardua ad Virtutem via.

Imprinted at London in Knightrider street, by Henry Bynneman, for Leonard
Ma^lard.

ANNO 1^^^.

To the right Honorable and his singular good Lady, Lady Anne, Countess
Warvvicke, George Turberuyle wysheth Nestors years, with all good fortune.
Since GOD (madame) has made Man of so divine and heavenly Nature, assignyng
him the head and Sovereign of all other earthly things: pity were it, yea
rather shame, for him to debase his kind, or taint himself with any thing
unworthy so noble a Creature. Yet so many are the cuils and mischiefs in this
life, assaultyag the mind and better part of man, making him frank offer of
such painted pleasures and counterfaite Fel^^^^ie, as without great head and
provident care, impossible is it for him to escape the deceitful snares of
alluring Vice whose joy co^sistet^ in h^^ s^^^^^sion and full. So diverse are the
hooks that Sin lays to take the Soul withal: as few of many can swim
through the rockie Sea of this perilous life without tasting that pleasant
hurtefull bayte. Which if they once feed on, taking therein delight and
pleasure, unawares they devour and swallow down the hook that brings them
spe^die and vnauoided death. Wherefore waying the danger hereof, and considering
the great store of vices, behouefull is it for us to devise some one remedy or
other against this mischief. And since nothing can better have redress than
by his contrary (as all diseases by contraries are to be recured) there can
not (I think) be a more spedie or absolute mean to avoid this monster Vice,
delighting in Man's decay, than to skirmishe under the banner of Virtue,
always awaiting on her, never doing ought contrary to her laws and
ordinances. For Virtue is it that hates Vice, seeking the best it may to
suppress that cankred nature of his, and withstand his malicious attemptes.
But so narow and straight is the passage to Virtue, so sundry are the Vices eke
lying in awaite and ambushe to intercept us, as it is a labor of no slender
toil to attain the same. Here might I for witness appeal Aristotle that
noble Greek and learned Philosopher, save that the Experience it self
sufficiently makes show thereof. Yet it shall not be from the purpose to
recite his opinion. He in his book of Moral Virtues has this Sentence: Quia
Virtus medium sibi quasi signum proponit, difficile est virtute esse praeditum,
Which I thus english: For that Virtue setts before it the Mean, as a mark
and scope, a hard matter is it to be Virtuous. See here (Madame) both the
position of the learned Philosopher, and his reason withal. For not alone has
he in these few words affirmd it hard to attain Virtue, but gives also a
cause of the difficulty therein. Because (says he) it consistes upon the
mean. And in deed so does it. Extremities are the mortal enemies of Virtue.
Virtue delights ever to observe the Mean, and flee excess in all things.
Whatsoever it is that partakes with Extremes, and shoonnes the golden Mean,
can not smatch of Virtue at all. Wherefore waying the difficulty of this
matter, As better hap can not befall a wandering Pilgrim doubtful and
altogether uncertain of his voyage (having many ways at his foot to pace in)
than to chance upon the right Pathe to his long desired lodge and harbor: So
greater comfort can not come to a man iorneying in the uncertain progress of
this pilgrimage of life, where Vice offers him sundry ways and bypathes to
wickedness, than to find a ready and beaten path to Virtue, there to rest and
stay his running and vnstayd foot. Which since it is so hard a matter to
find out without a guide, I (madame) have here offered my pains, as your
Ladyship may se, in this little Book, upon great desire to discover a plain
Path to perfect Virtue, that all men might discern the hie way that leads to
happy life. For assuredly our nature of it self is chiefly bent and inclined
to the ill and wicked trade. And albeit (Madame) your Ladyship for your own
part are in every point so furnished with Virtue, as small is your need of
any instructour therein, being very well able to advise your self in living
well: yet for that the place of honor wherein you sit, and your Noble
State, is a Spectacle and Myrrour to inferior persons, whereby to frame their
corrupted lives: thought it not amiss to dedicate you this slender treatise of
mine. Having desire to publishe it under the protection of your name, for that
I hope there will the more peruse the Book: and in perusing (I trust) shall
light upon some one Wholesome lesson or other, prevailing to the increse of
Virtue and honest life. Which if do happen, then shall I rejoice that it was
my hap trauailyng in so little a Book to do the Reader so great a benefit,
and your Ladyshippe have the less cause to accuse my bold attempt in
dedicating you the same. Neither yet do I challenge unto me the first
invention thereof, for then wrong should I do to Mancinus, mine Author: but
for Virtues sake was desirous to write of Virtue, though following the foot
and steps (as it were) of an other man. If my Author be in his language to be
liked for his devise in pe^ning the Treatise, then shall I not (I trust)
deserve misliking for translating the same. Wherefore presumyng upon the good
acceptaunc^ of this my Book at your Ladyships hand whom I boldly crave as
Buckeler to my weak and unarmed Muse, and affying well in the Readers
courtesy, I end this tedious Epistle: Crauyng your long continuance of present
honor, with good success in all your Life.

To whom I rest a daily Orator George Turberuyle.

Virtutis comes inuidia, Sed ex virtute gloria.
To the Reader.
I Neither write the nevves of Poules of late set out to sale,
Nor Meting of the London Maids: for now that Fish is stale.
The date thereof is fully out, no vvonder lasts long.
I speak not this upon desire to do that writer vvrong,
But for because not long ago within this City Syn
Had done a spoil (as one did write) and Conqueror ^^d been,
Displaying banners ^^ about in proof of Con^uest vvoon,
And sounding Trun^ as though he had the City ouerroon:
Because (I say) we mig^^ renevve the battle once again,
And reencounter Sin afresh that spites at Virtues train:
To fine we might that filthy Fiende and hideous Hydra slay,
Mancinus first, and I by him to Virtue show the way.
For Virtue is the foe in deed whom Vice does deadly hate:
And ever yet betwixt them has there ben a foul debate.
And though that Syn has greater guard and soldiers more in field
Than Virtue has, yet Virtue shall enforce the beast to yield.
Off shall his head from shoulders go,
Sin shall be sin no more,
The monster Vice shall sure decay that long the sway has bore,
If you Mancinus Path ensue and follovv on ^^e way
Which he to Lady Virtues lodge and Palace d^^^ display.
Which though perhaps were hard to find or ear he vv^^t about
By curious search and tedious toil to show to set it out:
Yet now it is so easy vvoxe by mean of his devise,
As who so follows him shall come to Virtue with a trice.
As Ariadnas friendly tvvist and slender tvvine did shovv.
Duke Theseus in the doubtful den which way was best to go
From Minotaure misshapen beast, half man and half a Bull,
With gorie guts of murthred men that had his belly full:
Even so Mancinus by this path will teach thee how to sly
The Labyrinth of loathsome sin where Vice and he do lie,
Delighting in the fall of man and feeding on his soul
As did that Fiende upon the men of Athens in the hole.
And look how much the soul excedes this earthly bodies mass,
So much the monster Sin the beast of Creta does surpass.
Wherefore let be our earnest care with joined hearts and hand
Against this Sin on Virtues side with sword and shield to stand.
March on your way by Prudence Path, for there are men of wit
To make you show vvher Virtue dwells, a house for harbor fit.
From thence there lies a crooked way not easy to be found
Without a guide and fellovv mate, a hard and rockie ground:
Where joyful Justice sitts in seat and avvefull rule does bear,
A happy man is he that can dispatch and soiourne theare.
The journey is not far from that where Fortitudo dvvells,
A famous Dame that all the rest in courage stout excells.
Where when thou happen to ariue, be Bold and never blushe:
For there, there can no cruel care thy mind or carkas crushe.
When thou with these acquainted art, to Temperance take thy way,
And do with her as farthest place of travail make thy stay.
For she will so thy doings guide and in such modest wise
Apply her care to thy behoof as best she can devise.
She will those luring Pleasures pinche, and sause their sugared taste.
With sour sops for thine avail, as thou shalt say at last:
Thrice happy I that found a guide to enter in this path,
That to so good and blessed port my feet conducted has.
Then look thou back from whence thou camst and measure with thine eyes
How hard a way from Prudence to the lodge of Temperance lies.
This, this assured is the mean to master Monstrous Syn,
And conquer Vice, that by report this Town of late did vvyn.
March on, let Mancine be your guide, if he the banner bear
And stately standerde in the field, you need not stand in fear:
For he so vvisely will provide and deal in ery case,
As if that Lady Virtue were there pressed her self in place.
For every vice a Virtue he well furnished has in field,
For every sin a countermate to force the Foe to yield.
So that though Syn were Hydralike and head of head did spring,
Yet Virtue should the Conquest gain, and Vice to bondage bring. The conquest
of Sin.

Syn shall be subject had in hold, the Conquest shall be none
Whose great report of late yspread and rashly so was blown.
Then (Reader) thou beholding art and must of force confess
Thy self in debt to him that did this perfect Path address:
A mean to come where Virtue sitts in pomp and princely Cell,
And teaches men the way to live and waste their ages well.
And thus with suit for pardon for this long discourse of mine,
My tale does end, my book begins which (Reader) shall be thine.
Read right, and deem by due deserte, mislike not ere thou see
What is the end of this discourse that here I give to thee.
If naught but Virtue be containde within this Treatise, then*
I hope thou vvilt not judge amiss, but thank my friendly pen,
That did as well for profit as for pleasure this devise:
No more, adieu, to reading fall of Virtue as it lies.
George Turberuyle.

James Sandforde in praise of the Translater.
IF warlike wightes for noble deeds erst don
Have in reward and guerdon duly won
Immortal fame, renown and glory aye
not to decay:
What then shall such deserve that set in sight
Things long time hid, in bringing dark to light?
Shall they not reap of their good sown seed,
and have their meede?
In war and Peace Minerua bears the stroke,
To Science all the door she does vnloke:
Great is her force in all the world wide
on every side.
Great force has mighty Mars in fight and field,
Much more Minerua has, whose learned shield
Does sense in war and peace the publik wealth
saving her health.
Who so learned Mineruas school frequent,
And have their youthful years in study spent
Deserves immortal praise and fame to gain
for taken pain.
Then worthy of reward is Turberuyle
Whose painful pen has thus to English style
Converted learned Mancinus Latin Muse
for men to use.
Herein is briefly told what Virtue is,
What life we ought to lead, what leads amiss
A work of price has Turberuile transposde
and here disclosde.
Therefore of God and man he well descrues:
For God has Virtue made, and man it serves
To frame his life: commend the writers pen
thou Reader then.
Tutto per il meglio.
A plain Path to perfect Virtue, devised and found out by Dominik Mancinus, a
Latin Poet.
The Induction to the Treatise following.
FIrst mighty God did make the heaven and sandy soil below,
And did the Elements in place, and settled seats bestow:
The^ next he decked with gleming stars the heavens face on hie,
With grass ye ground was trimly tirde and hues of every die.
Unto the fethred Fowls the Air he granted for their home,
With fish he filde the flapping floods and bid them there to rome.
Then last of all he shapte a man full like himself to see,
And made all living earthly things his humble thrall to be.
With Reasons use endued him ek^, whereby he might be seen
To differ from the brutish beasts and savage creatures cleene.
Then Man possessing Reason, and infeft with wisdoms lore,
Began to beat his brains about unknown things before.
Who, for he did forepassed things to present matters cast,
For certain saw the afterclaps and what would chance at last.
And so p^^uiding for the worst that might by hap arise,
(Well worthy as he was) he gat to be accounted wise.
And that self Reason eake it was that many leagues did make
And forced flocks of folk to join for aid and friendships sake.
It caused the people to obey those wights that rulers were,
And (after Cities once were raised) of Laws to stand in fear.
It bred unto the child the zeal and fathers friendly love,
And to the rest that were allide as Nature did behoue.
And thence it co^mes that parents have of them such carking care,
And thence that children reverence such as them begot and bare.
This Reason wills that one good turn should ask an other aye:
and bids that we at need should help our friends the best we may:
^wixt people she and princely kings both league and truce does knit,
and makes a love twixt such as never were acquainted yet.
and they on whom above the rest God has bestowde this gift,
^ore ready are to show good will and for their friends to shift.
^o Courtesy twixt man and man confirmed was and gat
^ greater force, by justice so their Empires grew to state,
^^d Kingly more became to them in Caesar's room that sat.
^esides from out this Reason in the minds of men there grew,
^ greedy zeal the secret parts of every thing to view.
^ bulte and sift so long about ^pith earnest care of mind
Until they might in every thing the troth and falshode find.
Which when they had by Reason found, this Reason gave them eke
A fervent love unto the thing which they before did seek.
For in good faith no pleasure is so great unto a man
As, what in ery case is best, to judge and thoroughly scan.
Which makes ye mind full many time once having found the troth,
To flee for any dangers dread it is exceeding loath.
No churlishe chance, no painful toil the valiant mind subdues:
Ne to maintain the right it will a present death refuse.
And thence the branch of Virtue that high Courage cleaped is
Proceeded, that protector is and guide to simplenis.
Of Reason eake the slenderst part we must not think to be
That which does give us such deligh^ on fairest things to see.
For only man perceiues and viewes by wit and wily brain
What order is in ery thing, what beauty eke does raygne,
And handsomnesse in Natures frame* which makes the witty wight
When he beholds this worlds form and has his shape in sight,
Thus softly to himself to say: how much more beauty might
Be seen in things, if we our manners would conform a right?
Wherefore the wise man's only carck his manners is to frame
Unto the pattern of the things, and make his mind the same
And like in beauties comely show unto the things he viewes.
And this is it that makes him shun, the evil, and quite refuse
To spot his mind with filthy freakes but to beware and wise,
And flee excess in all his deeds, and let no odds arise
In ought he undertakes to do, but deal in every case
In sort there may no want be foun^ at all of time and place,
And this does Te^perance take his roo^ within the minds of men,
Which fourthly here I mind to tou^ and last of all with pen.
These branches four, and virtues ra^ does Honesty comprise:
Which all unto the use of Man from Reasons root do rise.
And Reason from the mighty God and Prince of Princes came,
But common sort of simple men for Nature term the same.
But (gentle Reader) take the choice and say as likes thee best,
Or that it is dame Natures gift, or Gods if so thou list.
This I will undertake of these distinctly to entreat:
But first of all I think it meet the Wise man have his seat.
Of Prudence.
THe first and chiefest point of that which Honesty is hight
Is falshode to discern from troth, the ill from good and right.
And this so passing well agrees unto the kind of man,
As nothing more beseemes than that, nor nothing lightly can.
For every man has such desire to learn and come to skill,
As nothing from their knowledge should be hidden by their will.
With greedy care man pondreth all, and paiseth in his mind:
To err or be deceived he thinks it foul against his kind.
But he is wise that warely waits and siftes the matter so
As all his travail tends to this what Honesti's to know.
To the end to put the same in v^e. which best agrees with that.
But no man can discern it we^^, nor reckon what is what:
But he that measures out the same according to his kind
In every point, and Reason takes for Judge the right to find.
A wise man will not ever deem those things to be the best
Which other men allow and judge far better than the rest:
But such as seem unto himself well worthy of the price.
But certes naythelesse he must beware in any wise
That Reason rule his witty doom, let Sense obey and yilde
To Reason, as unto his better does a thrall or child.
But that you may have knowledge of the right with lesser pain,
Here orderly each thing ensues to make the matter plain.
Wherefore at first who so does seek to have that Honesty,
Must make account in all his life two special things to fly.
The one thing is to think he k^^^es not that which he in deed,
Is skillesse of: he must not put the thing within his creed
Whereof he stands not well assurde, affying overmuch
Upon his own devise and wit as though there were no such.
For many things do hidden lie in dark and hollow ^en,
Which is not to attain with ease allowde the wysest men.
To such allow no light belief, beware of rash consent:
For fear within a little space thou happen to repent.
There needful will it be to use a diligence and care,
And process eke of time to know what kind of things they are.
And peradventure we shall be compelde for safeties sake,
To seek a master to instruct what way is best to take.
In sundry things Experience eke will very much avail
And counsel of a friend, that will his friend for nothing fail.
In doubtful causes see thou seek the troth of either part,
That howsoere the matter fall, thou may avoid the smart.
It Is not sufficient on the one side parcially to speak,
And for to leave the other part both lame and over weak.
Nor is he to be compted wise that warely watches aye
The stingyng Adders teeth alone: for of the tail (they say)
And jaws he should beware alike, for either poisons sore.
So do, as that thou may not say I thought not this before.
For why it is a shameful word for any man to use:
Nor let it thee beguile that does full many men abuse,
That whatsoever thing they do presume or take in hand,
They think it altogether with right and honesty to stand.
And whilste they thus to flattring of themselves addicted are,
And servants to their errors blind: they deem their wits so far
To pass, that nothing may without their crafty compass lie,
No Reason can prevail to cause them lay their fancies by.
No art can force them to forgo the thing they once maintain,
They think their judgment better far than Reason never so plain:
As fathers over tender of their children, use to praise
Their ill demeanor thinking that in them all reason stays.
As when a Caruer cutts a piece or Poet makes a book,
They take disdain on Phydeas work or feats of war to look:
So these their own commend and like, and with a scornful browe
Condemn an other man's devise that wisdom would allow.
And all because the love of that themselves do take in hands
Does bleare their eyes, and makes ye none with them in credit stands.
But that they love themselves to well: look what they do possess
Is orient perle, and glittering gold, all other men's are less
To be accounted than the filth that in the channel lies:
With these is Reason quite exilde, these right and troth despise,
They little differ from the dumb and savage beastly sect.
Who so the things that common are by Nature, does reject,
And grudgeth sore to give the same, what? can we deem that he
Will share of any worldly trashe his proper goods that be?
But if so thou by Fortune chance to err in this respect,
As of thy self to make to much, and others to neglect:
Then mark thou well with hedeful eye what holy men and grave
Do hold for good, and think it fit for thee the same to have.
For many looking eyes by day a great deal more can mark
Than can one blinded eye alone discern or judge by dark.
And when thou have with good advise thy purpose thoroughly scande,
Abandon all delays, and take with speed thy things in hand.
A number are so lumpish and of such a leaden kind,
As, though they never way so much the virtues in their mind,
Yet are not to be compted wise: for why they leave undone
That part which is the chief of all where wisdom is begone.
Even so the green and gallant boughs upon the tree do bud,
But if they bring not forth their fruit in time, it does no good.
Even so the Soldiers march in field, and muster in array,
But never come to handie cuffes to bring the spoil away.
Even so into the fallowde fields in vain the seed is thrown,
Unless with sith thou sheare it down when it to head is grown.
For chiefest praise that virtue brings in Act consists aye:
And to consult, and naught to do is little worth they say.
But yet he wants not virtues praise but is commended too,
That beats his brains about the best although he can not do
Nor put in ure his purposed plat: For sickness hinders some,
And makes that they can never to their hoped purpose come.
Philosophers do well deserve both fame and praise to gain,
Who by their writing well to virtues travail us to train.
There is an other vice beside, which is, long time to spend
With over earnest study in such things as in the end
Are rough, and not to be attainde: for sundry things are such
And so profounde, as naught at all they profit seem to touch.
For to the end they naught avail or profit any whit
To bettring of our lives, although they vex us day and night.
Or if they might do any good* or aid us to attain
The scope it self: yet all the same I compte to be more vain
And less auailing than the end if it be sought alone.
What profit comes there by the search of moving stars? thou fool
To learn the things, and cause thereof why doste thou go to school?
Why couetst thou with earnest carke so many arts to know?
Or have the skill how Countries are disposed in arow?
Why do thou joy and long so sore by craft and wily wit
The subtle Sophister to pass conclusions false to knit?
Or with a sweet persuading voice and pleasant process told
Why doste thou couete so the poor and simple ears to hold?
If wise thou be, no whit at all of these thou standst in need,
More plain and simple is it far that thou should learn in deed:
Do learn the way both well to live and well to die the death,
These two alone are ours: we live and loose at length our breath.
A mean and slender study will instruct us well ynowe,
It is an easy knacke the mean to either of both to know.
Wherefore at first behouefull is to wit the thing that may
Make happy thee, and in thy breast let it full firmly stay.
And therewith learn the middle mean and path that thither lies,
Which when thou have once pased in, persist in any wise.
For many all their lives and days in learning it do wast,
But have no greedy mind or will to travail on at last.
What vailes to practice how to know the way, and there to rest? which when
thou know thy shame is far more shameful than the rest
That never wist the way to good will thou the path display
To other men, and wilt meanewhile thy self go run astray?
Will thou advise by counsel good another man to that
Which you do leave untouched, as though thou knewst not what were what?
How vain a practice is it the days and nights at work to have watched,
And by thy toil to profit naught when matters are dispatched?
In vain good faith our labor is and time misspent full sore,
Unless the deed do follow that which was conceiude before.
Then since the Act is perfect end of study, more desir^
To work with wisdom, than to learn to knowledge to aspire.
And therefore not without a cause the Soldier stout did scorn
Philosophers that all their lives in babbling schools have worn.
For says the Soldier (master Sage) I pray you tell me, what
Auayles it you to cry so loud and chiding wise to chat?
You braule from dawning unto dark from rising Sun to night,
Yet never agree: one flat affirms an other denies it quight.
The wise man answered, (O my son) we seek that Virtue (man)
Which none with ernest study enough could ever seek or can.
The Soldier smylde, what have (quod he) thy head with hears so gray
And have not yet to Virtue found the ready path and way?
Why? when then will thou use ye same? what? have thou any hope
To practice it in Plutos court? or there to have such scope?
Wherefore do learn as much as thou may put in present ure,
And having learnde to fall unto the Act it self be sure.
It lies not hid, but unto such as reach with earnest fist
It offers to be had, each man may catch it if he list.
Besides a part of Prudence is an Order to observe
In doing things, from which a wise man never ought to swerue.
First way thou well the gretest things and matters most of weight,
And then do place in second room more lesser things and light.
It is no reason thou refuse thy wife and babes, to have
A greater carke of plowing boy and of thy household slave.
Ne lawful is it thy life to way but little, or thy health,
Whilst like a greedy man thou go about to hoorde up wealth.
Loose not thy soul (I pray thee) whilst thou seek for bodies cure:
For why? more precious is the soul, the body more impure.
Whereof should man account so much, as that he should mean while
Neglect his soul, in whose regard all treasure is but vile?
What mad man would desire in earth to live a little space,
And by the same in endless death to have a lasting place?
And sure if due respect be had to wordles and endless years,
Thy life and age a moment then unto thine eye appears.
Have aye regard that him to whom thou most indebted art
Thou recompense in amplest wise: but chiefly yet in heart
And all before have God in thought. for mindful though thou be
In all respects beside, yet all is nothing worth if he
Be never minded but forgot. Have not regard alone
Of present time, but what thy state shall be when life is gone.
What more pertaines unto a man than in his mind to way
The afterclaps that if befall may hurt an other day?
But doubtless death and life again shall happen after this:
Which either us shall pay with pains or bring to better blis.
And that which comes in after time no certain limits has,
And so either endless is the joy or lasting is the wrath.
But as this life is shadow like, and blast of wind to see,
Even so the good or evils she gives too short and slipper be.
This place alone for pardon serves whilste we in earth do live,
That other life with rigor right to every man will give.
More better it is some pleasant pains to bide and suffer here,
Than torment never stinting in the hellishe fire to bear.
That yoke is easy to the neck that with good will is worn,
But grievous is the burden that unwillingly is borne.
Here CHRIST with physike goes about our pained limbs to heal,
But there with dreadful judges face that ghastly God will deal.
Account not that of any price or worth pursuit to be,
Which passes by in little space: let that be sought of thee,
Which long will last in steady stay not fleeing by and by.
Nor let that filthy fading trashe within thy coffer lie
That with a turn of hand is reft not able aid to give
In time of need, unable wares the owner to relieve.
By Justice measure all thy deeds, nor though thou happen to
Be matched with wicked wights, do not thy woonted trade forgo,
But keep thee as thou were before let Justice aye be one,
Although thou change as time require, the way that thou have gone.
For often double is the path that to one end does lie,
And one perhaps is now shut up, when the other way is hie.
Even as the hand now stretches fort^ it self by joints awide
And then becomes a fist again, yet one self hand does bide:
So will a wise man aye be just and ever at a stay:
Although he change his countenance according to the day.
I would not have thee light as wind, but even as time shall serve.
And as the case requires, be constant still and never swerue
But not to hard, or to severe, nor over hastily
Believe thou every tale that goes or credit every lie.
He both deceiues him self, and eake beguiles an other that
Does lend believing ear to every man that loves to chat.
A witty man should both abhor: for often times has been
The thing that fained was to sight and that which men would ween
And take for truth has fallen out a matter nothing so:
How often times does truth in cloak of fained falshode go?
And falshode eke how often has it lurkt to open sight
In shade and countnance of a truth, not ever lies are dight
Or bear their proper shapes and hues: and sundry times we see
That mere simplicity is thought a deep deceyt to be.
And as the flattering fawning guest a friendly face does wear:
So he that counsels well sometime a hateful heart does bear.
Of matters doubtful give no doom or certain judgment, but
So place your words as you the case still in suspense may put.
When ought thou mind to take in hand first ponder well in thought
How great it is, and what may hap when things ar thoroughly wrought.
If that thou mind to set upon require no earnest have,
Attempt it not with retchlesse hand, nor do it over fast.
Defer the thing whereof you doubt until such time you may
Have certain knowledge what it is: No damage comes by stay.
Beside, what so thou surely know unrightfully begoon,
Thou oughtst of duty to forgo and leave it quite undone.
And if suspicion chance to grow within thy doubtful breast,
Do shift it of: but still beware thou be not then oppressed.
Thou must in all thy talk what right and reason is, advise,
Or seek it out at least: for that in covert often it lies.
Thou must unto the simple sort what Honest is declare:
And show the way: but those co^straine that at commandment are.
And eke no slender part of praise and virtue lights on thee
If thou with comfort solace those in griping griefs that be.
The wight that well deserves praise not overmuch commend:
Nor over sharply do control the man that does offend:
For he of flattery bides the taint that to much praise bestows:
And he that too much does reprove a naughty tongue of those
That hear his talk, is thought to have. A greater care thou must
Have of a truth than of a friend, be true and ever just.
Before thou promise weigh thy wealth, and what thou have in store:
And having promised, keep thy touch, and fully rid thy score.
Look back upon the passed time, the future date forsee,
That like a witty man thou may do things that needful be.
Forescan the profit and the pain that may ensue or ere
Thou do attempt, to the end thou may missehaps the better bear.
Thou shall not ever work and toil, sometime from travail blin,
And purchase quiet to the mind that it may rest within.
But in that vacant leisure time apply thou not thy paunch,
But with good learnings dayntie cates thy gaping hunger staunch.
Flee Idleness when so unto thy needful rest thou go,
And practice then some godly thought within thy breast below:
Or else thy matters left undone do ponder in thy brain:
For sure the quiet mind can then judge matters passing plain.
It forward setts the matter slackt, it doubtful things conuayes:
The hard it softneth, makes plain the rough and ragged ways.
Unoccupied it not beseemes the wise man's wits to be:
Although his hand has laid aside his working tools, yet he
In mind must practice somewhat still. Have not so great a carke
To note how other men offend, thine own offenses mark.
Love aye to learn, but not to force of whom thou takste the skill,
Let it suffice thee to have learnde, let that content thy will.
Wexe ware and wise by others deeds, for oftentimes (they say)
Attain the skill of matters great by little things we may.
What every man will after be the tender age does show:
And of the life that is to come by one days sight we know.
Let not the Author of a word or deed thee stir or move,
But as the thing it self requires and is for thy behoue.
Nor like not with thy self too well for that a number have
A good conceit of thee: but learn where they be wise and grave
That do commend thy doings so. Enserch with busy care
To know such things, which lawfully to be ensearched are:
Learn that which law permits to lern, and wish to have the thing
Which being wished for openly* no shame at all may bring.
Beware of ouerloftie stall where fear it is to stand,
Or whence to come great danger is. Take ever that in hand,
And thereon beat thy busy brain that breeds thee quiet rest.
Some things there are which if you seek to get, thou shall be gest
Both wise to be and well allowde: but then thou must beware
When that thou have attainde enough to hold thy hand with care.
When once thou gotten have the wealth that may supply thy want,
The^ seek for that for which thou live, for which thy God did grant
Thee here to wast thy many days. Thou must not be a slave
Unto thy trashe and rotten pelf, but them thy vassals have.
Look what thou would not do if any man did thee behold,
That do not when thou art alone: nor be nowhyt more bold
Because no witness looks upon and viewes thy deeds the while.
When Fortune with her laughing brows on thee begyns to smile,
Then follow counsel most of all, let wisdom be thy guide.
For as the feet of him that stands upon the yse will slide:
So will the wights that happy are the golden mean forget,
And can not stay where Reason wills that they their footing set.
Nor yet among the stormy showers the Bark does more lament
When it amid the seas does stand in peril to be rent,
Than Reason in prosperity the happy man bewailes.
Wherefore when that a pleasant gale does blow thy blessed sails
Run not at randon after lust, but seek the safest seat.
Often times in calm and quiet seas when no fell winds do beat,
Beneath the water lies the rock and cruel crushing stone,
And often by them with rented ribbs the shaken ship does groan.
Whilst sundry times ye bark does bear his full and strouting sails,
A sudden shower with furious blast his pride and courage quails.
None minds to trap thee in the snare that uses threatening style,
But by his churlish checks does make thee heedefull more the while.
The cheerful look and freindly face, the eye with wanton wink
Beguiles us most: with syrops sweet we poison often do drink.
So smiling fortune many men by custom does entrap,
Whom frowning to subdue before she never had the hap.
And thus is Prudence here displayde, of Justice next we must
Entreat, that knits the wordle in love and knot of friendly trust.
Of Justice.
THis Justice is a certain knot of Nature, and a band
That wylls us unto many that we lend our helping hand.
So perfect and so sure a league twixt man and man it knitts,
As by this only Justice means mankind in safety sitts.
Demand not whether that she bids bring profit yea or no:
For profitable sure it is how so the game does go.
The chiefest part of Justice is to render honor due
To God, that gave us all, and eke himself on tree to rue.
Therefore who so a Christian longs to be, and have the name,
That chiefly he do love his God is needful for the same.
And let him love him so as he may well deserve again
To be beloved and favor find. And this he may attain
That willingly will hinder none nor damage any man,
But pleasure all and profit eke as much as ere he can.
For so is God himself to men, that to no one denies,
Which lives on earth, the use of sun though he in wicked wise
Do lead a vile and beastly life and give himself to lust.
Ne yet does he deserve at full to be accounted just
That profits none, nor any wrongs: for Virtue does require
A deed well worthy praise to have, that is Virtues chief desire,
She compts it not enough from ill to have the hand forborne.
Ne are we here on earth unto our private profit borne,
But each man bound to seek the help for others as we may:
For men were men begot and borne was Plato wont to say,
To aid each other at needful times. but every man aleeke
Can neither help, nor helped be: wherefore we must go seek
And compass how to do it best. for if by aid of hand
Nor Moneys mean thou may assist or by thy neighbor stand:
Yet do by counsel what thou can, relieve him with thy pain.
Beside, thou being strong of force the wicked may constrain
To hold their hands from hurting such as siellie Creatures are,
And be a mean that simple men may escape the subtills snare.
Again, by good advise and reed, by comfort and by check
Thou may do pleasure many times to them that would to wrecke.
But yet in doing duties we must cast a hedefull eye
To Order, State, and eke Degree: for Order certainly
To ery thing does lend a shape and beauty passing fine.
As, first to God thy duty do, then next of all incline
To profit of thy Country soil respect thy native land,
Then children and thy parents dear require thy helping hand.
And after these by blood allide and friends by office woonne:
Ne yet thou must the poor, the sick or aged cripple shoonne.
But rather be to pity moved: and eke among the same
If any pass in Honesty then sure thou art to blame
If those thou do not most regard and pity in thy heart,
And to their great and heavy need thy friendly face conuart.
And they that erst have helped thee are to be help again:
But then thou must remember that thou do it with a gain.
Do follow, as Hesiodus did will, the fertile field
That to the Ploughman with increase the scattred seed does yield.
But yet thou must beware, that whilst for any one thou shift,
No other man thereby thou do from seat and saddle lift.
Provide and wisely watch beside lest whilst that thou art bent
To show good nature, wealth do fail, and then thou rap and rent
From other men their proper goods. For commonly (they say)
The wastfull Bankrupt forces not from whom he take away,
When all his substance is consumde, then gets he ill report.
Commit no pillage to augment thy former state and port:
No not to gain a Princes crown from Justice swerue awrye.
And not alone the just man must from force and pillage fly,
But eake abandon fraud and gile: to Foxes fraud does long,
Unto the noble Lion force, for he is passing strong.
But neither fraud nor force becomes a man in any case.
And sure is none more deadly than the man that bears a face
And siellie show of simple sheep, and is a woulfe within:
And has his manners quite against the color of his skin.
And not alone in deed, for often in words is wrong: as when
Thou do object a fained crime to good and giltlesse men.
Pronounce the troth with tongue, and eke defend it evermore,
In sort as not by any thing thou set a greater store.
Nor do thou think that by a lie thou can once false thy troth,
But that therewith Religion quite is broken, and an oath.
For though that God for witness be not cited to the band,
Yet not the less he aye in place of good record does stand.
And if at any time at all it lawful be to lie:
Perhaps it is that troth may be apparent more thereby.
And he perhaps that speaks false his promise to preserve,
Perchance the same for all his lie a pardon does deserve.
So plighted hest must ere be kept as Constancy be found
In all our words, our promises with credit must abound.
But so it happen may sometime as slender is the fault,
To break a promise firmly made or with a man to haulte.
As if I promise that to thee that will no profit breed,
Or that which more will me annoy than pleasure thee in deed.
Duke Theseus could have wished erst with all his mind and heart
That Neptune would his promise broke when Hippolite in cart
(Unhappy youth) was drawn about the cruel craggie clife,
Where he for no desert of his was reft his honest life.
Let not the Just man blabbe abroad the secrets he does hear,
Nor in unlawful matters let his tongue not dare to steare.
By doubtful words breed no debate nor quarrel while you live,
But rather certain judgment in each thing demanded give,
Or rather hold thy peace out right, when is no cause to chat:
For often does the prating tongue offend it knows not what,
And wrongs it self, and others too. If thou in common weal
Do bear an office, and have cause in such affairs to deal:
Or having store of household folks at home at meal and meat,
The party that does ill deserve let him be duly beat.
To be accounted ouermylde, it is no praise at all:
For he that favors one that does amiss, will mar them all.
If any do offense, and thou be parciall to correct,
That thou art guilty of the same we may right well suspect.
The Magistrate does favor faults that letts a matter slip:
And too much favor of the Judge is called a gentle whippe.
He marres the multitude, and does whole Cities bring to sack,
That justly does not use the scourge upon the sinners back.
He quite undoes them: as the man that flings a fiery brande
Into a town, or gate unlocks when foes are hard at hand.
We can not call that Ruler good nor term him as a King,
But rather such a one as plague and mischief loves to bring.
But yet in punishment of vice we must not Reason pass:
To keep the mean in ery thing is good and ever was.
When so thou takst the rod in hand then be not to severe,
As though at other men's distress thou glad or joyful were:
But punish sore against thy will as though thou were constrainde
Thertoo, and that thou did lament his case that so is painde.
Beside if sundry sin alike and in one point offend,
Release not one, and let the other be in prison pende.
Reward not these with rigor whilste thou deal with other well:
I mean of those that all at once of law in danger fell.
Let like offense have like reward: deal not in Fathers wise
With one, and like a cruel foe with the other. Spiders guise
Is to entrap in crafty web the little siellie gnat:
But if there come a hornette huge or waspe that is weighty fat,
He crusheth down the slender twist and makes a thorough ways,
Whilst siellie flies in hanging netts the spiteful Spider slayes:
Even so the poor and miser man the cruel law does crushe
If he offend, but welthie wights through tiled trap do rushe.
If any do thee wrong: let wreake but counteruaile the deed:
Seek not to punish his offense no more than thou have need:
But if thou quite forgive the fact and no revenge do seek,
Thou art the iuster man for that, God thee the more will leeke.
Unto thy servants eake thou shall observe both law and right,
Give them their due, and look that they thy Justice do requight.
For Nature them our brothers made. so that thou must suppose
That fowly he offends that past the bounds of mercy goes.
If so their crimes committed be too heinous, ryd thy hand
Of them, or else be merciful: but if the case do stand
Upon some small and light offense, who can foresee to much?
Or who can deal with too great ruth if so the case be such?
And since we have thus vnbard the gate of Justice hall,
We will of Valiance next entreat that yelds to naught at all.
Of Magnanimity.
OF high and noble Courage I that Man confess to be,
That in defense of honest name no dangers dread will flee.
But willing undertake to do the hardest things of all:
He fears no man, he dreades no death nor ought that may befall.
No torment can the Noble mind, no yrefull threats subdue,
But only sacred reason make him change his will anewe.
But yet he will not rashely and in wilful wise desire
The peril or the danger, but as matter shall require.
For sure more fond may nothing be, than for a man to put
His life in danger, where he might avoid without a cut.
That man is over braynsicke mad that safe and well at ease
Upon the river, longs to launch amyd the mounting Seas.
He that his Country does molest, or breaks the Common laws,
That him we Valiant should account, there is at all no cause
But rather bold and bedlim beast, rash and ungodly wight
And any other term that tongue can well devise with spite.
Nor he Courageous that does seek his own and private gain:
But he that in his countries cause does offer to be slain.
For sure there is no praise of mind no worthy feate in deed,
Less it from Justice, and the love of country soil proceed.
Nor less he live uprightly, and plain dealing use, he can
Not gain the name of Fortitude, or of a noble man.
Let not the tickling brute of thy good deeds thine eyes delight:
Let it suffice thee that thou did atchieue the same aright.
For Magnanimity has aye respect of Honesty,
As for reports of giddie heads it forces not a fly.
Nor he that does depend upon the brute of peoples brain
Deserves the name of valiant mind and Courage to attain:
But he that could for go the thing for which himself does long,
That man in deed is valiant, that man is truly strong.
Who so does overmuch delight in Titles of his name,
And with an earnest study does seek out and search the same,
Is too too fond and childish wight: for chiefly does pertain
To valiant Courage to contemn the things that are but vain
Which common rascal much commend. the basest things despise,
The noble mind does couete that where dread and danger lies:
It thinks that all these earthly things are subject unto him.
Not all that he does see with eye, or touch with other lim
But what wc inward mind he viewes for worthy jewel takes.
Who so does scorn the earth, and of his mind a heaven makes,
That man I noble deem to be, that is a worthy wight.
But how can he be compted great and be of noble might,
That here below in earth does dwell nor does advance his head
Up to the haughty things aloft but lies like one were dead?
Will any man deny that it pertaines to Noble mind
By virtue to deserve the seat that is to Kings assignde?
Then doubtless he is greater far that does deserve by deed
A seat with mighty God in skies on heavenly joys to feed.
Who will deny the man to be of force and famous, that
By cruel siege does conquer towns and beats the Cities flat?
Then surely he is stronger much that by desert does gain
The stately fort of haughty Heaven with Jove to part his reign.
No toil or tedious travail can the valiant man dismay,
To cause that from his work begoon he leave or seem to stay:
So let it loathe thee naught at all at heaven door to knock,
To the end the porter may at length the gladsome gate unlock.
The heavenly porter scorns of none that beats with willing fist:
Nor any yet that justly craved his just demand has mist.
Wherefore go too, do never leave thy weary arms to lift
Unto the skies, since he at last will give thy hoped gift.
Thou shall attain thy suit at length, cease not till all be done:
A worthy crown is due to him that all the race does run.
Nor do not think the end to far, for when thou think least
That thou art there, thou have dispatched then shall thou be at reast.
The Noble mind is never bond or thrall, but ever free
From all offense: and fellow loves to God and Right to be.
Nor does it suffer riot, or unlawful lust to reign,
But for to yield unto his force the Senses does constrain.
No greater slavery than to have thy mind at Vices beck:
And see that Beast to set his foot upon thy yoked neck.
That is a perfect freedom of the mind, whom to the yoke
May no alluring pleasure, or unlawful lust provoke.
It meruailes not at any thing unless it bear a face
Of Honesty, and steadfast be in one self room and place.
It never yeldes to froward chance but constant ever bides:
And ill adventure under cloak of merry countnance hides.
For sure the man of valiant mind does force of no missehap,
But all good things does deem that he within his mind does wrap.
And he alone within his mind compriseth every thing,
That day and night does ever think upon the heavens King.
He frames his cou^tnance grave and wise, he looks with boldned browe:
No hautie language makes him fear or causes him to bow.
It does not well become a man of stout and sturdie stamp,
To stare with stern and glowing eyes and Lyonlike to rampe.
But rather have a visage mylde and browe of friendly grace.
For why a Valiant man in deed not judged is by face,
Or by his outward gesture demde: the deed it self is it
And mind that makes the Noble man. Thy self thou must not quit
And rid from public office, for because thou standst in fear
A foul repulse at peoples hand and sharp reproach to bear.
For go thou not thy Countries aid because thou must withstand
With sword and shield, with tooth and nail thy cruel enmies hand.
For that is it whereby thy stout and noble mind is tried:
That is the only mean to know where thou will flee or bide.
But he whom greedy goldes desire or beauty moves awhit,
Is not to be accounted stout but rather wretched wight.
For though that filthy coin to care enforces miser men:
It can not so Courageous hearts and noble Natures blen.
There is no less or baser thing than is the wretched mind,
That is a slave to pelf, and makes the eye of Reason blind.
But he Courageous is and stout that richesse can despise,
Content with poor and mean estate, where dread nor trouble lies.
Or if he have the worldly wealth, that so it packing sendes,
As all his joy consists in the aiding of his friends.
How common is the saying of King Pyrrhus unto those
That came from Rome to ransomhome again his Roman foes?
Quod Princely Pyrrhus to the men that would the money told,
Give me no great alluring gifts, give me no glittring gold.
Let us with sword, and not with coin maintain the cruel war:
For men bright shining wepons meet, for Merchants jewels are.
A worthy word for such a Prince of stout Achilles line,
It well declard his Noble heart from lucre did decline.
No less of Courage Curious thou werte well known to be
What time the Samnites offered up their golden gifts to thee:
For rosting roots thou satst as then by slender fires side,
When foraine Legates did display their treasures full of pride.
More liefer is to me (quod thou) and rather do I wish
To suppe of earthen vessel, than of such a golden dishe.
Wherefore convey me hence in have this golden trashe again,
We will no gold, we rather choose in Princelike sort to reign
Upon the men that owe the same. O words exceeding wise,
Declaring that such vain delights this Captain did despise.
Besides with force of bodies might behooves him to stand
To peril, and the hardest things that are, to take in hand
That will be compted Noble, and of Courage great to be.
But yet he must in any case beware, and wisely see
He do not rashly ought attempt but follow Reasons skill,
And shoonne the thing with speedy foot that wit and wisdom will.
Let him not venture on the thing that is beyond his might,
In sort that he him self thereof can never well acquit.
For many times the Bayard bold beyond his reach will run,
And bears ye shame for want of power to end his work begone.
But yet he must beware the while in using such delay,
That men conjecture not that he would gladly run his way.
For better is it far to dye than live with taynt of shame,
Men rather should endure the death than bide the loss of fame.
Encounter not with any man but when of force thou must:
For sure to blade it, is a thing too beastly and unjust.
War not unless it be to have a quiet peace thereby:
But in thy truce let no deceit or wily Treason lie.
Naught more agrees to Noble mind than conquerde wights to spare:
In dooyng so with Godly kind he seems to have a share.
It earneth not so great a praise the rebel to subdue,
As does to be of gentle kind and Pities train to sue.
The chiefest virtue Caesar had that bread his greatst renown,
Was that he used no rigor to the captives of the Town.
The Lion stout of courteous kind has Nature made to boys:
It never hurts the yelding pray or humble Beast anoyes.
Fight not with any Foe unawares, strike not behind (I say)
For why that kind of craft is it that cowards does bewraye.
Pursue not any man with hate or rancour of thy heart:
For that of base and miser wights and wretches is the part.
If any one unjustly speak of thee to thy defame,
Think with thy self his slander does nowhit deface thy name:
Save that his will was fully bent to hurt thee if he might,
But that his vile and cankred purpose fell not out aright.
For sure there is not one alive that takes hurt at all
Of any, less himself be cause the mischief do befall.
For no man once can touch the mind or secret parts within:
Of any force that can befall thou needst not force a pin.
And when so ear thou have the power an others harm to frame,
Let it suffice thee that thou have the power to do the same.
For no revenge a greater praise does purchase to a man
Than for to hold his hands from wreake when he most mischief can.
Thou shall not with a secret taunt or gyrde another nyp,
But if thou blame for any thing do it with open lyp.
A mind not guilty of offense, pure, simple, faith unbroke,
Are they that make the Noble mind as witty men have spoke.
Dishonest dealing, wicked life, and belly full of sin,
Ar things that make a fearful wretch, For when the mind within
Is never free from foul offense, how can a man but quake?
The harmless heart no heavy care can sad or sorry make.
What needs he dread ye lives upright? death should he fear awhit,
The gift that Nature has allowde? by which he commes to sit
In blessed seat with mighty Jove? of torment should he fear,
Whose cruel pangs in his behalf our God himself does bear?
Then whereof should he stand in awe, whom CHRIST defends aye?
And all the route of heavenly powers assist as well's they may?
Who could enforce the Martyrs erst for tremblyng fear to rue?
Who could by manace or by threats their Noble hearts subdue?
Not them could puisant Princes cause or tyrants hands to dred,
Not armies huge of myghtie force, nor ramping beasts unfed.
Before the Rulers of estate youths, babes, and silver heard,
And women, weak by course of kind, were never once afearde.
Not bended bow, nor bloody blades, not brands of fiery flashe,
Nor ready hands with steely darts, nor fistes with fearful lashe,
Not loathsome gayle, nor famine long, not thirst or other pain,
Not burning oil, nor scalding pitche, not boiling brine in baine,
Not golden gifts, not kingly crowns, nor Princes daughters vowde
In holy band of marriage their constant purpose bowde.
And not alone the parents glad their children could abide
To see amid the scorching fire, or on the gybet tide:
But also (which is more than that) the loving dame her self
To yield to torments would persuade her weak and wretched Elfe.
The brother would to brother give his counsel in the same,
And wife exhort her spouse to bide both fire, sword, and flame.
Who can report those martyrs were by death yconquerd? No,
They rather Conquerors (good faith) became by dying so.
There is not any thing alive more strong or sturdie than
The world, the earth, and lofty Skies to yield to force of man.
Like blessedness unto a man, or pleasure can not be,
As (mighty God) to quite resign the world and die to thee:
And that not by the sword alone, or tasting of the death,
But die to thee by scorning of this flesh and filthy breath:
And yet remain alive and quick among the wordly wights,
Not forcing on the fickle joys, or foolish fond delights.
The man that with the sword is slain is sure but once to die,
But who so tames his froward flesh a thousand deaths does try.
Nor ery man that does desire or couete in his heart
To die by sword, can of the sword be slain or have his part.
The sword is even a grace of God: and whomsoever he
Vouchesafeth to accept with sword dispatched so to be,
That man undoubtedly in kind is next to mighty God.
But now enough my wandering Muse has rangled far abroad
In large discourse of Noble Minds, now time to blow retreat:
And with a luckie marching foot the other path to beat.
Of Temperance.
I Have of Noble Courage said, both purpose place and time
Of Temperance do will me now to write in perfect Rhyme.
He temperate may well be termde and calde a modest man
That bridle motions of the mind with Reasons snaffle can:
And keep Decorum in his words, and eke in erye deed.
Wherefore that such a one thou be (I tell thee) thou have need
Thy wishes well to think upon, and what thou will request:
Pursue the good, and long for that, and let alone the rest.
Those things are good that simple kind and Nature do require,
Not that whereto Ambicious mind and Pride would feign aspire.
The man that owes and has himself, not many things does miss:
He deemes he has suffising store that has himself ywisse.
He ever flows and swimmes in welsh, and greatly does abound:
We can not say he lacks ought in whom this store is found.
For each himself may by himself and of him self suffice,
If so he do possess the good within him self that lies.
But he that deemes his own too scant, and seeks for foraine stuff,
A misers life does ever lead and never has ynuffe.
For though his store be near so great yet he in mind does crave
A thousand other things beside, and greater heap to have.
But he (unless I be deceived himself possesses, and
In good assurance of himself sans other help does stand
That witty is, and can discern the things that needful be.
Even as the man whose corpse without default of limbs we see
Is compted perfect body whole: and eke contrariwise
He taken for a maimed man that lackes one of his eyes,
Or wants a nose, a hand, or foot, a leg, or other limme:
Even so the wight whose inward mind and wits are woxen dim,
And can not see what Reason wills for Errors foggie cloud,
Is compted not to have himself, nor for a man allowde.
Wherefore at first possess thy self, hunte not for foreign things,
What can be thine, when that is not that next the body clyngs?
A witty man has great desire disease away to drive,
And other hurtful things to be the longer time alive.
Who will of purpose poison suck or taste of venim vile?
Who falls headlong in the dike that may bestride the style?
No sure, if any by mishap or fraud of other sup
Of poisoned dishe, to Physic straight He bends to belche it up.
If by misfortune any break his leg, or joint it out,
The Setter of the bone is calde and poasted for about.
And those that bleare we running eyes have physic for the same:
And more than that, if so by hap thy lumpishe Ass be lame,
Thy self on foot for Smith do run a Vulcan must be had
To shoe the Jade, and heal his heels his legs are wrapped with wad.
Then why if any griping grief thy sense and soul possess
Seekst not with care to cure the same and quickly to redress?
For how much more the Mind ye corpse in Noblesse does excede,
So much the more regard the mind than does the Body need.
O, to what purpose with such toil and travail do thou drown
Thy corpse, and make in doubtful wheel thy Soul to run so rowne?
Why day and night in fervent heates do thou thy body broose,
And do mean while thy better part and chiefest member loose?
Fie, too ungodly, cruel, and unto thy self thou art
Extreme, that with the propre hands do breed the propre smart:
Why do thou mash thy mind within so many nets, from out
The which thou can not rid it, though thou willing go about?
See how it wakes the day in care and night in noisome woes,
And like a thing pricked on with spur unquiet forth it goes.
And thou full like a Tormenter with cursed Bellonas scourge
The sielly flying soul and hurtlesse mind do daily urge.
What? better were it not for thee the loss of hand to have,
And that whereby thou waxest wise, in dayntie sort to save?
Or than to loose the part, from heaven that was allotted thee,
Without the which with other beasts thou might compared be?
How false and frail is all thy hope both living here and dead,
If so that member be alack that ought to be the head?
Wherefore especially thou must the sickness of the soul
Remove, that nothing want, and that thou may be perfect whole.
Direct the same by rightest ways and plainest paths, that he
Full well may do his duty, and the witty guide may be.
But (Gentle Reader) to avoid the being ouerlong,
Account that these unto the Soul and perfect Mind belong,
To hope for that alone which still is sure to be a stay,
And such a great surpassing good as never will decay.
To fear that being once befalne for ever and a day
Will hurt, and such a thing as none relieve with succor may.
To follow with an earnest care, and study all such joys
As no discase does daunt awhile or furious face anoyes.
To sorrow that displeasure whom no pleasure does ensue,
Or by the means of whom decays both life and health to you.
Force not of other things at all, but of an hostage as
Thou woldst acco^pte from whence in have the guest would gla^ly pass:
But rather as a burden deem and grievous pain in mind
The things to be that stop thy race, or make thee stay behind
The Trauailer both car^ge should and careful sickness shun,
That luckily he may his course and pointed journey run.
And sure this Life is even the Path wherein we daily pace:
But the other is our Country, or of foul Exile the place.
If so it be our Country, then assuredly we shall
To Grandsyers, and our blessed friends in peace to soiorne all.
But if Exile and banishment to us it chance to be:
Then down we go to dungeon deep where is no game nor glee,
But yelling cries and clamours great, and never wasting flame
Appointed things for due desert the sinful souls to tame.
Those pass into their country, that by mean of witty brain
And Reason, rid themselves of ill, and did the Good attain.
But they contrariwise Exile do suffer, that alive
In error dwelt, and in the trade of Virtue could not thrive.
The Mind does rouing run astray, as often times as it
Not gouernes, and does see the good, but follows not a whit.
But now we have digrest too far, the cause does will retreat,
And eke our Method byds us of our matter to entreat.
At first of all our meaning was of Motion of the Mind
That Te^perance hight, to tell our tale and of the Modest Kind.
In this shall all my talk consist, this undertaken charge
As plainly as we may my Muse and I will set at large.
Decorum chiefly do observe and note with earnest eye:
For sure no slender force within his seemly bounds does lie.
And this Decorum double is, that modest minds possess,
One general and common kinds the other somewhat less.
The common kind is it that links with Honesty in all
And each respect, and can not from his side or footing fall.
This more apparent is to sight and to the ears, without
This general Decorum can be nothing good, no doubt.
It is naught else at all but even agreement of the things
Which men do, well and wisely work thence this Decorum springs,
And as the form dispersed is the body quite throughout,
And is not yet the body but a shape set on without:
Even so with Honesty and right, Decorum does agree
It beautifies the good with shape and makes it fair to see.
And as the Bodies seemly show delights the lookers eyes,
And makes them marvel how it could he wrought in goodly wise:
So does Decorum move the mind, and makes it marvel much
How that the beauty of the things should happen to be such.
Thy self (good Reader) better may within thy mind devise
The Nature of the same than I in Meter it comprise.
The other kind of decentnesse is that assuredly,
Which has his chief respect unto that part of Honesty
Which guides the proper motions of the Mind even as it list
And it in habit, gesture, and in measure does consist
In voice, and bashful blushing hue, robes, time, and seemly place.
This makes yt thou do stand so great within the peoples grace,
A welcome wight to ery man this causer is of thee,
That such report and noised brute In ery place does flee.
Nor do thou scorn or set at naught what men of thee do deem:
It Is ill the judgment of the world so little to esteem.
Allow and listen to their doomes, for he is compted proud
That does disdain that aught besides his own should be allowde.
There are ill fauourde things that do the Minds of men offend:
As Arrows wound the body when the Archer list to bend
His crooked bow, and shoot his shafts with nimble hand away.
And such as do offend, the parts of shameless men do play:
But those that offer force of hand are too unjust we say.
And not alone Decorum in the Bodies outward show
Is to be kept and well obserude, but in the Mind also.
It is an easy thing the Mind to frame and fashion fit,
As long as Reason rules the roast, and in her seat does sit.
Or (though by hap she be displaste a little) if she get
Her old and sacred room again, and reign deuoide of let.
Here first of all from filthy Ire thou must in any wise
Refrain: for it both inward mind, and countnance does disguise.
What sight more lothsom can thou see or look upon with eye,
Than one that is in pelting chafe and angry mood? for why?
Full like a Boar he fomes at mouth whom Curres have cruel made
With baulyng barks on ery side: or like a bedlam Jade
That will not easily bide the bitte. Assuredly we can
The party that in Anger is not think to be a man.
For then he waxes out of kind a savage beast outright,
And like a frantike man inragde he lacks his Reason quight.
And after Anger once is calmde, he then repents him sore
That he so like a senseless man behau'd himself before.
A mean this mischief to avoid is at the first to cast
And wisely scanne within thy breast what cause of wrath thou have.
Even as the watchman sitts a loft to spy his cruel foe
In turrets top, for fear he do oppress him ere he know:
So good attendance must thou give lest anger come upon,
And do invade thee ere thou think such fretting malice on:
And going out of door as though thou would to field to fight,
At threshold claspe thine arms close in every point aright.
And furnishe so thy self about as though thou stoodst in fear
Of rouing thieues, that laid to spoil the goods in ambushe were.
But if so be unawares thou fall into the well of wrath,
See that thou be not plungde too long within that beastly bath:
And do meanewhile with fretting fist no foul offense correct:
For why outrageous Anger of the mean has no respect.
Detest excessive cruelty, have ever that regard,
Revenge for charity, but do a gentle pain awarde,
Especially if father thou thy children punish: he
That is a father ought unto his children good to be:
He should not have a heavy hand, but light, with little smart.
And where as Kind within thy breast has grafte a gentle heart,
Detest thy raw and hungry rage of fleshly savage sort,
That with their teeth to tear the pray do think it passing sport.
Again, you must in any case avoid and flee away
From Motion that contrary is to Anger, that in play
And to much daliance does delight. For Nature never made
A man to jest, but she requires of us a grauer trade.
Let all thy words to profit more than to a pleasure tend,
Deal most in earnest, but in jest thy wind but seldom spend.
Yet Nature does not quite deny a man to sport and jest:
But yet to hold the golden mean she thinks it ever best.
It is not seemly too too grim or over hard to be,
And reap but hate for solemn looks: nor yet for to much glee
To be despisde and had in scorn. By Jesting do not crave
Vaingloriously throughout the Town a Iesters name to have.
As we allow the weary man a time of quiet rest,
To ease his pensive pained limbs with labors long oppressed:
Even so with seldom pretty iestes thou may refreshe thy wit,
But then thou must so place thy words and sayings, as may fit
And best agree with gravity. See that thy jest be such
As may both honest be esteemde, and ery way may touch
Both honest shame, and good devise, and Wit in ery case.
Besides when time requires thou shall not rashely run thy race
As bedlam Roges do use to do, or like a posting slave.
Let all thy Iestes be weighty, and thy iesture very grave.
Let not thy voice be ouerlowde, go not to fast about,
For fear thy hasty pace offend and trouble all the route.
Beware in any wise thy words no Anger do provoke
Or heavy cheer to any man: let naught that thou have spoke
With bitter girding breed offense. With rankling tooth to near
Let not thy babbling bite or touch the man that does it hear.
Ne does my writing Laughter bar, so that in modest mean
You use the same: for otherwise it spills the countnance clean.
For too much laughing marres ye look for boys is laughter fit,
And gigling dames that Reason want and have but slender wit.
Who so at theft does girne and laugh and thereof makes a game,
Or smiles to see an others harm, is very much to blame.
In Plays avoid the filthy gain: for certainly by play
Is nothing got but wasting ill the golden time away.
If young thou be in lusty age and have thy limbs in prime:
Some painful practice do devise to pass away the time,
An exercise to try thy force: but with discretion use
The same, and do beware thou do no limme or member bruise.
I sundry times have seen an old man play and use disport,
But yet (good faith) it has been all in good and sober sort.
But never saw I in my life a youth delight in game,
Of whom I could conceive that he to good would ever frame.
When thou with study weary art, and that thou have a will
To solace, cope with learned heads, and men of tried skyll.
For conference both wholesome is, and eke increases wit.
Do bridle both thy mouth, and Venus part with pinching bit,
At randon never let them run: for he that loves to feed
Too much, and Venus mynion is, he is a beast in deed,
And only but a Man in name, for shape accounted so,
Because he does from place to place in manly person go.
What? ery man may soon suppress Cupidoes flames, if he
Withdraw such things as to the fire in steed of faggots be:
Or if he never beat his brains, and fire his fond desire
On things that are by Nature apt to stir that scorching fire,
Not taking in too many cups: if thou be wise take heed
How to the doubtful skirmish thou with Venus do proceed,
Or fight to much with belly fare. List not at all to try
How honest and how sober thou could by a Thais lie.
When Wine and Women are at hand trust not thy force to much:
For fire will quickly take the towe if it the towe do touch.
When so thou list to conquer sin and beastly living, fight
Not near at hand, but have thy foe a great ways off in sight.
Let wanton mates not enter in thy house in any wise,
Do bar thy door with biggest bolt: for sure no safety lies
In coping with such hateful guests, they never will away
Without the conquest till they do thy fotted carcas slaye.
No triumph in this doubtful case is to be had or won,
Unless we show the foe our heels and from the battle roon.
And sure (a maruells thing to tell) the Palm alone is due
To him, and he is Victor that in poast from fighting flue.
But if so thou by Fortune chance Cupidos thrall to be,
Redeem thy self in all the have: thou needst a slender fee
Or sum to ransom home again thy self if thou be wise,
Shake from thy neck that seruage yoke that on thy shoulders lies.
Use force, and flee: for stay is full of danger out of dout,
The longer stay, the worser state. And who so goes about
To flatter Madame Venus, he shall suffer greater smart,
And feel the flame the hotter far that fretts the Lovers heart.
And since thou art a man by kind of sect and seed divine,
As God is far from flesh, so thou from flesh must far decline.
Though thou in secret do offense and no man see thy face,
Yet thou as witness ever against thy self do stand in place.
Why do thou more than of thy self an others presence fear?
Since thou a witness in thy breast against thy self do bear.
It little skills where any see thy doings yea or no:
For day and night thy Conscience of erye thing does know
In all estates the lust of flesh a foul offense is thought,
But more unseemly in an old and Aged man is naught.
For why? the white and silver hears the witless youth should guide
By Counsel and by good advise for fear they wander wide.
And therefore ought they al their talk to frame so wise and grave,
In presence of the youth, as they of them may honor have.
For this in former passed times was Age in honor had,
For this alone the Fathers were accounted grave and sad.
But on the other side again let youth do reverence
To aged Syres, and ^y to them be succor and defense.
When ancient Syres to Court do go, or on the holy day
To church, a rout of youth should then awaite them on the way.
And make their choice among them al whom each does fancy best,
And whom he could content himself withal above the rest.
For sure it is a perfect sign of Virtue in a man,
To reverence an aged wight in humblest wise he can.
Let youth with patience fall to pains to make their bodies hard:
From Wine and Women but they must in any case be barde.
Let gross and homely be their fare no dainties in their dishe,
The belly must be fillde, but not as much as throat could wish.
Let never young men haunt the Cooks where curious Cates be mest,
Let that suffice them that at home in Fathers house is dressed.
No, neither when they come to age and youth is gone and past,
Let them be idle and unwrought, or filthy pleasure taste.
For who denies but aged men may many things dispatch?
Let them or write with pen, or at their studies have a snatche
As soon as they return from Church, when service time is past:
That exercise is good as long as morning Sun does last.
But let the Boy be then at Book and lesson learn by heart,
It Is easy to enforce a child from study not to start:
He easily will bear the yoke. but do not force awhit
Although he can not word by word his lesson well recite.
For seed that in the soil is sown lies hidden long below,
And many months is under ground, but yet at last does grow:
And all the while in belly of his mother Earth it lies,
The want of humor in the seed. the moistie soil supplies.
Likewise what so the child does learn and takes in tender years,
In after time when age comes on the fruit it self appears.
Let grave and decent be thy weed, be modest in array:
For fear thy outward garment do thine inward kind bewray.
For sundry nice unmanly men by nice attire are spid,
And by that means breaks out ye bile that was in covert hid.
The filthy whelke and bladder read appearing on the skin,
Declares unto the lookers on the blood corrupt within.
Think that such niceness appertains unto the woman's kind:
And yet I can not praise the wench in whom that vice I find.
Extreme or over great to be. wherefore if so thou have
That fault, embrace it not to much, nor do thou ever crave
To have it if thou once be free and quit from such a vice:
For sure it is a filthy thing a man to be too nice.
Both woman's wede and wanton gate refuse in any case,
And think that they are ever apt man's Nature to deface.
Fie, shame upon it, what is more against our manly kind,
Than underneath a woman's weed the shape of man to find?
Yet let thy garments handsome be not sluttish, lest the Fame
And common rumor yield to thee a foul and filthy name.
Keep thou amid the two extremes: ne, though thou have no store
Or great excess of wealth, thou must a slouen be the more.
For neither must the poor man go too sluttish in his weed.
Nor does the man that bars thee from this niceness here in deed,
Persuade thee to be over rude, or to unclean array:
But highly does with all his heart commend the middle way.
What so comes nere ye two extremes unseemly is and ill:
The Middle is the Virtues place, there she is planted still.
Let simple cheer content thy mind not bankets costly dight:
Such cheer as well from famine may thy empty belly quight.
Sufficing let thy table be, let pleasure not redounde
Therein to much, but ever there let meat enough be found.
Let hunger be in stead of sause and stir the stomach up,
Delight thou not of syrops sweet deuisde by art to suppe.
Force not thy change of dishes, but for wholesome victuals seek,
And rest content with cates that erst thy Fathers old did leeke.
Nor do account so greatly of the Kitchen glory, but
Thy whole delight and study in a sober diet put.
Ne shall thou be so sparefull as a Niggards name to get,
And cause that ery man on thee his hateful teeth shall whet.
Be not severe in slender things, nor seek to set no laws
In sort to bannishe mirth, and be of drousie dumpes the cause.
For trifling toys full many times a great rebuke do bring:
And yet from thence does slender gain and little profit spring.
And where Decorum many parts and causes has, the best
And chief consistes in that we know Decoru^ how to wrest.
For not in ery time is one self thing allowde for good:
As Proteus Monster sundry shapes did shift in one self hood.
Look what became and fitted youth in green and tender years,
For aged Syres unseemly shows, full soon the odds appears.
State, Office, time, and present age a difference great do make,
And causes thee what erst became unseemly now to take.
And what a private man before thou likedst well, as now
To Office called in common weal thou must not once allow.
The furious phrase thou used in field encountering with thy Foe,
Behoues thee now a quiet man in City to forgo.
If bending thou to aged years in practice do delight
That fitted youth, assure thy self thou swarust from Duty quight.
And when thou art well stepped in age if then thy manners be
Not altered, but wc youthful pranks and pageants do agree,
Then do thou wax a Mo^ster soul whom men of right should flee.
In youth thou wishte to come to age and silver hears to have:
So now thou should another life and other hostage crave.
Well may we laugh the Sot to scorn that in his latter days,
Much like a babe in cradle clowtes does fall to childish plays.
Look how thy priestly garments do from others disagree,
So much differring ought thy life from other men's to be.
And how much higher is thy room and office, so much more
Thou oughtst thy manners to regard than thou were wont before.
Do not as common sort of men, since few or none at all
May match with thee: to higher things and deeper matters fall.
If thou in place appointed be of Lion stout to sit,
Then be a Mouse no more, but do as is for Lions fittte.
And since CHRIST has thee endude with Eagles gleaming eyes,
Dyg not the groo^d as Ants are wont, but view the lofty skies.
When erst a soldiers life thou ladst thou threwst thy darts apace,
Now being Soldier unto Christ instead of darte and mace
Take up his Cross, and fight therewith. When Physic was thy Art
Thou dydst by Physic banish grief from ery lymme and part:
But now a Shephierd waxen thou thy siellie flock should feed.
The Shephierd watching all the night of fold does take his heed
For fear the foul and fretting Woult with harshe and hungry iawe
Do crushe his Cattle, and convey the flesh into his mawe.
No, neither is it thought enough a man himself to save,
But that he must as great regard unto his cattle have.
And he that with his proper life can take it well in gree
To loase his flock, deserves from fold and room remoude to be.
A number challenge Shephierds names and would be coumpted so,
But falsely they usurp the same as do their dealings show.
For neither have they any carke of weak and hungry flocks:
Nor though they had, they could do more than stones or wooden stocks
As touching points for Pastors fit. it is seldom where to see
A Shephierd well content with that he has: although he be
As full and thoroughly stuffed as may his swollen belly hold:
Yet long his gaping guts to feel a farther taste of gold.
Besides to keep Decorum full and eary way to hit,
Thou must respect unto thy kind what Person best will fit.
For where as him it well becomes to set his Countnaunce sad,
It best beseemes an other man to look with visage glad.
And if that one will counterfaict a sad and solemn grace
And look demure, a man shall shape a Woodcock by his face.
And if that other fall to mirth and use a gamesome glee,
It fits but ill unto his kind, it will indecent be.
One gentle is and courteous wight, his talk is ioynde with jest:
An other can not frame with dumpes a passing pleasant guest.
This man is simple, full of truth, and loves to stand with right:
An other has in curious talk and filed phrase delight.
Wherefore let each man follow that whereto his kind agrees,
Especially in that wherein no Vice at all he sees.
To mark the witty Husbandman I think it not amiss,
That grafts his grifts in ery soil as fit and greeing is.
For first he notes the perfect Kind and Nature of the ground,
And where he thinks y^ pla^ts will prove with plants he setts it round.
In hills aloft the Vine is plast, in vale the Alder tree:
The Olive in a drier vain, for that does best agree.
Where cold and chillie is the ground the Chestnut he is pight:
The fat and blacker earth is it where Apple trees delight.
The gravel and the Sandy soil the Franckincense does love,
And in the hard and stony plot the Citron Pome does prove.
With mount the Pear can best away in Moore the Willow grows:
The Plane tree waxes soonest big where Water freshly flows.
Wherefore respect thy proper Kind and to thy Nature cleave,
For ery man's becomes him best, all others natures leave.
Endeavor by thine own devise and wise forecasting brain
To purchase Glory, others gifts contend not to attain.
For look what stars allotted have can no man well avoid:
Nor, what the Planets do deny, can ever be enioyde. Each thing follows his
propre kind.

When will the fearful waking Heart do way his quiuering dread?
When will the Bull the Lion match for all his horned head?
When will the Lamb not fear ye Wolf? or take him for his foe?
When will the sharp and prickeard Fox his kindly fraud forgo?
When will the Hare not dread ye Dog? or stand of Hounds in awe?
When will the Moorecock leave to diue with Fish to fill his mawe?
The coleblacke Crow shall never sing so sweetly as the Swan,
Although he cry with clearest pipes and pleasantst note he can.
The Goat will not forgo the woods but tread the yuie tree,
The slender legged Frog will still in plashe and puddles be.
The woeful Turtle never will from doleful dities blyn,
But aye bewail his loving Make when he does once begin.
A man that says against the hair to practice any thing
Is like to him that would his ship against Tide and water bring.
And certes who soever thinks against the stream to sail
May stand assurde his fond attempt can never long prevail.
For when his fainting elbowes yield and arms give up, the Tide
Does beat him back as fast again upon the other side.
So often he that cares not for his own, but couets most
For other men's, gains neither theirs and yet his own has lost.
And sundry times the Gnuffe ye gripes a thing full fast in fist
For greediness of novel pray, both this and that has mist.
If Praetor thee or Tribune will to take upon thy back an Office, in the which
thou do both skill and practice lack,
As thus perhaps, to tell a tale and preach in open press
Where thou but little Grammar have and Rhetoric much less:
Then well consider thou before, seek learned men's advise,
Learn that whereof thou have no skill, let labor help the dise.
So that although thou can not win renoume or Noble fame:
Yet that thou may avoid reproach and escape from slanders shame.
What kind of life thou vndertakste pursue and follow still:
Unless thou have good Reason why thou should exchange thy will.
And do it so as other men may see the Reason why
Thou from thy old and former trade on sodayn so do fly.
Be not uncertain like the wind, but as occasion lies
Change thou thy purpose and intent: be said in any wise
And constant, but beware thou be not marride to thy mind
And overthwart, as many are of vile and rebel kind.
For doubtless (this I know for sooth) is most assurde and true,
It Is compted lightness for a man to change his trade anew.
But if so it be rashly done, then shame ensues the deed:
And when thou mindst to chop, beware of ouerhastie speed.
For sudden change does ever make men wonder very sore,
Suspecting what the cause should be of changing evermore.
When thou art callde to Office, shift away thy private mind:
And think that thou to be the head of many art assignde.
For then by thee the people speaks, thy tongue and theirs is one:
By thee the people hears and sees, thou art their stay alone.
Wherefore good reason is it that their profit thou provide,
To whom the public Office has appointed thee a guide.
The Common profit ever ought to be preferde of right
Before a private members gain. The Officer should quight:
Forget and be unmindful of him self in any case,
The^ have regard what best besemes a man in such a place
Possessing seat of awful rule, change weed and woonted face:
I mean behavior used erst before thou borste a sway.
The Praetor many things forbids, and so the Consul may
Which private men can not control. besides the Place and Time
Allow not sundry things for good which are withouten crime
And good at any other stem. Pericles chafed sore
With Sophocles that was his mate and self same office bore,
And worthily rebuked him because he did behold
A pretty boy, when he of laws his tale and sentence told.
But if so be his fellow had in field or wrestling place
Done so, Pericles to have chyd would never had the face.
Wherefore as in a Lute the strings and fretts do all agree:
To please the longing ears of them that listen to the glee:
So Person, Time, the Place, the Age and ery thing beside
Must all accord, and as it were be all in one allide
In him that public person bears. The Private man likewise
Must practice Justice with his feeres, not study how to rise
Or seek to press his equals down, and under foot to tread.
Yet would I not a Citizen persuade to put his head
Beneth his girdle that is not his better in estate,
And whom the Common laws allow his fellow and his mate.
Be not so simple sotted as to bear away the scoff
Or be despisde of any man, or naught accounted off.
And whilst you woldst be gentle thought and of a courteous kind,
Take heed thou be not ouermylde. let none have power to find
Ambition lodging in thy breast or boldness overmuch:
Submit thy self, but not to low, be egall unto such
As are thy peers: ne yet despise inferiors unto thee,
And with good will do honor those thy betters far that be.
Yet stand not too too much (I say) of higher Powers in awe:
For he that leads his life upright has need to fear no law.
O God, how great desire should dwell within thy heart of right
To have a conscience clear from sin that fear abandons quight.
Be not seditious, but with all thy power do practice peace,
For that is it which causer is that Public weals increase.
Do honor due and reverence to such Estates as bare
The office erst, and such as now do wield the Common care:
Yea every such as bruted is to be of Virtues band.
It is a goodly matter for the child in awe to stand
And reverence of his ancient Syres, and such as parents are.
If thou by fortune travail from thy native country far,
And make abode in foraine Town, deal not in any case
Or meddle once with any rules or customs of the place,
But to thy private business have thou respect for aye,
Least any (stranger pack thou hence) by hap to thee do say.
Nor if thou be a Townsman and within the City borne,
Thou shall no Pilgrim seem to hate or of a stranger scorn,
But yield good entertainment unto all that come and go:
Be friend to all that travail, and not once to one a foe.
For he that cuts the Strangers throat or currish is to those
That travail Countries, leaves to be a man, and headlong goes
Into the bounds of beastly kind. For why Lycaon was
A Woulfe esteemde, because that be for cruelty did pass,
To forainers that chaunst to come where he his hostage held.
Think ery burden to be borne that thou may fitly weld:
But all dishonest filthy things may not be borne withal.
For sure a foul uncivil thing the bearers neck does gall
As yoke does pinch the heyfers throat. Eschew the thing that gains
An ill report, and the with freekes of filthy rumor stains.
Thy shameful parts of Nature thou shall covertly conceal:
For Kind her self does will thee so in honest wise to deal.
When so a Player comes on stage he ties his trinkets hard,
For fear if ought should fall, the plays Decorum should be marde.
Then suffer not for very shame a scaffold vice that may
Uncivil be by reason of his license in the play,
In Civil nurture thee to pass. believe not such as deenie
That eary word that they do speak does passing well beseem,
But do eschew in any wise and filthy language flee:
Especially in open place when men give ear to thee.
For shameful talk does well declare the speaker of the same
To be a man from Reason far, and quight abhorring shame.
But if by hap of force thou must and matter so require,
To tell thy tale in clenliest wise by circumstance desire.
For loathsome language pierces deep into the inward part,
And does torment the quiet mind and well disposed heart.
Detest it as thou would a thing that Carrionlike did smell:
Or as an Isie place where none can fasten footing well.
For filthy savors noy the nose, the slipper Path the feet:
But beastly speech the manners marrs that else would seem discreet.
Let none presume in things whereof he has no perfect ground
To chat, for present may be some that will his words confound.
Let him that little Latin can in Greek not wade to far,
Nor him that smatters Greek translate old Maro, lest he mar
The grace and beauty of his verse: Let him that studies law
Not meddle with the Physic Art for fear he seem to raw.
Besides a handsome iesture must observed be in gate.
For ery man beholdes him well that goes abroad: the state
Of all our manners many times is deemed by the same,
And men that want Decorum there do bear away the blame.
The going shows the minds conceit. Let not thy gate be slow,
Nor do not with too quick a foot or pace too hasty go:
But use the mean amid them both. It likes me not at all
Thou stalk like him that bears a mess of gruell to the hall:
Or like the maid in solemn sort that to the temple wendes
At dancing day, when she to choose a fellow mate intendes.
But yet I would not have thee use such posting have as might
Both make thee pant and want thy wind, or fall down hedlong right.
And eke thou shall as great a part of good Decorum see
In talk and language, and as much for that commended be.
When so among thy fellows thou thy tale do hap to tell,
Let not thy voice be ouerlowde, for that agrees not well.
But in assemble to pronounce when so thou have a cause,
To the end thy tale may perce their ears do stretch awide thy jaws.
Yet utter plainly all thy words with voice both loud and shrill,
For Nature and thy helping hand that purpose further will.
If so thy matters be of weight, severely set thy grace:
If light and of importance small, use sweet and smiling face.
In judgment sharper than in talk look that thou ever be:
Let life be more severe than looks, do learn this rule of me.
Do sause thy talk with pretty jest, and yield with willing mind
Unto thy fellow, look a praise for doing so to find.
See that thou ever blase a troth, but not to scolding fall
With any man, of force thou must observe a mean withal.
For sure suffices thee to say thy mind is nothing so:
Use no contentious talk with him in any case, although
He do defend the other part. Unto thy fellows hark
When thou have said, it is shame for thee alone to bawle and bark.
If any stand in stubborn sort maintaining naught at all
But falshode, yield, for fear your talk to greater mischief fall.
Although the tale which any man in presence minds to tell
No whit delight thy curious ears or fancy passing well:
Yet trouble not the rest that would give ear unto the talk,
But rather patiently endure all others tongs to walk,
And do but seldom speak thy self. If thou be sad by kind
Reprove nor find no fault with those that are of merry mind.
Despise thou none for that thy self in wisdom do exceed.
But rather aid them if thou may by good advise at need.
In speaking ever do beware and wisely look about,
For fear the sickness of the mind by babbling burst not out.
Nip no man in his absence, for (no doubt) it is traitorlike,
A man that is not ware of thee behind his back to strike.
But rather look where whilst thou do an other sharply touch,
Thou do not by the self same mean control thy self as much.
What so they are thou speakst unto do courteously entreat:
The lesser sort thou shall not scorn no more than of the great.
But rather travail and thou can to bear a show and face
As though thou madst account of all: this proverb takes place,
Who so does lone, is loud again. by courteous language we
Must chiefly covet in good will of ery man to be.
But most of all our friendship old must be respected still:
And greatest care must aye be had to maintain first good will.
Demand no question sharply, nor with cursed and cruel word,
And eke thy self demanded shall an answer mild auorde.
Dispraise nor praise not any one for vice or virtue more
Than Reason wills: a mean is best, keep still the mean in store.
So like or else condemn, as he that hears thee may not say
Good faith thy judgment is but ill, thou wandrest far astray.
Thou shall not like the better with thy tongue in that thou do
That spiteful sting into the limbs of men in absence thrust.
For ery one both marks the man and hates him that railes
Upon a man behind his back and with his tongue assailes.
Do ever flee the flattring guest, nor flatter thou at all:
For both offenses grievous are, nor this nor that is small,
When other speak thee fair and smooth have ever this in thought
That those good fellows gladly would for little price be bought.
But when thou spekest an other fair, he will for such a friend
But little give that proves him but a gloser in the end.
Account no more of great report that wicked wights bestow,
Than if the cause were ill whereon this great renoume did grow:
But think it praise that naughty men devise in thy defame,
The chiefest praise is to offend the beast that lives with shame.
It Is hard to stop the open ears against the pleasant call,
And that was ever compted yet the greatest praise of all.
No other Syrenes sure they were that wise Ulysses guylde,
Than smooth and pleasant speaking tongs with falshodes cunning fylde.
They, they are Mo^sters great enough to trap the wisest man.
Thou ever more must stand in dread of pleasant language than
Of rougher speech. For spiteful tongue does aye discover vice,
When gleining marcha^ts cloak ye crime and cog with crafty dise.
The pinching griefs that men diseasd do feel, they seek to heal:
But such as never ache they scorn and tender never a deal
But die thereof or ear they thought such mischief would befall.
The wou^d ye shows to outward mark the Surgion will with small
And little cost procure to health: but that which hidden lies
And rankles deep, beguiles the man that is accounted wise.
Do not desire, but as thou art, at any time to seem
Among the people, covet not that they of thee do deem
More than in deed is reason why. Thy deeds and noble race
Thy valiant prowes, thy grandsyres great bring not so much in place,
Nor seek thy lineage to advance thy self extolling so:
For sure it ill becomes a man his proper praise to show.
Nor is it seemly for a man an others friends allide
And Gentry to deface to much thereby to quail his pride.
Let raging rancour never cause or malice move thy brain
To go about another fame or good report to stain.
Nor if thou covet great account of wisdom, go about
Nor be the sounder of thine own good deeds, to set them out.
For as no man of Reason will his follies blabbe abroad:
So neither should his virtues by himself at all be showde.
The tale (they say) is nothing worth but yelds a beastly smell
(Much more untrue) that any in his proper praise does tell.
But covet rather so to deal as men may blase thy deeds,
That thou a myrror may become to Age that thee succeedes.
But he that blabs his beastly deeds and makes them known to all
And tells his filthy trade of life, a frantike fool we call.
And whether it be true or false that he reports so,
He well deserves on Gallow tree to hang to feed the Crow.
But if thy fortune frame in sort that thou unknown do live,
And do deserve a greater fame than any man does give:
Then somewhat in thy proper praise (with Modesty) thou may
Declare, but ever keep a mean in ery thing thou say.
Make men to understand if ought that famous is does lie
Within thy skill: but do procure them no offense thereby.
For no man under bushel putts a candell bearing light,
Or nearer than he ought unto the thing applies his sight.
Vainglorie by no learning seek that harbors in thy brain:
He is unwise that longs for that, All glory is but vain.
For whatsoever thing we do accomplish worthy fame,
It is not we, but CHRIST, our King that does atchieue the same.
Wherefore to him is glory due this boldly may we say:
For holy Fathers of the Church so use in Church to pray.
Then certainly the glory that we men on men bestow
May vain and light accounted be, and fitly termed so.
When so thou happen to control or rate a man for ill,
Seem not to do it touched with wrath, but for a mere good will.
For oftentimes the bitter guest that chides in angry mood
Does profit naught, the pleasant man is he that does thee good.
For he does more a thousand fold instruct and teach the way
To virtue, than the chiding Carle that cruel words does say.
Who so upon an Error does unwittingly amiss
Deserves a pardon at thy hands: but say unto him thus,
That if he do in after time commit the like again
He shall be so releasd no more but bide the sharper pain.
Then if thy words prevail no whit but that within a space
He do the like offense again, then put him in a place
Assignde to tame such retchlosse Roges clappe fetters to his shanks,
To stand assurde he shall no more go play such beastly pranks
Proceed not over far in chaufe, behoues thee too beware:
Be not too sharp or cursed to those to thee that strangers are.
If thou be wise do deal therein as cunning Surgeons play,
Who for to heal do swap the dead and rotten flesh away:
So thou pretending good to do thy friends with wisdom rate,
In seeking to reform their faults procure thy self no hate.
Wherefore control but now and then be seldom in a heat:
Unless there be committed wrong, and when none other feate
Or way will serve the turn so well as chaufing will in deed.
If any do the like again to thee do take good heed,
Accept his warning well in worth: to him that for good will
Does monishe thee, use no outrage no word or language ill.
For if upon good reason he has chidde thee, then no doubt
He did thee good: if not upon good cause, yet went about
And minded he but well therein although thou deem not so.
At any time when so thou art defamed by thy foe,
Or that he whet his rankling tuskes against thy good report:
Deal wisely with such bedlam beasts in grane and sober sort.
Oh, how much does thy subtle foe vnweapned daunt thy pride,
When so he causer is that thou from good demeanor slide?
Let from thy wise and sober lips no word unseemly fall,
Though he uncivil beastly man in currish wise do braule.
Besides to void the mischief, and to stinte the strife begone,
Digress thou from such brauling flat and to the purpose roon.
Deal in such sort as unto thee may no man justly say,
What? (stop my friend) you ra^gle now return again I pray.
And when thou see that irkesom is thy process ouerlong
Unto thy fellows, shut thy pipes and end thy loathsome song.
Seek not the lofty Marble house beset with pictures brave,
But covet aye the lodge where thou thy perfect health may have.
And whether thou thy self do build it up, or buie the same,
Provide it such a one as best unto thy use may frame.
For since Houses builded are to only use of man
Let each one get him such a room for profit as he can.
Thou must not seek for pleasure of thy house so trimly dight,
But rather in the beauty of thy secret Soul delight.
Whom if thou cleanse (no doubt) it will strange odours yield to thee,
Wherein thou may such solace take as shall best liking be.
And where as in thy house thou stayst but for a little space,
Both day and night that other is to thee a dwelling place.
Then, let it be thy only care to deck it passing fine
With precious perfumes sweet to sense do make it freshly shine:
In sort the owner may not by his house so famous be,
As may thy house and dwelling place accounted of by thee.
It is unseemly that a man should horow all his praise
From lodge wherein but for a time and straungerlike he stays.
But let the lodging somewhat aid the masters good report,
And help as much as lies in it to set to show his port.
But take good heed the saying old be not applyde to thee,
O Lord, how far this Owner, and this house do disagree?
For oftentimes my self have heard men say, and that of late:
O worthy ancient house, how much diminisht is thy state?
Again in Country build thy Graunge no greater than it should,
But keep the custom aye therein, a Coat to banishe cold.
Thy hand, thy iesture, lips and looks do govern in such wise
As men may well discern the thing within thy breast that lies.
And all such iestures as thou deemste in others fond to be,
Account it will not very well unto thy kind agree.
But if thou doubt at all thereof, go seek thy friends advice
That will instruct in ery point what most agrees with vice.
For so do cunning Painters deal and Poets of the best:
They ask how other men do like their Pictures lately dressed.
Besides to gain a heap of wealth and to increase thy store,
Thou shall not follow filthy arts at any time the more
But ever shoon the b^^stly gain whence hate and envy springs.
Wherefore thou shall not keep a Port to look and search for things
That pass from thence to forain Realms: nor Fulkers trade ensue
By taking money for the loan as though it were thy due.
Thou shall not follow Butchers craft in shambles leading life,
For gain to knock the bullocks head, and cut his throat with knife.
Thou shall not play the Hukster, for these Arts that I have said
Are vile, uncleanly, base of kind, and nothing to be wayd.
And all those other trades of life are to be compted vain
That all in work consiste, and naught in beating of the brain:
And that for money are to bye, which wit can never be:
Wherefore do force no one of them if thou be ruled by me.
There restes no wit in ought that is set out to open sale,
No good increase of knowledge comes by Bellyfare and Ale.
The Dicing Dick, and Daun^^ng boy pursue no honest trade:
The Pedlar eke that bears his pack himself for lack of Jade
Is nothing to be compted, or the Mercer that does buy
And sells his trashe within a while does use full often to lie,
And like a periurde patch does prate and all to get a gain:
And sure than him that is forsworn can nothing be more vain.
For why he crafts with man, and does yea God himself despise.
But if so be that one become a Merchant man, and plies
His matters so as wealthy he is woxen by the same,
And has his storehouse full of wares, he does deserve no shame,
Nor worthy is in my conceit a foul rebuke to bear,
But rather praise for doing so if he at last forbear
His merchants trade and fall to plough and wax a Countreyman:
For better than the tillage of the soil there lightly can
Be nothing or of greater same, that takes so little seed
And yeldes again such great increase to pleasure us at need.
This trade of yore the Noble men that Conquerours became
Of taking of the plough in hand and culter did not shame,
They never blushed to break the soil: the Roman Court did call
The Fathers that appointed were to rule and govern all,
And fet them from the Country Coat: and he that is as now
The Consul, bearyng all the sway of late did drive the Plowe.
Of all the other trades I know Physicians bear the bell,
And he is worthy praise that builds a house for men to dwell.
To buie an office be not thou too quick or sharply set:
But when thou have it frankly given or offered thee, do get
And take it yelding worthy thanks. Believe not ery lie
That rumor spreds, or brute does cause in open air to fly:
For often vile and wicked heads no troth at all devise.
And many times the naughtiest men in smooth and simple guise
Do blaze vntrouthes to wrong y^ good: as much as lies in thee
Confound and do resist their trade, and what they say do flee.
And what they do, in any ease do bar it by and maine.
Endeavor in thy happy state to be in pleasant vain:
For then thy power does serve thee best then may thou pleasant be,
Yea, though thy wealth be so^what short go hunt abroad for glee,
Least every man account of thee as of a miser wight.
Beware when thou lamentst thy haps thou never do recite
Commodities of other men: lest they do deem that thou
Do spit and swel at their good luck whom Fortune does allow.
Be earnest evermore to learn, but see thou force nowhit
What one he is that does instruct so he do teach thee right
And having skill impart the same to such as do desire
With greedy minds to light their torch or candle at thy fire.
Remember that thy self did learn of other men before.
My Muse Thaleya hold thy hand, proceed (I say) no more,
But end thy undertaken work: if ought be left unfold
When better time hereafter serves thou shall at full unfold.
Do pardon (Reader) if that I my race too far have roon,
For sure my Muse did mean thee well when I this Book begoon.
A Path to Pleasure thee alone, a Mean to find the way
To perfect Virtue, where she sitts and keeps this earth in stay.
Finis.
G. T.

The Translater to the Book.
FArewell thou little book an other man's and mine,
The Gods allow thee blessed hap, report without repine.
Well may thou liked be. and so thou shall I trust,
Of such as Virtue do embrace: as for the rest thou must
Appoint upon as foes. I mean the sinful sect,
That neither thee for Virtues sake, nor Virtue will respect.
Was never man that wrote of Virtue yet a whit
But Envy would with malice seek his travail to requite.
But force thou not at all, be bold and never blushe:
For Glory ever gains the bird where Envy beats the bushe.
Since thou of Virtue do and nothing else entreat,
I know thy foes are friends to Vice, with wrath and ire repleate.
With them thou have to deal: thou know the wonted saw.
The Jade will kick at him that rubbs his back if it be raw.
Then since thou prickst with pen the galled back, be sure
Thou shall despite, in stead of love of wicked wights procure.
For troth does purchase hate, and reapes that fruit for gain
A bad reward for good desert. But wotst thou what again?
The better sort of men will like thy purpose well,
And ring thy praise by good report as loud as Larum bell.
If be that pende thee first, and brought thee forth to light
Could find in heart to hazard thee to hands of foul despite:
Why should I more account to keep thee under wing
That only phrase for phrase translate and verse to Meter bring?
Thou art no new devise, the weed wherein thou were
Is somewhat altered, but I trust Mancinus need not fear
Or stand in doubt of thee, he shall not loose his right:
I would not go about to wrong a Roman if I might.
But for desire to make Mancinus better known,
I toylde anewe the soil that he with painful plough had sown.
I trust he shall not loath our mother tongue at all:
Mancinus is Mancinus still I trust and ever shall.
And thus to end my tale I wish (thee little Book)
To do no worse than him that does upon thy Virtues look.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON in Knight Rider streate, by Henry Bynneman, for L.
Maylerd.


