News from Spain. A RELATION OF THE DEATH OF DON RODRIGO CALDERON, MARQVES OF
SEVEN Churches, etc. Faithfully translated according to the Spanish Copy
Printed at MADRID. By Fernando Manojo. From the Court. 1622.

News from Spain.
DON RODERIGO CALDERON was the son of Francisco Calderon, who being a
Soldier in Flanders, begot him of Maria de Sandalin a German woman. He was
made legitimate many years after by the marriage of his Parents, and borne in
Antwerp, amidst the wants of War and military Misfortunes. Being a Child of
few months old, he was let down the City wall (an angry presage of what was
to succeed) to avoid the danger of a sack, without receiving any hurt but
fear. His Father (now a Widdower) borne at Valliadolid, of honest Parentage,
with some Inheritance, brought him thither, and seeing him grown up, and not
beloved by a Mother in law, whom he had made his second Wife, thinking how to
setle him in some course to live; placed him first as Page with the
Vice-chancelor of Arragon, and after with the Marquis of Denia, Don Francisco
Gomez de Sandoual y Rojas, now Duke of Lerma, who then sat at the stern of
this Monarchy, and was styled the Favorite of King Philip the Third, now with
God. Don Roderigo shot up so fast, under the shadow of his Masters Greatness,
and trenched so deep into his favor, that he got to be a Groom of the
Bedchamber: And, after Don Pedro Franqueza, Earl of Villa-longa, he was made
Secretary of Estate, and only managed the Offices of diverse; so that
Expedition in the great affairs of Justice and Reward past through his hands.
He was Active and Intelligent, of a comely Presence, somewhat haughty toward
Suitors (whose company then he wanted not) but punctual, obsequious, and
careful where he meant to please. He married with Dona Ynas de Vergas, Lady of
Oliua; which Title he left after to his eldest Son Don Francisco Calderon.
His Father (an honest man) sought not to rise, but wisely noting the
inclination of his Son, dissuaded him sometimes from it, whereat taking
dislike, blown up with the wind of Ambition, he forgot somewhat his natural
duty, (desirous to link himself to the Family of a great Lord of these
Kingdoms, who was Governor in Flanders where he was borne) yet he advanced
his Father (a Widdower now the second time) to be a Knight of Saint John, and
Alcayde of Consuegra: after of Saint James, where he was Lieutenant of the
Order, and had the best Encomienda in Arragon; in which place, like a Christian
wise man, he bounded the limits of his fortune. The trumpe of Fame sounded
far the name of Don Rodrigo, and his great favor with the Duke, and struck
in the Government. Hence pride of heart entering, made him treat presumptuously
with diverse, and Power and Greatness laid open unto him occasions of
Corruption and Briberie, from whence grew his excessive wealth. Ill Report
published his great faults so broadly, that he sought to shelter himself
under the Protection of his Majesty's Pardon (gotten indirectly as was said) by
which he received plenarie Absolution for all was past. But by occasion of the
Duke of Lermaes retreat from Court to his own House, his excesses were again
divulged, with a common imputation of Deaths, Falsifications, Witchcrafts and
Briberies. The particulars were these. He was accused by the Attorney General,
culpable of the death of our Queen, Lady Margaret of Austria, who is with God:
but because the proofs were not pregnant, he was of that acquitted, as also
for the deaths of Alonso de Caravajal, Father Christopher Suarez a Jesuit,
Pedro Cauallero, and Pedro de Camino. But for the imprisonment and death of
Augustine de Auila (an Alguazil of this Court) and circumstances thereof; and
the assasinate committed on the person of Francisco de Xuara, by the Sergeant
John de Gusman at his procurement, and for having unduly obtained the Pardon
of his Majesty deceassed, for his said offenses; he was adjudged to die. He
had notice thereof from Lazaro de los Rios, etc.

HIs Titles, Offices, and Commodities, were these, which follow. He was Marquis
of seven Churches, Earl of Oliua, Comendador of Ocana, Knight of the Order of
Saint James, Captain of the German Guard, Treasurer of the House of Arragon,
Register of the Chancerie of Valladolid, Steward of the works of the said
City, Chief Alguazil of the said City and Chancerie, and Alcayde of the
Kings prison. He had two Regencies there, and the first voice and place in
Court. He was chief Postmaster of that City. He had a Marauedi for every
Bull of the Cruzada that was imprinted in Valladolid, of the Kings gift, which
came to above six thousand Ducats of rent. He had always a Chamber of
allowance in the Play Houses of Valladolid, as also in the Corral of Madrid. He
was Regidor of Soria, and had a voice in Court. He had two Regencies in the
City of Placentia, and a voice in Court. He was depositarie General in the
said City, and had a voice in Court. He was Register of the Court of the said
City. He had the Patronage of the Monastery of Porta Coali in Valladolid. The
Patronage of the Riall Chapel of the Monastery of the Mercedes of Madrid.
His household stuff was valued at four hundred thousand Ducats. He had
half of the mother of Pearl brought from the East Indies, containing thirty
Quintals of shells, which among the Negroes passes current for Bullion. He
had the Impost of Brasil wood that came from Lisbone, worth twelve thousand
Ducats a year. He had a Grant, that none without his leave, could barter for
Milstones and Whetstones as Barbers use, which come from foreign Parts, to
send them to the East Indies; this was worth to him many Ducats.

It is verified for certain, that he received yearly above two hundred
thousand Ducats of rent. To particularize all his wealth, would ask along
time.

His Father, his two Sons, two Daughters, and his Wife, went from Madrid two
days before he died, having much bewailed his fall, and wrought much for his
delivery.

The Executioner lead his Mule, and (according to the custom of Spain) made
Proclamation. This is the justice which the King our Sovereign Lord commands
to be done on this Man, for having treacherously killed a man, committing an
assasinate, and being guil tie of the death of another, with other offenses as
appears by his Judgment: wherefore he is to be beheaded, and be an example,
that others that shall do the like, may have the like.

A Relation of the death of Don Rodrigo Calderon, Marquis of seven Churches,
etc.
I Stand in doubt to write what will seem strange to many, and my Relation be
taxed as too short, by those which saw it acted, and by others, which saw it
not, too affectionate: but the synceritie of my intent is grounded on the
mean, taken from a particular Confession which discovers the greatness of
the Action, and rareness of the Case. Don Rodrigo Calderon, late Marquis of
seven Churches, Earl of Oliua, Captain of the German Guard, a Knight of the
Order of Saint James, and Comendador of Ocana, being imprisoned in his own
house with a strong Guard, having but the use of one only Chamber with little
light; after his Cause had been in discussing two years and a half, had
sentence of death given against him, by the Lords of the Assembly, Don
Francisco de Contreras (now most worthy President of Castile) Luis de Salzedo,
and Don Diego del Corral. He had notice thereof by Lazaro de los Rios, a
Register of the Process, the fourteenth of July 1621. To which he made answer,
that he heard it. Then turning to a Crucifixe, he said; God be blessed, whose
will be in me fulfilled: which was like some other of his actions, both before
and after (which, to be short, I let pass in silence) grounded on a virtuous
Spirit, wholly exercised in spiritual books of devotion, and full of Religion
and Christian courage. From that time, until his death, which was three
months after, he never was unclothed, nor came in bed. There was a Pallet by
his bed side, with a leather couerlet, on which in the night he rested a
little, spending the most part of it in mental Prayer, wherein he much
profited by reading a Book of the holy Mother Teresa of JESUS, to which he
was much affected, so that he could repeat by memory whole Pages thereof: as
also out of a Book of Prayers, composed by Father Molina; and in spiritual
Conferences had with the Religious, he cited to them these Books, or others
such like. He daily read the lives of Saints in Flos Sanctorum, persuaded
thereunto by Mother Teresa and Father Molina, of whom (as he said) he learned
it. He made a general Confession with Humility and Contrition, accompanied
with many tears of tenderness, witnessing the good preparation of his mind,
for what was to come; but to declare particulars, would make rather a Book
then a brief Relation.

And I heard Friar Gabriel his Confessor say, who is Procurator General of the
discalced Carmelites (a religious person of venerable fame) that during thirty
years space, wherein he had been a Physician for Souls, he never
experienced the like: for neither when the sentence of death was notified unto
him, or upon any discomfort did he change countenance, or shed tear; but when
he remembered his sins, they fell like showers. O force of divine love! which
does soften hearts not shaken with adversity, from whence proceeds their
Fortitude and Humility. He had conference with diverse Religious, and
particularly with Friar Gregory de Pedros, a Preacher to his Majesty, whose
great parts of learning and eloquence are already blazond by fame, and need no
report of mine. To him and his Confessor he unfolded his Conscience with
Security and Satisfaction, not regarding Honor, or any other pretext, having
so resigned up his will to God, and his obedience to his Confessor. That humane
fears wrought little in him, without resolving speedily what difficulties they
proposed. How excellent he was in this, his death will bear witness. He
petitioned an appeal from his Judgment, according as his Counsel advised
him: but his diligence in procuring his defense, never diuerted his mind from
the consideration of his death, nor made him omit the exercises of a virtuous
life. The Judges did not admit his Appeal, but insisted on the execution of
the sentence: whereof he having notice the first of October, answered; I hear
it, and turning to a Crucifixe, said: God be blessed, whose will be in me
fulfilled. No impatient word was ever heard fall from him, for as his Soul
grew daily nearer Heaven, so showed he most courage in most discomfort, not
being sensible of earthly losses, but falling out of love with them, the joy of
his Spirit flew a higher pitch, then the discontents of this World did reach
unto, so that on the day of his death (had not his Confessor hindered it) he
would have proclaimed his sins in the street, as he often sought to do in
prison, if he had been permitted. His Appeal being not admitted, and the
Judgment confirmed; on Tuesday at midnight, Friar Pedro de la Concepcion, went
to him with this news, in place of his Confessor, who then was not well, who
told him he was to receive his Viaticum on Wednesday. He found him quiet at
his prayers, which he used much, and received in them particular favors from
God. He demanded of him wherefore he came: he answered, to spend the night
with you. Falling to discourse of the miseries of this life, and of the
happiness of the other that is without end, having fit time, he said to him:
Who would not with a good will, exchange a life temporal for an eternal? To
which he answered. Alas, Father, would I had not this one, but a thousand lives
to lose for Gods sake: then (replied the Friar) he will come to you to morrow,
and give you the Pledge of his Grace, to receive hereafter the Crown of his
Glory. He then presently conceiving wherefore he said so; kneeled down before
a Crucifixe, and with great zeal of devotion, said thrice: Thy will be done, O
Lord (using this resignation of mind in all his tribulations.) Then rising up,
he said, I have something to do; and going behind the bed, he put on a shirt
of hair, and a cross with sharp pricks of steel, which he ware about his
neck, having (for obedience to his Confessor) put them off the day before, to
mitigate his continual penance, making his virtues more secure, by the
secrecy wherewith he practiced them. This he did on days of fasting, which
was weekly, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, and in those of abstinence, not
tasting any thing that might please him, yet so warily that those which
attended him observed it not. The rest of the night, he spent in spiritual
Exercises. And when the Friar propounded to him, how God rewarded those that
take benefit by afflictions, offering them in imitation of his most painful
Passion: he answered. I pray God, Father, my sins cause me not to lose so
great Happiness; although, I assure you, I feel such comfort now, that if it
would not seem lightness in me, I could laugh. Neither was his fear unlike
his hope; affections which tied him alike to God; humility and acknowledgement
of his own misery, accompanied the one; and trust in Gods Mercy and Power,
the other. On Wednesday morning, he disposed the affairs of his Soul by
direction of his Confessor, and of Friar Gregory de Pedrosa, whose assistance
was of great comfort and profit to him. Then he went into the Chapel, wearing
the white mantle of his Order, where his Confessor said Mass, and he Received,
with great Faith and Love of God: at which time, with a Spirit full of zeal,
he said: O Lord, since thou come to me to day, let me come to thee to
morrow; and coming to those words of consolation: In manus tuas Domine
commendo Spiritum meum: he added, Vitam and honorem meum. The Mass being
ended where he Rcceiued, he heard other four, with such tranquillity and
devotion, that he never sighed nor lamented, being thereat out of modesty
ashamed, lest his devotion should be therefore accounted rather
vainglorious, then virtuous: in this he excelled, as his private Alms,
given in the time of his better fortune, bear witness; and the Religious, by
whose hands they passed, can affirm. The Chapel, in which lies the body of
the holy Mother Teresa of JESUS, in the Church of the Discalced Carmelites at
Madrid, was part of his Alms, which he desired to make more sumptuous, if his
Order had permitted. He also built the Heremitage in the Desert de Batuccas,
and caused two Masses to be daily said in that which is near to Pestrana. He
said the Office of our Lady, and for the Souls departed, having continued it
many years. He was Confessed, and received in the Pascall Feasts, our Ladies,
and the Apostles, and examined daily his conscience: which he used for these
four or five years last past, to do twice a day. He had thrice made his
general Confession before this last, which he ended on Saint Matthewes Eve,
and Received the next day. In the prison he was confessed twice or thrice a
week, after he might with leave do it. He passed the evening with his
Confessor, and with Friar Gregory de Pedrosa, in spiritual questions, so
high, that it appeared, God was his Tutor, and the School the Prison, as he
said. In his Spiritual conference, these words escaped him: I wish I could
give a thousand lives for mine Enemies. His Confessor checked him for calling
them Enemies; whereat recalling himself, he humbly demanded how he should
name them? His Confessor told him, he should make that Recognition for those
which sought to hurt him, if any such were. He much esteemed this advise, and
fulfilled it. This night, Father John de la Madre de Dios, companion to his
Confessor, brought him a Memorial of Bequests from the Religious of his Order,
which were Prayers and Fastings. He was greatly comforted therewith, and
humbly answered, that he hoped to see himself with God, and to beseech his
divine Majesty to reward their great charity. Giving discreet satisfaction
unto all, and not leaving any thing by his near approach to death unperformed,
that belonged to courtesy and vrbanitie, or virtuous policy. So that when some
came to demand of him debts, no just cause moving them: he answered, If his
estate were in himself, he could dispose thereof as he liked; but being now
in his Majesty, he stood obliged to defend it, and make no declaration in
prejudice of the true Owner, for those that unjustly sought to have it. Talking
with Father John de la Madre de Dios, he said: My Father, Wife, Children,
Estate and Honor, is taken from me, as to morrow shall be my Life; but that
which only grieueth me, is, that I have no more to lose for Gods sake; the
memory of the loss of these things did not trouble him, but the desire that
his death might give example to others so to live, as to save their Souls. O
generous condition of a zealous Soul! All love seemed too little, compared
with the greatness of the Object; and light increasing according to love,
discerned more clearly the unlimited distance between humane power, and
divine Omnipotency. Being late in the night, he was importuned by the
Religious there present, to lie down on his Pallet, which he did, holding a
Crucifixe, and by him the Picture of the holy Mother Teresa of JESUS; there he
reposed a while, overcome rather with contemplation then sleep. He demanded
of Friar Pedro de la Concepcion, if he should receive Extreme Unction: who
answered, That the Church used not to give it to those that dyed so. Them (said
he) since I cannot receive this Sacrament, do me the courtesy, to teach me
the Ceremonies thereof, to know them before I dye. The Friar took a Manual,
and said the Prayers, Letanies, and Ceremonies, omitting the substance of the
Sacrament. He gave ear to all with humble attention and devotion, not
shunning, but seeking earnestly to prepare himself to dye, in the well
performing whereof, he placed his greatest happiness. Then he continued in
mental Prayer, from five a clock until six in the morning, with admirable
recollection, for the which, afterward he infinitely thanked God. Here let
Contemplatiues, practiced in prayer, consider the divine Favors showed by this
Repose, to a man that had the sword laid to his throat, whose thread of Life
was even spunne, the representation of Death securing the attention of his
Spirit, who being unloaded from the weight of this mortality, was united to its
everlasting Beginning: a thing so desired by those that treat with God, and
only effected by Death, and wished of him, as the mean to obtain so glorious
an End. That morning he put off his hair shirt before his Confessor, modestly
preventing the public inconvenience which might ensue, by what he desired to
have secret. Then kneeling down before diverse grave Religious persons, he read
a protestation of Faith, which himself had made. In it was contained, a
quintessence of inward zeal, uttered in words, so feeling and significant,
that it caused both admiration and confusion. Don Pedro Fernandez de Mansilla,
an Alcayde of the Court, came to take his leave of him, whom he met half way,
with a behavior and countenance of such serenitie, that it paralleld not with
his present estate. Don Pedro desired him to command him some service, to
which he answered, That since he gave him leave so to do, he besought him
for a quick dispatch in his Wife and Childrens business (which was a s^te for
Land with his Majesty, that depended before Don Pedro de Mansilla) to this he
gave him a courteous answer. Those that then were present, began to shead
tears, and sigh, seeing a courage so undaunted, and a presence so venerable.
He seeing himself to be the Cause of their woe, comforted them, saying:
Sirs, it is no time to lament, but to rejoice, since I am going to do the Will
of God. These words gave cause of comfort to pious minds, by discovering the
good estate of his Soul and great Christianity. Then he went into the
Chapel in a Cloak, and upon it the habit of Saint James, where he heard many
Masses. He entreated the Carmelite that said it, to put his Soul together with
the Host into the Challice. This was to follow the example of the holy Mother
Teresa of JESUS, who on a Palm Sunday said the like. This wrought so good
effect, that he was comforted both in Soul and Body, and encouraged to
suffer. He gave his Rosarie to a religious man of the Order of Saint Hierome,
for accounting himself as dead, he prepared for his own Dirge. Thus he
continued, performing many acts of Contrition, in fervent prayer, until the
time of execution. At eleven, Friar Gregory de Pedrosa came unto him, and
said: Sir, now let us go, for God calls us. He presently answered; Let us
go. When they put off the Cloak of his Order, there came one and put a Hood
over his short Coat, from which and from his doublet he had the night before,
cut the neck, and the strings from his band, in place whereof he had put a
button, to come more ready to his last End, knowing he was made a sacrifice to
God, who disposed the means to make his death more easy, which he received
rather with Love then Fear. When he went out of the Chapel, he told his
Confessor, he felt himself very weak both in Soul and Body: who answered
him; Trust in God, and pray to him for strength, and he will not deny it you
at this time. Coming to the stayres, God gave him courage, that it now seemed
not difficult to him to go in the streets, as it was wont; so other things,
which in his imagination appeared impossible, coming to act them, by Gods
assistance, were become very fezible. Coming down the stayres, and seeing a
Mule ready for him, he said: What, a Mule? Nay, I ought rather to be dragged
in a basket; practizing still more pure Acts of Humility and contempt of the
World, and desiring the most disgraceful death. He rode on the Mule without
fear, squaring all his actions to the rules of Modesty, and necessity without
ostentation. Then he toeke a Crucifixe which he embraced so affectuously, that
it made great impression in the beholders. Going on, the people cried: God
pardon, and give you strength: to whom he answered, Amen; God reward you.
Coming to the Market place of Saint Dominick, and hearing the Prayers and
Cries of the people, he lifted up his eyes, and said: Lord, since they all ask
my Pardon, Pardon me, I beseech thee. When he came to the Smiths little street,
he said to his Confessor: Father, this is rather a triumph, then a carrying the
Cross of Christ, who was blasphemed, and I am prayed for. Pray, Father, that
the joy I now feel, be not a reward for that little I have suffered for his
sake. I dare not weigh these words in the balance of my Reason. Let us leave
something in silence, since his valor and sincerity, will sooner be searched
into by a zealous affection, then uttered by an eloquent tongue. He fixed his
eyes, with a grave aspect upon a Crucifixe there present, testifying thereby the
recollection of his thoughts. In his contemplation he remembered the spiritual
encouragement, given him by the Religious which accompanied him, divinely
discoursing on the Happiness to come. Being come to the place of Execution,
with a constant Countenance, he alighted from his Mule, and without any help,
went up the Scaffold. He beheld without fear the Sword and Block. Set his
Hood right, and said to the Religious: Let me rest here awhile. His Confessor,
and Friar Gregory de Pedrosa, sat down about him, with the rest of the
Religious, in number twelve, no person, but what was needful, being suffered
to enter. They kneeled down to pray for his Soul. He read diverse Iaculatory
prayers, with such resignation and attention, that his Instructors stood
astonished. After a good while he rose, and told his Confessor, he felt
himself comforted, to see that God wrought in him his will, saying, it was fit
to thank him therefore, and be confessed before death, and absolved by the
Bull of Faith in Baptism, with a protestation thereof. He did the like at the
time of his confession.
He was confessed, and receiving absolution, he fell on the ground and kissed
the feet of his Confessor. Being commanded to rise, he went to his Chair,
not to dye, but to triumph, with such courage, humility, and magnanimity,
that all were filled with piety and admiration. A part of his Hood he cast
behind the chair, and prayed whilst the Executioner made all things ready.
Then he called him, embraced him, and spoke to him most lovingly. He proceeded
so far in acts of pure Love and Joy, that when Friar Gregory de Pedrosa
said, Now is the time to show courage, he answered: I never felt such content.
When his feet were tied, he said, What do you? The Religious told him, it was
the Order. Then tie me, said he. Coming to tie his arms, he put them out,
saying: Hold, tie them. Then he called the Minister of death (let decency
excuse me for using this term) and said: Come hither, Brother, let me embrace
thee once more, and bowing toward him with his body, his arms being tied, gave
him the humble kiss of Peace. This Act of heroic humility, done with desire
of greater demonstration, drew down many tears, either of joy or sorrow in
the Spectators. When they tied him in the Chair, his Confessor told him, That
Christ was also tied; at which time he remembered the Passion with affections
burned in the fire of divine Love. His eyes were covered with a black taffata,
which himself had brought for that purpose. He lifted up his head, ready with
joy to perform what before he had so often thought of in prison, and said,
Take it, O Lord; Take it, O Lord. When the Executioner held the taffata with
his left hand, to give the stroke with his right hand: he forbid him, saying: I
will sit still, with a voice and heart so strong, that were it lawful, I would
say, Naturre had privileged him from fear. Then received he the stroke, and
repeating the sweet Name of JESUS, gave up his Soul. The Lookers on, though
bathed in tears, beheld a spectacle, not horrible, but pleasing, caused by a
happy death. A death that has eclipsed the greatest examples, and limited the
highest praises, whose duration will out-last the World. For were he not in
Nobility so ancient, he might hereby lay a foundation for a glorious Family;
since Nobility is but a virtue of the mind, practiced either in undergoing
dangers in War, or in giving good examples in peace, both which were seen in
him; and if according to the end, the virtue of the mind is to be measured;
here only was the love of God, where no respect was had to the World or to
Fame, which in the end will become dumb. This example of his death has
wrought much, being in Madrid, the Court of Don Philip the Fourth, King of
Spain, where is a general concourse of Strangers, magnifying with respect the
Spanish name (beside the deserved credit of their ancient valor) seeing a man
paralleld with any whom the Roman cloquence did extol, for although Sceuola,
Regulus, Horatius, and many others, suffered much honor; yet here morally
speaking, it was without it. And if any were present at this death, either
without Religion, or of a contrary (which God forbid) what inward remorse,
unquietness of mind, and accusation of conscience must they needs have, seeing
such strange acts of Faith and Love to God, wrought with such fortitude, that
it only may teach us the force of Truth, and Light of Catholic Religion. In
this Glass they may see their errors.

Thus far my love has carried me, although my Relation be but as a shadow
of this wonder: which such as saw not, may not hope to know as it was, because
those which were present, want capacity to declare it.

As to the substance, I had particular information from those which conuersed
with him in prison and abroad; all Persons of Virtue and Religion; and although
I heard of much more, yet would I not insert here but what was certain; for a
matter of it self so admirable, needs not borrow ornament or addition
elsewhere.

His Body lies buried in our Ladies Church, of the Discalced Carmelites in
Madrid, in the Deane and Chapters Chapel. These Religious, out of love to
him, buried him there, in a Tomb covered with a black cloth, and on it the
Insigne of his Order. Requiescant in pace. This Epitaph is written upon his
Sepulcher. He who within this Tomb does lie,
Began to live, when he did dye.


Soli Deo honor and gloria.
Imprinted at Madrid with license, by the Widow of Fernando Correa de
Montenegro.


