A declaration of thee power of Gods word, concerning the holy supper of the
Lord, confutynge all liars and falls teachers, which maintain their maskynge
mass invented against the word of God, and the Kings Majesty's most godly
proceadynge compyled Anno dn^i

M. D. XLVIII

Ezechi. ii, Their fathers have broken my couenaunte even to this day, and they
to whom I send, they are children without all shame and of such an heart as
cannot be reclamed, Saint Tho^ says, y^ worl^ malignaune
Is sore infected, and in great ^eoperdyt
through vaynglory, which is repungnau^t
To gods precepts, his law and verity
For people they be, of soch malignitie
and corrupt minds seducig what the^ may
Al godly proceadinges utterly to delay
Marvel not you bishops, and prelates of dig nitie
Though in ye zeel of Phynes, and also Helias
I stomock your sturdines, so full of impiety
thus stubburnly to stand against our Josias
which to reform his church and brig it as it was.
To her primer state, yet seduce ye what ye may
His godly reformacion, utterly to delay
This practyse you that s^^tful generacio^
Under cloked ypocrisy your grau^tshire to maintain,
much after your brother Judas is your^ co^ uersacion
with your lowsy ^urkig, to play legerdemayn
your craft is perceived, because ye co^uay not clean,
Yet are ye not ashamed, seducing what ye may
His godly reformacio^, utterly to delay
What c^science had your forefathers to put in their treasurye,
the. xxx. silver plates, which was for blood the price,
But no conscience at al, had those beasts so bloody
To murder the son of god, according their practyse,
such like ar our spiritual leaders ^ their de uyse
Which be not ashamed, seduce what they may
his godli reformacio^, ^^terli to delay
Sought they not by all means utterly to quench,
The faith of christ's most glorious resurrection
and as y^ damosel, y^ inquisitiue we^che
to have trapped peter, she asked him a question
do not these biting bears, so full of co^^e^^io^
without al shame, invent what they may
His godly reformacio^ utterly to delay
These waged soldiers, they should surmyse a lie,
That christ was stolen, they being a sleep
this exercise our ministers does use and oc^p^
by their hyrede sophisters to blemish and keep
this heaue^l^ verity, from us hongrie sheep
And as shameless liars, seduce what they may
His godly procedi^ges, utterly to deley.
Great is y^ dilige^^e, labor and study
of these whorish apostals (apostels I should say
which under y^ similitude, of virtue ^o holy
like popish ypocrites, craftily do they play
yet of their duble deli^g ashamed are not they
by all subtle mea^es, to seduce what they may
His godly procedinges utterly to deley
But truly they labor and travel in vayn
Like besheles of gods wrath, to kyck spew and spurn
yet shall the truth have his passourth plain
though they would kyl, head hang and burn
for the word of god shall not in vayn turn
but shall work gods will seducet what they may*
His godly precedinges utterly to deley
Christ says the tree is known by ye fruit
The^ must ye be judged, at the eye ymyne^te
By your subtle sleyghtes, though ye seame mute,
Yet work ye heythny she laws and rytes pestelente.
mayntayni^g mysteris of madness bitorme^t
And tyrable terrors, seduci^g what ye may
His godly reformacion, utterly to delay
A plant set was in the corrupt council
Of your alic^e^t grant sire of soch laudatio^
That if al your ^ugling, should you yet fayl
That should bring you to your estemacion
this captyue you men's co^scie^ces by collusio^
With your venomous vanities, seducyng what ye may,
This most godly reformacio^ utterly to de lay
Go little book, god send the good success
In their harres and minds which will y^ puse
and not to be blamed because you do expres
theypocrisi of soch as gods word does abu se
Thy name manifest here you do refuse
Yet in this myter, who that applies his mind,
Thy holy name written therein shall he find
To the high excellent and most gracious Prince Edward Duke of Somerset, Earl
of Hertforthe viscounte Bean Camp. Lord Semer, Gouerner of the Kings
Maiesteis person, and Protector of al his realms, his leauetenau^ te general
of al his armies, boht by land and by sea, treasoroure and Earl marshall of
England, Governor of the Ylles of Gernsey and Iersey and knight of the most
noble order of y^ garter
Ihon Mardeley wysheth grace peace and abundaunce of knowledge in gods truth
security of body with long life in the lyuinge God. Through Christ Jesus our
only savior.
Considering redupted and most noble prince, how prone and ready the malig
ners of gods verity ^e with all their exact diligence, to deprave and say ill,
as well of the true doctrine of that infallable and syncier truth, as al so of
thee teachers and preachers of the same, it has in manner compelled me
^oundering the great dysceatfulnesse and sturdynesse of the se wicked
wordlinges which be so pernyscyously bent to blind ye people of god with lies
and old wy fe ^ ^ables to depresse and hold dow ne the gospel of christ, and
still to uphold and maintain man's inuencyons, dreams and traditions. Thus
most gracious lord has in manner coharted me, to set fourth th^s simple
work, touching the most holy body and blood of christ which is the food of
our souls and confortable pledge of our salvation, sertyfyenge the true
beleuers to be made heirs of eternal life, and the partakers of all christ's
merytes. Death and resurrection, the which most sacred mystery, has been
both learnedly and pythely, by soundrye notable clerckes, and learned men,
devulgated unto the congregacyon as well in their Sermoones as in wrytynges
therein confutyng all errors and false opynyons which the ungodly malygners
have seduced thee people in, and yet do both by wryt^nge and preaching,
contrary unto the instytution of Christ the simple meanynges of the
Scriptures and the Kings Majesty's most godly beholdoye children of Syo^
and rejoice in the Lord you^ god for he has given you ^ teacher of ryghtes
ousnes Io. l. ^^
proceadynges, where of your gra ce is a fortherer of the same I have most
redoupted lord as one most unworthy and indynge, without profound knowledge of
learning confess me far unable to enter in the discussing of so high a matter
yet albeyt I have according unto the talente which I have received not hydyng
it in the ground as did that euel servant, but to y^ measure and
understanding which I have received of god by ye gift of his spyryte I will
like unto ruthe the mohabite, grain some part as well upon the land of scrip
ture as upon ancient Doctors approved, and the^ so gathered as it were in a
bundell together, the true understanding of this mystical meat of christ's
body and blood Declaring the right use thereof as by the word of God shall be
plain lie approve, and for because as yet this holy mystery hangs as it were
in a ballaunce, and not the true weyghe thereof as yet received of the multitude
I have dedicated this simple work into you re noble grace, unto whom God has
not only committed the guard and defense of this polytyke and civil realm,
But also the setting forth and ratifycacion of Gods most infalable word
which has many years sustayued open and manifest wrong, in this holy
mysterye. And because I cannot so exactly prefer this urgent matter to so
prudent and myhhty a Prince as your grace is, yet I trust my good will and
dyligence is accep ted of God, and though it be but very little that I can do,
yet I hope likewise that for the declarati on of this simple and manifest ve
ritie* your grace woll pardon my bold euterpryse and accept this power work
of my s^are hours in good part, which shall encora ge your prayerman, to the
more continuance of study here after. Thus god the eternal father for the
death and blood sheddynge of his only son Jesus Christ our savior preserve
the Kings Ma iestie, your most noble grace with all his most honorable
counsel, and the hole realm to gods glory.

Amen.
Your most humble orator Ihon Mardeley Clerc of the Kings Majesty's mynte
called suffolk house.

The power of gods word
Considering prouer, if wake in the ^ aye and keep the p^the of y^ righ teous,
for thee just su^l ^w^l in y^ land and ye innocents shall remain in it, But
y^ ungodly shall be to ted out of y^ land and y^ wit ked doers shall be taken
out of it.
thee wonderful mutacion of man's judgments, and also what great hurt^ and
daungyer of soul ens^yth by the educatyon and teaching of foch corrupt
doctrine, to the congregacious, as rather is to be feared supersty cyousse than
Godly, for many their be, that thynkethe the Gospel of Christ, In these
days to be wrested more after the fantasses of men, than according unto the
cen^yre truth, of the same: as sundry persons which of malycyouse minds, be
not ashamed both so to say, and speak, and also boldlye does affirm,
without all shame, that the rytes and ceremonies used in the Church, which
cannot be proved by the Scryptures, ought to be taken for the word of God
unwritten, and that we ought to believe them as thee holy word of God, con
tayned in thee sacred Bible, and thee Testamente of Christ, full well
considered the Prophet Esaye. These kind of men, where Esaias, ii^*
he says, Your lyppes speak leasynges, and your tongue sets out
wickedness. No man regardethe truth, nor righteousness, and no man
Iudgethe truly, every man hope^h in vain thin ges, and ym^gineth dysceate:
And therefore to peynte out soche lygi^tmate children of Satan, the father of
all liars, whose sons natural the^e sh:y^ckynge Children be, which seek
council, but not at me says thee LORD* which take a web in hand, but not
after my will, That they may heap one sin upon another. These halltynge
generacyon, whi che of froward hearts, will not walk in the testymonye of
Ihesu But tread fourth still in thee dampnable Doctrine of lies, and men's
doctrine of lies, and men's tra dy^yons, unto whom it is said. iii. Regum.
xviii. Chapter. How iii regum xviii.
long will ye halte on both parts, If the Lord be God, follow him, If Baal
be God, follow him Oh how does these wicked Edomites, defend the kingdom of
Antichrist the eldeste son of the devil, By whose lyenge and most dampnable
doctrine, they have seduced the people into blindness and error, against the
verity of the manifest truth of the scriptures and most godly proceadinges of
the Kings Majesty's: The ho ly Prophet David in the. lii. psalm. psam. lii.
Makes great exclamatyon of these Uyperous liars (saying) wherefore
enforcheth y^ thy tongue to myschief, forging disceate like a new set raser,
wherefore loueste thou malice rather than honestye rather to lie, then to say
truth, for thou delyghtest in peruiciouse speech. Oh fraudulent tongue, these
blind teachers, God shall utterly rote up by the rotes, and destroy them, he
shall throw them down out of their tabernacles, and consume them utterly,
for so many as make or love leasynges, ^po, xxii
shall be cast among murderers, and Idolaters, in the lake of hell burning
with fire and ^r^m stone. What else be al those which goes about to teach the
doctry ne of men and soche sacraments and lowsy ceremonies, as be not ones
mentioned, or taught us by the word of God. What else I say be these. But
liars, viperous whelps, and the children of Satan, which brought fourth the
fyrstlye (for it is said) Set lyeng gene. iii, ^^o viii. E^he iiii C^^lo, iii.
a side, let every man speak the truth unto his neighbor, for as much as we
be members together and lie not one to another. Esaias lix. Chap. Hier. These
dreamers Esaias. iix,
aleageth for the stablysshynge of this their dampnable doctrine, the words
of S. Ihon, which says that Jesus did many thyn ges, which be not written,
and also S. Paul commanded certain ii, these, ii
unwritten tradicions and ceremonies, to be observed of the Thessalonia^s and
kept. And that Paul him self preached not the scriptures only. But also the
tra dicions of the elders (these I say) and soch like doctrine, many of the se
belly beasts, goes about to tea che and instruct the people, to be the gospel
of Christ, and by the same, would stablishe, not only certain sacraments, and
ceremonies used in the church, but also their God of the altar, to be very
flesh and blood ryally (yea, the very same body, that was borne of the
Uyrgyn Mary and suffered upon thee cross, which is blasphemious doc tryne, and
most necessary to be confuted amongeste all matters. Now being in
reformacion, these manner of teachers says S. paul are always false liars,
wicked beasts, and slow belys, These hypocrytes do affirm, that y^ church (as
they say the byshopes (as they understand has power to judge over the
Scripture and to examy ne it, and auctorytye to allow or to r^fuse the
Gospel. To dyspence with the tene Commandments to alter the form of
Baptyme, and to make new artycles of our faith, besides those, which are
contained in the Scryptures. This detestable error and blyndnesse of soche
teachers. Whose malycyouse obstenacye, where through they blaspheme God, and his
word is to be lamented, the thing being so manyfeste from the which to
stablysshe the hearts and minds of the godly, which believes the word
written, to be suffycient for their salvation and to contempe and abhor
these doutyng dreamers of these malygnau^^t minysters, I will resyte certain
testymonyes which euydentelye shall approve the written word of God* to be
the only and unremovable foundacyo^ of our faith and that all the Artycles
of our salua^yon ought to be proved by the holy Scryptures, and not by thee
Gloses of men, Byshopes laws, or man's tradicions, rytes or ceremonies, which are received in the church, and not contained in the scriptures, which they say
is the word of God unwritten. The first prove is the fourth of deu^^, iiii
Deuter^. Where it is said, ye shall not add unto the word, which I speak
unto you. Neither mynishe from it, note these words, if they were ever
expounded to be understand of the unwritten word, which these lyeng
disceauers affirm, but ought to be understand of the written scripture only,
so that plainly they whi che ymagyne, yt there should be any other vnwrytte^
verity, be clerly against Boddes truth, for in the sixth of the same beke is
written. deute, vi
What I chmaund you, that shall thou do only, unto the Lord thou shall neither
add, nor mynyshe, any thing. And in the last chap. of the Apocalips, who so
ever adds any thing unto this. The Lord shall send him the plages, which
be written in this book. Which place the Duns men even Duns himself,
grauntethe that this saying ought to be understand of the whole scripture.
The^ do not these false teachers sin manyfestly, against the commaun
dementes of god, which does affyr me, that their is any other word of god
unwritten, as they do why ^he expound the scriptures after their own
fantasses, giving judgment of the will of god, without the word of God
written, and is it not a deueliysshe lie, to say, the scripture cannot be under
stand without men's comentaries or gloses, because the scripture is so obscure
dark and doubtful, that it may be else applied to con deu. xxviii
fyrme heresies what benedictyo^s be appointed of sundry kinds unto them
that keeps those thyn ges, which be written in the book of the law, And in
the. xxii. of the deute xxii
same book, does not Moses say manifestly thus. Set and fix your hearts upon
all the words which I testyfye unto you this day, that ye may command your
children to keep and obscure al things why che are written in the book of the
law, for they be not given, and co^man^ded unto you in vayn: But that every
one of you should live after them Oh mark what these words imports, that
here is euerlastring life promised unto all them why^h keep these things,
which at wryete^ in the scripture So that by these words ye may clearly
understand, that Moses, he a^opnteth this to be the fynall e^^^ and only
cause why. That god would have his word to be wryt te^, y^ al men, of what
degree so ever they be (might be saved) by the word of god, and then the
sequel must follow to be a plain blasphe my, to affirm and say, that we may
be saved, or dampened by any tradicions of man's inuentyons, being not expressed,
in gods bo ke, are not all those very ydiotes, and fantastycal, which does
ascry be this ignorance and negligence unto god (as thou^he) he either ^^l^t
not, or else would not, Deter mine all artycles necessary, unto o^^e salvation:
to be oppressed by wrytyn^e within the holy Scrip ture, (or else) they declare
the^ selves, to be ignoraunte of the fynal cause, why, the Scripture was ^e uen
unto us, he has not given unto us, a patched, or a work un parfect, but a
full and a whole glass se, wherein the par^^ght ymagyne of his d^itie, which
Saince Paul calls the prynte of his substaun ^e should a^^e^^ fully therein,
Also S. Ihon say^^e that this word does shine in darkness, and that is the
light which shyneth in men's hearts, blinded of the deuel, through sin: and
that Christ does open unto us, the will of GOD through his gospel. Therefore
it is not only thee ignorance of man, that the word of God is thus
blasphemed, But through thee malice of thee devil, for the deuell never
cease to dysfygure this word, which is the testy monye of thee Son of
god, wh^ he despised, before thee world was made, and shall fight with fight
with him, even with al his power, until the day of judgment This book, the
King is commaun ded to have always in his hands and in his syghte, y^ book of
y^ law and to read out of it, all the days deuteronomy* xvii
of his life, for this purpose, that he should learn to fear h^s Lord god,
and he delygentlye to apply his study, therein. And then this promise is made
him, that he shall live long and many of his proge uy, and lynage, shall enjoy
his king dom, after him, would unto God, all Christen kings, and princes,
would regard the reading of this book, and think it to be one part of their
offycie, to be sometimes occupied in the reading thereof, that they may learn
the will of God, how he will be feared by his word only, and not by any popy
deute xxx
she laws and man's tradycions, for it is wrytt^ in the. xxx. of
Deuteronomium. The commaun dement which I give unto the, is not above thy
power, neither far re from the, it is not set in heaven neither it is beyond
the sea, but the word is night unto the, even in thy mouth and in thy heart.
Mark what Moses says here, Remember says he I have ^et it before thy eyes,
that thou mayes^e read in that book and understand it also: For in this book,
he forbid death al manner of honor, and condempneth all manner of worship and
service, to be invented other done unto god, after the will, com maundementes,
trady^yons and doctrynes of men, contrary to his word or otherwise then his
worcester de appoynteth, or that which is not ordained by the same or commanded,
for these services must be learned out of the word of god both what will
please him, and what pleases him not: These things be know^ only, by the
holy wryt ten scripture, and if ye believe not this, be sure heaven and earth
at the latter day shall witness against us, if we follow these false lyenge
Prophets of the false chri stes, which ymagyne a new word and a new christ, as
to be bound to certain appointed places, day ^s meats, vows, to abstain
from the lawefull creatures ordained of god, for S. peter puts a diffe rence
between thee Prophetic^ll scripture, and an interpretacyon which is made, and
inuenced of man's own brain, and such tradycyons which are made and en^oyned
at man's commandment calling all manner of doctrynes, which be not contained
in the scrip ture of the holy ghoost. Ca^cyos and disceytfull fables,
exhortyng all men diligently to try by this candell of prophetical scripture,
the doctrine, of the false lying pro phete^, which ymagyne a new prophecy^,
or scripture, and a new word, for by that means says h^* shall be ^^^^ed
out the deuyls subty^^ie and ^^l^^o^e, Calling al m^^^ doctrynes not contained
in the scripture, very darkness, and the scripture only to be thee true
light and l^nte^ne as David called it saying) thy word is a lante^^e unto my
fete. and the light unto my path wa^es: Paul in both his Epistle to Tymothy,
and in his Epistle to Tyte also does ear nestly warn us to be ware of the
blasphemies, which should be in this last time, o^ these lyeng teachers which
should lay upon our necks new and wicked opynyons, and buld and confyr me,
with their doctrine and laws, not con fyrmed by the word of God, and the
prophets, but by false signs and lyinge miracles, to blind and disceaue the
unfaithful and soche as have not received the truth of gods word, and he
monysheth us so earnestly of these things, that he calls heaven and ^arth,
to wit nesse with him, that be ^yd premo nyshe and declare to us before, of
these Antichrists that should come Declarynge thereby what care and sorrow, he
takes for us, and how sore he lamenteth, that we should be thus seduced and
disceaued, by soche blasphemous Antichrystes, as these be, which would appoynte
us another Gospel, of their own brains to feade us, with dreges of their
invented Sacraments and lowsye Ceremonies which they patched unto thee word
of word of God, as necessary unto our salvation, having not the scrip ^ures
for the stablyshement of the same, and it would then compel the people of God as
well to receive them with asmoche reverence as those sacrame^te^ and other
ordina^ ces instytuted by the word of god, These blyndes guydes, the Prop^et
Esaye threateneth the everlasting night of infydelyte or un belefe, and unto
them also that be leave either any new reuelatyons or else any apparicions of
dead sp^ rites without the word of God the words be these, shall the people
seek counsel of their God: or shall they ask counsel of the dead, for the
living, shall they not rather look and search thee law of thee Lord, and take
the testymony of god unto counsel, for if they tell you not (says he)
according unto this word. They shall have no morning light, Oh mercyful lord
what sore and grievous, saying (is this) yea it is a threatenyug, unto them that
understand what this voice is, and what darkness this signifies, this morning
light says Esaias (is Christ) the light o^ the world as he says him self bid
dynge us walk in the light while ye have it, that no darkness com pass you,
thye light the prince of all darkness stale first from mankind thoro we
infydelytie, and robbed us of thee true knowledge of God, and brought us into
aldarkenes of errors, and supersticio^, by these lyenge prophets which would
bring v^ to infydelitye by their dark doct^yne of vnwryte^ veryt^es, but it so
pleased the son of righteousness to restore this light unto the world again,
and his coming was unto us thee bright morning which the prophet speaks of
in this place But alas it is no marvel that we have so long walked in this
darkness, for we have been taught by Bala^^ prophet, a new christ and have for
sake^ the word of God. and sought this light in the deuylles doctrine, and men's
tradicions, having our confydence in fantasys, that we have believed dead
spyrytes, and made new articles of our faith, as that there is a purgatory
after this ^y^^ out of the which souls may be redeemed through y^ sacrifyce of
y^ mass, which y^ antychriste of Ro^^ and his lying shauelinges make to be a
sacry^yce for y^ quyck and the dead ^^trarye to y^ institucio^ and ordayna^ce
of christ. Having not one word of y^ scripture ^or the stablishment of these
their dreams. And ^^t the^ co^ti^ue in y^ ministracio^ o^ ^ ^asse daily
against y^ kings mai^^^^e^ most^ godly procead^^g^s, ^y ^cca^yon whereof the
people commyt Idolatrye, alas it is to be ^^^^^ied to ^e y^ sturdynes of these
Babilonical papists which will not gyu^ place to y^ truth, but shall still
continue in their maskyng, and contrary to the word of god, o most execrable
antichrists which take upon you, to offer up a sign for a savior, which is
made by the hands of a wicked man and bring m^ to worship bread and wine instead of the eternal God which ar to falls god^ (as they are used, by your
lyfti^g up, where find you in the word of god y^ ye ought so to do but only by
your Romysh fathers apoyntme^t, Christ never commanded his word to be preched
unto bread and wy^e which are but two dead things, but to soch people as had
faith to believe and follow y^ same, he bad yt faithful beleuers of this holy
supper, to take and eat this bred and not to knele to it, and to worship it as
god. For S. Augu, and the old doctors calls it a sacrament, a mystery and
mistical meat whi che is not eaten with to the and belly, but with ears and faith,
and as touching ho nour and worship to be done to it, it is plain y dolatry.
This most odiouse veneracio^ was added by your pope, not with out the perpetual
^urse of god, as appears in Deuteronomy. xii. and Apo. xxii. For in your popes mass
nether is y^ lords death set out to be understand or preached nor yet his body
and blood frutfully theri^ received, nether ar y^ hearers there of ^swaded to
continual thanks giving, nor yet christianli exorted to a mutual love and
concord, but the deuoutest yt comes to y^ mass of you rs, one ha^eth another,
one dis^ay neth another, one troubles another, one robs another, besides y^
abominable supersticious and ydo latries which are daily therein committed, this
your abominable ma sse by so mani pestele^t popes du^sed which were peruerters
and stin^kinge Sodomites not regardinge the saying of the holy Apostle S. S.
Paul, but peruertyng the scrip tures for y^ mayntenau^ce of their Rom, xv*
belies and for lucre sake, which said. To. xv. I dare not speak of any of
those things, y^ christ has not wroughte by me. O shameless beasts the^ how
dare ye be so bold as contraay to gods holy word, invent and make the
vytuperable mass, wherein is the gloriouse sup per of the Lord (which was his
own instytucyon) most blasphemously blemysshed, and brought clean out of
remembrance, in y^ christen church, wherefore a remembrance of christ's death
to his co^ gregacion was that heavenly sup per first ordained, and a universal
thanks geuynge for the most fruitful benefyte of the same. In that holy and
sacred supper ar the mutual members of Christ's mistical body there gathered
together and knyt perfeyghtly together to their headde with the joints of
faith, and synowes of love, where as it is truly mynistred. But in your
popysshe mass their is no soche godly order, did not Jesus christ in the
institucion of this sa crame^t all bread symply say unto his apostles (take
and eat) he said not, behold and worship, did ever any of the Apostles
provoke any man to soch worshippi^g as these Idolaters do. Mark how far these
tals prophets of Baal, swerue from the doctrine of S. paul, as abhomi nable
scorners and thieves which pra ctyse nothing else but the utter de structyon of
souls and inuenters of tumulte and sedicid among the peo ple. Brethren says
he I beseech you Romans xvi
mark the^ that make division and give occasions of evil, contrary to the
doctrine that ye have learned and aduoyd the^, for they that are soch serve not
y^ lord Jesus Christ but their own bellyes and with swe te prechinges and
flatteri^g words deceive the hearts of the innocen tes, what may be more
plainly spo ken against this your new inueu ted sacryfice of the mass as ye^
call it, than that ye be sowers of diuysyon enemies to your King hurters of the
publyke whelth and breakers of the commandments both of god and the
magestrates, now whose subjects be you (neither gods nor the Kings, but
obedient ministers to your father the great anthichrist of rome, it manifestly
appears why hold ye not up the eternal testament of god to be worshipped in
the which is christ con teyned both really and substauncyal ly, no, that were
nothing for your proffect and comodytie, this blindness of me^ and obstenate
malice where through the blaspheme God and his word is rather to be lamented,
the^ to be convict by the word of God the thing is so vituperable, Ye blid
bussardes where have ye one joint of the word of god to make this holy supper a
sacryfyce either for to be worshypped but only ye received that doctrine of
the wicked lanfraneus the great enemy of gods truth and true religion and papa
innocencius which added this transubstancion this vnkno wen god whereunto ye
cause thee people to commit ydolatrye. Christ says math. xxviii. Teach them
to mat xxviii
keep all things that I have com maunded you, and I ho^ in the, viii chap. of
his gospel says, if ye aby Ihon. viii
de in my word, ye are my disciples in deed, and ye shall know y^ truth, and the
truth shall make you free, he that is of god, he heaxeth y^ worcester Ihon. xix.
des of god, and every one that is of y^ truth, hears my voice, now to
worship here by love any vysyble thing, declares ^laynlye ye hear not the
voice of God, for he has not so commanded you (for Ihon, ^^v*
thus says christ) if ye keep my co^ maundeme^tes, ye shall abide in my love,
and ye ar my friends, if ye do those things that I commanded you, But and if
ye leave the commandments mar^, vix.
of god, and maintain your own constitucions, and cast aside the
commandments of God to keep your own tradicions, the^ are ye false lyenge
Prophets, of whom Hieremy would have us to be ware ^^. Where he says, take
Hiere. vii
head says he, ye trust not in coun sels that begyle you, and do^ you no good,
and further he also says Hi^x, xxiii
hear not the words of the Prophets that preche their own drea mes, and y^
prophet Ezechiel both ^ze xviii xxxiii.
in the. xviii. and. xxxiii^. of his book says, h^are o ye house of Israel
says y^ lord / is not my way right or are not your ways rather wicked. The
children of thy people of thy people say (tu^^he) the way of the lord is not
right, where as their own way is rather vnrighte, what can be more plainly
set forth to declare your abhominaci on not only concerning the abuse of y^
holy supper of ye Lord, in these thiges before spoken, but also your man. xvii.
old leven wherwythe ye have so sowred and poisoned the veritye of gods word,
by your beggetly tradi^^^s and unwritten verities, that thereby ye have spoiled
and robbed y^ people of the true ministracion of thee Sacraments, as unlawful
Ihon. ii Luke. xix mar^, xi math. xxi.
biers, and sellers of gods mystery Like robbers and thieves ydolaters and
^urtherers which ought to be driven out of gods church with whyppes, for
dysceauyng the peo ple as ye long have done, and yet do to this day, they be
not ashamed both to wryt and preche, that the very natural body of christ,
both in quantite, and quality is co^tay ned ^yally under the form of bred in
the sacrament, and is a daily oblacion both for the quick and the dead and
must also be taken for a sacrifice, of no less value and effeca^ye, the^ the
body which christ him self offered upon the cross, and who that believes not
this, shall be an heretic, what abominable thieves, and mockers be these
which teach the doctrine, they practyse nothing else, but utter destruction
of souls, what a^ these else, but spi rituall thieves, seysmatiques and soul
murderers. Rebeles, and tray tours, to god, and to man. Never did crewell
pharao, hold the peo ple of Israel in so wicked captiui tie as does these
supersticious ge neracion these idle Sodomyties, hold the most dearly redeemed
heretage of the Lord, If any thing under the heavens, has neade of
reformacion, let all men that mine death any godlynes, think this to be one, let
us beware of these tra^sgressores of gods commandments, math. xvi.
for their own tradicions, for these be they, who^ S. paul does admonyshe us
of, in his first Epistle to Time, ^he. vi. chapter. If any man teach
otherwise and is i, Tim, v^.
not content with the Doctrine of godliness, he is puf^e up, and kno weth
nothing, but wastethe his brains, about questions, and strife of words,
whereof spryng envy raylinges, euel ^urmy^ynges and ha^ne, disputacions, of men,
with corrupt minds and destitu^e of the truth* which think yt lucre is
godliness, from soch separate thy self. And say not Ihon in the second pystie
the first chapter says, ^i, Ihon. i.
Whosoever transgresses and aby death not in the doctrine of christ, has not
god, He that endures in the doctrine of christ, has both y^ father and the
son, If there come any to you, y^ bring not this lear ^ynge with him, receive
not him to your house, nether bid him god spade, for he that byddeth him god
speed is partaker of his euel deeds and Hebre. xiii. be not carried about with
diverse and strange Hebre. xiii
learning, here is to be perceived, Whether thee teaching of these mermaydes
song be sweet, and according to the scriptures, or else full of poysone (are not) to them y^ give hearing to this their da^pnable meolody which ledeth to
death the hearers thereof. But yet never was Gnato unready of his flatteryng
seats, to compase his cloked ^olusio^s, where he fyndethyching cares, by his
ypocrytical speech but now to prove by gods infalla ble word, whether Christ's
natural body, be in y^ sacrament as they say and would make you to believe, or
not, you shall not perceive by ye scrip tures, nether by y^ ordinance of chri
ste, nor yet by any reason, it can so be, and now let us hear what witness
christ him self the everlasting word of god gives of his scriptu re, The high
doctors dysputed here of eue^ in christ's time, which thought yt the scripture
without the traditions of thelders was not suf fycie^t for their salua^io^, and
for y^ enstructio^ her of, one of those doctors came unto christ, and said. May
ster, what may I do, to inheret everlasting life, Christ answered this
curious doctor sending him to thee scripture, s^yinge what is written in y^
law, or what do y^ red therein, as though he should say thynkest y^ that god
is a cha^gling or a wauerig red, which will alter his mide every hour, as me^
change their laws, and ymagyn daily new opinions of god thou shall well
understand that the word of god continues for ever. Therefore do thou nothing
but even the self same thing (one ly) that thou fyndest written in y^ law and
prophets, do that and thou shall live, he says not how thyn kast thou, or
how do thou here, the pharisees, and the scrybes, prea and teach, go to
their doctrine, but he byddeth go search y^ scripture, and albeyt the Scrybes
and doctors, patched their laws and tradycions unto the word of god, as our
Ypocrytes, and doctors do, in this holy Sacrament, of Christ's body and blood,
and would also prefer their drowsye dreams, before the word of god, as
christ shows in the. xv. and. xxii. of Ma thew, Yet among all lyenge pro
math* xv xxii.
phetes, the true Church, had one judgment, and belefe: that y^ will of god
must be known by the scrip tures only, and that all artycles must be judged
and examyned by it, as christ declares, where as he says, unto the Jews.
Search y^ scriptures, for ye believe surely, to have everlasting life in them,
by these words, Christ testifyethe plainly that the opinion of the old
church, was that al me^ should judge al articles of the says, necessary unto
salvation, by that on ly, and where he byddeth them exa mine his preaching by
the scrip ture, he shows euyde^tly the who le gospel to be contained in y^
old scripture. Therefore now let us ser che the gospel, what Christ teaches,
concerning this mystery of his body and blood, whether we can find it to be
naturally, transubstancially, and ryally in the sacrament, as they say, or not.
These pa pystes have preached, put in writing, and taught, that after they have
blown and spoken over thee bread which they hold between their fyngers, and
breathed over the wine in y^ challice. That their remains nether bread nor
wine, but by transformacion, or as they say transubstanciacion, thee natural
body, of Jesus christ: under the accidens of the bread, is their inuisybly
hyd, and the blood also, under the accidens of wine: If this doctrine be not
both against the verite of holy scripture and reason, you shall se it manifest
ly proved, for this sophistical determination, proceeds of the vanity of
dreams, and clearly against y^ doctrine of S. paul, and the holy eua^
gelistes, and al y^ ancient doctors as S, Augustyn, Cyprian, and other old
writers, as breuely I shall declare* ^. corin. xi,
and first S. paul, says thus to the Corinth, our lord Jesus christ the same
night in which he was betrayed took bread, and geuynge thanks, break it, and
said, take and eat this is my body: which is bro ken for you, S. mathewes
words math x^vi
be these and as they supped, Jesus took bread, blessed it, and brake it, and
gave it to his disciples, and said take and eat, this is my body, S. marc,
xiiii. Luke. xxii
Mark. and S. Luke, affyrmeth the same words, written in their gospels,
expreslye namynge it bread and not the substance of breadde, S. Paul in this
place, says man i. corin xi,
approves him self, and so eats of this bread, and drinks of this
challice: he says not eat ye thee body of christ which is hyd under the
accidens of bread, and drink ye his blood hyd under y^ accide^s of wine, But
openly and symply, said he, (eat of this bread) These words certaynlye
declares the scripture to use no fayni^g, nor dis ceyt, and here it does
approve, what bold and presumptuous teachers this be, which durst dyffyne and
determyne, against this doctrine of S. Paul, and the evangelists that there is
nether bred nor wine, but the symylitude of bread and wine where as it is also
written, in the act. xxviii
Acts of the Apostles, on a saboth day, when we ware assembled, to break
bread, here it is not said of the lykenes of bread, and S. Paul i, Corin. x
says also, the bread that we break is it not the participacion, of y^ body
of Jesus christ, by these scrip tures, it is perceived plainly to all true
beleuers, that it is expreslye pronounced to be bread and not a shap lykenes or
appare^ce of bread these scriptures ought every chri stian to believe upon:
pain of eter nall dampnacio^, for the holy scrip ture uses no fayning, and
truly every faithful christian man, well understanding thee mysterye of of
this sacrament, does take it to be a sacrame^tall bread, and not as comyne and
vsyall bread, a bread sanctified, and ordained to deuyne uses, because that in
this most holy action, the spirit, and soul, of the faithful, should be
noryshed united, and knyt to christ by faith by yt invisible sign, in this
mortal life, which in the life to come, shall be openly showed to his electes,
without any sacrament, or covering, (at all) which our redemer, and high
^yshop, has ordained for a memory all of his death, unto the consumacion of
the world, and as the faithful receive that bread into their belly, by eating
it, so vndouptedly, they re ceaue the fruit of his death, into their souls by
thee beleuynge in him, for a remembrance, imports the thing, to be absent,
and therefore this holy mystery, being but a remembrance of christ. Tha^ can
he not be here present, for truly Barthra^ priest
if the mystery be*done, under no figure, than do we naught, to call it a
mystery, for that cannot have the name of a misterye, wherein no thing is
hid, where nothing is removed, from our corporallen cis where nothing is
covered, with any veale, But that bread which by the mystery of the word is
made the body of Christ, and does show one thing to thee externe senses, and
another thing sounds to the inward mind of faith, for outwardlye, the bread
remains bread still, as it was before, the same shape is euydente, the same
color is seen, the same taste is tasted, But within is a thing much more
precious, much more excelent, that is to say, the body of christ showed, not
with the sen ces of the flesh, but with the eyes of a faithful mind, is seen
recea ued or eaten, the wine also which by the consecracion of the priest, is
made the sacrament of the blood of christ, which sets forth one thing,
outwardly and contains another thing within, for what other thing is
superfycially looked upon, but the substance of wine, Taste and it sauereth*
wine, smell and it smells wine, look on it, and y^ color does argue wine,
but if a man do consider it inwardly, the^ not the lycour of wine, but of the
blood of Christ, it sauoreth to the beleuinge people, when it is tasted now
that no man can deny these things to be true, it is manifest that the bread
and the wine be called the body and blood of christ fyguratyuely, for
notwythstanding after the mystical consecracio^, bread is not called bread, nor
the wine, wine, but the body and blood of christ, yet after yt which is s^ne,
ne there is their any kind of flesh kno wen in the bread, nor in the wine any
drop of blood, for if nothing were taken here fyguratyuely, tha^ should here be
no place for the worcester king of faith, because y^ nothing shuldbe spiritualli
done, but what soever it be, we should take it after a fleashely intellectyon,
and what faith is, by the sentence of S. paul is an argument of things that
appear not, that is not of these sub sta^nces, which are seen, but of tho se
which are not seen, yet shall we here take nothing, according to faith, for
what so ever it be, we may see and diserne it, after our corporal senses,
and what I pray you can be more foolyshe to take bread for flesh, and call
wine blood and a mysterye we cannot call it, where no hyd or secret thing is she
shed* here is to be understand, in this holy supper of the lord, that it
represents to us an inuisyble grace, and therefore it is not alone thing, that
is seen, and that is believed, for these things that be seen, do only feade
the corruptyble body, being corruptyble the^ selves. But these things why
cheer not seen, do fead the immortal souls, they being immortal them
selves. Our fathers in the deserte, by a spyrytuall meat, and a
spyrytuall*drynke, did eat Chri stes body and drink his blood as thee
Apostle does witness, our fathers says he, have eaten the same spyrytuall
meat, and dron ken the same spyrytuall drink, as ye would say, So could he in
the deserte, turn the manna, and the the water of the roke into his flesh and
blood. Notwythstandyng his flesh was hanged on the cross for us, long after,
and his blood shed, and here you shall consydere what is meant by these words
spo ken* by christ, except you shall eat the fleashe of the son of man, and
drike his blood, you shall not have life in you, he said not yt his flesh which
hanged on the cross should be cute in pecys, and eaten of his Apostles, nor
that his blood which he shed for the redemption of thee world, should be given
his disciples to drink, for it were a wicked thing if his flesh should be
eaten and his blood dronken, as the capharnetes and infidelles took it, being
offended with his sayings, therefore he said to his dysciples, if you shall see
the son of man ascendyng thither where as he was before. etc. (as though he
should say) You may not think my flesh, to be eaten of you corpo rally,
neither my flesh, to be deuy ded into pieces, for asmoch as after my
resurrection, ye shall se me vysyhly ascend into heaven, with the fulness of my
hole body and blood Then ye shall perceive my fleashe is not to be eaten of
these that believe as the infidels think. But that the bread and the wine
changed by a mysterye into my body and blood, is to be received of y^ faith
full, for he says consequentelye. The spirit is he that quickens, the
flesh profyteth nothing, after any soche sort as the unfaithful understand,
but otherwise it gives life as the faythefull take it by a my sterye. So in
this mystery of the body and blood of christ her is spiritual operacion, which
ge ueth life, without the which open racion, the mysteries be unprofitable, for
well may they fead the bo die, but the soul they cannot, here the papists say,
that those things be done in verity, but not in a mysterye, wherein they
repuge against the wrytynges of the holy ^ i^. iii. d^ doctryna christians
fathers. S. augustine says. Except ye eat says our savior, the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you, (he seameth
says he) to commau^d a wicked thing. Therefore it is a figure commanding us
to be co^municators of his passion, this is profitable to prynt in our
memories, that his flesh was wounded and crucified for our sakes. S. au gustyn
does thus affirm the mysterye of the body and blood of christ to be a figure,
for it is no point of religion says he, but rather in^ quitie to take his
fleashe and his blood carnally as they did which understood not Christ's
words spiritually, but carnally, and went back therefore and departed from
hi. Now, here is plainly se^ forth unto you, that this holy sacrament of the
body and blood of christ's, is a mystery certifieng thy weak conscience, that
as that sacramental bread is broken, ^o was christ's bo die broken, for your
sins if ye be faithful, abiding in christ and he in you, but if you be wicked
and vnfay thful, ye do not eat his flesh nor drink his blood, although ye
eat the sacrament of so great a thing, These be bedes words upon the. i.
epistle to the Corinth. the. x. chap. i, Corin, x
Now where as these dasyng drea mers and lowsy locustes, does teach that the
presents of christ's natu ral body is holy, contained in ye sacrament that is
easyer said, the^ pro ued For this says S. aug. to Hie to. his body wherein he
rose must be in one place, but his truth is di spersed in all places. and also
writing unto Dardamu^ does prove that y^ natural body of christ, must neades be
in one place only) and also yt his soul can be but in one place, at ones, and
further says, if we should grant christ to be in all places, as touching his
manhood, we should take away the truth of his body for he plainly affyrmethe,
as touching his godhode he is in every place, and as touching his manhood he
is in heaven, as this doctrine of christ does plainly prove, spoke^to his
disciples, sayig, yet a little whi Ihon. vi
le I am with you, and the^ I depart to him yt sent far, and he said again, it
is expedient for you, that I depart, Ihon, vi*
for except yt I depart, that co^forter shall not come unto you. And yet he
says further, and forsake y^ world, and goo to my father / and more fully to
touch this matter / he also says math. x^v mar^ xiiii Ihon xii.
poor me^ ye shall ever have with you / but me you shall not ever have, here it
appears as touching his godhead, he forsook not the world, when he ascended,
unto his father, and therefore it must neades follow, that as touching his
flesh, and manhede he fors^ke the world, as all the old doctors and faithful
fathers de fine that christ meant not that his natural flesh, should be present
in the sacrament to be eaten with our teth, and therefore whosoever believes his
body natural, to be their, is begyled, and is robbed of the true believe
therein, with their craftye co^ueyaunces and vnwrytte^ truths, by which they
bring the people into bondage, and captyue their consciences, in blyndnesse /
to the utter destruction of soul and body. Teaching them a straung doctrine,
contrary unto the gospel. But every plant that my heaueuly father math. iv.
has not planted, shall be plucked up by the roots, says christ, and now
according to my first part and preposicion of this mat ter, I say, y^ there
is sufficient scrip tures written, for our salvation. and for the probatio^
thereof, I will lay this sentence of the old church confyrmed of christ against
these blasphemouse teachers, of these unsavory sacryfyces of Baal and Bell of
their holy fathers of rome invented contrary unto the censer word of god,
which is written in the* xii. of Ihon. The word whi Ihon xii.
che I have spoken, shall judge the^ in the last day, says christ. Now the^
these enuyous Edomites, whi che teach the people a new found doctrine made of
their own bray nes, as this is, to cause the people to believe that the natural
body of christ is in the sacrament, or to make it an oblacion propiciotorie, or
expietorie, and to be worshypped, this teaching, is not found in the scripture
of god, but in their own ymagynacions, and private inter pretacion, for the
mayntenaunce of their own bellyes. S. Peter says, that the scripture is not
expounded after the appetyte of any pryuat person, but eue^ as it was given by
the spyryte of god, and not by manes will, so must it be declared, by the same
spyryte, full well knew the Apostle S. Paul when he said to the Thessalonia^s.
The ^. ^hes. ii,
mystery of iniquity, eue^ now begins to work, and also prophesyed what
should follow after his time, saying. Take ye head to actu, xx
your selves, and to all the flock, over which the holy ghost, has put you
ouersears to fead the congregation of God, which be purchased with his own
blood, for I know this well, that after my departing, shall enter in greuouse
wolves among you, which shall not spare thee flock, and even of your selves,
shall arise men, speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them, and
therefore watch. etc. What more evident to ke^ can be given of you, and set
forth by Paul, ar ye not ravening wolves, what else do you, but spoil and
rob the people of God, when ye teach and instruct them, contrary to the
verytie of the gospel to follow your lying signs and beggarly ceremonies, as
S. Paul gala, iii.
calls them, to rehearse the^ it shall not nead, but touching this holy
mysterye of Christ's body and blood, which ye have so sore deformed, blemyshed
and spotted by your straunsubstanciatyon, and other abuses to the destructyon
of the people, and first institucion of christ I must of very sorowfulnes, of
heart, approve you by thee scripture to be very thieves, murderers, and
deceauers, and where I have already declared and approned, by the word of god,
and thee old writers, whose sayingee I have in manner but gleyned, with ruthe
the mohabite, as the history makes mencyon, what that most holy and blessed
sacrament of the bo dye and blood of our lord is, it is to be believed but as a
mystery, and fyfygure representynge to the eyes of our faith, the death and
passion of christ, crucified for our sins and rose again for our
justification, and as verily as that bread is broken emonge^ us, so vetriye was
christ's body broken for our sins, and as verily as we receive that
sacramental bread into our bellye, through eating it, so verily do we receive
y^ fruit of his death and meretes into our souls, by beleuyng in him, so that
the body of christ in this sacrament, is not corporal but spiritual, and the
blood of chri ste is not there corporal, but spiritual. So that nothing is to
be ta ken in this holy mystery, but spiri tually, Here is the body of christ,
but not corporally, here is y^ blood of christ, but not corporally. These be
the* words of Barthram, a learned Priest, written. Lvii. yea res here to
fore, so now, this is proved sufficient to stablysshe the faith of all men I
trust in this point. And as to the worshipping thereof, or to be a sacrifice,
as they say, You shall have the scriptures to confute that doctrine,
sufficientlye, first the supper of thee Lord, ought to be done after thee
ordinances of christ, as appears the first Epistle to the Corinthi. 1, Corin
i^
the. xi. chap. And upon those words, to it is a memorial of y^ death of
Christ. which brought saluaci on, and not a sacrifyce, but a reme^ braunce of
the sacrifyce, that was once offered up upon the cross, for therein is a
promise made, as appe reth in the. C. and. it. Psalm. Christ psalm, ^. it,
shall be our bishop, for evermore or dayned of the father, and this pro mes is
performed, for christ has entered once into the holy place, by an oblacion
making perfect for evermore, so that we nead not heb. ix. ^* x
to have him offered up for us again, the which dies no more, We know that
the oblacio^ which Moses made, was for sins, as appears in the leuitical
law, when the oblation did sanctifye, and thee blood did wasshe The^ if this
one sacrifice (in the which christ did offere up him self) did satisfy for
the sins of the whole world, according to the seyenge of Esaye. Esaias* iiii
He did bear our sins, and he was torn for our wickedness, As S. Ihon
says, he is our satisfaction Ihon, ii.
and so forth so that all oblations which ar besides this, is but vay ne, as to
rear an new oblatio^, and to set little by y^ first, to make god a liar and to
deny Christ, which bought us after the words of S. Peter, For if the sins
be released ^^. p^it. ii.
and forgiven in the sacrifyce of the mass, it follows that, that on ly
sacrifyce of the cross did not sa tisfye, for all sins, and is not that to
deny the lord, which did read me us, not with corruptible thin ges, as with
gold and silver, but with his own precyouse blood, so that this holy
sacrifice, which is Jesus christ, the very lamb, and most holy Enoce^t, and
without Ihon, i*
spotte. The which alone takes away the sins of the world has offered for
us, to God the father, him self, has given his life, and shed his blood, for
our redemption* Making an end and consumation, of all outward and vysyble
sacryfyces, and S. Paul to the Hebreus writes, it is co^uenable Hebre. vii
to have a bishop holy, innocente. separate from sinners, and higher then the
skies, and in the. ix. chap Hebre. ix.
ter of y^ same Epistle, is said thus christ y^ bishop of goodness, came in
presence, by a greater and a perfyter tabernacle, not made with ha^ des, not by
the blood of gotes, or of calves, but by his own precyouse blood is ones
entered into the sanctuarye, and has found eter nall redemption, here is
plain and euydent that for our salvation, and redemption, we have no neade of
any other sacrifyce, or daily offeringe. for them selves, and for us Except we
will have them our re demers, and to renounce the obia cio^ of Jesus christ, and
yet further Hebre ix
it is said, in the same chapter. Ie sus is not entered into the sanctu arye,
made with hands, but chief ly in heaven, to the end that now he may appear for
us before the face of his father. and not by ^au^e that he offered not him self
often times and after he ^ayth, he should have suffered often, ^y^he the
beginning of the world. This ^exte does clearly express, that Jesus christ,
offers not him self many times or that he should dye many times, for Jesus
christ to dye, and to be offered unto his father, is al one Now shall he
never dye more, whereby he shall never be sacrifyced and in sacryfyce, he will
never offer him self more, tha^ it follows that no man can offer and sacryfy
ce him again, for if he offer not him self, ^howe may other offer him, for
certainly sithe the death death of christ, all vysyble sacrifyces, is ceased,
and the state of sacri fyces is appeared, wherefore they a^ vain seductors,
begylers and liars and may be known to be fools, vnwytty, unhappy, and void
of brain Now ^or a more ampie probacion Hebre. x.
pounder well the. x* chapter of the same Epistle, which makes mention,
thoroughly of this sacry^yce, psalm. xclii
of Jesus christ, the which has made an end of all vysyble sacryfyces, so
that none does abide for sin. Behold I come lord god, to the end, that I may
do thy will, by the which will we be sanctyfyed, by the oblacyons made, by
Jesus Christ, for by one oblatio^, he has made the sanctified, yt is, the
faith full perfyte, for ever eternally, for after he says, I shall have no more
mind of their sins, and of their iniquities, and where there is remyssion of
the^, there is no more oblation for sin. But S. Paul declares unto us, what
sacrifice we should offer, let us follow his deuyne, Rom* xii,
and council, I pray you my bre thren, by the mercy of god, that ye offer
your bodies, in a lively sacryfyce holylye and pleasant to god. etc. To
offer this sacryfyce We be all ordained of God Kings, and priests, without
any soche disguysed, shaven, shorn, ce remonies, for we be to vile, and
vnworthi to offer unto god, any new sacryfice for sin, for asmoche as christ
has offered up him self to his father for us, as touching to worship the
sacrament, In the who le scriptures, another by any writing of the old holy
fathers, and doc tores, as S. Augustyne, Ambrose, Hierome, Cypriane,
Chrysostom, Fulge^cius, and soch other, never taught men to worship it, for
if these holy fathers, had taken these textes before resyted carnally, as they
took it spirituallye, then in their works they would have tau ght me^ to
worshypped it, but they never taught me^ to worship this sacrament, because
they took it spiritually, and therefore to worship it, it is dampnable
Idolatrye, for god will give his honor to non other, for this holy supper of
the lord, is taking for a plege of ever lastyng life, which the faythefull
desire most humblye to receive, with a manifest perticipation, even that
thing which we touch in the Image of the sacrament, which is the pledge and
the Image, of another thing (that is to say) they represent another thing, but
not themselves, yea they which is showed unto the beleuers, y^ death of christ
inui^ybly, for a perpetual remembrance of his passion, for christ says in the
gospel, Do this in my remembrance and S. paul expounds it thus. So often as
ye eat of this bread, and drink of this wine, you shall show y^ death of the
lord, till he come. Thus we be taught, both of Jesus Christ, and S. Paul. That
the bread, and the wine, is set furthe to our eyes for a figure, or a memory
of the lords death, (That) as often as we shall receive this holy supper, of
the lord, it may put us in reme^ brau^ce, in this time present, what Christ
has done for us in times paste, that we may be made mind full of his
paynefull death, and passion, which he suffered for us: and that we may be
made also worthy partakers, of that godly communion, by the which we are delyue
red from death, and knowinge that after this life, we shall come to y^ vysyon
or Christ, where we shall have no neade of any soch instruments, to put us in
remembraun ce any more, by any ext^r^^ll sign, what cor^st ^^the ^o^^ for ^s,
for we lokyng of him face to face, shall not be a^moni^^ed by any out ward or
iemporall thyng^s out only to be fully certy^yed by the contemplacion of the
truth it self and to give glory^ and praise to the auctour of our health* for
ever Note*
Now it is to be noted that y^ faith full receaueth not the thing looked upon
with our carnal eyes, in the mystery: of this sacrament but that which is
believed for the meat is spyrytuall, and the d^ynke is spiritual, and fead^th
ye sou le spiritually, and y^ g^ueth euerla stynge life to the beleuers
secretl^e, as ^^^e ^a^youre says him self, ^^e spyryte is he that quycke
neth. The ^^easshe profyteth nothing ^h^n. vi*
proffeteth nothing. Here breuely have I declared unto you, ye true
understanding of the most blessed sacrament, of the body and blood of christ,
both by the mind of christ him self. S. Paul, the eua^gelistes and the old
fathers, and holy doc tors, as here is recyted, and if any will diligently read
the scriptures they shall find and clearly percea ue, that for the space of.
L. ix. years, all the doctors to affirm this sacrament to be a mysterye, and
never knew of this transubstanciation of the bread and wine, as the se deuelish
dreamers does teach, therefore believe them not, for they are blind leaders of
the blind, so that the leader, and the follower, shall fall both into the pyt,
And as it is mencyoned in the. i. of Sapience, Sapien i
what a terrible sentence they shall give against the^ selves, in the latter
day of judgment, in horrible fear, shall they confess openly befo re the
high judge Jesus Christ, to whom is general power both in heaven, and earth,
that all has been dampnable follyshenes, that they have gone about, that
they have erred from the truth, and have been wilfully ignorant, and that they
have tired the^ selves, in thee way of wyckednes and destruction and so
forth. Thus these ungodly teachers, of their own dreams shall why she the
great mountayns to over whelme the^, in that dreadful day, therefore hear
what S. galathi. i.
Paul says. Though we our selves, or an angel from heaven, preach any other
Gospel, unto you, then that we have preached unto you, hold him accursed: Now
has paul preached unto you as ye have hard, (and we) says he (yt is) all
those which has preached the same gospel. But these lordly lubbers, as
glorious glottones, have preached unto you, (and do) The Gospel of their
father the Antichrist of Rome, that is a great tab bell, of ceremonies as
rynging, syn ging, knelyng / kyssyng / mocking mowing / lyenge / and sellinge
the holy sacraments / as it is written none may sell or bye / but he have y^
apoc. xiii.
mark of the beast* these be the lycherouse locustes / of Egypt, thee
vpholders of Sodom and Gomor / The popes own cattell^, tokened with his own
mark, I cannot term them as they ought to be, do you consyded that ye^
notwith standing, the word of god is now so p^^^y ^en^yrly and symply caught as
thanks be unto the living god and our young David and your grace it now is. And
that it has pleased the Kings Majesty, and his ho norable council to set it
fourth ac cordynglye, and specially in this high mystery of the supper of the
Lord, whereof we simple souls, have long been robbed of th^ne part of that
holy sacrament, that now it should be restored unto us hole, and not thee
priests, to eat by the hole the^ selves, as they yet daily do contrary unto
the word of god, and the Kings godly pro ceadinges, and in as much as in the^
lies, does not only seduce the people still, to follow there maski^g mass,
which was not known in the church of the faithful (as Be da says) which was
four scoore and x. years after ye death of Gregory the^ such masking was not
known till monckerye of benedictes rule came in, and than began pryuate
masses, a scripture of the popes in uentyon, an unwritten very^ye: which they
would make us to bele ue, as an article of our faith, But hear what christ
says, Search ye scriptures for they bear wytnes of me, and S. Peter says
also, all the Prophets do witness with him, that God forgeueth all thee
sins of them, which believe and put their confyde^ce in christ And now to make
an end, I will resy te two faithful witnesses, against this deuelysshe
cauillatyon, that these falls prophets teach y^ people concerning this
mystery, afo re spoken of, as upon all other there dampnable doctrine which they
ground upon mane tradycions, which S. Peter and S. Paul co^ futeth. Peter in
his first Epistle, ^aileth soche blasphemers, as do ymagyne a new word of
god besides that which is written, and he calls them lying prophets, which
teach any thing contrary to this prophetical and Apostolical prophecy / and
a rule whereby we should avoid all manner of lies / and to have a special eye unto
the candel which is ye word of the prophetical scripture which dryueth out
and banesheth away / al darkness and lies of the deuell and his Doctors /
these be his words. I write unto you this second pystle / to pryck you up and
to quyckene your hearts / that ye might remember the words which have been
told you before by the holy prophets / and also y^ words of our message /
and commandment which be the apostles of the lord our savior / for ye
must know / that in the latter days, there shall com mockers, they shall bring
in says he) perniciouse and dampnable sects. And now S. paul says they shall
speak lies in hypocrysy / under the colloure and pretense of holiness /
forbyddyng to mary / and to absteyne from meats which god has created / to
be received of the faithful with thanks giving / and they shall deny the lord
says he which has bought and redeemed the^, and thee way of the truth shall
they sclaunder, and reuyle, do not our papists even so now a days, Let all
men that know God judge, and they shall find both their doctrine, and living,
like as these two holy Apostles has painted the^ unto the world, I could have
declared ma ny things more of the saying of these Apostles, to have been more
circumspecte of these dampnable bypers, which were superfluus. but the whole
world has thanked be God, received knowledge by the word of God, to know
the^, and to beware of their leven, and here with S. Paul, I commytte you unto
the word of grace which is able to edyfye you, and to give you an inheritance
with all the^ that be sanctyfyed

SO BE IT.
Joel. it Turn to the Lord your God, for he is gentyl and mercyful, pacient
and of much kyndnesse: and ready at all times to forge ue wickedness.
Math. xx. The laborers in the Lords vyneyar de, that came last of all
received their penny so well as they that came in the morning Nether had one
more then another
A complaynt against the styffenecked / made by the aucthour of this book.
ALas I lament the dull abused brain
the insatrike fa^tasses, and witles wilful nes
of one and other, yt at truth have disdayn
They say soch parables, they cannot expres
some says they be realers, at ri^te recheles
and some say but little, and think much in thought
well, this process I speak of, is not for naught
Oh wooful chance most unfortunate
So suddenly making, this great alteracion
For sithe the world, was first create
Was never seen any soch deuysyon
How much is truth, had in dirision
For falshode faineth fables, full maliciously
The truth to drown, alas so pytiously
Much malice is ministered, under holy precence
Most me^ be moved, lying signs to uphold
False Iammes, and Iambres, be placed i^ p^sence
To wou^d Mycheas, as in regu^ is told pashur ponisheth hieremy, demetrius is
bold
Baal and Belles ministers, rage furiously
To drown the truth, alas full pytiously
Helyas, and Daniel, be in woofull case
By false Alchimus, that wicked counsele^
Christ cruelly crucified, by Pilat and cayphas
Paul enuyed, by hermogenes, does appear
Peter by symond Magus, and Menaunder
The apostles proved, with payues spytefully.
To drown the truth, alas full pytiously
Custom craftily cloked, truth bears no feale
Doing is doubtful, and dare not for fear
Pluck bake p^su^ptio^, which proudly p^uayle
poor keketh syle^ce, and sees not soch gear
Blindness is braging ^eking here and there
To spew spytful poysone, blasphemously
To drown the truth, alas full pytiously
The rude rudely learned, blind as an ass
Dotyng in dreams, dispysyng obedience
wylful without wysdo^, of nothing does pass
As rebel rybauldes, without intelligence
defending their god mazyne with much violence
Against the prycke, to spurn vnseamely
To drown the truth, alas full pytiously
Hatered hates honesty, a whoringe to go
M^^yce makes men, masyng in madness
Penurye pincheth pryue^y, with pain and woo
Prelletes pra^e papisticallye, with boldness
Lewd lowsy lyeng, lu^keth in darkness
false fayni^g flatery, friendship does ampliffy
To drown the truth, alas full pytiously
Who blames blas^heme^s, boldly to brag
Of their dotyng doctrine, drowned in lies
Tearig truth a sou^der, like a torn ^agge.
Blinding men's hearts, and blering their eyes
Like lurking lowtes, and lecherouse spies
As subtyl ^erpentes, working pe^niciously
To drown the truth, alas full pytiously
The witles wllfully, walk their ownway
not following salomo^s sapie^ce, but Baales posterite,
In fa^tastical pha^tasses, let truth say what he may
yet slouthfully will they sleep, infecte with inpuritie
Supposi^g the^ selves sure, to s^a^d i^ security
Stablyshed in s^yffenes, pu^t up arogantly
To drown the truth, alas full pytiously
These stoule sturdy stomachs stand styffely
As bytyng wolves, craftily closteryng
Like me^bres mal^gnaunt styck stubburnly
to uphold proud hamone, y^ shaueli^g
yet power pincheth not for all their ^u^mu^ing
And gredy gasping, by sleyght p^su^ptuously
To drown the truth, alas full pytiously
Might is amassed, and will not shewtte
At wytles wilfulnes walking at e^se
Wysdo^ will not wyllingly make the alke^ mewtte,
Reason reme^breth not what shall displease
Perel is p^sent, where poverty does disease
the wynd blows a lofte and no man willi^gly
Stops y^ blaste, y^ sou^deth so beheme^tly.
These wicked betmyne, and worms subtyle
like wy^ie wolves, of y^ serpe^tes generacio^
When will ye leave treding on christ's hele,
shall gods son be to you still a sign of co^tra distio^
when shall his verity with al veneracio^
Be received and used amongst you reuere^tly
And not still to drown it alas this pitiously
When walk ye from wa^tonnesse, of worldly vanity
when stablysh ye stedfastnes to be parmane^t
when seek ye rest, and mutual amytie
when showt you sharply at the viper pestele^t
when put ye poysone, from the innocent
when stops y^ stream, yt flows abu^da^tly
That drowneth y^ truth, alas this pitiously
Shall nature work things unnaturally
shall false for truth be still prefarred
shall power ponishe with cause cruelly
shall wrong for right be maynteyned
shall darkness for light be reueyled
shall Ma^mo^ for god be taught religiously
To drown the truth alas this pytiously
If right spoyleth, wrongs usurpation
if truth does falshed, eyect out of place
if power ponishe ill with godly reformation
if light does darkness utterly deface
if god throw down ma^mo^ by his word of grace,
if man be fead with the veryte of ma^na hea ue^ly
Why the^ is y^ truth drowned alas so pytiously
A wake from your wilfulnes vnfyle your eyes
open your oppression, and faults execrable
drown your drou^y doctrine of vain ceremonies*
pluck away your crooked cano^ laws detestable,
stably she the two Testame^tes of god so venerable
Enbrace y^ verity with heart and mind willi^gly
And drown ye truth no more alas this pytiously
Else Thoby laketh his lykyng for want of his son,
Rachel is rufully raged and like to catch cold
Mo^^che y^ m^wme^t y^ game has won
Lacoue laugheth thereat, and bears hi^ bold,
Io^e phat y^ ge^tyl, is bought and sold
Yet Ruth y^ mohabyte gleyneth full busely
To p^se rue this truth drowned so pitiously
FINIS.
Imprynted at London in saynct Andrews Parysh in the Ware drop By Thomas
Raynald.

Cum priuilegio,


