A declaration of the Mass, the fruit thereof, the cause and the mean,
wherefore and how it ought to be maynteyned.

Newly perused and augmented by the first author thereof.

Master Anthony Marcort at Geneue.

John.vi. I am the bread of life, who so comes to me shall have no hunger.
And who that believes in me shall never have thirst.

Translated newly out of French into English. Anno M.DXLvii.

Read me first from top to too
And afterward judge me a friend or a foe.
If you do judge me or I be tried,
You shall be blamed when you are spied.
Cephas Geranius to the reader.
AFter that I had considered the great and horrible blasphemy presently
committed against the holy institution of the supper of Jesus Christ, In the
stead whereof to us is proposed a thing that is feined and found to the great
dishonor of Jesus Christ and of his church, we have obtained this present
book of the author for to declare the ignorance and simplicity of many. And
to put away the abuse and presu^pcious assertion of other. But for as much as
the said treaty is submitted to the judgment of all persons, among whom is
great varyaunce in gyuynge sentence at a blusshe, as willing to esteem of the
portion as of the hole book. But first to read it al through, understand it,
and examine it, and that by the holy scripture, by the which al thing ought to
be ruled, esteemed and weied and than to judge Or else as says the
Iurisconsulte in the treaty De segibus. It is a thing inciuile without to have
seen all the law to judge or answer to a part thereof. Also saint Hilary in
the book of the Trinity desired that it should not be condemned before that
they had read that which he had written, and also not to have regard to ye
fautors of the errors which are here vanquished. For as says the Cann.
suspect.iii. quest. The foes and adverse parties ought not to be judges, by
mean where of it is necessary they learn to judge them selves, and as before
god, estemyng that the same is verity, after the which we shall be al judged by
Jesus Christ from the high estates to the low.

The preface of the author.
WE have the words of the prophets steadfastly, in ye scripture the which ye
ought to regard as to the ca^dle shinynge in a dark place, unto the time that
the day begin to give light, and that the day sterre arise in your hertes.
And first understand this that the holy scripture is not known by our own
exposition. For the prophecy was not given in one time by the will of man. ii.
Peter.i.
But the holy men of God, inspired of the holy gooste have spoken it. And
therefore (as saint Paul says) all scripture divinely inspired is
behouefull to be taught, for to reprove, to correct, ii. Tim^. iii
and to be showed in justice, because that the man of god may be enti^rly
instructed to al good works, by the which so many evident textes unto us is
apparently showed that the rule of our faith is the only and holy word of
God. After the which only we ought al to believe and keep in all that
concerns God and our salvation. Whereunto by great fidelity exhorts us
the holy Apostle of Jesus Christ saying in this manner. Phillip. iii.
Proceed we in one self rule whereunto we be comen, because that we may be all
one. Now it is certain that in folowinge the opinions and fantasies of men
(the which are so variable, and contrary each unto other) that never we may be
of one accord but it is behouefull for us to take one soole scripture for our
light and bryghtnes, for our direction and leadynge. The which alone to be
our perfect and entier rule which can not nor ought to be any other than the
only word of God. For as much as therein is contained the divine things.
Psa. cxvi. Roma. iii. Gala. vi.
Every man is a liar, and the only god is true. Werfore right well concludes
the said holy apostle yt whosoever follows this rule peace shall be over them
and mercy. Over them says he, and not over the other, for there is but one
only way of salvation.

It is than right evident that the holy scripture is the only stone and
foundation of our says by such wise that we ought not for to be leave, Math.
nor hold any thing whatsoever it be, touching the divine things, but as it is
contained in ye holy scripture, without chau^ging any thing, adding or
minishing, Otherwise it should be no more faith, but folish opinion,
imaginacion dreme error, desceit, and knaueri. Therefore it is not behoueful for
any creature to undertake for to add, invent, change, or diminish whatsoever
thing of the said holy and immaculate word, but in all and over all it ought to
be taken and left in the right purety and clear simplicite without pluckinge
(as thy fantasi is) to other sens tha^ the holy spirit, has reueiled it, and
that upon pain of eternal malediction, yea and if it were an angel of heaven.
And here against must not be alleged time nor custom to ye contrary, Ga^a. i.
how long soever they be, Apoca.
or may be, for as much as the Lord God is immutable whereby the right
divinity can never be abrogated, nether by long antiquite of time nor moved or
changed by tradicions, or constitutions of man. For the word of God remains
steadfast everlasting, Esaie. xl
permanent and true, and no power may to the contrary. And if any that by some
space of time have lived, have preched, written diffined believed and taught
otherwise tha^ the said holy word bears or conteyneth, it is nothing worthy
of allegacion, for be the time never so long, it is nothing esteemed or
reputed in the presence of God as it is written. Psalm. xi.ii. Pet. iii.
A. M. years in ye presence of God is as a day passed that is to say as no
thing, or a very small thing. Moreover God has ordained time behouefull at his
own good pleasure, Roma. i.
wherein he has determined reveled, and manifested his verite. The which time
can nether be forthered nor hyndred. For ye purpose of God is immovable, which
he has openly showed and declared in the temporal and holy natiuite of his
son, the which came not incontinent after ye transgression of Adam but tarried
long time, and by the space of three. M. years did leave the world in
idolatry. This notwithstanding when the plenitude of time ordained of God was
occo^plished, than he sent his son made of a woman, made under the law, to
thend that he should again, Gala. iiii.
bye them that were under the law.

Now after yt he has done to us this great mercy, should it not be a great
pride and cursed unkindness in stead to give him graces and thanks for such a
benign and charytable dilection (for the which he gave his only son) to
say, wherefore tarried he so long? why came he no sooner? I have spoken this for
to touch and abate the ingratitude and arrogaunce of many poor blind
persons the which at this present time (to whom it has pleased God by his
infinite bounty, many festing him self by his holy word and gospel of
salvation, the which a certain of time by the permission of time was despised,
contemned. cast under foot corrupt and put in forgetfulness) sai these words
of plasphemy, or other like, and wherefore has he tarried so long wherefore
showed he this no sooner? Have not our predecessors lived well? It suffiseth us
to live as they ded, so many great clerks and wise folks following the
counsels and determinacions of the universities, the Ceremonies and
ordynaunces of the Pope may they fail? which be words of ignorant folks, or
mockers, hard hertedand obstynate. By ye which words their ignorance so
clearly does show, that it is noyesome, as touching the mysteries of God.

They understand nothing but by infidelite, being put in reproved senses without
tear or reverence, preferring horible blasphemes, which is a sign of the ire
and furor of God, decla, ryng upon such folks inevitable ruin, and most
dreadful damnacyon. Also all such words and allegacions vene inutile and
vain without any efficace, for the Turks and Sarasins will say as much of their
law. Than we must mekely tak and receive the gift and grate of God at such
time as his good pleasure is to give it us, without disputing, wherefore he has
tarried till now, with out allegyng multitude or puralite of persons, nor also
speak of the life, or end of them that have leued here to fore.

For God is mighti to dispose his creatures at his will, and and no man may say:
wherefore do thou so. More over it were better to follow the only Myche
having the spirit of God, ^o^. ii.
than all the sacrifiers and Prophets of Baall, having the spirit of error.
ii. Reg. 28.
How be it I beuele steadfastly that if in the time past the euangelike truth
had been thus'shewed as it is now that many of our predecessors would rather
have endeavored them mekdly and faithfully to have received it, beter tha^ we do
now, ye world is so perverted and corrupt by the doctrine of me^, which is a
leuin of the Pharisees, Ma. xxvi.
ye which Jesus Christ admonishes us to e^chue and flee. Mark. viii.
Nevertheless we must not for the hardness and malice of some adversaries and
enemies of the truth, Acts. iii.
leave to declare and manifest as much as shall be possible the pure and true
word of God. In the which without any doubt, al they shall believe that be
ordained to the life eternal, and none other and all to the honor glory and
praise of god To the which thing as true, and obedient children to him we
ought to procur, without sparing any thing, or in aniwise to dissimule

This is for an aduertisment that in this present matter it behooves each one to
stay wholly to the holy word of god, as to that whereby al creatures shall be
judged. All thing ought to be examined and proved, and none may contrary it
Now for to touch ye purpose whereof presently we treat. It is needful by holy
scriptures to declare and evidently to show: how the mass ordained of the
Pope and Bishops, and other parsones which in great pride against right and
reason named them self of the church, is directly against verite, and
manifestly against the holy word of God. And therefore it is an abhominoble
thing that ought not to be permitted to endure, by cause ye by the same the
Lord god is greatly offended, And the most part of the world unhappily seduced
and begiled, The which mass under shadow and color of holiness, the more
easily to seduse and deceive the world, has been brought, and thus cautelously
compassed not by holy scripture. Wherein cannot only be found the name of
mass. But by sondri Popes and Bishops with other like it has been found, and
put in the stead of the holy supper of Jesus Christ, of the holy table of the
precious and holy bread of tha^kesgeuinge the which ought to be taken of the
congregation of al faithful Christian people, in mind and recordation of the
death and passion of Jesus Christ, in remembrance also of the charity and
dilection wherewith he loved us so much that he gave his life for us Likewise
in signification of the charity and love fraternall, whereby we ought to love
each other, as members of the body of Jesus Christ.

In the stead of the which so salutary and, co^solable institucio^, in
po^pious Ceremony for their pleasure they have caused us for to worship a
little bread, as if it were the very God, wherein all idolatry, al iniquite, and
wickedness is reised. And this have they done, the better to authorize their
reygne and lordeshipe, the better to exercise their tyranny, the more easily to
make marcha^dises of our souls, and devour the substance of the people, and
finally to cause the^ selfs to be worshipped. For as people effronted without
shame having harlots foreheades, they durst well say, and publy shed that they
were more worthy than angels or ye virgin Marye. Because that if one of the^
(albeit that he is infect, and a harlot full of filthiness) held a morcell of
bread in his hand he has the power (if he will) forth with without declaration
at his only word there to cause the son of god to come and descend in body
and in soul all a live, as byg and as hole as he hanged on the cross to bear
him here and there, to keep him in a box or an almery, to eat him and swalow
him when he list. To be short, and let him do what he will, it is an horrible
thing to think on it. And if they be demanded from whe^s they have and
comes to the^ this merueilous power more tha^ the other that be not disguised,
anointed, shorn or cliped. They answer better tha^ they wene. For they say it
is because of ye caracter, yt is to say, the toke^ and marvelous mark where wc
they be sygned, but if they thought well on that, that they do say, truly
shame and fear would still them. For it is written that none may cheapen,
sell nor bye but he have the mark of the beast. Apoc. viii.


How be it because that our matter may be well builded, clearly understand and
proved. It is necesary to touch, declare and show in particular some points
of abhominacion that be fosid in this mass. For to show all it is almost
impossyble, and I believe that no man can do it, and if any hade power given for
to do it, it behooves him to have a very great book, so much maledictio^ is
enclosed therein, and detestable perdition. Not withstanding ye to many it
seems precious and fair But as it is written in S. Luke. That which is high
unto me^, Luce. xvi
is abomination before God. And S. Paul dare well sai ye the angel of satan
trans figureth him self in to an angel of light, ii. Cor. xi.
The which in this place is very greatly fulfilled, when under the shaddowe of
holiness, under apparaunce of verity, somuche liynge and falsenes in hypocrisy
is found and which is worst of all, this evil is so greatly shed, this
canker is so much sown through all the body of christe^dom. This miserable
herb has spread the rotes so far, that unto man it is impossible to remedy
it, but ye which is impossible to man, is easy to the Lord God. Therefore
return we to him, and with a meke heart pray we him that it will please him to
be hold us in his mercy, Luke. xviii
give us his blessing, and open our eyes in such wise that we may clearly
know the veryte, Amen.

First a declaration of the daily sacrifice that the sacrifiers give to
acknowledge in their mass to be done for the salvation of the people.
THese sacrifiers than as not content with the volu^tary and holy sacrifice, b^
the which Jesus Christ yt is ^he very lamb and most holy innocent, and without
spot ye which alone takes away the sins of ye world, has offered for us to
God his father him self has given his life, ^^on. i
and shed his blood for our redemcion, making an end and consummacion of all
outward and visible sacrifice, yet as reputing ye vnsufficie^t putting them
self in the stead of Jesus Christ, they have a mass, or in their mass made
and inverted a visible sacrifice as they have said vtile and profitable for the
redemption as well of the quick as the deed, which is plainly against the holy
scripture and an outrageous co^temneme^t, and a right renouncing of the death
and passion of Jesus Christ, which shortli is easy to be showed

In the.vii. Chapter of the epistle to the Hebrews, in spekinge of Jesus
Christ, ^ebre^. vii.
among other things it is written. It was co^uenable to have a bishop, holy,
innocent seperat from sins, and higher than the skies. That is to say
ouerpassinge al virtue and power of pure creatures, the which has no ned (as
the priests) to offer every day sacrifice, first for his sins, tha^ after
for the sins of the people. For he has done this, in offering him self
once. Notably he has done in offering him self one time, for never was such
an oblation, nor never shall be again, but as fully sufficient has for ever in all fuffised once for all.

In the.ix. Chapter of that same epistel it is said thus. Bebrue^. ix
Christ being the high prist of the good things to com, entered in by agreater
and perfiter tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this
creacion, and not by the blood of gotes or of calves, but by his own precious
blood is once entered in to the sayntuary and has found eternal redemption.

Here again he says, that by his presenting ones, eternal redemption is made
and accomplished. Whereby it is very evident that for our redemption we have no
need of these poor sacrifiers, offering and sacrifieng daily for them self,
and for us, as if they were our redemers Therefore if we will not renounce the
oblacion of Jesus christ, or repuete the same vnsufficie^t which is clear and
manifest by the text of the same Chap as it is said afterward. Jesus is not
entered in to the sanctuary made with hands (which are but similytudes of true
things) but chefly in heaven to thend that now he may appear for us before ye
face of his father. And not because that he offered not him self oftentimes for
(he says after) he should have suffered often since ye beginning of ye world,
But now in ye co^sumacio^ of ye worlds he has appeared by his sacrifice, for
the destruction of sin, and as it is ordained of men for to dye once, and
after that comes the judgment. Even so has Christ been offered once to
abolysh the sins of many. Here is certainly a very express text where it
says clearly that Jesus Christ offers not him self many times, or other
wise he should dye many times. For Jesus Christ to dye and to be offered to
his father is all one. Christunt mori et ^^udent presentati idem.
Now he shall never dye, whereby he shall never be sacrified, and in sacrifice he
will never offer him self. Than it follows well that men can not offer and
sacrifye him. For if he offer not himself, how may other offer him.

And it may not be said that the sacrifice that is made now is the memory of
that first sacrifice. Whereby moreover it follows yt all our sacrifiers that
make the people to understand, that they present and make sacrifice for the
quycke and for the dead. Yea and yet to be the more galant, only for them that
they please to choose and name. Therefore it appears manifestly that they be
seductors, begilers, and liers. For certainly by the death of Jesus Christ all
visible sacrifice is ceased, and the state of sacrifiers is exspired. Wherefore
they are shorn in vain, and dysguysed for nothing else but that they may be
known for to be fools vnwytty, and voyed of all brain But for more ample
probation it behooves to consider the.x. chap. of the same epistle, ^bre. x.
where as almost over al is made mention of the holy sacrifice of Jesus Christ
the which has made an end of all sacrifices, so that never a sacrifice
visible abides. And among other things it is said thus in the person of
Christ. ^bre. x. ps. xxxix
Behold I come Lord God to the end that I may do thy will, than follows. By
the which will we be sanctified by the oblation of the body of Jesus Christ
once for all. Than after it says. For by one oblation he has made for ever
them that are sanctified perfect. And also the holy ghost testifies it. For
after he says. I shall have no more mind of their sins nor of their
iniquities. And where there is remission of them there is no more oblation for
the sin.

And for because that excuse of ignorance be not in us, let us consider what
these pore sanctifiers heretofore have said. That very true it is that Jesus
Christ had given his body in sacrifice, principally for the sin of Adam (and
as they say) for original sin, but not entierly for sins that be
committed actually, day by day, which is none other thing but for to say
and blaspheme that our Lord Jesus Christ has not made and found entier and
perfect redemption. And therefore they say (as if they were adjoined or knitte
with Jesus Christ, for to healpe him to make our redemption, and that they
were our redemers, that they offer to Gdd in their mass, a sacrifice for the
remission of our sins, which is a merueylous boldness, and a unhappy
arrogaunce. For the which to abate and put down in the said chaptre,
forthwyth it says after this manner. If we sin willyngly after that we have
received knowledge of verity, there is left us no more sacrifice for sins.
The which words (in whatsoever manner that any will take them) be so clear, so
quick and mighty, that they can not be enough merueiled at, how the world
has been so abused, blinded. and deceived to suffer as yet willyngly such
sacrifice, or to present any sacrifice visible and outward unto the Lord God
for our sins, seeing that so constantly, so myghtyly, so many times and often
the said holy Apostle affirms and says that there is no more sacrifice, nor
never shall be. For after Jesus Christ it behooves not to look for any other
sacrifier. But it has behooved, and so god has permitted that Satan by him and
his ministers have seduced the world a few except. For it was a fore spoken
and prophesied that all should be thus wasted and lost. Mat. xxiiii
And finally for to manifest the power, glory and magnificence of the
sovereign Lord, the which by the sound of his word, ii. Theff^^. ii.
and by the spirit of his mouth, shall put to ruin and overthrow the reygne
of his enemies, that is to wit, Antychrist, the world hell, and Satan.

Alas is not this a great misery to this unhappy world, to have so greatly
despised these fore alleged sentences, to have co^tempned them in this wise,
and so coldly passed them over withoutany other aduiseme^t, never willing to
consider that there is great difference between sacrifice and testament. For
wha^ we offer a sacrifice to God, we give a present to him whereby it is very
evident that when we take and receive of him any thing, that it is no sacrifice
but a liberal gift and pure mercy.

And who than is so blinded that he sees not here clearly that by gift of a
testament, confirmed by the death of the testatour by great love and charity,
he has wholly given him self unto us? Saint Luke touches it at the quick
when he says thus. Luke. xxii
This chalice is the new testament in my blood that shall be shed for you.
Testament he says, not example to do sacrifice. At this point they have very
ill thought, when by forgetfulness (to the end that I say not my
sunderstanding) such a gift they have wylled to change into sacrifice. If we
will do sacrifice let us do that saint Paul says and believe his divine
counsel, where he says thus. Roma. xii.
I pray you than my brethren by the mercy of God, that ye offer your bodies in
a lively sacrifice, holily. pleasant to God. etc. To such sacrifice we be all
ordained of God, priests and kings without being shaven, shorn, ceremonies
or dysguysed. Not for to offer his son unto him again. For to offer unto him
such offering we be to unworthy, to vile and infecte, forasmuch as he offered
him self to his father for us.

The which oblation for all times is right sufficient and perfyte, or else it
behooved for to reiterate or renew it because it should be imperfect, or else
certainly inconvenient to seek any other, which by strong argument of
scripture. I show thus.

In the epistle to the Hebrews by diverse arguments it is concluded that for
the death of an high Bishop there must an other be ordained and by the death of
him another, Hebrews.x.
and so consequently unto the time that there come one entyerly immortal,
which is our only mediator Jesus Christ. Note this.
The which always assisteth for us in the presence of God. Likewise for the
imperfection of the sacrifices of the. old law it behooved every day to begin
unto the time that one was offered entyerly perfect and consummate, which must
not be renewed. The which most holy and most perfyte has be made by our high
Bishop and pastor Jesus Christ which offered him self in sacrifice, and none
other thing no better thing nor none so good could be found next God. All this
is declared more at large in the.v. vi. viii. and.x chapitres of the said
epistle.

Now I demand of all sacrifiers if the sacrifice be perfect or imperfect
wherefore abuse they thus the pore world, No est dare me di^t.
and sell a thing that is nothing worth. If it be perfitte, why is it daily
renewed, and so often times by thousands begone again. Put your self forth
poor sacrififiers, and if ye have power to answer, answer, for gladly I would
upon this hear your answer. i^q. never.
The which I know that ye will bring forth ad Calendas grecas, that is to say
never, after your honest custom.

For the which things that be so evident and manifest that any man ought to
be ashamed to say the contrary, some wyly foxes all ashamed of their matter,
to cover and excuse their malice to abuse and begyle the world again (as
their manner has been and is always to resist and gainsey the verity (as now
are many not ashamed to speak and properly to say they have not done
sacrifice, but only have offered sacrifice of praise which is openly against
the Canon of their mass by the which they name and call this bread (after
that they have pronounced the words which they call sacramentalles) holy
sacrifice, holy oblation, presented and given to God as the sacrifice of Abell
and Abraham. and commonly they call it Corpus domini, the holy hooste and such
manner of names.

Also for to pray to God and offer to him a sacrament of praise needs neither
bread nor wine, there needs neither light nor ca^dle, shauyng or sheryng,
nor diguysyng with unaccustomed and wy de garments, whereby they can no longer
cover their abuse, their malice and errors by such fictions and legerdemaynes
whereby always they distroye them selves, having so little wit that in so
speaking, they confound it wholly them selves. For sacrifice of praise is comen
to all persons. Be it man woman, or child they are all bound to offer
sacrifice of praise. And by this means if in their mass be none other
sacrifice but praise a woman might say it, yea a little child, which is
directly against the accustomed doctrine. But it must needs be that such
lyinge dreams distroye it self.

Now have they said over al universities Papalles that the mass said or song
by an unthrifty harlotte priest, was, and is as good, as the mass of the
most holy priest, that is. The which thing we confess to be more verified
tha^ they wene. For ye best of the^ both is but wretchydnes, howbeit their
intention is to say that, that comes not of the virtue of him that does such
work, but by the virtue of the thing wrought. that is to say, offered to God
sacrificed and presentyng, and in their Latin they do say. Non virtute operis
operantis: sed virtute operis operati, that is to say, not by the virtue of
the work of the worker but by the virtue of the work wroughte which is all
falshode, dreams, and inventions of me^ as above is effectually showed.

The second declaration is if in the Sacrament of bread and wine there is
transubstanciation or not.
FOr thermore to confound error after error, notwythstandynge that this
first point is sufficient to abolishe it evidently. I mean not the
Sacrament of Jesus Christ, for it besemeth me not but this triumphaunte
Papal Mass. The said selye poor sacrifiers as enchauntours and idle people
which never esteemed the holy scriptures, and for to increase and publyshe
their folly she frenasy, scantly wyllyng to give place to the body of Jesus
Christ, have said, put in writing, preached and taught. That after that they
had blown or spoken over the bread which they hold between their fingers,
and also over the wine that they put in the chalice, that there remains
neither bread nor wine but by transformation, or as they say
transsubstanciation, the body of Jesus Christ is there under the accide^tes of
the bread inuisibly hyd. And the blood also under the accide^tes of the wine,
being there no more bread or wine which is a doctrine of deuyls, against al
verity, against al experience, against reason, and holy scripture, the which
has among other things cast away and alienated from the christian law and
religion almost all the earth, so full of wretchedness is the papysticall doctrine.

That this doctrine and sophistical determination proceading of vanity and of
dreams is entierly against the holy scriptures, it is evident and manifest by,
S. Paul, S. Matthew, S. Mark, and S. Luke. Where as al these witnesses of truth
speak of the holy supper of Jesus Christ, they have said and put in writing
that our Lord Jesus Christ took bread and break it distributynge it to his
Apostles and disciples. First S. Paul says thus. i. Cori. xi,
Our Lord Jesus Christ the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread
and geuyng thanks brake it and said. Take and eat, this is my body which is
broken for you. S. Mat. likewise says in this manner. Ma. xxvi
And as they supped. Jesus took bread, blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to
his disciples and said Take and eat, this is my body. Ma. xiiii.
Saint Mark also and S. Luke have written it in their Gospels, Luke xvi^
where as they name the bread expressly, and not the substance of bread.
Item S. Paul in the place before alleged, after that he had made ample
mention of the institution and ordinance of the holy supper of Jesus Christ,
said in this manner. Man approves him self, and so eats of this bread, and
drinks of the chalice, where as he says not. Eat ye the body of Jesus
Christ, which is hyd under the appearance of bread, but openly, purely, and
simply he said, eat ye of this bread. Now it is certain that the scripture
has no dissceyt and that in it is no fainyng And notwithstanding this the
poor blind folk have been presumptuous and bold that they durst diffine and
determine against saint Paul, and other evangelists that there is neither
bread nor wine, but only the similitude of bread and wine. Also in the Acts
of the apostles it is written thus. After. x^*
And on a Sabbath day, when we were assembled to break bread, where as it is
not written semblaunce or likeness of bread. And S. Paul in an other place
says. The bread that we dreake is it not the participatio^ of the body of
Jesus Christ. In the which so many evident places the holy scripture
pronou^ceth and says expressly to be bread, not a shape, or kind, appearance,
or likeness of bread. Wherefore on pain to be condemned of god, we must simply
believe it to be bread, and not lykenes of bread only, for (as it is said)
in the holy scripture is no feinynge.

True it is that the fayethfull Christians well understanding the dignity of
the Sacrament, take the bread sacramental, not as comune bread, vulgar and
usual, but as bread sanctified, appointed, and ordained to divine uses because
that in this most holy action the spirit and soul of the faithful should
be nouryshed, that is to say, knitte, joined, and vnied by special operation
to his propre life, which is his pastoure and only savior Jesus, and that
invisible for the time of this mortal life, by intelligence and contemplation
of faith. To the which in the life to come, shall appear without coueringe of
sacrament, openly, actually, really as our redemer, high bishop, king and
sacrifier ordained of god his father* unto the consummation of all things.

Saint Cipryan martyr, one of the au^cie^t doctors and the fathers of the
church in a sermon yt he made of the supper of the Lord yt begins.
Suscitati Lazari. Hierosolimis increpuerat rumor By high and long sentences
that which I have toutched shortly, among the which he said thus. Panem
angelorum subsacramento manducamus in terris, eundem sine sacramento
manifestius edemus in celis.

That is to say, we Christians eat the bread of angels, which is Christ the
living God under the Sacrament in earth, but we shall eat it in heaven
manifestly without color of sacrament. And what he understands by eating
him, self declares it in the same sermon, saying, Quod est esca carni hoc
anime est fides, quod cibus corpori, hoc verbum spiritui. That is to say.
That, which the meat does to the flesh the faith does it to the soul, and
that which the meat does to the body, the word of God does it to the
spirit. As touching the propriety of bread it is well to be noted. The nature
and condition of bread and wine (as to their first constitution) is to nourysh
and feed the body. But it has pleased the Lord to ordeyne them in his holy
Sacrament, to another and more excellent operation, which is that to the well
understanding and faithful person it brings and represents (not to the
sense of the body, but to the soul and spirit) actual taking quick
knowledging, and mind of the body of the savior of our souls, delivered to
death for us, and of his precious blood shed for our redemption, which be two
sundry things. For the body might well have died without effusion of blood,
as we se daily many dye. But by his great mercy it pleased him for to do
both for us. That is that he has tasted death as to the body, and not only
that, but also would shed and offer his precious blood in price of our
rede^tion. And therefore because that in his church should always be had mind
of these two admirable works he has ordained this same holy sacrament, which
is the consummation and end of all other in two visible things that is to
wit in bread and wine, the which things should never be separate, as they
have done in the Popysh church, which is a great wickedness and extreme
sacrilege openly against the institution and ordinance of Jesus, that so
expressly and so evidently had conjoined them. But what care unkind folk
ennemies to the verity, of the ordinances thereof, for they be wise, and not
vnwitty. If saint Paul were alive, O how he would cry against such a cursed
abuse, so would saint Austine, S. Ciprian and all other induced with the good
spirit.

But to returue to the purpose, it is certain that of the same bread which
they had used in eating the Lamb of passing, called the Pascall lamb. Jesus
Christ took, and brake, saying, take, eat, this is my body. Where upon in the
sermon before said this good doctor Ciprian said thus. Ante verba illa, cibus
ille co^munis, tantum nutriendo corpori co^modus erat, sed er quo a domino
dictum est, hoc facite in meam commemoratione^. etc. panis iste solemni
benedictione sacratus, ad totius hominis vitam, salutemque proficit. That is to
say before the words of Jesus Christ this meat that was commune auayled to
feed the body only. But sith that the lord had spoken, this bread consecrate
by solemn blissyng profits to the life and entier salvation of man. This
bread than by one such and so singular application, so high, solemn and
excellent blessing is changed and altered, not in corporal sense, but to
intellectual spirit, not of kind or substance but of operation of nature,
of signification, dignity and office, yea to the faithful, but nothing to the
unfaithful but perdition.

The which thing ill understand has given occacion to the schole men at
this present time curiously and vaynely to dispute that is to wit, if the
accide^tes may be separate and remain without substance, substance without
accidents, and other diueres allegations, which are not to the purpose of
Jesus Christ nor of his church but serve to confuse the world, and to bring
the christen religion to sclau^der, mockery and irrision, for of one
inconvenience (if it be not withstand) many other will follow.

Who may than any more sustain, support, and endure such folk, the which as
presumptuous and arrogaunt, without fear or reverence have be so bold, to
conclude that there is neither bread nor wine, but have dreamed and invented a
wanton and a new term of speaking, that they have called (as is above
spoken) transsubsta^tiation. The which in the holy scripture was never read.
Nor by the saints and good Fathers of the primatyue church imagined. Whereby
as enemies of God and his word by very right ought to be expulsed, and cast
away, or the better and fayrer to speak, as piuishe fools they ought to be
contempned and despised.

How be it if any should demand them by what verity such a thing is done.
They will answer forthwyth, by the doctrines of their schools, that it is in
the virtue of the sacramental words, proferred and pronounced over the
bread. In such wise that if there were no body that understood, or heard
the said words, that nevertheless the said transubstantiation would follow,
so that the sacrifice had his full strength with matter conuenable. etc. But
certainly I greatly wonder and have pity on them that they be so blind and
have not so much understanding to consider that our Lord spoke not to the
bread when he said. Take, eat, this is my body. Nor he spoke not to the
wine. As. S. Luke recites when he wrote. And took the cup and gave thanks,
and said. Take ye it and distribute among you. Also afterward likewise he
gave the cup after supper saying. This cup is the new Testamente in my
blood, which is shed for you. In the which writings and all other of the
new testament this matter is very evident that he never spoke to the bread nor
wine. Than it may be well said that these poor folk be very vnwitty, in
secret hidyng aside not willing to be heard and understand of any, blow
and speak thus over the bread and wine. Whereof our Lord Jesus Christ never
gave unto them neither example nor word But it is the custom that always one
error engenders an other error.

The.iii. declaration is of the assistence or corporal presence of Jesus
Christ in the Sacrament of bread and wine at the Mass.
IN this point more than in any other they have failed, and erred greatly, wha^
they said, wrote, preached, gave to understand, and taught, that in the stead
of bread and wine (as they say) under the shapes or kyndnes visible, white or
blake, yelowe or read, it is al one, the body of Jesus Christ really and in
deed, entyerly, corporally and personally in flesh and bone, as great and
perfect as presently he lived. And in this wise they have provoked almooste the
universal world to manifest and open ydolatri. Against the which importable
abusion it behooves to resist myghtily with the holy scriptures.

And first of all we must reteyne and note well the article of our faith, Romans
vii.
that Jesus Christ died for our sins, and arose for our Justification. man.
xvii^
And after his resurrection ascended in to heaven, and sytteth on the right
hand of his father, reigninge in majesty, to whom al power is given, in
heaven, in earth, and in hell. Philip. ii.
That he ascended into heaven visible in the presence of the Apostles and
disciples it is certain. ^ciuu^. i.
Of the which wonderful asce^cion they were faith full and true witnesses, Mar.
xvi.
as it appears in the Act. of the Apostles, and by S. Mark in the last Chap.
of his Gospel. Also S. Paul writing to the Collossiens says in this manner.
Cos. i^i.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek heavenly things that be above, where
Christ is, sytting on the right hand of the father. If follows well than,
sith that Jesus Christ is above in heaven sittynge on the right hand of his
father, that he is not here in earth between the preistes hands, nor closed in
a box or aulmery, for his body was never but in one place at once.

Therefore if his body be in heaven, for that time it is not in earth, and if
he were in earth, it should not be in heaven for of certain a very perfighte
body is but in one place at ones as I said before, Caue^d^ a sabe^^^^.
and it is no need to dream or allege any miracle of God, and say that god is
almyghtye to make it be done, and to multiply it at ones, in sondri places,
for that is the rauinge ymaginacion of man without foundation of scripture. And
yt God makes such a multiplicacion we have none assurance of scripture, nor
divine promise

Argumentu^ a posse ad esse ni^^^ co^cludit.
Wherefore to say. God may do it, ergo he does it. That saying is nothing
worth, for here is no question of the power of God. And it is all certain that
God has the power to make all the Asses. Horses and Mules in the world for to
speak, as he made Balaams ass to speak, howbeit he does it not.

More over we have never red in holy scripture that he has multiplied and put
at one time on body in sundry places But rather made it to transport fro one
place to a another at his pleasure, Da. xiiii.
as appears of Habacuc that by yt an angel was in continent horn from Judea
in to Babylon but wha^ he was in on place he left the other. Act. viii.
Likewise it is say^e of Philip, after that he had baptized the gelded man a
man of authorite with Candace queen of the Ethiopiens that the spirit of our
Lord ravished him suddenly, and was found in Azoto.

But that one only body has been in sundry places at once was never red.
Wherefore to say that God does such a miracle without apperteining, without
sight of any thing, without any knowledge, the folishe dream is to great. The
works of God be manifest, clear, open, and certain. He never did miracle on
any manner body without manifesting it. The works of God be not covered
(special when they concern bodily things) but as I said be clear and open.
Than to say and affirm such a miracle without evidence and right great
certitude, is greatly to err, and to constreyne the people to believe, by fire,
water, blood sheding, death, prisonme^t, cords, and hangment, is most cruel
tyranny. Moreover we have infalible certification by the holy scripture, of the
co^ing of the son of man, yt wha^ it would please him to depart fro heaven, he
should be visible and manifest. For as S, Math says. ma. vviiii
Yt any say unto you Christ is here, or there, believe him not, for as the
lyghtning issues fro the orient, and appears unto the occident, so shall be the
cominge of the son of man. And thereof the holy angels of God gave great witness
wha^ they said to the apostles. Ye men of Galile, what stand ye still be holding
the sky? Acts.i.
This Jesus that is received from you in to heaven, shall come as ye saw him
ascend to heaven. That is to wit openly, visibly, clearly, and manifestly,
not hid, courted wrapped, or clothed with bread or dowghe.

And if unto all this be answred by sophistical fa^tasi, yt is understand
alonely of ye coming at the day of judgment, and not in the sacrament,
wherefore (as they say) he remains with us in body and soul perpetually
although yt he hides him, and shows him not. This is a saing at will
wherewith they have abused us in time past which saying was easy and light to
believe, here before when we believed it by the seduction of hypocrites

Also yt saying is a blaspheminge, Ma. vvv?
and makes Jesus Christ a lier. Which says expressli, that we shall have always
poor folk with us, but we shall not have him always, The which words we must
necessaryly understand, of his body, and his humanite. For as touching his
holy sprite it is over all, and always with them that be his, as it is said in
S. Math. man. xxviii
Behold I am with you to the end of the world.

Now is this an over dullynge and darkening of the spirit and understanding
of the people to bind them and cause them to stop and stey at a litell bread,
at a thing visible and corruptible, to cause the^ to seek him there, which is
of soue rayn majesty in triumphaunt glory. For now he is out of his time and
out of his infirmite, and nevertheless, in the putting and holding of him
without any order thus in a lu^p of dough, he should be more set by tha^ ever
he was in the presence of Pilate. Yea if one would say a furbisher of old
baggage. Nay, like as a dominican said sometime, in the cite of Geneue openly
preached yt he made him self as little as a Pismire. And if it were not yt the
matter is so ernest, and that I have dolor of the folyshnes of such one
graceles. I could not abstain me for laughyng.

But in leauinge the fools in their folly, I would wite, what v^ilite or profit
might com to us that he were with us in a little morsel of bread so hyd? ^^^n.
xvi.
when he him self said, if he ascended not to his father that the holy. Ghost
should not come, and when he was ascended into heaven, that he would send
him, which be did at the day of Penthecost, and sytte also on them that it
pleased him.

To be brief this popish doctrine is cause of the universal destruction
almooste of all the world. And they ought not for the covering of their yes,
and the better to exercise their vnsaciat auaryce, for their pride, their
marchaundise, and rapine and for to give some appearance and color to their
matter, for to allege or bring forth these words. This is my body that is given
for you. For by them none other thing is showed but presence sacrame^tal in
the bread and wine not as it has be said vulgar or commmune, but
significatiue and Sacramental, which is and ought to be taken in great
reverence in mind of the death and passion of Jesus Christ, representyng the
brenninge love great charity wherwyth he loved us, and bys holy spirit
wherwyth he has quickened us.

Betokenynge also the lone that in very charity we ought to love each other,
as members of one body, whereof Jesus Christ is the head and that it is so, ye
same words gitreth know ledge thereof. For it is certain, that, that which we
do se that is to wit the bread or as they say the whitnes of bread, is not
the body of Jesus Christ.

Therefore if any say to me. It is true, that which is seen is not the body,
These (...) ioy^x c^^teyn^.
but under that or within that which is seen, the body is contained and
encloses. This is well glosed, and thus altering the purpose, and the words
of Jesus Christ they be no more taken in their pureness and simplicity, as he
preferred them with out gloss or addition, for he said not under that or
within that is contained mi body but symply said. This is my body as it was
said of the Paschall lamb. Exodus ^^
This is the passage of the Lord God. And nevertheless it is very euidente that
the lamb was not the passage, but that only it betokened the passage. Lamb^.
Passaige
In this manner also the bread is not the body, but it sygnifieth the body,
as in another place it is said, that Jesus Christ is the stone, ^^e^ ^o.
howbeit it is certain that he was not the stone, i. Co^. ^.
but that by the stone he was signinified or represented. To this purpose
says saint Austine thus, Res significantes accipiunt nomina rerum
significatorum Non enim dicitur: petra significa bat Christum, sed absolute
dicitur petra erat Christus. In like manner of speakinge he said I am the very
vine. ^^ou. xv vine.
That is to wite. I am signified by the vine.

And above all this is to be noted. For it is written he believed the word of
the Lord And it was reputed for righteousness and accord was made between
him and the Lord, of the which Iustyficacion and acccorde was given unto him
the sign and token of Tircu^cision, and in ordeynynge the said token the Lord
God said unto him. Hoc est pactum meum. Genesis xvii Circumcision.
This is min accord or covenant. How, beit it is very cuident that the said
incision or circumcision was not the said accord or covenant but it was only
the sign of the accord or covenant Whereby if I should ask of a learned
person, the perfect understanding of these words this is my couenaunte. He
would say to me this is the sign of my covenant. Like wise I would say to him
of this. This is mi body, Ma. xxvi
this is the sign of my body. For it is alone manner to speak, so highlye and
perfitlye in all things like as there is no man that could reasonably say to
the contrary Other textes ynought there be in holy scripture, ^ Cor^. xi.
where such manners of speaking is used, whereby it was not necessari thus hardly
to take this text after the letter Hoc est corpus meum, that is to say: this is
mi body without swet mistical and spiritual knowledge, but it has behooved so
to do for to grease and fat the healyes of these fat bulls and rauishe the
world in admitacion.

Also because the iuel of abominacion should be araised in the holy place,
Psalm. xx^* Daniel. xi i. Thessa. i^
and that thereby the manne of pride and of sin and he of whom the coming
is after the operacion of Satan in all power and signs, lienge miracles and
wonders, should be exalted and worshipped as God.

Notably the holy apostle did say, signs and liyng wonders. For in this mass
and blown bread great wonders, loud lies he has imagined. Is it not well
dreamed, well lied, and raued to have said that all the accidents of the
bread, and wine as whitnes, roundes, weight, taste, savor moystnes etc. be and
remain there without subject, that is to wite without foundation and
substance. Is not this very hardily spoken to say, that they hold, that they
bear, and that they close the body of Jesus Christ, all of his heyght, all
entyer, all a live in flesh and bones thus and so, and whither they will.

I demand ones again what means, and wylleth this poor sacrifier when he
pronounces the words over the bread? sayng. This is mi body. leuyng the rest
of the text evangelical, and adds presumptuously this word, (...), saying.
Hoc est enim corpus meum, that is to say, for this is my body, The which
word, enim (or for) none of the euangelystes did add wherein they enterprise
upon the word of god If the said sacrifier will say that it is his own body
that is hid under this whitnes and kind of bread, it is certainly a foul and
a stynkinge thing. If he shall answer that it is the body of Jesus Christ,
wherefore says he not then. Hoc est corpus Christ, that is to say this is the
body of Christ. Because it might be understand what he said. And if he say,
that be recitethe the words only or that he recites the words yt Jesus
putfurth taking the^ materialli, or by manner of nothing To that I answer, that
words taken materially (by their own schosastical doctrine) signyfieth
nothing.

Moreover I ask of the^, where they have promise and assurau^ce of God that
every time and as often as they shall pronounce such words that the body of
Jesus Christ all suddenly shall descend between their hands. If they allege
this text Hoc facite in co^memorationem meam, that is to say, do this in the
reme^brau^c of me: it is not answered to the purpose. For it is right manifest
that he speaks not there and makes any co^ma^deme^t that he should do
sacrifice, ii. Cro. xi.
but of the co^mestion and eateynge of the bread, which ought to be done in the
co^memoration of the charity, death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
showing the same (as. S. Paul says) till that he come, that is to wit, (...)
of.xviii.
openly and manifestly at the great day of dome, and ought not to stay so much
at this verb substantyue Sumes est, that is in Englysh, am, was and is:
wyllyng to conclude, that he is there corporally, because he said, Hoc est
corpus meum, this is my body. For this verb substantive, albeit that it is
expressed, yet proves he not bodily presence, but sovereign and spiritual,
like as he said. Where two or three be gathered together in my name there am I
in the mydes of them. He said expressly, In me dio eorum sum. And nevertheless
it is very certain that he will give none other thing to meaning but his
goostly assistence, not personally, or corporally, as these Papists have
preached that not only Jesus Christ is there present really in body and in
soul, but also (that more is) the angels and saints, and all the celestial
court. Wherein they show plainly the efficacy of their error, wherein they be
fallen, and have not so much understanding to know that they confound them
selves. For like as by their saying they put and multiplye the body of
Jesus Christ in sundry places at ones, so must it be than, that all the
Angels and all the saints of God be in diverse places at ones. And if they be
so ashamed to consider it: I would learn of them the text of the word of God,
where they found this, and if it were so that they have none I deteste them as
dreamers and cursed liars.

And if we bring forth the.vi. chapitre of saint Ihon, where as he says, I
am the living bread which is descended from heaven, if any eat of this
bread he shall live eternally. And the bread that I shall give, for the life
of the world is my flesh. That afterward he said, except ye shall eat of
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood ye shall have no life in
you. He that eats my flesh, and drynketh my blood has life everlasting,
and I shall reyse him up again in the last day. For my flesh is very meat
and my blood is very drink. To this allegation I answer, that in all this
Chapter Jesus Christ manifests and declares, him self such as he is and
was, yt is to wit our life and only gyuer of life.

Moreover he willed to take away the folyshe ignorance of some poor blind.
folks that followed him for none other thing, but that they thought that he
would feed them bodyly without any more labor, because he had nourished
them by the multiplication of.v loves, John.vi. mat. xiiii and.xv.
at one time, and of.vii. at an other in the deserts. Other (as it appears
in the same Chapter) esteemed him the son of Joseph. And by this contempned
him without estemmyng any thing of him but that he was a man, and nothing of
divinity they knowledged in him. The which only deity feeds and
nourishes our souls and spirits. Wherefore because they should not pretend
any ignorance, and that they should not excuse them of sin, he said unto
them. I am the living bread which descended from heaven. That is to say,
from eternity in temporalitie, by the only mercy of my father without merit
of any creature, He said then. I am the living bread that is descended from
heaven, as if openly he had said, despise me outward as much as you will, yet
am I other then ye wene, ye se the body without that ye do despise, but in the
same abides the plenitude of divinity.

Therefore it follows, the bread that I shall give for the life of the world,
is my flesh. The which he has greatly accomplished by his death. Collo. ii.
In the which for to quycken us, he has wyllyngly given him self in perfect
sacrifice, offering him self by great obedience with a brennynge love to his
father for our redemption. And right proprely he calls his flesh bread,
^hon.v.
heavenly bread and living bread because that he and his father be one self
thing. In the which signification, the holy Apostle calls Jesus Christ an
heavenly man, or other wise he should not be our life and noury s^inge. ii.
Cor. xv
And in likewise as the bread is not made for it self, but for the nouryshynge
of other, so Jesus Christ the very son of God is made man for our
redemption and life, as it is said. Uerbum caro factum est, that is to say,
the word became flesh. Yea if that by lively faith, Ihon.i.
and assured and steadfast confidence we be united and knit to him. Then the
very true intelligence and right certeintie of this chapter is nothing of
the corporal and carnal eating, but of the spiritual co^mestion or eating that
is made by a lively, entier and steadfast faith which vniteh, encorporateh and
kniteth us to Jesus Christ, which causes us to taste his holy word, as him
self declares in the said place, where as he says. The words that I
speak ben spirit and life, the flesh profits nothing, that is to wit,
carnal thoughts have no place here about, neither is the flesh eaten and
swalowed into the bealy or stomach. But it has profited much fastened on ye
cross and to the Lord offered and sacrified. For truly the flesh eaten
profits not the soul, and to say that it were the feadynge of the body,
John.vi. Men's ve^sci corpor^enescit.
it were to merrily spoken. And it behooves necessarily for to understand this
chapter, as it is above said, yea if it please not the adversaries to make
Jesus Christ a liar for to defend their fantasy. The which by the same chapter
is lightly and spedely showed, if it please you to consider it well.

In a certain text he said thus. Who so ever believes in me has eternal life,
and I shall raise him up again at the last day. In the other text he says.
Who so eats my flesh and drynketh my blood has everlasting life, John.vi.
and I shall reyse him up again at the last day, wherein it is manifestly seen
that by these two textes, all is one thing of the faith and of this eating, and
who that believes in Jesus Christ, eats and drinks the body and blood of
Jesus Christ. Or else the first preposition (That is to wit, that who
soever believes in Jesus Christ has the life everlasting) should be falsified
by this (third) that follows. Uerely, verily I say unto you, if ye eat not the
flesh of the son of man, and drink not his blood ye shall not have the life
in you, howbeit before he affirms that who so ever believes in him has
everlasting life. Whereby it follows infallibly, that to eat the flesh, and
to drink ye blood of Jesus Christ, Nota
to come to him and believe in him is one self thing, and there is no man
living how subtyl that he be (if he be not all out of his wit) that ca^ say
against it and that it is not true. How many thousands of children, young
adolescentes and other persons have be and shall be in everlasting life, that
never bodyly did eat of this visible bread, nor drink of the Chalyce, and
evermore the process is general, wha^ he says verily I say unto you, if ye
eat not of the flesh of the son of man, and drink not his blood, ye shall
not have ye life in you. Wherefore it is necessary to take and understand this
text, Non sic ^^^duct^^ intiqui.
not of the visible and outward eating, but of the inu^^ble eating, which
is the inward faith.

Saint Austine understood this well wha^ in the person of Jesus Christ and of
the Jews he wrote thus. Illi putaba^t erogaturu^ se corpus suum. Ille dixit
ascensuru^ in celu^, De co^fee^ ii. cap. pry antiqui de heres^^.
vtique integrum. Cum videritis filiu^ hominis ascendentem vbi erat prius certe
vel tunc intelligetis quia non eo modo quo putatis erogat corpus suu^, vel tunc
intelligetis quia gratia eius non consumitur morsibus. Item donec finiatur
seculum sursum dominus est, sed tamen hic nobiscum est veritas domini. Corpus
enim in quo resurrexit in vno loco esse oportet, veritas autem eius vbique
diffusa est. That is to say. The Jews thought that Jesus Christ would have
given them his body for to eat, and he answered the^ that he would ascend
into heaven whole and perfect, because they should know and understand that
they should not receive it in such manner as they thought for his grace
consumes not by morselles. Moreover v^nto the end of the world the Lord is
above. But the truth of the Lord remains here below with us. For it
behooves that the body of the Lord which is risen be in one place. But the
truth of the Lord spreads over all.

Ite^ Fulge^tius speaking of Jesus Christ wrytteth thus. ^usgentis u^ ad
Thrasnti liber.ii.
Absens erat in celo secundum humanam substantiam cum esset in terra, et
derelinquens terram quum ascendisset in celum. Secundum vero diuinam et
immensam substantiam nec celum dimittens quum de celo descendit, nec terram
deserens quum ad celu^ as ce^dit. That is to say. Christ by his humayne
substance was absente from heaven when he was in earth, and was leaving the
earth when he ascended to heaven. But by his divine and infinite substance he
left not heaven, when he descended from heaven, nor also left not the earth
when he ascended to heaven.

I have alleged these two au^cie^t doctors not for to give authority, or by
the^ to approve the truth of the Gospel (for the virtue and power of the
word of God depends not of any creature, neither in heaven nor in earth,
and if all the world were against it, it remains true everlastingly. (But I
have only broghte them to show ye, that which is said before is no new
thing, as these false Antichrystes give to wit, that allege their lies,
dreams, and fantasyes, setting aside as much as in them is possible the holy
word of God by their gloses and traditions, by their distinctions lunatike
inue^tions. After the which word of God notwythstandynge (will they or not)
all the Popish order shall be judged before God.

Whereby entyerly to the same I do hold and stey me, casting of all that is
said by men. in that which concerns divine things without evident and true
authority of scripture after the which all Christen men ought to be ready
to give answer, Duid h^c dicent facrifici^ i. Pe. iti.
and to satisfy to all men that ask them a reasone of the hope, which is in
them. Than sithe it is certain that Jesus Christ, as touching the body is
in heaven living and reignynge, as saint Peter witnessethe saiynge. It
behooves certainly that heaven receive him unto the time of restoringe of all
things, that God has spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets in the times
past. Acta. iii.
We ought not to seek him bodily in any other place unto the time that he
show him self openly. Who that will not forsake all verity of scripture,
ought to lift up his heart unto heaven with all his understanding and mind,
abidynge in humble desire, the hour that it shall please him to transfer us in
his rest. Not worshippinge here below any visible thing, for the scripture
shows us otherwise.

Also Jesus Christ in ordeynynge his holy supper, and the Sacramental bread
to his disciples said simply, Accipite, et manducate, that is to say, take
and eat, and said not. Respicite, adorate, that is behold and worship. Nor
never any of the Apostles enticed or provoked any to such wroshyppynge as the
priests of idolles have done From whose tyranny it may please the Lord God in
his strong hand to deliver his pore people. So he it. Math. xv.


And if again (notwithstanding the things before said) stubbornly they do
reply these words of Jesus Christ. Hoc est corpus meum that is to say, this is
my body, to be true, to yt I answer, that there is nothing more true, so that
it be well vndersta^de^ of us, for it suffiseth not to allege textes of holy
scripture, but if they be well applied to the true knoledge of the holy ghost
well expounded and tried. Or else Satan against Christ should triumph, Math.
iiii.
yea and false prophets, heritikes and such folk as be against the church of
God would bear him away.

In conclusion of this matter it reiteth that every one be well advertised, that
all that which we have said in this party, is only for to gainsaye their
ignoraunces, yt do maynteine so fat and gross an assistence, and bodily
presence of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament with such a multiplication, as they
say. For it is not to be doubted that Jesus Christ assisteth not us at his
holy supper, but certainly by a manner unspeakable and unable to be told, and
unto us for the time inco^prehe^sible. Of the which assiste^ce he by his grace
make us partakers. Ame^.

The fourth declaration to understand what the Mass is.
Think ye not my dear brethren that in speaking against the Mass, I do
speak against the ordinance of Jesus Chriist or the institution of his holy
supper. But to the contrary it is for to yield and restore it into the purity,
which Jesus Christ by his goodness has ordained and instituted it. For truly
there is nothing said nor done in the mass but it is contrary to Jesus Christ
and his word, the which lightly is to be known by this declaration.

First this word mass is a new term to speak, of ye which holy scriptures
never made mention. The which term signifies all that which is said and done
in the same from the beginnynge unto the end, comprysynge ceremonies,
inclinations, songs, ryngynges melodies, sensynges, lyghtes, washynges, the
introyte, the confiteor, the kyrye, the gloria, the oration, one or many, the
epistle, the gradual, the prose, alleluya, the gospel, the creed great and
little, the per omnia, the canon, the sanctus, the paternoster, the agnus, the
post communion, the requicsca^t, or ita missa est, Yea and a mass is sole^pnal
or hye, or else low or dry, one universal and foral folk, another particular,
and for the fraternites of patronage only, one for the rich, wherein is most
ryngynge, another for the poor wherein is least ryngynge, one of the day, an
other at pleasure, of the trinity, of the holy ghost, of the.v. wou^des, of
the croune of thorns, of S Fraunces, of saint Austine, of S. William, of S.
George, of S Roberte and a million of such sorts, One for the time, an other
for the goods. One to go a viage, an other to come again, one for beasts,
of. s. Hubbert for dogs of saint Antony for swine and hogs, of saint Loy
for horses. etc. One for the living, another for the dead, one for marriage
another for other fortunes. One of Gaudeamus, another of Requiem, one De
ventre, another de teribilibus etc. Not forgetting the hunting mass.
And after as ye mass is, such vestimentes is assigned. As lovers and plaieres
devise by colors. That is to wit, yelowe for the apostles, Read for the
martirs Grene for the confessors, whit for the virgins Black for the dead or
the souls, and so consequently of other. It is a dream to think thereof-

Now it is so manifest that ye very blind folks may se that of these things
a foresaid. Jesus Christ never spoke, and of it all ordained nothing.
Wherefore to cast away these fantasyes of men, is not castyng away of that
which Jesus Christ has instituted.

And if any make obieccion that there be good things in the mass at ye least
as is the epistle the Gospel and the Creed, the Pater noster, and other like
and ought not thus to be despised. To that I answer that it suffiseth not to
have good things, but they ought to be well used, and they must be applied as
they ought to be. Also enchau^tours nicromancers and wytches that in their
noughtines uses some good words shall they be excused of crime, which awyse
man would not say. And like wise by ye same purpose may be said to excuse ye
mass because of the good words said therein, which greatly is abused and done
otherwise tha^ the word of God supporteth And that it is so, it appears
clearly, when Jesus Christ preached declared and showed forth, the Gospel and
his holy word to every creature. Not for to cry or singe it. Mat. xvi.
And yet these poor sacrifiers do no thing saufe only they read or singe a
certain collet. Yea, and in a speech which the people (and them self, for
the most part) do not understand. Albeit that saint Paul in the power of God
commands that we shall not speak in the church, 1. Co. xiiii
that is to say, in the congregation of the faithful, but only in a speech
that every one may understand, or at the leafte afterward for to be
expounded and declared.

For what auailed it (although we say good things) and speak French, Dutch
or Italish in the presence of them that understands it not? and so it is to
sing, read or say the Gospel in Latyne or other words of God and is not
understand. What edifiyng comes threof what instruction? or what doctrine of
health is to the simple people?

Judge now I pray you, sith ye best of the mass (as they do use it) is naught
worth what than is the residue? Truly it is a let of salvation a destruction
and ruin of all goodness, so fearful (to them that know it) that never was
none such like as I do declare it. S Paul says yt the gospel is the power of
salvation to all beleuers, Romans i
but he says not that for syngyng of the gospel, to cry it, to howl it, or
bear it in a golden book or silver before the stomach, or in a towell hanginge
about the neck (as many fools esteem) but he meneth the Gospel to be
showed, preached, declared, and received in the virtue and power of the spirit
of God. Domo^ do audie^t absque predi^a^te.
For as much as faith (without the which none may be saved) comes of heringe.

And what thing was there ever yt has put a side the euanglycal preachinge
somuche as this proud mass? If S. Paul came for to preach in the mass time,
God knows how he should be received. Likewise if a pardoner or a berer of
Relykes, or any other tryfler should come, yet they will say to him, Make
have ye office is long, and neuerrtheles they be agreed.

What think ye that they would do to a simple christian person that would
gainsaye their abuse O Lord God, where is the time that thy seruau^te Paul
continued and prolonged his sermon till midnight? Act. xx.
And sith we be in this purpose that we are, seeing that the Pope does paynt him
self so well with the name of S. Peter and S. Paul for to maintain his
tyranny, where is the mass yt any of the^ both said? We read in the Acts of
the Apostles how S. Paul went from town to town, ii. Cor. xi
from one rigio^ to another, in Asie, Affryke, and in Europe to thentente to
exalte, preach, and show forth the name of Jesus Christ, trauaylynge by land
and sea unto the death for him. And how he disputed and confounded his
gainsayers. But of the mass there is no mention made but only of brekynge of
bread, and of the holy supper of Jesus Christ, the which by the mass is holy
abolyshed and set a side. O miserable abuse.

The.v. declaracion is of sundry fruits that come of the Mass.
IT is written that an ill tree can bear no good fruit whereby after ye knoledge
of so much evil that this unhappy mass brings to us, Mat. vii.
what frut may ye now know thereby? but error hypocrysi, ydolatry, tro^pery,
begiling seduction, strife, blasphemy, maledictio^ and abhomynacion. To be
short, it is a total dampnacion and perdicion. And this I speak touching
the secret and hid things. But as to the visible things of the world and the
flesh, that evermore bends to a bothenles pytte of evil, Operemitti non
ce^um qui perit.
I shall declare somewhat.

It is co^munly said that al things be made for the life and so they say, of
whom Saint Paul speaks, that their beli is there God, the which belly is a
terible God, John.vi. P^i^i. iii.
where to without sessyng much is offered, much presented and sacrified
notwithstanding that it tourneth al to corruption, and that it never gives
rest to these miserable servants that settyth al their care to satisfy, fat,
and please it, as sleuthful, lykerous, dronkers, kermorauntes, fat calves fat
bulls, and such manner of swine.

Now was there never such an invention found so subtly as to live without
taking pain without labor or thought the ketchynge well furnished for to
make fat soppes and to feed their fat trippes This is I ensure you a plentious
mass that brings forth so much dedly fruit, under appearance of holiness
wherwyth the poor world is swallowed up and devoured. Think (I pray you)
how much fruit brinketh in their finger kissynges that they name the offertory
of ye mass. These byg lubbers take no thought for all the weke to feed their
ribawdrye. Alas for pite, Corbam. Corbam. Corbam. Mor. vii.
how many poor women bears to the^ that wherwyth they should feed their
children, or help the poor nedy? And in deed this manner of offering came of
the first church of Jesus Christ. Where as the faithful brought of their gods
and gave them to the Deacon that was ordained a servant to the poor to
distribute to the^ that which was given to him. But these fellows take all and
keep all, wherein they be open thieves, for they keep to them selves the goods
of the poor, to feed and maynteyne their fylthynes and fat belles. This is the
first fruit.

Another fruit much like to this, this ple^tyful mass brings forth, by the
which these worshipful massemongers have gadered and heaped, wha^ under the
shadow of long prayers they have ravished an devoured the houses of the poor
wydowes and orphans. mat. xxi^^.
The which princypally was made for foundacio^s of anniuersaries years minds
and yearly and daily masses. By the which false and outrageous means they
have obtained and heapyd up riches impossible to be thought, as housing rentes,
lyuelodes possessions, Lordships, Iam sec^ria ad radicem arboris post ta est.
towns, castles, contries, barounies, duckedomes and that moreover realms,
and principalytes. Here is a shrewed tree in the earth ouerplanted and roted,
the which nevertheless shall be cut down and destroyed by the sword of God.

And from this merueilous, earthly and so rich fruit is another spronge. Mat.
ii^.
That is that these shorn massemongers, that at the beginning were poorer than
cobblers, have made the^ selves to be called masters and lords, and above al
other have occupied, ^u. xi
optayned, and usurped in eueri place the first seats. Than came they into
liberty (not of spirit) but of the flesh, ready and licensed to al evil. And
moreover, they have exe^pted, withdrawn, and separated them selves from the
obedience, which by the commandment of God, they ought and owe (will they
or not) to Princes and lords. For s. Paul writes thus. Omnis anima
potestatibus superemine^tibus subdita sit. To. xiiii
That is to say, every soul be subject to the hie powers But the holy Apostle
said not. Omnis anima laica, that is to say: every lay man's soul, but eueri
soul. As it was once answred in a college of Paris by a master Ass, whose
nosethrels and fete ought to have been cloue^, and sent to pasture

Out of all this spronge another fruit more pleasant, agreeable, and dilicious
to the tender and dilicate gentilmen. That is, that by one accord (yea, by a
commune law, made among them selves) they should live in merry wanton nes and
lecherous idelnes, without labor or travail. For their hands be to soft,
but to plai at tennes, boules, tables, cards, and dyce, to leap and dance
for their pastime, but for to labor, fie, because they be anointed, greased,
and their pates plucked. And all this, solatious goodness comes of this ioly
mass. O mass mass, how gentle art thou, how loving and pleasant to these
folk. How can they hate the? how can they leave the? how can the banysh
the, sith thou haste set them in such an easy quiet and rest, to labor
nothing at al. And that mor is, if they can read or sing a mass, lift up
their arms and knele, haueyng a portuouse to babble their mattens, they need
none other thing. As for books, volumes, and quaiers of holy scripture to
search and study, it forces not: for they he not requisite for the mass.

And as for study, it is a melancholious business, werines and a noyous, not
convenient for such idle beasts, that would live without any thought and by the
sweat af other men's faces. Oh how contrary is S. Paul to them? The which not
wythstandyng that he was an Apostle of Jesus Christ, a Bishop, but not mytred,
nor horned, a Doctor of verity, a doctor of the church but not hooded,
nerthells he wroght with his hands, and for to do so he admonishes and
desires every person, but what have they to do with God or saint Paul?

Yet an other fruit of this mass, and tha^ a great evil I will show as now.
The fruit is great and increased, for never hen laid so many eggs, and
hatched so many chyckens as this mass has brought us shorn poules.

And what man can think the nombre of the cockerelles that run after
harlottes, as cocks after hens. And when these iolye lovers have laid their
layghters, and sitten their brodes, they sit in their temples, singing as
cocks on their perches, yea (and properlier to say) de skant in counterfeit
things, gapyng, criyng, and howlyng. So many cocks, cockrels, and pullets,
that is to say, of Monks, Friars, Nu^nes, prestes, laisisters, this fat mass
hatched, and fed, that it is wonder to believe, and to satisfy so great
anombre, it was of force necessary to bild many henhouses and nestes, to lodge
so many lapwynges. Tha^ no^bre if ye can all the cloisters, abbaies, priories,
monasteries, temples, chanonries, prebendes, alters, portatifs, and not portat
ifs, and such other things that the mass has brought forth. And upon that,
think a litel I pray you and ye shall perceive what it man ye be, is it not
well multiplied. Avarice has wroghte a pase, as witnesses one of their order
named Willam de Peraldo, in his time bishop of Lions in the some yt he has
made of virtues and vices, (...) de P^^at do.
in the second part, in the title of Simony. Where as he says ye avarice
has found the multitude of al tars and the colectes of the mass the which
thing finalli is turned into horrible idolatry For by ye means the pore
people have be learned to seek and worship god, in temples and places made with
men's hand. Albeit (as Esaye says and S. Stepha^ allegeth) yt the most highest
is not habitau^t in the manner as they wene for, Esai. (...) By ^eta. vii.
the temple of ye living god is ye heart soul and ye spirit of ye faithful.
For the which cause Jesus Christ said, yt the true worshipers worshipped not
the Lord God ueyther in the mountain nor in Jerusalem, John.iiii.
but in spirit and truth, And therefore faith Saint Paul, that the faithful
is the habitation and temples of the holy ghost. And also Jesus Christ,
willing to give consolacion to all faithful people, in speaking of his
father, of him self and of the spirit of verite, which the world can not
comprise said thus. We shall come to him, and make our dwelling with him, he
said not, yt we should come into a temple, or in such a place, or in such an
altar. ^. Cor. vi. vi. Cor. vi.
But he said, we should come to him and make our dwelling with him. Wherefore tha^
by your advise has the people thus be taught to run hither and thither, Ioh.
xiiii.
but for to catch such as they bring? O insaciable coueytousnes, Lertaynly I
dare well say, that the brybats or watchinge thieves lurkinge in wooddes, be not
to be dread as these Antichrists, the which have not alonly pylled and
robbed the temporal goods fro the people but have cast out, and by thyr
false doctrine almooste all the world out of the way of salvation, and streied
it from the Lord God and from all verite. Hereabout we ought not to speak,
but only he wayle, sob and weep by great dolor and heuines. And therefore I
leave to speak of their false miracles, of their idols of Gold, Silver stone,
earth and of wood. etc. Of their pilgrymages their viages, and such manners
deceites whereby the world is brought in to a dark botomles pyt

This is the evil that at the beginning of this ungracious fruit I was in
purpose to speak, that of all evils it is the greateste, and never man could
imagine worsse. And what would ye worsse then to begiuen into reproved senses.
To be stricken with so great darkness, that they do come and judge the good to
be ill, Be qui dicit is ma^^t Sonu^.
and the ill to be good. All this by this mass is come on the people as ye
may clearly understand by this that is declared above. Esaie.v.


Of this evil above all other the Prophet tes have made mention when by great
threte ninges of the evil that was to come over the misbeleuinge people,
Esaie.vii. Mat. xiii. Mar. iiii. Luc. viii. Ioha. xii. Ac. xxviii Romans xi. Ps.
Lviii.
have aforespoken ye blindness and cursednes thereof. And is it reason that be
will not take and receive blissinge, that cur singe come to him? Whereupon it
needs not to pretend or allege ignorance, saing, if there be any evil it is
only for them that has inverted it, truly also for them that follows it. As
it is written. If one blind man led another, Mat. xv^
both of them falls in the diche. And therefore I pray every one to be ware.

The.vi. declaracion is of the cause and wherefore the mass ought to be
maynteined.
THe cause is euidente, since it brings forth so much fruit. Is it not a
spring of fat soppes and brothe? Is it not a good milche cow, and who saw
ever such a sow that so easily, so swetely, and so fatly has so many pigs?
where fore should they leave it since they find it so good Truly with good
right they main teyne it. For it is very handsome for the belly, They have no
need to do any thing, and less for to study. Da. xiii.
What will ye more? Other cause I find not wherefore it ought to be maintained
but if it be like the sacrifiers of Babylon that maintained their God Bell,
because they were nourished, their wifes and small children, with that which
was offered to the said idol. Re^esnesse mendutiu^ di struyisse
But as one Daniell chanced thider that destroyed their false works, and so
were confoundded. God shall arise, and all ready he has reised a Daniel full of
the spirit of verite, yt shall plainly at the full give knowledge of the
falsenes of the mass, so covered and closed, and there shall our poor
sacrifiers be overthrown.

The. vii declaracion is of the means, of the manner, and how this poor mass
may be maintained.
Sith that for the causes before said the mass ought to be maintained, there
rests but the manner, the mean, and how that may be done, for it is the
chyefe of their matter. Attend here poor sacrifiers, for ye have no more any
other refuge or soture. And therefore ye ought to love me well, saying that I am
so thoughtful of your b^sines Harken than well, and retain the counsel that
follows, for ye can never find a better for your matter. Now ye must note how
many ways a thing may be mainteyned.

First alledginge ancient custom. But herein I will prove it naught worthy.
For howebeit yt since.iiii. or.v. C. years your mass has be riesed, taught
and builded in apes toies and iuglinges which we se now, yet was it not in the
ancient and first church. And therefore if we must allege ancient custom, it
is not for you, but a against you every white. Moreover in divine things, and
that are by the ordinance of God, contrary custom made by men, has no
place. And ought not to be called custom, but abuse and corrupcion.

Secondly a thing is maintained by pluralite and multitude The which thing
may be done in humayne things only, to make an end and agremente upon
the difference that may be between men. But such a thing can not be done nor
ought to be done, in things stablished of God. For truly the verite of God
depends not of great number of the will or fantasy of men. Whereby all be
it that ye allege great multitude of folk for your part, that in this case
cannot serve you, for it is not to purpose.

Thyrly, by lies, false understanding, wilines, hipocrisy, kepinge good
countinau^ce, simulacion, feyninge some very ill thing: as if it were very
good, for to maynteine them self for a time, wherwyth many a monge you, at
this your great need can not greatly arm, cover, Fronti nussa fides.
and help your self, but yet truly at the last it can not warraunte you, for
by process of time a thing painted or steined is discovered with the wether.

Fourthly ye shall mark and to be short, that in.ii. other manners a thing is
mayntened.

The one is by force, the other by righ Wherefore one of these things ye must
choose, advise you which of ye two is most fet or mete for you If ye yield you
to the right, truly your mass is at an end. Super Omaia vincit Feritas. iii.
Esdras, iiii.
For falsenes, hipocrisi and lienge dreams, by right and verity are cast
down. Than rests no more to yon but ye fore, which is not the best part. So
wot I not what to do, but that by your wicked spirit (as ye have well be
goune) at the force ye shall keep you, and in as much as ye may do, stope and
let the general Councelle. By this mean ye may maintain it for a time.
But the Lord (against whom ye fight) will destroy you at length.

O Christen people consider by what means these gallauntes mainteneth their
business is it not all by force? They enprison, they destroy, they pil, they
drive a way, they banishe they burn, they slay, they drown and murdre as
many as they may, as many as gaynesaye them. By shameless lies also, such
workers of iniquite (because they dare not abide the light) diffame all lovers
of verity which is extreme malice. To give Gold, silver, Jewels and
presents to whom they know have power to mayntene them, they be diligent. For
their only hope is all together in men, wherein manifestly appears their
vnexchewing and approaching ruin. Iere. and xvii.
For cursed is that man that takes the flesh for his arm and his strength.
It is said that all plants which the heavenly father has not planted shall be
rooted out. Mat. xv.


That is to understand as well of the wicked, as their works. Moreover it
behooves us well to hope that God by his great goodness will send us some
virtuous Ezechias or reise a true Josias that by high corrage shall set and
constitute an order over all. Than shall we se the face of the lord shine upon
us, as the bright Son after a derke clowdi wether. For if the holy Sacrament
that not only represents to us, but also presents us the precious bodi and
worthy blood of our redemptour and only savior Jesus Christ, were keep in
the pureness. If the said holy and sacrate supper of Jesus wherein his
simplicite, well set forward, the usage of the same well observed, the
efficacy and fruit thereof well understand, the death and passion of the
savior (because we should not be unkind again) taught at large, the
promises pronounced and declared as it ought to be, the mass so full of
ceremonies partetly amended and corrected truly the poor world, the which by
it, is so greatly troubled and wasted, should be in rest, and from a great
unhappiness, should return in to tra^quilite and felycite.

The which it may please the eternal father to give us, for the reverence
and dignite of his only son most best beloved his very Christ our Lord,
to whom be perpetual honor and glory. Amen.

C. G. to the faithful reders.
Most dear brethren and friends, i. Pete. i.
bought (as saint Peter says) not by gold or silver, but with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ, suffer you not to be bought and sold, the sacrifiers
unto this day have bought and sold us, and be ye not servants to men,
subiecting you to them for to displease ye Lord God But consider your liberty
and spiritual dignite, wherewith God has made you fre, and leave the servitude
or thraldom of the mass and of these sacrifiers, that put you in over great
subjection, against the ordinance of our Lord, as here before our faithful
and good friend Marcort, has full well proposed and showed, as a true censor
or Judge. Whereunto I pray you by the name of Jesus to think diligenly thereon,
and exactely to judge, as it was before said to you in the beginnynge, without
hatred or corruption of judgment. And thou reader principally which have the
knowledge of these things. Behold how thou maiste not be excused before God,
seeing that thou assisteste to the mass, head of all idolatrye and
abomination, as willing to communicate and be partaker of the table of
Christ, and of Antichriste, or of the devil, and by that means to serve two
contrary Lords, which can not be done for it must all to the one, or all to
the other, not halting with both the fete, but as Helfe said. If the Lord be
God serve him. If Baal be god follow him. If also the supper of God is of God,
keep it, if the mass be not true leave it, not waneryng on both sides, as
folk with two faces, whereof saint Paull reprouinge the Corinthyans that
likewise would assiste to either of them, said. Ye can not drink the chalice
of our Lord, and the chalice of deuiles. Ye can not be partakers of the table
of our Lord, and of the devils table. Will we provoke the Lord to yre^. etc.
And yet above all, thou miserable which have clear knowledge of the verite,
how dare thou procure, take and reteyne the benefices, that justly we ought
to call venefices or socerys, procedynge of this foul, vilanous and abominable
sourge of Rome? Thou knoweste that they be gooddes de an athema or of cursyng
more horrible tha^ that of Hierico, conquired. Thou art not ignoraunte in
receiuynge a Bishoprycke, abbay, cure, or chanonry, that thou consentest to all
the abhominatio^s which be daily done in the said places, against the honor of
god what excusatio^ can thou pretend before God and before man, seeing that thou
know by the word of God that they be but abuses? Some will say, if I take
not this benefice another shall have it that shall persecute the Christians,
that shall ruffle with the profits thereof, and that will give no thing to the
pore. To that I answer thou whited wall, wilifox, painted sepulcher, and false
hypocrite, that thou ought not so to do in any wise. For the Apostle says. It
behooves not to do evil, Romans iii.
to thentent that there may arise goodness thereby. Than what is he that knows
not that richesses, causes their possessours to be dampened, by pride, avarice,
glotony, and by lechery, that proceeds of them, as of a foul puddle. Thou
than that receiuest the benefices and singest the mass, or at least ways then
co^sentest and assistest them that singe it. Be it for to have the co^modite,
or profit, and living, smalli regarding the gospel but digging and hidinge the
talent of the Lord in the mean while. What soever Gospel and verite thou
saiste that thou haft, thou art the less to be excused. For as a blind and a
leder of the blind, putting offense and slander before thy neighbor thou
dooste not commit idolatry only but causest the other to do idolatri serving
the idol when thou say by words, or do with a piece of dread and say,
here is the God, thy savior that a gain bought the, Ev. vvii Ps. (...). ^ii.
To. vii
like as Aaron by over great infirmite and disobedience willing in those
days to please men more then God. And also Jeroboam stired mor by ambicion and
couetise, tha^ by ignorance, said to their people settinge forth a Calfe here
is the God O Israel that led the out of the land of Egypt.

iii. Regu^.vii. 8. ^ii. Para. liii. a. iiii. Re. xxiii. a. iiii. Reg. xxiii.
a. ^^u oratis one Mas naffe.
Alas mi most beloved consider in what fearful inconvenience, in what peril
and danger of perdicion ye be, in saying before your eyes and communicatinge
such horrible blasphemes, a gaynste the majesty and goodness of God. Therefore
leave and forsake such idolatry cominge out of Babylon, or else puttinge
a^waye evil fro among you, resist with power to destroy it, as the true
minister Moses and these true kings Asa, Iosaphat. Josias. Ezechias, and
Manasse, But more sooner by the lively and mighty word of God, even as it
behooves you to do: albeit that it is enjoined to the Princes and Goueruours to
put all such Idolatry to ruin and confucion, by all means that may be.
Otherwise if ye persevere thus, ye shall never enter into the land of
promission, no more than Aaron and his did, but yet that more is to be esteemed,
into the realm of God, the spiritual and very land of promission. Into the
which God by his grace wcdrawyng us fro this worldly Egypt lead us by the
great Moses and mighty Iosue, which is Jesus Christ. Amen.

But because the better and bryflyer we may know the black fro the white,
the darkness fro the light, the dream fro the verity: I will rehearse in an
epiloge a little gatheryng painted as it were in a table and will set forth the
said, mass with his colors, wherein at one sight he wholly may be thought,
but notwythstandynge more imagined in the heart.

For in wryttynge of it, and porterrynge it: all quilles and penselles would
never suffice, for the high and infinite abuses that be in this Mass and
therein contained.

Here follow certain damnable abuses that are in the mass, contrary to the
holy supper of Jesus Christ
Forasmuch as the said mass is but man's invention and nevertheless
commanded, as if it were of God. Against Deutr. xii. a.d. Mat. xv. b. Romans
xiiii. b.





That they esteem ye same the more worth for the persons that say it,







The abuses of the Canon.






They offer the son to the father, that has offerred him self.





After the Canon.








Of that it is deffended that none be so bold as to tuch the bread and the
chalice that the priest touches,

The death of Christ is not auanced therein against.i. Corin.ix. e.

They do the mass in commemoration of saints.

It is said for the dead. Contrary to the supper ordained for them alive.

They lift up the bread and the chalice that it may be worshipped.

For the iestures and cou^tena^ce that they make like hypocrites, mo^mers and
iuglers,

a fornicatour, whose mass the^ selves have defended to be herd, howbeit it
is herd, against i. Corin.v. c.





For that they celebrate as Simoniakes for silver and other temporal things
against their institutio^s. Against. Mat.x, a. Act.viii. c.

Because, it is applied and said as well for beasts and things that be lost,







By that in so great supersticio^ they keep their hoosties, subjects to
rotte^nes and corruption, in boxes and awineries, bearing them at certain
times and days through the streets against.

In that they return home as folishely with the same, as they went out
therewith, against. Cor.xiiii. c.d. Col.iii. c,





In that by their over great boldness and pride, or rather cursed sacrilege,

YE shall know many other obusions of the massein the book called the Cauteles
or wiles of the mass. Certainly full of cauteles, in the divine rational with
out reason and nothing less than divine, in the some Angelyke, more than
inhumaine and deuily she. In the pastoral the souls feed and nouryshe with
thistles, and at the bridge of all evil wherwyth they be al pontifical wholly
filled.

These be sundry fruytes of the mass that be most commune and notable.
1 MVltitude of prebendes. 2 Multitude of priests. 3 Multitude of temples and
chapels. 4 Multitude of aultars. 5 Diverse oblations and offringes. 6 Worldly
riches and pride. 7 Idleness and trwandisse of the shaven. 8 Multitude of
harlotes. 9 Fained hours and prayers. 10 Detestable hypocrisy. 11 Devouring
of widows, orphans, and the poor. 12 Renounsyng and destructyng of the death
and passion of Christ.
And so consequently of the other, which are infinite.

TO make short ye error of the mass is most deadly and hurtful, as well to
the goods as to the persons, in as much as it seems to have most sign of
holiness and goodness saying that it is all execrable or cutsed. Truly the venim
wherewith the pestilence is covered anoieth and greueth more greater tha^ that,
that is seen open.

Ite missa est. Amen 3. Esdras. 4. chap. Super omnia vincit veritas. Above all
thing the truth ouercometh.

MDXLVII. Printed at Wittenbergs by Hans Lufte.


