Here begins a necessary instruction for all. Covetous rich men behold
and learn what perel and danger they be brought into, if they have their
consolacion in their dangerous and miserable Mammon, made by Ihon Mardeley
Clerk of the Kings majesty's mynte in southwarke.

Cum Priuilegio.

To the right worshypfull Master william web, mar cha^t of Salisbury Iho^ M.
wissheth continual increase of virtue and prosperous securytie of health,
knowledge of gods veryte, and everlasting phelycytie.
THe cause and occasyon, that I have taken upon me to communycate this simple
work un to you, which I nominate, the dangerous, or miserable Mammon, was
only to this end, and purpose (for as much) as experience opens unto me,
that not wythstanding, (as now) every man has I trust* or at the least
e^itendeth to enbrace the word of God, which is apparent before their eyes,
and to take such fruit by the same, tha^ the old fleshlye Adam, may be
mortifyed and to be renewed in a new conuersacio^ and life, and to walk in ye
light, and not to be carnally minded, which S. Paul Rom, viii.
calls death, but to be spiritually affected, according unto ye word whereunto
ye be now called: But truly it is a lamentable thing, to se the corruption of
ma^s mind which bears as it were a certain zele, or affections, to ye word
To lease by knowledge i^ better not to know
of God and can both speak of it, and also is desyrious to here of it, and
yet their lives be not wythstandyng nothing agreeable* there unto, but still
dwell in the old man, as much coveting, riches and worldly substance, as
they did before they had knowledge and rather more, who sees not how gready al
kind of me^ be in these (...), as well the clargye as the (...). The mighty,
as the marchaunte, which heapeth and chracheth in tresure, lands, and
possessions so gredely, as though ye world should continue for ever, having no
regard, nether to the poor members, nether it is to be feared, to their own
solles health, it may not be: says the apostle Paul, that they which were once
Hebre, vi
lyghted, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were become partakers of
the holy ghost, and tasted of ye good word of god, should fall away (for soche
says he) do crucify ye son of god making a mock of him, alas who ca^ expres
without a river of tearers. The a covetous mind to get riches is never
satisfied with sufficient.
insaciable desire yt me^ have to obtain riches, ho^geri^g so much for the^,
yt he forces not if he may have gold treasure, and this tra^ssytorie
substance, by what means he comes to it, besides y^ greet cark^ a care, and
travel, he takes night and day, to bring in goods, and riches, into his
possession, and when he has gotten it, he hordeth and keeps it from ye use,
relyue, and help, of the poor brethren, which shall ra there peryshe, than he
will other lend, give, or socoure, the^ with any of this his miserable mam
mon. Which he so warely reserueth to him self, as though, he should inhabit
the earth ever, contrary to the word of god, which these rich me^ have in their
hou ses and many times redyng the sa me, And also unto the law of nature, what
else be these kind of covetous men, but even soche as the Apostle speaks of,
in his epistle Hebre, ^
to the Hebreus ye. x. chap. ^ayeng, If we sin wylfully, af Who so sins
against god shall be put out of the ^oke Exo. xxxi^.
ter that we have received knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sins But a fearful lokyng for judgment, and a violent fire,
which shall devour the adversaries. A Tyrable and most fearful sa^e^gis this
unto al sinners, and i^ especial to all soche as loves gold / better then god.
The covetous man will here peradventure say / no man does love his riches /
better then god. Unto soche I answer / if thou se or know thy brother /
destitute of living / to mayntayn his family and occupie^g / and thou having
in thy keeping / more treasure the^ you do put in use / but reseruest it / in
thy coferes, thou then love thy gold / better the^ god / For S. Iho^ says he
yt loves not his bro Love is ye first precept and cause of all good works.
there knows not god / as much to sygnifye louethe not God for they are of
the world / and not of God / for he that knows god hears his word / and
loves his brother / for love is a commandment / and hereby know we ye spryte
Joan, iiii.
of verity / and the spryt of error But now and every man lykethe the bred
that is gotten with disceate Prove. xx.
/ at the last his mouth shall be full of gravel / what shall the rich man
take away with him more then shall the poor / saving paraduenture there may be
moo clothes found in his grave / the^ in the poor man's / it is a rufull
thing to remember / the whealynesse that the covetous rich be in, for the
neade and myserie of the poor / they nether feel / not yet consider. For the
wise pro. xxvii.
man says / he that is full, abhor reth a honye comb. But to him that is
hongrye / every sour thing is sweet. Alas how little be the poor brethren re
me^bred of the rich, in this age it would petie a man's heart to consider it,
for if he give a part of ye scrapes of his table, or an. ob. or a penny / he
conteth with him self, he has done asmoch, as to him is comanded, no certainly.
Thou art not so discharged of thy duty and reconi^g, which you must render of
thy bayliwike, as in this little treatis shall be declared. For ye wise man
discribeth what you ought pro, xxviii
to do unto thy brethren. Thus says he, who yt gives unto the poor, shall not
lack, But he that turns his face from soche as be in necessity, shall suffer
great poverty Prou, xxix
him self, Now seeing yt the poor, and the le^der shall both mete together, and
the lord shall lyghten both their eyes, I would consel al me^ who^ god has
endewed with riches. To ponder this little work, and to have an earnest purpose
and ready will to order their substance according to these scriptures, not
written by the holy ghost in vayn, but to admonish us of ye They that take not
head unto the word^ of god ^e enemies to them selves
will and pleasure of god, and to frame our life and co^uersacio^, after ye
precepts of ye same, Albeyt, their be a great number which have ye goods of
this world, and esteymeth little or naught either ye word which they have
received other else their bonde^ duty unto their poor brethren, they be so
bli^ded with auaryce, and love of the^ selves. To anymate soche sort of men, I
thought it my part to take upon me to put forth this small work as a thing
very neadful, for the foresaid consideracio^s to move, and styre ye rich, to
bestow their labors, in ye lords vyneyarde, yt they may for their well
doing, receive their penny of everlasting life, And for ye love I bear unto
you amongst all other my dear fre^des, I dedicate this ye fruit of my spare
hours, unto you, trustyng ye will take it in good part which shall incorrage me
here after to gratifye you with some other work as occasion shall serve me,
Thus god preserve your Maystership in health and prosperious success* in all
your godly affairs yours at commandment.

Ihon Mardeley

Redderatione^ villicationis tue. Iu. xvi The dangerous and miserable Mammon.
Amongst the hole multitude of euyls thrown upon ma^kyn de, in this mortal
life A poor man leding a godly life, is better the^ ye rich yt goes in
froward ways pro, xxviii
is to be feared most greuouslye. The prickyng thorns of riches which these
welthy worldlinges be endewed wtal in soch superflus habo^dau^ce, yt alas it is
to be lamented. Co^sydering ye great danger, and perel / those men be in,
which possess ye same, and think it no part their bo^de^ office, and duty,
to mynistre unto the poor me^bres of Christ, according unto the Gospel, But
continuallye labor, and study, to enryche the^ / and their posterity eue^,
as ye use thereof, apparteyned un to the^ only, and none other inue^tinge, by all
ye means they may possible, to get and obtain riches, lands and possessions,
with great travel and care of mind / as though ye thing ones gotten / should
ever remain / and Worldly riches is but a mutable thing ^ passes away like
to ^ dream
still continue with the^ / or else at ye least / their children and friends /
to enjoy the same after the getters decease: These kind of men, little
pondereth, or weighs in their minds, This fearful saying of our Savior
christ, spoken in the. xvi. of S. lukes gospel, where it is said, Come and give
now account, of thy Bailey wyke stand forth, Let me see, what account thou
can render, of soche goods as thou have had lent to the, and how you wilt
dyscharge thy self, of the dystrubucion of the^ unto whose use you wast
appointed to have ye keeping of thy riches, and not unto thy nowne goo to make
a reconing quickly, Oh merciful lord, shall this street account, by this of ye
rich worldlynges demanded, yea truly, for when the evening comes, which is
the end of this world, the^ shall Where ye faith of christ is, there is love to
the brethren*
every man give a just reconing of his Bayliewyke, and take his reward good or
bad, according as he has enployed his Talant here. Now if thou can
discharge this thine account, justly and truly. The^ was their never any
earthly lord, yt so rewarded his servants, as thy lord the^ thy audytoure
will reward the, for he will give the life and joy, everlasting, But and if you
o rich man, be negligent and regard not thine own velthe, and take no head
unto this thy reconing, no tongue can expres the soro we and pain, yt thou shall
suffer. Therefore, the desire of so great joy, and dred of so horrible pain,
yea al though thou had no love of god in thy heart, yet at the least way
it should make the continually to remember, that their must be account made of
thy Baylywyke, Therefore be circu^spect, and learn this lesson of the wicked
steward and make you friends, of the wicked Ma^mon, which is your riches, that
when ye have ru^ne your course in this transitorious life, and depart Luke xvi.
hence, they may receive you into everlasting habitacio^s, Consider o thou
rich man, which with al thy study ouse diligence, labors and continually,
trauelleth, with all thy wit and endustrye to obtain riches, and to be of
great sub stau^ce, to purchase ample and great possessions, as though thou shul
^es inheret the earth ever. Mark Luke, vi
what is said to the in the gospel, Woe be to you that are rich. That have
therein your consolation, Woe be to you that are full, for ye shall ho^ger, Woe be
to you that now laughe for ye shall way^e Luke. xvi.
and weep. etc. Oh how far passes the wisdom of the children of this
world, from the children of light. For what soever he be which loves money
and fyxeth his heart upon the vain riches and substance of this world,
Eccle, v
^s never contented nor satisfied for all his delyght, and pleasure ^s in
riches and yet, for all that says the wise precher, he shall have no profyt
thereof. Is it not to be grievously lamented and so ^owed, to se what insaciable
desire many men have to get riches and be so careful and studiouse for It is a
helly pain to be infected with a covetous mind
the optayninge of the same, that in manner al their whole care and study is ye
way. And unto what end and purpose, do they thus torment them selves nothing
else, but to heap up, and gather in, to enryche their children, wife, and
friends, to be lords over the poor, and to live here in great welthines,
having no co^sideracio^ of this streat account, to be re^dred, both for ye
inordynat gathering thereof, and also for the not helpyng of their weak
brothers, which peryshe for exterme neade, and lake of things necessary to
mayntayn them and their family, And many be The miserable life of ye covetous
man is not to be excogitate.
yet so miserable in gettyng goo des, and riches, that they pynche their
bodies, as well by the travel labor, and pain which continually they take, but
also be soch nigardes that truly it is to the^ a helly pain to bestow some
part of there money, upon their own belys. And many times for feablenes being
exersysed in their couetuouse chrachynge up / this worldly glase, which is all
but vanity, that they dye myserably To these men speaks the wise Eccle. xiiii
man, which says nothing is more wicked, and ungracious, than is a covetous
man, for their silver nor their gold shall not be Doph^. i.
able, to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath. Therefore beware o you
rich covetous man that thou get not thy goods, wrongfully as by extorcio^
stelth usury, or deceyte, if yt thou have than woe shall be unto the, at this
dreadful day, of thine account making, for thus says S. austen, Austen, i.
if he be cast into ye fire that has not given of his own goods justly
gotten. Where shall he be cast yt has stole^ other men's goods, thynkest you?
Or if he shall brene with the fend? yt has not clothed ye naked. Where
iudgest thou he shall berne, yt has made naked those yt ware clothed. Oh how
few does these rich men cloth now a days. Almost none, but cares al to
cloth him self (and his) Remember what the scripture Eccle, iiii.
says unto him. That of his car full travel has no end. And that his eyes
cannot be satisfied with riches, nor will excogitate with him self, (and say) for
whom do I take this paynfull travel. For whose pleasure do I thus consume my
Eccle, ii
life. And yet after all his labors, he shall be feign to leave his goods to
another. That ne uer traueled nor swet for them, therefore is it not a vain
thing To it not a great fo lie and madness to be carful for those why the he
^oth not know
and a great myserie, for a man all ye days of his life to travel labor and
study to enryche other which shall (eue^ his own son) Cast* his arms
abroad, and in all ^alcyuyousnes, and wantonness consume this riches which
thou have so grievously all the days of thy life cared for, yea in a small time
he shall wast and spend it away ryotously, And vnthryftely, art y^ goods
gotten by covetousness is s^e^t las^iuyously many times, of y^ eyr^s
not the cause of this evil thy self which by thy life would not bestow thy
substance, according, as thou art bounden. Both by the commandment of God,
and the law of nature. Doeste thou not understand that the bread of the
hongrye is the life of the poor. And he that defraudethe him of his bread
defraudeth him of his life. And is it not also written. Prou. xi. He that
trusts in proue^. xi prouer. ix.
riches, shall come to naught, And it is much better to have a little with the
fear of the lord, than great and insaciable treasures. Be hold says the
holy prophet ^f, xxxvii^.
David in the third and eight psalm. He heapeth up treasure, and yet knows
not he for who^ he gathe reth it, is it not more tha^ madness (yea) very madness
it self. To be so desyrious of great riches which is so dangerous, and
excludes many out of ye kingdom of heaven, it is said in the gospel. My little
Math. xix
babes, how hard is it for the^ that trust in their riches, to enter into the
kingdom of heaven, whereby it is more easyer, for a cable, to go The entering of
the rich into heaven is is hard.
through ye eye of a nedle, than a rich man to enter into y^ kingdom of he ue^,
Ponder well these words o you man, which art choked with the thorns of riches,
and worldly sub stau^ce, weigh I say from the botto^ of thy heart, what perel,
and Ieoperdy, Esaye* ^
you art in, which join house to house, and field to field, shall ye alone
inhabit the earth? The precher Eccle. ^i
in the second of his book says I made gorgious fair works. I builded my
houses orchardes and gardeyns of pleasure. I gathered silver, and gold,
ple^tie. etc. And I se al is vanity under ye son, shall you not leave al
these things To other, what madness is this says S. Auste^, to lose life, and
gra ^u^u, ^^^
ce, and to procure, the souls da^pnacion to win gold and lose heaven,
psalm, li^^^
And therefore says ye prophet psalm. liiii. unhappiness, shall compass the,
round about, travel and unrighteousness, in ye mids among the^ Abacuc. ^^.
does not ye prophet Abacuc say. Woe be to the^ yt gathers together. That
which is not of his own. And heapeth up thick clay against him self: Therefore
says a holy Doctor. The clay of Egypt The claye of Egypt is f^eshlye
cauetynge ^arnal plesures, and tra^sytorious things of this world.
is toughe stinking, and meddled with blood, and the slattes were hard to be
undone. For they were bake^ with the fire of covetous, and with the layre or
earth of lusts: Alas in this do travel rich me^ and in this they watch lye^g
await for poor me^. Here what is said of soche. They have led their days in
vanity and wealth. And in a mome^te they be gone done into hell, this is a
fearful sentence, to be feared of these rich worldli^ges But alas I fear yt
two things specially, make me^ thus to live by coveting and rape of other
men's goods. That is desire of honor and dread of poverty. But take heed and
beware says S. Lu. in ye Luke. v^
vi. of his gospel of covetousness. For no ma^s life stands in ye abo^ dau^ce
of things which he possesses. And S. Austen says, we se Austen
says he, yt ravenous fyshes, have some measure. For when they ho^ger, they
reap and eat. But when they be full, they spare. But ye covetous rich man, he
is never satisfied nor fulfilled, but ever he takes. And never has enough,
Riches endures but a month and ye owners also ^anisheth in ye twync^lls of an
eye* zacha* vi
without dred of god or shame of man He occupies dead men's goods, as though he
should never dye To soche it shall be said: you fool This night will they fetch
away thy soul from the. Than whose shall you things be, that you have so
gredely gathered together. what vengeance falls of this sin of
coueteusnesse. Read in the Prophet zacharia the syxte chapter / and thou shall
se. Wha^ zachary was commanded of the angel to life up his eyes to se what it
was yt goes out, the prophet asking what it was, it was answered, This is ye
pot going out And that is the eye of the earth, this potts couetyse, which ever
more gapeth after worldely goods riches and honor / And as Riches is y^ gods
of the u^ady,
y^ lycoure in ye pot profyteth not to ye pot self. But unto them that draw,
and drink thereof, so worldly goods, often profyteth not the keeper. But other
that come after for it is written. He that has money, shall have no fruit of
it, full sore be ye covetous persons blinded. That they se not how they should
come to heaven. But to win ne tra^sitorie things, they have as many eyes as
Argus had and mo, for they are like to owls and nightroues that seethe better
by He yt has not co^passyo^ of the poor loves not god,
night than by day. And through this vile avarice / a man does lose ye pytie,
he should have of his own soul. For by that dedly sin is lost the life of the
soul. In gettyng riches and thereby is lost also the pytie they should have
unto their bodies, putting the^ selves in much great ieoperdie, both by sea,
and land, and also leseth the ruthe and co^passio^, they should have of Job. xx
other poor men's indigence and nead, for it is said when he is filled he
shall be stopped, oh what ty rabble sayings of the scriptures be these, will they
not take away that inpietie which is thus closed by obstynacio^ that this coue
tousnes may go out of the rich man's heart / by repentance / and to fol low the
saying of christ which says in ye gospel of S. lu. That Luke. xvi.
he which is faithful in yt which is lest, the same is faythefull in much.
And he yt is unfaithful in ye least, is unfaithful also i^ much So the^ if ye
have not been faithful Math. vi*
in ye wicked ma^mo^, Who will believe you in yt which is true, if ye have not
been faithful in another ma^s business, who shall give you your own, As who should
say Whosoever has ye substance of this world ought to be a distributter to
the poor,
ye rich covetous man, is but ye keeper for the poor, and ought to be a just
and true mynyster, and a faithful distrubutter as well in ye least as in ye
much, that is to give of his little as of his much, quantity for quantity,
being his own for no man lives to him self but to benefyte other. And
therefore if the rich men, be not faithful in the poor man's busynes, who shall
give him his own, for god shall for not doing his bonden duty unto his weak
brethren, take psa, xxxv^^
it from hi^ (for it is written) They bear no burde^s, but be in all ease and
riches. They be not oppressed with mortal myserye of men nether pinched with
nead, like other me^ wherefore they are pufte up with pride. They be droned in
myschefe, and injury, so that for their welthy riches. They be ge uen to al
lusts and follow the desires of their own hearts. But lord how suddenly are
they banisshed, and destroyed. And with sondrie myschefes consumed. etc. Woe to ye
proud welthy in Sy^, eue^ soche as think the^ selves sure upon ye mou^te
Samaria, lo these ungodly The rich do neglecte ye necestie of their brethren
rich men, think to possess their riches perpetually, They drink their wine
out of goblets playe^g upon istrume^ts, anoynti^g their heads with ye best oil,
but no man is sorry for Joseph's hurt. No man tendereth the nead of other. Eve ry
man hops in vain things. And provides for his own, he is a wise man which
can by his wit and policy get and heap riches to gether and much in
estimacio^ with the wicked. O say they, se how ye world goes with this man /
he has by his endustrie in few years gotten great substance and possessions
surely he is a wise man. ^pot. ^^^^.
But what is written of soche worldly wise. Woe be unto the^ yt ar wise in their
own sight. And think the^ selves, to have understanding ^uc. xvi Math. vi
for that which is hyghly esteemed among me^ is abhom^ nable in ye light of god.
Riches is a perelous trape, and many be taken in the snare, for by the
inordynate coveting thereof, many heapeth up their own destruction, for the
pleasure thereof in ye end it is very grievous and bitter. The rich glotto^ yt
had so great pleasure in his riches, was cast down into hell. The great rich
Epulo which Epulo
fared so deliciouslye and had soch an insaciable covetous heart to have
treasure / had poured i^to his mouth hoote molte^ gold as the history makes
mencio^. Couetyse, is cause yt rich men, eat poor men, even as beasts eat
grass. And will not let the^ grow up, but keeps the^ loo not helpinge the^ in
their necessities / but sets their pasture from the^. S Ambrose Ambro. de
suo ubell^ de ^^both
well pai^teth fourth these rich covetous me^, saying how far will ye rich
men stretch out your covetousness, will ye dwell a lone upon the earth, and have
no poor me^ with you, why put you out your fellow in kind and couite riches
and and possessions, which kind and nature has made co^me^ to all both poor
and rich, will ye the^ rich me^ challenge property therein. Nature and kind,
knows no riches, for she brings fourth all men poor. Naked we come and
naked the earth takes us again, nature makes no difference between rich and
poor, look among the dead bones, and se if thou can know the rich from the
poor. What auaylethe thy riches then o thou covetous man, which art never
fully satisfied so long as thou art in this corrupt and stinking flesh Behold
how god has plaged covetous persons, for Innocentius Innocen.
speaking of ye harm. That co meth of covetousness says, Oh how many me^ has
covetousness deceived and spylled, for covetousness Number. xxii
sake. Would not Balaam for gifts that king Balac promised to have cursed
Israel did not his own ass reprove his conscience, and hurt his foot at a wall
and not wythstanding yet he was overcome. And lead away with covetousness:
Achane was stoned for Ios^^* ^^^
covetousness. Gyhesye was stryke^ with leprosy for sellyng of Amanes health that
came by ye grace of god, and many moo as Judas king Achab and other innumerable
which covetousness, has brought to destruction (for it is written). psalm xii.
The couetouse man shall receive punyshme^t when he dies, and also it is
written in Hierime the. ix. cha. I^tem. ix.
Let not ye rich man glory in his riches. For they be mutable and tra^sitorye
things. It was not with out cause yt the wise man said. Blessed is ye man, yt
is found without spot, and has not gone after gold nor has had trust in the
treasure of money. Which is he, and we will praise him, for he has done
miracles in his life (as though he would say) there is none, or at the least
very few / but al know and perceive in the^ selves, what gredy desire and
love, they have to money. And yet to blear the eyes of the poor, this cover of
shame, and vice. Has couetyce, which they call bodily sustena^ce, neadful to
nature / under shadow of y^ which couetyse to obtain riches, does labor
i^ordinately, and vnsaciably out of rule and al godli measure, by al^ means
possible he ca^ ymage^ thus with al his dilyge^ce, he goes after gold, and
trusts in the treasure of his money, and will not suffer his money to follow
him / and that money may remain for his sake. And not he for the money sake,
like as a bondsman to his Mammon, to love the money, and to set his heart upon
it for where Luc. xii Luc. xvi
your tresure is, there shall be your heart, also. For ye cannot serve God and
Mammon together, and for this cause the apostell ^aull he calls no other
sin Idolatry. But only covetousness, for a covetous man declares his carnal
will, and how that he has more trust in his riches, then in God. For he
thinks to have more gain by his money than by god. It is to be lamented to
se these wealthy worldlinges what manner of glory and confydence, they have in
their riches, calling and substance, for if they be not yet of the notable
soorte, of the mighty rich covetous me^, Yet if they be extolled to any
office but as feed men, It look they a lofte with a lordly countenance upon
their inferyours, which has their lyuinges of the same fountain, out of the
which they same lycoure for their own lyuynges, as though ye same ware thrall
or bonde^ servants unto the^ which is contrary unto the saying of S. Luke, in
the. vi. chapter ^u^e. vi
of his gospel, which says an evil man, yet uses lyberalytye unto his
friends. And the brutall beestes, of their own kind be good, and lyberall,
unto their own nature, how much therefore ought a christen man, think it a
higher thing, that his goodness and lyberalytie, should help them, that be
indigent. Even those which deserve it not. Yea, his enemies, and even the^ that
have hurt him. For except thou help thy enemy which has neade of thy help,
and soccour him in his necessytie, it is even as thou haddeste stolen from him.
For thou art bonden to help him. So says S. Ambrose, (feed the hongrye
Ambrose.
says he) for if thou feed him not, you kyllest him, as much as in the is,
For if thou be a covetous man, and dwellethe in thy riches. Thou have nether
charytie here in earth unto thy brethren nor to God in heaven, for thou
beareste this pote as is before spoken of, Into the land of Samar^e. That is
to say: into the land of stenche, (that is hell) for their is stenche in
stead of swet smelling. Beware o thou covetous rich man. That lives to thy
own comodytie. That thou go not with this pote into the lake of darkness.
Consydre that thou must render a streate account of thy bailey wike. Therefore
bestow thy substance discretelye. And make the friends of this wicked Mammon,
whiles thou art the vser of it (for else) Thou shalt be an inhabyter of
everlasting death, and shall there pay the uttermost farthing. Oh Lord that
every rich man would consider what his duty, and office ware toward his poor
brethren. Then would he not be so gredy to heap and gather riches To that end
to use them as many does, unto their own destruction, as it is much to be
feared. For amongst all kind of men, rich covetous men, be so blinded in the
duste of their substance. That they will not se, the necessytie of the poor,
but with all diligence, looks unto them selves their children and family,
Living in all lusts and pleasures as in sumptious far, Gorgyous apparel /
gallant and fair houses. Of these it is written. They satte done to eat, and
rose again to play. Oh would unto the living god, that the rich men would
remember who are their children. Then should they find that the hongrye,
thyrsty, naked, sick and strangers, by their children. For who^ god has
Every rich man's house is an hospifor ye nedy
made their houses an inn, or an hospital, for the^ to be releued in. Take
example of Lote which showed mercy unto the poor. And hyde them in his house
buryeng them by night, which were slain by the fylthy Sodomytes, and beware
thou be not like unto the rich glotton which ^u. x^ i* ^
despised the nead of poor Lazarus. For the rich man was buried in hell, and
Lazarus was received into the bossome of Abraham. By which storye it is
euydently declared, that the substance, of the rich, appartayneth unto the
poor, and those which have not to defend the cares of this life, thou art
bounden to help in all that in thy lies, For a sacrifice well pleasinge unto
god, is to Ec^l. xxxv
attend to his commandments, and to depart from al iniquity, and
unrighteous, showing mercy unto thy dettours, as the Mat. xviii
Lord did unto his servant. And gather not your treasure upon the earth,
where ruste and mothes corrupt, and where thieves Math. v^.
break through and steal. But gather your treasure, together in heaven where
neither ruste nor mothes etc. That thou may ^u^, xii,
be blessed as Solomon says in the iii. of his Pro. Blessed Prou, ii^
is the man, that fyndeth wysdom and obtayneth understanding, for the gettyng
of it, is better then any marchandyse of silver, and the proffyte of it is
better then gold. Therefore, there is no precious stones to be compared with
understanding apply thy mind oh rich man to understand the duty unto thy
poor brethren, whom thou art bounden to succoure help and love. For saynete
Jhon in his secounde epistle says, he that loves his brother, abydethe in
the light and he that hates his brother, walks in darkness, and cannot tell
whether he goethe for darkness has blinded his eyes. Se therefore that ye love
not the world neither the things, the lou^ts of ^world love not god.
that a^ in the world. For if any man love the world, the love of the father is
not in him. For all that is in the world, is lust of the flesh, Lust of the
eyes, and pride of goods which vanyssheth away and the lust thereof* But the
covetous rich men, be of the world, and therefore speak Ihon. iiii.
they of worldly things and the world hears them, they be also lovers of
them selves, and make all the prouisyons possible for the maynteynaunce of their
own belys, and to be esteemed, had in reputacion, and great reverence, for
their riches sake, seakyng and procuryng mighty friends unto whom they make
great feast^s and banckytynge having plentye and haboundaunce of al things
thus the world loves the world, and the rich cheryssheth the rich. But the
nead ye poor brethren have skase the cro^s or scrapes which falls from
their tables. And yet many times, if they give a halpenie or a penny to a poor
man, it is thought to be a great benefyte unto him. Or if they call a poor
house hol der, having wife and children, having no help to get his living to
soccour them wythal, yet if he and his wife have their belly full of meat at the
rich man's table Their children cryeng for honger at home, yet think they to
have done a charitable alms. Alas this is far from the alms and love which
thou ought to do unto thy nedye brother, For o thou rich man which have
plentye of gold silver and other substance, lyeng by the, being more then yt
shall be sufficient or requysyt for thine own use, but only to horde and kept it
in thy store box, and the same to lie, vnocupied, having over (and above
that,) to maintain thy state and occupienge, according thy tn vocation thou ar
bonde^ to distribute lend and give it unto soche as want and as would thereby
live with moderacion and honestye (for it is written) he that does ask give,
and from him that would borow turn not thy face, for we know S, John. That we are translated i, Ioh. iiii.
from death unto life, because we love the brethren. But he that lo ueth not
his brother, abides in death, and who so ever hates his brother is a
manssear: Do we not herby (says he) perceive. That for love he gave his life
for us, and therefore ought we al so to give our lives for the brethren, for
whosoever, has this worlds goods that is habunda^ce of riches, and sees his
brother have need, and shuts up He that has no petye of ye poor loves not
god.
his compassyon from him. Now is the love of god in him. Therefore let us not
love in words and tongue, but with the deed and very tie. And so doing we be
fully sertyfied, that we are of the veritye that is of god, and can before him
quyte our hearts, that we have loved our brethren / here is a confortable
lesson, for the covetous rich man, to learn and also to follow. But if your
hearts condemp you, God is greater than your hearts, and shall condemp you for
he knowethe all things, he knows your unkindness, and ingratitude, yt you
show to your brother i^ kind. For though thou say I love God, and hate thy
he yt loves not his ^ brother loves nyt god.
brother, Thou art a liar, for how can be that louethe not his brother who^ he
sees, love god who^ he has not seen? Oh most vain man, which blyndisheth thy
self to know god. And eather in getting of thy riches, other else in the
abusyng of the same, thou nether knowethe God, nor thy brethren, for having
any superiority over him. Thou show a stately and a proud cou^tena^ce, upon
him, and as ready to consume and eat him up with lordly words, as to
ouerwhelme and devour him, in pluckyng from him, grou^ de and living. Therefore
(it is written) be circumspecte and take the more head unto those things,
which ye have hard, for doubt Paul ad Hebreus ii. chapter
lest ye peryshe. It is a marvelous thing that these covetous rich men,
does not, or else be so blinded with avarice. That they will not remember what
is spoken Eccle, v
in the scripture against their insaciable desire of riches, that the
abundaunce of their riches will Job, i, d.
not suffer the covetous man, to sleep. He is so bussyed in his mind, night and
day to bring it into his keeping. And yet riches holden and kept. Is to the
great ^, Tim. vi.
detereme^t, and hurt of him that has them in possession for often times they
peryshe with great mysery and trouble. Yea and if it happen he have a child,
yet gets he nothing. But as he came naked into the world, even so shall he
goo again, is not this a miserable plage. That the covetous rich man shall not
enjoy his riches, and may, their Eccle, vi
children neither. For it is written god gives a man riches and good and yet
gives he him not leave to enjoy the same. But a another man spends them.
Therefore whiles thou art vser of thy goods remember that thou must give a
streat account of thy Bailey wyke, and according as the scripture does teach
the do, That is, Eccle, xi
lay thy bread upon wete faces, and so shall thou find after many days, that
is, hap thy nedy brother that wepeth for want of succor and thou shall have
many days in perpetual bless for ever, for when the clouds be full they
pour out rain upon the earth, Cease not therefore. With thy hand to sow thy
seed, whether it be in the morninge or in the evening, for you know not what
frut shall grow thereof unto then crease of thy salvation for god loved a glad
gift, quomodo potest esse misericors. And o, how much is it for to be
mercyful to thy brother i^ kind for if god has endewed thy with riches. Thou
Math. v
may not emagyn and think. That god has given the^ unto the for thine own
use and profit only. But that thou art made but a steward over them to
distribute, and bestow them unto the profit of the come^tie, for doubtless the
rich man is not the very owner of them. But only God he it is which is the
owner, for he says by the Prophet Agget. Gold is mine, and silver is mine
and he has but committed substa^ ce unto unto thy hand. But for a ceason to se
how thou will distribute the^ to thy brother, for all is but vniuersa vanitas
omnes homo viuens. Now if thou be a faithful disposer of this wicked mammon,
according thy duty and gods commandments and for by cause that thou shall
well know, it is thy office to mynister to thy brother, note the Parable of
the rich glotton as is aforesaid which was clothed in sylke faryng
dylycately, and was buried in hell Upon this place says S. Gregory that he
was not dampened because of his despoylynge and getting of others. But because
he did not distribute his goods to other as the process of ye text does
declare. And seeing thou must neades give accomptes of all that is given the,
The^ canste thou not glory in thy riches, but rather to fear and tremble in
weiinge with thy self how much thou have to account for, before the high
judge, and mighty audytor Christ, for he will not be delu ded all though the
world may be blinded and have a perpetual study, and by all the ways and
means that may be in ye to benyfyt and do good to the neady and poor, for if
thou shut up thy charity from thy brother thou sleyth him as much as in the
lies, for the prophet says Woe be unto the crown of pride ^^a, xxviii*
whose great po^pe is a flour that fades away, from such as be in wealth and
ouerlade^ with riches. And therefore says he, trust not in thy riches, for it
shall not help in ye time of ve^geau^ce, and there is nothing Jesus the son of
Syrach, ^
worsse tha^ a covetous man, no nor a more wickeder thing, the^ to love money
for it is but fylthy dou^ge Hear these words o thou covetous rich man, which
seaketh rest in thy substance, and takes co^solaci on and pleasure in thy
riches, and wilt not use it, as thou art appointed to ye easment of thy poor
brethren And according unto the commandment of love, which is to love thy
neighbor, eue^ as well as thy self. But alas who so does now a days, in all
thiges, do unto his neighbor as he would be done unto, who gives him, who
lends him, assysteth and eadeth him, in all his necessyties, as he would his
neyghbor should do unto him if he ware in like neade, few or none in the world,
for ye wild ass Jesus the son of Cyrach. xiii
is the lions pray, eue^ so are the poor the meat of the rich, for ye
covetous rich man, he has no co^passio^ of the poor, but all his eye is unto
him self, and cares not for ye misery yt his brother endures He does not
understand what is written. Good and euel, life and death Eccle, ^^
poverty and riches, ar of god. As who should say, god may give riches, and
make ye rich poor, at his pleasure, for it is an easy thing in his sight to
enriche a poor man quickly, and also to put down the proud from their seat,
and to exalte ye humble. A perellous time shall come upon the rich as says the
prophet Abacuc, which heapethe Abacuc. (...)
up other men's goods, And woe unto him yt couetousli gathers goods into his
house, yt he may let his ^est on hye to escape from ye power of mysfortune. The
very stones of the wall shall cry out of it says this holy prophet and though
it be far of for a time, yet at the last shall it come to pass and not fail.
Oh the^ in that day what account wilt you make of thy Baylywyke, what answer
will thou make of the wytholding a way ye goods of the poor / shalt you not
render a streat account thereof yea truly, to thy utter da^natio^. Therefore
beware how you gets riches and when thou have gotten the^, that you dispose
the^ godly upon thy poor brethren by kind for whose use they are given unto ye
and not only unto thine own as I have before declared unto the in this simple
tretyse, and learn of ye wise precher Ecclesiastes what wholesome and frutful
instructions he gives to Eccle* ii.
soche eouetous rich me^, which be so insaciable in gatheringe and heapynge up
of goods and never contented, thus says he. I was weary of my labor which I
had taken under the Su^ne, because I should be feign, to leave the^ unto
another man, yt comes after me and who knows whether he shall be a wise man,
or a foul, and yet shall he be lord of al my labors Is not this a vain thing
and a very vanity. That a man shall leave his labors, unto another that never
swet for the^. Therefore I perceive there is nothing better for a man, tha^ to
be joyful in his labor, and to bestow and distrubute his goods whiles he
lives, for that is his portion, for who will bring him to se the thing, yt shall
come after him, for as they be al dust, so shall they all turn unto duste
again, now here have thou hard by the word of god in what perel and Ieoperdie,
The rich covetous man stands in when he shall give up his reconi^g at ye last
day and how he ought to distribute and bestow the^, of the nedy and poor, so
that in the so doying he may aduoyde the danger of eternal da^pnatio^. And to
obtain ye celestial joys of heaven unto yt which god bring us all.

So be it.
FINIS
All ye which be endewed with riches and tresure
Remember your streate account, that ye must render
Be merciful to the neadye, give Mammon with measure
To succor their want, who^ ye ar bonden to tender
Be lyberall to give, and also a free lender
Then be ye good Baylyffes, and mynysters profitable
Else shall ye perish, if ye god des word do pounder
For hiding your talent, with the servant reprouable
Here ends a small treatise named, the Dangerous, and Miserable Mammo^.
Imprinted at London in saynct Andrews Paryshe / In the waredrop By Thomas
Raynalde.


