A NEW BOOK, entitled, I am for you all, Complexions castle: as well in the
time of the pestilence, as other times, out of the which you may learn your
complexion, your disease incident to the same, and the remedies for the same.

Published by JAMES MANNING, minister of the word.

Morbus cedat medico, arti nusquam mors. printer's device of Cambridge
University Press HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINter to the University of Cambridge. 1604.

And are to be sold at the sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard by Simon
Waterson.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Thomas Bennet, Lord Major of the city of London.
Whereas it is the order of the most, to dedicate unto the best deseruer, as
well in regard of worthiness of the one, as office and duty of the other, I
deem me not to degenerate, in dedicating unto your L. this direction, which is
dimmed for want of time, wherein more acuitie might have increased, yet
perfectly seeing the way wherein to wait attendance, for your L. use and
service: the readier for that your L. is placed a protector over our worthiest
and most famous place of protection, whose wings being but bedewed with false
report of pestilence, no small sort do savor of distress, there, and else
where: but being by death displumed of many, and dispossessed of more by daily
departure, may justly possess all with grief, and desire to relieve, to see
the city in grief, enduring separation daily, whereas unity should be
howerly: the rather, for that your L. has not been absent, but with your
brethren carefully busied, in comforting, releeuing, and preventing, which
ought to be a joy and comfort for all, to see the distressed have so ready a
keye, not only to shut up, and secure from pursuing pestilence, but to let out
at liberty without wast of the afflicteds wealth. Of which joy I taking part,
have joyfully imparted, this little labor, which I shall with more joy in
better manner, endeavor to pollish and finish, and with most joy of all bold to
dedicate unto your L. if this may move your Honor, to limit the same to pass
in open way, where the most may accompany the benefit therein: which I humbly
commend unto your L. as a better, beseeching the best of all, to comfort your
Honorable estate with increase and continuance of happiness and heavenly
bliss. And so ceasing your further trouble, J humbly take my leave.

From Wellingborough in Northamptonshire. Septem. 1. 1604. Your L. in his best
endeavors to command, James Manning.

To the Reader.
Having considered the careless regard of many concerning the health of
themselves, and others, and the great necessity in this greiuous visitation: I
could not but endeavor to counsel, and to relieve by this poor pamphlet,
poor in regard of plainness, respecting the plainer sort, whose welcome
shall admonish weariness to be wanting, when I shall heareafter in better sort
be busied, in finishing this slender and short labor, posted forward to help,
although not to finish such a needful work, which I leave to the long
devised, and learned lines of others, extant, or to come, whom I never minded
to rob of any rightes, neither purposed to prevent by publishing of this: but
as all could not be free masons, goldsmithes, and principal workmen at the
building of the temple, for then few of them should have lived, to have
finished their work, or have seen the use thereof, and for that the
commandment, necessity, and the godly end thereof, did move the meaner
sort, therefore they brought timber, stone, mortar, rubbish, and necessary
matter for the workmen, to make choice of: So in my well wishing to help, I
could not combine with content, to take ease, and be absent from building,
having no more gorgeous means, or curious matter, but against fear to offend
Zoilus, Theon, and the curious crew, have posted this pamphlet, to pass for a
welcome, to so many, as shall hereby feel themselves better moved, or any
ways amended. In hope whereof I commend thee with my prayers to the physician
of soul and body.

The Contents of this book.
MAn is not to suffer bad humors in himself nor others. Chap. 1, 2, 3. 4. How
the pestilent air is caused, how it works. c. 5. 6. 7 Signs showing the
air to be infected in substance, in quality, in substance and quality. c. 8,
9, 11. Signs showing the air to be infected in quality the next year
following. c. 10. Signs showing if the putrefaction proceeds from the places
upon the earth or from within the earth. c. 12.13. From whence the infection is
now. c. 14. The infection is more dangerous taken at the nostrells then at the
mouth. c. 15. The putrified air cannot pass to the heart by the organes of
smelling so speedily as in most creatures. c. 16. Which of the virulent
qualities in the air is aptest to be taken and to destooy. c. 17. The sanguin
complexion is aptest to take the infection, the time when. c. 18, 19. 20.
Signs to know the sanguin complexion. c. 21. Signs to know if the blood in
the sanguin or other complexion be infected. c. 22. Means to cleanse the blood
in this complexion. c. 23, 24, 25. 26. Means to make the sanguin complexion
less apt to take it having cleansed the blood. c. 27. 28. and to know whether
they have taken it. c. 28. The pome for this complexion to smell upon and to
use in the time of pestilence. c. 29. The water for this complexion to use for
their houses and clothes. c. 30. The perfume for this complexion. c. 31. The
pills for this complexion. c. 32. Means what to do if this complexio^
suspect they have taken it. c. 34. Things good to be used by this complexion in
the time of pestilence. c. 33. 35, 36, 37. Things ill for this complexion in
the time of pestilence. c. 38. Herbs good for this complexion in the time of
pestilence. c. 39. Things not convenient for the sanguine complexion. c. 40.
Things convenient. c. 41. What fruits are seldom to be used of this
complexion in the time of pestilence. c. 42. 43. What fruits and seeds are
good for the liver in this complexion. c. 44. What roots are ill and good for
the liver. c. 45. 46. What woods are good or ill for this complexion. c. 47.
48. What gummes are good or ill for this complexion. c. 49. 50. Metridate,
treacle, saffron in the time of pestilence not to be used of this complexion
without direction in special cause. c. 51. The phlegmatic complexion why it
is so called. c. 52. Signs to know this complexion. c. 53. This complexion is
aptest to breed the infection. c. 54. The diet for this complexion. c. 55. What
minerals and stones are ill for this complexion. c. 56. 57. What herbs,
fruits, and other things are ill for this complexion. c. 58. Herbs good to
purge phleg. from the liver and to correct the qualities of phleg. in the
liver. c. 59. Herbs good for the breast, heart and heart. c. 60. Certain
things which this complexion may eat that others may not. c. 61. The manner how
to purge this complexion whenever the humor exceeds. c. 62. The means to
purge the blood in this complexion. c. 63. The water for this complexion to use
as before in the sanguine complexion. c. 64. The perfume. c. 65. The pome. c.
66. The pills. c. 67. Reasons wherefore the choleric complexio^ is not placed
next the sanguine as diverse have used. c. 68. The aptnes of this complexion to
draw it and entertain it. c. 69. Signs showing this complexion. c. 70. The
diet for this complexion. c. 71. If the head or stomach be over hot abstain
from things in the c. 72. 73. Directions how this complexion is to feed and
from what to abstain. c. 71. What things this complexion is to forbear is
showed. c. 74. 75. What stones, what plants, what fruits this complexion may
best use is showed. c. 76, 77, 78. The means to purge all humors in this
complexion and specially choler. c. 79. The means to purge the blood in this
complexion. c. 80. The water for this complexion. c. 81. The perfume. c. 82. A
receipt for this complexion to take at any time in the time of pestilence. c.
83. The pills for this complexion in the time of pestilence. c. 84. The pome
for this complexion in the time of pestilence. c. 85. What Melancholy is. c.
86. The reason wherefore this complexion is least apt to take this infection. c.
87. Signs showing this complexion. c. 88. Things convenient for this
complexion. c. 89. Things ill for this complexion. c. 90. What things are to
be used commonly, what not so commonly. 91, 92. 93. Things good for the liver
and spleen in this complexion. c. 94, 95. The purgation for all humors in this
complexion and specially for excess of melancholy. c. 96. The receipt to
cleanse the blood in this complexion. c. 97. The water for this complexion to
use in the time of pestilence upon their clothes and in their houses. c. 98.
The bole for this complexion to use in the time of pestilence. c. 100. The
suffumigation. c. 99. The pills. c. 101. The pome. c. 102.
General receipts in the time of pestilence, by pome, pills, etc.
The pomes. c. 104, 150. The pills. c. 106. The ponder and pills. c. 107. 108.
The perfume. c. 109, 110. The water to sprinkle and use as before. c. 111. A
receipt to cleanse the blood, c. 112. Signs showing the heart or humors about
the heart to be infected with the pestilence. c. 113, 114. Means to know who
is infected. c. 115. Means to know if any rooms be infected. c. 116. Means to
know which of the two that are infected lying sick shall live. c. 117. Means
to know who has any soar and whereabout. c. 118. The order for those which
are shut up being infected or suspected. c. 119, 120, 121. No man can certainly
set down the cure for every one infected, neither cure the same, although it
be not confirmed at the heart, the reason. c. 122.
COMPLEXIONS Castle.
CHAP. 1.
WHereas the beginner, and preserver of all things, in his word does will us to
consider his creatures, even to the least, Ecclus. 42. v. 22. Oh how delectable
are all his works, and to be considered, even unto the sparks of fire: and to
praise him without being weary, Ecclus. chap. 43. v. 30. then how much more
ought men daily with chearefulnes, and diligence, consider and regard the
wonderful order of himself, even unto the least and basest member, or part,
which is of more estimation, then a thousand sparks of fire, and more to be
wondered at then any one element, because it consists most wonderfully of all
the elements, and is that, for which they all, and all other things were made
and ordained. Then seeing there is no earthly thing, that man should more
regard and consider then himself, what means should any man think to be too
much, to preserve this rare and wonderful order of man, in convenient, comely,
and healthful manner? May not they be suspected for murderers of themselves,
which for idleness, will not seek, for sparing cost, care not to seek, which
upon malicious stomach, and brazen courage, contemn to seek in time, the
means the Lord has left, to preserve and continue that wonderful matter of
man, in convenient order? Unto these it happens most commonly, when
extremity of sickness has entered their castle, and ruin begin to rush in,
then none more diligent, none more liberal none more calm and tractable, when
all labor cost, willingness, and pains cannot prevail. May not they be
suspected of murder, who knowing a place infected with the pestilence, will
presume to enter, either by reason of intemperancie, not fearing, or for gain
give the adventure? May not they likewise be suspected of murder, which
knowing their houses infected, not endeavor to use the ordinary means,
either to shut it up, and to fly from it, cito, long, tarde, or necessity
constraining to tarry, then, and there, to seek the best means they may? May
not they be condemned for murderers, which having plague soars, will press
into companies to infect others, or wilfully pollute the air, or other means,
which others are daily to use, and live by? The word of God commanded the leper
to have his head bare, a covering for his lips, his garments burnt, and to
cry, I am unclean, I am unclean, Leuit. 13.45. to the end he should be
known, and not infect the air with his breath: then how much more ought they,
to note themselves by especial signs, and to keep them from infecting the
air, having soars much more ready to infect then any other disease.
Furthermore, if man will not be careful and consider this wonderful order of
his body, because he knows that it must perish, he must know that he must
neither appoint nor prevent the time: beside he must know that it is the cage
of his soul, which must live for ever, and therefore in honor of that being
the image of God, keep the cage as clean as he can, neither break or
dissolve the same, least his soul, as an untimely bird, fly unto the hill. No
body polluted with gross humors, either with excess, or defect of any
humor, but it is more apt to grieve the soul, defile the soul, and offend
the creator of body and soul. Does not excess of choler cause men to rage?
of phlegm to be dull and sleepie? of melancholy to frenzy? and subtlety of
blood to wantonness? then perilous is the state of the body, whose spirits
are possessed with the infection, a propagation many times to despair, and to
forget all duty, without Gods especial grace. Is not he a simple man, which
will entertain a daily adversary to dwell with him, which they do, that
admit bad humors to have domination in them, violating nature, or altering
her, so as she is compelled to bring forth fruit like unto her changed state,
that it may be said of some children in whom excess of raging, dulnes,
craftines, wantonness, dropsy, leprosy, frenzy do reign: while my
parents slept, and were not watchful to purge their natures, the enemy, the
malignant matter caused these tares of bad fruit to be sown in me, which
except grace do govern, will exceed, so as there will be little hope of any
good fruit of me, because my soil is natural to bring forth bad fruit, being
thus caused by my parents: quod natura mihi dedit aliernari nequeat, except
Gods holy angel watch over me, and with the blast or breath of the holy spirit
winnow away my corruption. Now therefore it behooves parents to be no less
careful to purge and make clean their bodies from hurtful humors, the
causes of ill effects, then the husbandman has to purge and cleanse his feed.
If we have a trespass, or misdemeanour done in our goods or houses, we seek
to amend it, but if bad humors do hazard our bodies, and adventure our bodies
to bring forth bad fruit, or infruitles, before our time hazard death, we
defer the ordinary means, disaduantaging nature, and art, her minister:
carelessely cutting off the number of our days, which God has numbered in his
foreknowledge, and by mediate means to be continued with our great care,
because he first cared for us, and daily continues the same.

CHAP. 2.
THe law of nature calls for a special care and regard, to preserve every
member in order: for if she be distempered in the least, the principal
members are disquieted, and consequently the whole body: then what special
care ought man to have in preserving the natural, vital, and animal members,
the cause of increasing, living, moving, continuing, and being, not only in
office and duty one for an other, but all of them for man, and man for his
maker. Many are not only careless to help nature in her order, but by
excess daily do hurt her in themselves and others. God has given her to
thee, for thee, in thee, and with thee, to continue his appointed time, and
has made her a means to entertain strength, wisdom, knowledge, learning,
delights, and pleasures: all which do lurk, if she do lower, all which do
leave to be, if she be not to live, being the natural life of man. Job. 34.
v. 14. and in Levit. 17. v. 14. she is called a spirit, the next worthiest
unto the soul in the service of God, thereupon it is said in the Psalm, My
soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.
This spirit which is the vapor of blood, and becomes vital, and animal, is
the cage wherein the soul moves: the liver, heart, and head, are the
principal regions from whence the spirit into all other members and parts do
pass, with the souls power and effect, either good or bad, so that no member,
neither the spirit, not the soul can say to either, thou did this
wickedness, or goodness without me, and therefore must receive alike. Now then
for the excellency of natures order pollute her not, distemper her not, but
endeavor to continue her, as God has framed and ordained means for her.

CHAP. 3.
THe law of man requires of thee to consider, and endeavor to preserve thy
body in convenient order: for the stipend it allows for him, that murdereth
himself, is base regarded, and vnreuerent usage of the corpse, by marks upon
their graves, in void and vild places, besides the loss of goods from wife and
children. Let men therefore take heed least by their negligence, wilfulnes, or
couetuousnes, they be not guilty thereof, before God and in their consciences,
and so be prevented of their continual joy, for preventing the Lords purpose
hear a little while, which is to have a man to live the number of his days in
holiness toward him, and in dutifulnes to dispatch, what God himself, what
king, country, and parents plead for: which they cannot do, that wilfully
will take the means to shorten their days, or negligently omit the means, to
hable them to recover to continue their days. Thou art not only injured,
either by taking the foresaid means, or likewise omitting the means: but
God, the parents, king, and country may be injured, for great might be the
glory, which God might gain by the rest of thy days, much might be the joy
and comfort to thy parents, king, and country: therefore shorten not thy days
wilfully, neither omit the means whereby there may be hope to redeem what
wilfully or negligently thou have hazarded to loose of thy appointed time.
Furthermore, man is not only charged with this watchfulnes, and care over
himself, but he is charged with a care over others, especially over such as he
has charge: for if thou know the means to help to continue the number of
another days, and be hable thereunto, thou must endeavor to do it, because
thou must do, as thou would be done unto, and also hope of some of the fruits
before named to come from that body: nay office, and duty, drives every one
to help others, from sickness, soars, or dangers. Art not thou which art a
master or superior, bound to grieve for thy servant, and to relieve thy
servant or inferior languishing, and yet laboring about thy business? art not
thou inferior likewise bound to greiue, and endeavor to releive thy superior
languishing, and yet counsayling and caring for thee? Now therefore let
superior, and inferior endeavor to continue the number of their days, which
to God (as I said) is certainly known, and to man uncertain: yet men must
certainly know, that it is the ordinance of god, then not to be resisted, but
in others, as well as in our selves to be continued; by our best endeavors,
because we are members one of another, and therefore ought sensibly to feel
each others grief and passion.

CHAP. 4.
THe soul cries unto thee to correct bad humors, and not admit them to
reign: for when she would be gentle, mild, and patient, the excess of
choler, constrayneth to rage and revenge, when she would watch and pray, the
excess of phlegm, causes sleepines, and dulnes: likewise the excess of
other humors, or the confounding of humors, works effects more unkindly
against the soul, for whatsoever is of the flesh, is oppugnant to the spirit,
or soul, until it has converted it, to bring forth together the fruits of
the flesh, which are badges not only of an unregenerate man, but of a
miscreant, in soul and body. Seeing then the law of God, thy own soul,
nature, the law of man, parents, king, and country, command, and call unto
thee to endeavor to preserve thy body, by the almighty his means left unto
the, and by his means to correct excess of bad humors, and to amend their
confusion, least they here confounding, soul, conscience, and understanding,
god at thy first death confound thy soul, and in the last general judgment,
thy confounded soul carry thy flesh unto the place of confusion. Therefore it
is most necessary for thee to know thy complexion, to know what humors
abound in thee, or are deficient, or whether they, or any of them be confounded
or shuffled with nature, causing alteration or confusion.

CHAP. 5.
TO define the pestilent fever, is but to reiterate others actions, neither
much profitable to the unlearned: therefore I purpose to spend the time in
that, which may tend unto the good of the most, with the least suspect of
detraction or ambition. The pestilent fever is taken not only by infection in
the air, infused by celestial orbs, and from putrified places, in and upon
the earth: but also by bad humors about the heart and ill affected spirits in
the heart, whose aptitude does entertain the said infection, yet not alike in
all, for all then should die alike: but according to the complexion, it is
taken sooner or slower, in greater quantity or less, and according to the
virulent quality, or quantity in the air, taken sooner or slower, and
according to the subject sooner or slower destroying: as in the humors about
the heart, and the spirits in the heart, in the one slower, in the other
sooner, because the vital and animal are destroyed more speedily: thereupon
it comes when any are thus wise affected, they are exceeding hot, they rage,
they cannot stand, and die quickly, or suddenly, in the other, soores often
times do save, because nature does purge her self, by the emunctory places.
But if they do not break forth, the virulent matter returning to the places
about the heart, there does remain, and kindles exceeding beat, whereby the
heart and spirits therein contained are inflamed, and all natural humiditie
thereby consumed.

CHAP. 6.
THe qualities unnaturally working in the air from the celestial orbs, and
massy globe, are over much hotnes and moystnes, actiuely working in the air,
and all three in the humors and spirits of man: the sooner, by the aptitude of
complexion and season, or the time of the year, altering the qualities
natural, both in complexion and air, in summer sooner, in winter slower, in
the one, because there is exhalation, of putrified vapors, and heat
exceeding, causing it to be more virulent: in the other, because of the
antiperistasin of the could quality in the air, which does alter the hotnes
infused from above, and divert or turn back the hot putrified quality lower
into the earth, where the coldness of the earth does alter it, and the drynes
retain it.

The substance or matter putrefying in the humors or spirits of man, is air
impure: thicker then air natural, by reason of moisture, yet not so thick as
water or mysts; by reason of heat: hotter then air natural, yet not so dry
by reason of excess of moisture.

CHAP. 7.
THe reason wherefore it does putrify in the humors or spirits of man, is the
excess of heat or moisture, putrified in the air, conveyed thither: the one
inflaming, the other cause of continuing or retaining, by reason of the
densitie or thicknes. Secondly, aptnes in the subjects to entertain the fame.
And thirdly large passages to convey the same to the subjects, and in all, a
disparance from the substance and qualities of the air, and of the natural
humors and spirits in man.

CHAP. 8.
IF the substance of the air be infected, then not only men, but birds,
beasts, herbs, and plants will die.

CHAP. 9.
IF the air be infected in quality, then men, and birds may die by it, more
or less, sooner or slower, according to the quantity of the virulent matter
received, and according to the quantity of virulent and putrified matter in
the receiver, and according to the aptnes in the subjects, either by large
passages letting it in, and being within, inhabilitie of contrary qualities
to expel the same.

If putrefaction be in the qualite of the air, that it is over hot and
gross, or more hot then gross, as commonly it is, then it is good for the
choleric and sanguine, to dwell in low rooms.

CHAP. 10.
THese are signs, showing the air to be infected in quality the next year
following: in autumn before, there will be flashings of fire, and many meteors
of unequal shapes, in the spring following could and little rain, in the
spring and summer, the wind most Southward, great heat in the day, and the
night very cold.

CHAP. 11.
THese are the signs showing the air to be infected in substance and
quality, the effect continuing summer and winter, and the next spring
following: the reason is, if the air, the winter before, had been infected
only in quality, then the contrary would have corrected it, which to
judgment whas as hable, as in other winters. Secondly, passions sensible felt
and seen, in bodies, in the herbs, in the air, and from the earth, like as
was the year or spring before. Thirdly, the event in places more general,
where no means came, but the air to infect.

CHAP. 12.
IF the putrefaction proceeds most of the earth or uppermost parts of the
earth, as from stinking channells, standing lakes, priuyes, or other polluted
places, as dunghills, unclean kept houses, and such like, then there will be
felt many sudden great stinches, and unsavory smells, such as cannot be
distinguished, or discerned, what it is, or whereof it comes, because it is
confounded, being made of diverse stinches: in that year there will be many
frogs, toades, venomous worms, fleas, and flies.

CHAP. 13.
IF the putrefaction proceeds from within the earth, then venomous beasts and
worms will be seen more commonly above the earth, and will breed upon the
earth, and many of them will die.

CHAP. 14.
THe putrefaction or virulent matter of infection now, is from celestial orbs
principally, also from corrupt places, partly from corrupt humors in man,
begotten by the two former, and ill order in feeding and sleeping, in idleness
and late walking abroad, and sitting up.

CHAP. 15.
THe infection taken at the nostrills is more dangerous then otherwise,
because there are two organes or passages that lead to the heart, from thence
more, then from the mouth.

CHAP. 16.
THe putrified air cannot pass so speedily to man's heart, as to diverse other
creatures by the instrument of smelling, which is covered with a pellicle or
filme, which is to be lifted up before he can smell by the air or fume: and
that pellicle is grosser in man then in other creatures: and therefore
requires the hotter or stronger fume to move it. Secondly, the instrument of
smelling is placed deeper in the head, then in any other creatures. Thirdly,
the instrument of smelling is nigh the brain in man, which with the moisture
does hinder the natural complexion of the instrument of smelling, which is hot
and dry, attractiue or drawing unto it.

CHAP. 17.
IF the putrefaction in the air be more hot then moist, then it is more apt to
destroy, and to be taken by the nostrills: first, because the heat is subtle,
and passes up speedily to the pellicle, and moves with the fume or moisture.
Secondly, for that the heat does resist the coldness and moisture of the brain,
the which are hinderers of smelling.

CHAP. 18.
The complexion aptest to be infected, is the sanguine, first, because the
qualities in that complexion are like unto the qualities in the air, hot and
moist, and therefore does entertain the air the apter. Secondly, because
these two qualities in this complexion makes it more conuertible, like the
air, which will sooner be made hotter or moister then any of the other
elements. Thirdly, because in this complexion, the passages leading to the
humors about the heart, and to the vital spirits in the heart, are more large
and spacious then in any other. The reason is, for that blood natural is not
without his vapors, which cause motion, and where most motion of blood is,
there is cause of extention, and the same is in this complexion.

CHAP. 19.
The aptest time for this complexion to entertain the virulent matter into the
humors, is in the former spring especially: for then blood increases, and
passes up and down, being not thoroughly refined, and made the readier by
his motion and impuritie to receive it.

The aptest time for this complexion to entertain the virulent matter into the
spirits vital is summer, by reason that the blood being made hot, and the
spirits likewise hot, and air continually heating.

CHAP. 20.
This complexion may take the infection, although not at the nostrills or
mouth, yet it may take it at the emunctorie places, and at the pores in the
skin in other places, which are more large and readier to be opened, then in
the other complexions.

CHAP. 21.
The signs showing this complexion. Visage, white and ruddie, most read in
the cheeks, eyes orderly placed, yet somewhat large ofttimes, veins blew and
full, pulse full and great, urine plenty, read and ofttimes gross, seege,
and sweat exceeding, digestion perfect, apt to bleeding and sleeping, willing
to move, yet abstaining from motion, by reason of heat and sweating, subject
to dream of bloody things, and amorous toys, affable, affectionate, yet to
be removed, well spoken, chaungeable in opinion, apt to have the yellow
iaundes, heat under the lites, at the heart, and raines, stitch in the right
side, subject to the chollicke, and then the hands and face will be full of
srecks in many a one, of mean stature and comely for the most part, a lover of
music and wines, effeminate, beard large and comely, delightful in himself,
a lover of company and conuertible with them, merry for the most part, hair
of color red or yellowish, subject to the fever called Synocham. This
complexion having taken the infection in the humors about the heart, in the
emunctorie places, or at the pores in the skin, being come unto the blood, may
best of any complexion have a vain opened.

CHAP. 22.
IF this complexion or any other, have the blood infected, the veins will be
blackish, and not so full, as before in health, for that the good blood flies
inward to the sediment from the infection, and there remains subject to
infection by little and little, as it goes outward, or as the other runs
inward, the liver will be worse in this complexion, and consequently digestion
imperfect, the body hot all over, more then in other complections, because
blood infected has larger passage, then in other complections. For as much as
good blood is not without good vapor, and both of them, cause of vital
spirit, and that cause of the animal spirits, by which two man lives, and
moves, and is made more hable to resist the virulent matter of pestilence:
therefore it behooves every complexion to cleanse his blood, and purge it from
humors hurtful unto it, which these receipts following by Gods help will
perform.

CHAP. 23.
TAke of cassia new extracted one ounce, of honey half an ounce, of sugar two
drammes, infuse these seven or eight hours, in four ounces of borrage water,
and sower ounces of violet or endive water: if you can, get a fingerfull of
liuerwoort, and first bruise it a little, then infuse it with the cassia, it
will be very proper, (especially if it be in summer) then strain all together,
and drink of it every morning fasting, three hours before meat, the
quantity of two or three ounces, until you feel your blood reasonable
cooled, and the stomach not impaired.

CHAP. 24.
IF this complexion does learn or perceive, that choler reigns in the
blood, then let them take the quantity of Cassia, honey, and sugar before
mentioned, and of Rhubarbe three dra^mes, of the sweet rush called squinant,
one dra^me, pound them all gross, then infuse them seven or eight hours in
seven ounces of water of endive, or cichorie, or for want of these, in the
decoction florum and fructum, to the which put of syrup of roses laxatiue, and
of syrrupe of violets of either half an ounce: take it two mornings or three
together, warm it a little before you take it, and take it somewhat colder
then blood-warme.

CHAP. 25.
IF this complexion does spy, that phlegm be mixed with the blood, then let
him take of Turbith, or Agaricke, two drammes, ginger two scruples, and pound
them gross, or slice them thin, and infuse it with half an ounce of Cassia and
an ounce of honey if it be in winter: at other times take as much cassia as
honey, and infuse all together in eight or nine ounces of sweet wine, or
Oximell, that is, one part vinegar, twyse so much honey, four times so much
water boiled until the third part be wasted, and clean skimmed: take this two
mornings fasting.

CHAP. 26.
IF melancholy raygne take of cassia and honey one ounce, and of polypody one
dram, a scruple and a half of ginger, cut the polypody and ginger very thin,
and infuse them altogether, in six or seven ounces of fumitory water eight
hours: then strain them and drink it warm fasting two mornings together:
when you take any of these you must sit a quarter of an hour, the^ walk as
long, then lie upon your right side, then upon your left as long, that done,
then sit up tight half an hour, after that walk and sit at your pleasure in
your chamber.

CHAP. 27.
Having cleansed your blood, and avoided the bad humors, which most annoy you,
(which is meet to be done, in every one once a year, in many twice, in the
former and latter spring, (and in some oftener) then will your blood and
spirits be less capable of the infection, and better hable to expel it,
having taken it, and so much the less capable and hable, by how much you
shallbe careful to use these receiptes following, best fitting for your
complexion.

CHAP. 28.
FIrst a receipt very proper to be taken, not only, as a defensatiue every
morning fasting, but for your resolution to know, whether you be infected, for
then you will vomit or at least be very full, and desirous to vomit, by
reason of the contrariety of the qualities in these substances, and the
virulent heat in your own substance. Send unto the Apothecaries bills made
as follows: R. Santalorum omnium, Boliarmenei ana scr. 2. aq. rosar. dr. 2.
aq. violarum dr. 3. vini albi. dr. 5. infuse these in the waters and the wine
7. or 8. hours, then strain them through a very course strainer, and drink
it fasting, or before supper an hour and half.

CHAP. 29.
A Pome very comfortable, and necessary for this complexion to use at all
times, and especially in the time of pestilence. R. Santalorum omnium dr. 2.
florum Boraginis, Violarum, Rosarum rub. ana dr. 1. s. rad. Cichorij dr. 1.
Macis dr. 2. Cort. mali citri dr. 1. s. Camphurae dr. 2. Ladan. d 1. Papaneris
albi scr. 1. Ambrae gra. 2. Cinamomi d. 5. cu^ Teribenthina in aqrosarum Lot.
in qua fiat dr. 1. storacis infusio hor. 7. Smell unto this at any time, but
cheifely fasting, and when meat is digested.

CHAP. 30.
A Water to sprinckle upon clothes, and in the house, meet for this
complexion at all times, and in the time of pestilence most necessary. R. olei
violarum, Nenupharij ana d. 2. olei rosarum un. s. Camphurae un. 5. omnium
Santalorum un. 3. Thuris dr. 2. Myrrhae un. s. Cort. Limonum citrinorum and
granatum ana dr. 1. Tamarise, Ribes. Coriand. ana un. s. When you have gotten
these, or so many as you can of them, then cut them or pound them gross, and
boil them in two quarts of vinegar, or one quart of vinegar, and the other of
water, until a pint be consumed, then put in your oils and gummes, and stop
the vessel very close, and let the^ boil half a quarter of an hour. Strain
it before it be cold through a coarse strainer very hard, then put to it of
rosewater un. 2. and mix it well with it then put it into a glass stopped
close, and set it out of the sun: when you would use it, stir it well
together before you put in the brush or sponge, because of the oils which will
flote and be uppermost. This may serve any complexion, the better for the
chollericke, if you do add more of the cold and moist things, as of the oil
of lillies, violets, of the lemmons, oringes, and pomegranates, and such like,
which the Apothecaries may do, if you inform them of your complexion: the
better for the phlegmatike, if he diminish of the cold and moist things, the
quantity following, and add of these things; origani p j. Thuris ar. 2.
cipressiar. 2. Iuniperi dr. 3. the better for the melancholy, if you add of
oil of sweet almonds, and oil of nutmegges, dr. 3. of musk gr. 4. costi
dulc. gr. 2.

CHAP. 31.
A Perfume proper for this complexion, and good for all, to alter the virulent
quality in the air about thee. R. nucis moschat, caphur, nardi,
garyopillorum, ana dr. s. ladani, calamit, ana dr. 1. stiracis dr. s. santali
albi odoriferi, benionini ana dr. 3. ciperi dr. 1 s. fol. rosarum rub. dr. 2.
matorani, fol lauriana dr. s ligni aloes dr. s. omnia in puluerem redact.
commixtaque cum aqua rosarum, in qua tragagant. gummi arabicum, sieve caphura
maduerint, formenter pastilli, sieve orbiculi pro suffimento. Then may you at
pleasure take some of it and perfume with it, as with other persumes. Use the
perfume in the forenoone, then the water in the afternoon: let all the
household be present to take the perfume, especially those of this complexion.
This will last or continue three days in your rooms, or in your apparel, the
longer if you use the water presently after the perfume, for the oils, and the
apparel will retain it a long time, which others that come nigh you, or talk
with you will discover, especially if the water prescribed for the plegmatike
be used.

CHAP. 32.
These pills are good for this complexion, but best toward winter, or in
winter: for the often using in summer may procure a fever. R. Aloes dr. 2. lot.
in vino alb. and aqua violarum sieve Endiuie, succi acaciae. dr. s. myrrh,
cinamoni ana dr. 1. fiat massa pillularum cum vino and aqua boraginis, sine
cichorij. If you have the hemorehoids, or if women have their sickness, then
tell the Apothecaries, and will him to add to the former, bdellij subalbidi.
dr. s. and thereby you shall be sure of no harm to the intralls: add this
Dragaganthi dr. s. take the weight of half a dram in pills, before you go
forth, or before supper, but drink presently after a little draught either of
ale or white wine. Whosoever do use these pills, they shall find for their
complexion a great benefit to the head and spirits.

CHAP. 33.
IT is very good for this complexion in summer to use this, R. Tamarirind.
dact. un. 2. fiat infusio sieve decoctio in sero lactis lib. 1. s. and drink of
it two mornings, you may take this, when you will, so that it be not presently
after supper or dinner before digestion be made: if you will have it taste
sharp, put into it the more of the Tamarindes. I would wish every complexion
in the time of pestilence in summer to use this, but move not violently
presently after you have taken it: this will procure appetite and coldness, and
kindly purges choler.

CHAP. 34.
IF this complexion suspect, that they have taken the infection, then let them
put their legs in warm water, and be let blood in the veins, which lead
from the heart and head.

CHAP. 35.
IT is very good in the time of pestilence for this complexion, to use
frication in the morning, especially of their thighs and legs.

CHAP. 36.
IT is good for this complexion to drink in the afternoon of a ptisme made
of barley, adding to it a little vinegar, to every pynt half a spoonefull.

CHAP. 37.
IT it good for this complexion, to use vinegar in their meats, and to wet
their chamber flores with vinegar,

CHAP. 38.
THese things are at no time convenient for this complexion to use, but worst
in the time of pestilence, for their exceeding heat, being hot in the fourth
degree: garlic, leekes, garding cresses, pepperwort, onyons, radish roots,
neither are these convenient especially in the time of pestilence, because they
properly heat the liver, and inflame the blood, wormwood, egrimonie, fennel,
hyssope, spike, margerom, folefoote, time, hearts tongue, all herbs, which are
hot in the third degree, as rhue, sauine, cloves, mynt, penyriall, veruin,
smalledge, perslie, centorie, laurel, three-leaued grass, saffron, spourge,
the flowers of eldern are ill for the liver, because they heat it, the flowers
of betonie, Camomill, centorie, the flowers of Squinant called the sweet rush.

CHAP. 39.
These herbs are good for this complexion especially in the time of
pestilence, being cold in the second degree; Lettice, cichorie, sorrel,
beetes, Endive, liuerwoort, crowtoes, fleewoort, plantin, knotgrasse: and these
likewise are good because they properly cool the liver: fumitorie,
waterlillies, purslayne: but most properly these cool the liver being eaten:
cichorie, lettice, enduie, liuerwoort, the flowers of cichorie, water lillies,
and red roses are likewise good to cool the liver.

CHAP. 40.
THese are not convenient for this complexion: flesh of old beasts, vdders,
brains, fat (especially of flesh) hot bread, much sleep, bloodinges, or
intralles of beasts, marrow, raw herbs, (except borage cichorie, or
lettice) nue ale, hard cheese, Fennish flowers are ill.

CHAP. 41.
THese are good for this complexion, bread of wheat somewhat leauened, well
baked, not over old: wines well fined, and of meats, those which are of good
digestio^, not over sweet, nor over easily to be digested.

CHAP. 42.
OF fruits sealdome use these: Juniper buries, cloves, for they are hot in the
third degree, but less seldom these, long pepper, white pepper, black
pepper, for they are hot in the fourth degree.

CHAP. 43.
Eat seldom figs, capers, dry meats, for these are hot in the second
degree, and so are nutmegges, which heat the heart very much in this
complexion.

CHAP. 44.
OF fruits these are good for the liver: barberries, guords, cucumbers, for
they properly cool the liver, so are limonds, millions, prunes, peaches
pomegarnets, oringes somewhat tart, these are cold in the second degree.

Of seeds these are ill for this complexion, for they heat the liver: anise
seed, persely seed, cummin seed, fennel seed, wild smalledge seed,
caraway seed, garding pepper seed, persnipp seed. These seeds cool the
liver: guord, cucumers, endive, lettice, milion, purslanie, citron seeds.

CHAP. 45.
OF roots these are ill for this complxion, for they heat the liver:
smaledge, fennel, persely, sparage, rhue, butcher broom.

CHAP. 46.
SIchorie roots and such like before mentioned, are good to cool the liver.

CHAP. 47.
THe use of these wooddes are good for this complexion: cypress, the
tamariske, santalum rub. alb. citrinum.

CHAP. 48.
THese not so good: the juniper, guiacum, the wood aloes, the hebene tree, box
tree, red styrax, milleldine, the cedar tree.

CHAP. 49.
These gummes for this complexion are good: the Arabicke and Camphure.

CHAP. 50.
These ill: the gum of the Cedar, and the gum Ammoniacum, being hot in the
third degree; but these worst of all, Euphorbium, and the gum Belzoin, for
they are hot in the fourth degree.

CHAP. 51.
Let this complexion take heed in taking Methridate, treacle, saffron, and
such like, which often times are means to inflame, and procure sores whereas
there would be none, and the malignant matter, by less dangerous means, or by
natures ability might be prevented.

CHAP. 52.
The phlegmatike complexion is so called, by the two qualities in the water,
cold and moistnes, combined and predominant in a body; consisting likewise of
the other three elements, yet principally participating of this, and thereupon
has the denomination phlegmatic, videl. cold and moist for the most part.

CHAP. 53. Signs to know this complexion.
The substance soft, foggie, quauing: the color of the substance whitish, the
proportion large, for the most part, or else exceeding gross: veins hardly
seen, blood waterish, pulse slow, the body slow in motion, sleepie, dull,
hair plain, sieldome bald, not apt to learn, cowardish, spittle white, and
after motion very frothie: urine gross and white, especially after great
labor; subject to dream of waterie things, as of fish and ponds: much
superfluity or excrements by spitting and sweating: the feet stinking,
especially after motion: the body subject to his natural infirmity in
February between the tenth day and the twentieth: this complexion is subject
to pain in the head, loins, knees, priuities, arms, and feet, by
phlegmatike humors taking cold: fearful, timorous, the breast commonly
without hair, sieldome angry, not retaining anger, soon cold, the breast
commonly narrow, and these are subject to the sickness of the heart, and much
subject to a quotidian fever.

CHAP. 54.
This complexion is aptest to breed the infection, because moisture does cause
putrefaction, especially in the latter spring, and winter: because then phlegm
reigns, causing gross humors, that is to say, making blood thick, phlegm
thick, and choler gross, retaining heat unnatural, which by heat in summer
is made more hot and virulent expelling putrefaction. You must understand, that
I write upon the phlegmatike body, as he is said so to be naturally of
phlegm, which is cold and moist, sweet, and white, without distinction in
taste, for that tastes all other things: the substance, the form, the
passions, the accidents of the phlegmatic, which has phlegm unnatural, are
diverse: for some is slimie, some salt, some viscous, some sower, plasterie,
stipticke, thick, gross, some thin: before all or any of the which phlegm
natural was, and by distemperature, it becomes as before, which for the most
part, is by excess of phlegm natural, and by accidents coming to it.

CHAP. 55. The diet for the phlegmatic.
Hot things moderately used are good for this complexion, for they do
attenuate and digest phlegm. Eat of one meat at a meal, if not, then eat
the finest first, else the gross meats suffocate, and the finest lie
undigested, by reason of the coldness in the stomach, which cannot digest the
gross meats so speedily as other complexions. They must abstain from such
meats as engender phlegm overmuch, and are cold and slimie, clammie or clung:
new chief ill, all fish for the most part, the best are small fishes fried:
the inwards of beasts ill, repletion or feeding to the full ill, for concoction
in the phlegmatic is slower then others, and therefore they ought of all
others to satisfy nature, not appetite. Idleness is ill, for agitation
procures heat and concoction, although it may be alleged that the stomach
is never idle, nor out of motion in any complexion, and therefore not only the
stomach, but all the body desires not to move, but to be quiet and still:
even as the water which moves not, except the wind move it, or the
straightens or highness of the place force it to move.

CHAP. 56.
These mineralls are ill for this complexion to use, in regard of their
coldness: quicksiluer, lead, white lead, burnt lead, spume of silver, or the
dragges of lead.

CHAP. 57.
These stones are likewise ill for their coldness: the carbuncle called a
corneol, the saphyre stone, the crystal, the granat stone, and this worst,
the diamant, for it is cold in the fourth degree, likewise coral pearl is ill.

CHAP. 58.
Things cold in the first or second degree, or moist in the first or second
degree, are not utterly to be forbidden to this complexion; because they work
not extremely, but may properly be corrected, by things hot and dry in the
second degree, and so made temperate. But things moist, or cold in the third or
fourth degree, are sieldome or never to be used: for their correctiues must be
equipollent, and then very often there happens to the qualities of the other
humors, no little distemperature. Use this sieldome, Mandrags, houseleeke,
henbane; these never, humblocke, poppie, golden-hearb (otherwise called orch:)
forbear sorrel, lettice, purslaine, violets, waterlillies, endive, cichorie,
fumitorie, plantin, borage, nightshade, white roses and read. Eat sieldome of
sharp oringes, pears, prunes: more sieldome of gourds, cucumers, of apples
sharp and moist, pomegranets, lemmons, millions, peaches, grapes. Use these
sieldom, barley, millet (otherwise called Turkish wheat) mallowseed, rapeseede.
Refrain from cypress wood, the Tamariske tree, lignum trium santalorum,
veriuice, vinegar, and the juice of opium, the juice of an Indian tree called
sanguinem dracouis, campher. Those things which are cold and dry in the first
or second degree, or cold in the first and second degree and dry in the third,
may best be tolerated to be used in the time of pestilence of this complexion,
then at other times.

CHAP. 59.
These are convenient for this complexion, because they abolish phlegm from
the liver and blood; wormwood, egrimonie, fennel, hyssope, spicke, margerom.
These are convenient, because they do correct the cold quality of phlegm at
the heart: balm, mynt, sage, borrage, buglosse, basell.

CHAP. 60.
These likewise are convenient for the breast; horehound, betonie, maiden
hair, the nettle, dragon woort, and of these many are convenient for the head
and other places. It is good for this complexion to use Cinnamon, Frankincense,
hoppes, calamynt, and sometime Rhue, and mace is good, (although it be hot in
the third degree) because it is aromaticall and cordial, water-germander,
colewoort, penyriall, persly, the roots of penyriall, carriot roots, galinga,
fennel, rapes, zedoarie, persly, the sea onyon, coriander seed, dill seed,
anise seed, smalledge, tocket, persly seed, sweet Almonds, Iuiubs, cypress
nuts, figs, capers, nutmegges, cloves now and then, flowers of rosemarie, and
lauender, saffron, but not often in the time of infection, melilot, slaechados,
buglosse, cammomill, the flowers of the sweet rush, the flower of our ladies
rose, garding pepper, Iamine, sweet amber, and sperma caeti, (or parma caeti)
the dry skumme or froth of the sea; it is good to use the stone that glasiers
cut their glass with, called an emrod, the Ancarcasite or fire stone, the
blood stone.

CHAP. 61.
THis complexion may eat onyons, and garlic orderly, so as there is no
distemperance, in the natural humors by choler. Much use of salt, gross
pepper with meats are convenient: greeneginger, and myrabolans condite, very
convenient: keep the head and feet warm: dwell in high, and dry places:
moderate sweating is good.

CHAP. 62.
IT is very meet for this complexion, to purge once a year at the least, in
the first spring when it is well entered, with this receipt following, finding
no special cause to the contrary.

R. Turpeti dr. 5. fol. sen. dr. 10. polypodiidr. 2. Hermodact dr. 2. s.
Rhabarb dr. 2. Zuigib dr. 1. cinamomi anisi ana scr. 5. when you have all
these, slyce them, and pound the aniseseede gross, then sees them in a pynt
and half of water, until the third part be consumed, then take of it fasting
three ounces, and put to it an ounce of syrup of roses laxatiue: take this
three mornings together if you see that your body be not sufficiently purged in
two mornings: which the excrementes, and your drynes or sleepines will show:
if that slyme, or water come not, or slime somewhat yellowish comes and no
waterish, or white slime matter, then purge no more. So soon as you have done
purging take this, R. Iu lap yiolat un. 5. aq cinamomi aq. borag. sieve endiuiae
un. 5. this will qualify the distemperature made by the purge, and will
comfort properly.

CHAP. 63.
Within a fortnight after, to cleanse the blood, take this receipt: R. Cassiae
nouiter extractae, mellis ana. un. 5. infuse it in half a pint of sweet wine,
in un. 2. of borage water, drink this two mornings fasting.

CHAP. 64.
THe water, proper to this complexion for use in the time of pestilence, or at
other times, make it as it is for the sanguine complexion adding unto it, of
oil of sweet almondes un. 1. of frankenscence dr. 3. juniper, un. s. of
cipres un. 1. of cloves un. s. of oil of dill un. 1. sweet amber dr. 2. let
there be a pint of vinegar, and a pynt and a half of cose water put unto it.

CHAP. 65.
The perfume for this complexion, is to be made, and used as for the sanguin,
saving, in stead of gum arabicke, use the gum myrrh, and storax, or in stead
of them gummi ammoniacum, as much as is convenient for the making of the mass
somewhat liquid.

CHAP. 66.
A Pome for this complexion: R. Santalornus odoriferum d. s. fol. rosarum
damasc. d. 2. Ambr. odor. gr. 3. calamynt. dr. 2. gummi Thuris dr. 2. macis d.
1. s. Anethi dr. 1. nucis moschat. d. 2. gariophillorum dr. 1. galing. d. 1. s.
florum Chammomil. d. s. stirac. d. s. cinamom d. 2. mosc. gr. 2. ladani d. 1.
cum Terebint. in aq. rosarum and milissa lot. vel potius in liq. stiracis, fiat
pom.

CHAP. 67.
The pylls for this complexion: R. Aloes lot. in vino odorifero, and in aqua
Chammomelini, sieve betonic. d. 2. myrrhae cinamomi d. 1. siucci faeniculi d. s.
fiat massa cum aq. faeniculi ac boragonis. Take it in such wise as is showed in
the sanguine complexion.

CHAP. 68. For the Chollericke Complexion.
Whereas some may think, that I should have placed choler next unto blood
(according to the order of some writers:) first because choler, is the next
proper begotten humor of blood: secondly, because his cell or receptacle, is
the nearest to the blood: thirdly, because it is of the quality of the fyery
eleme^t, which is as they account the worthier element, being the preserver,
and purger, of most things: fourthly, because it is the beutifullest, and the
highest element in place. Yet because phlegm is the beginner, and begetter of
blood, and blood of Choler, and melancholy: therefore, I accoumpt it, prius
tempore, and ordine, sustinendo, although not ordine honoris and dignitatis, in
making man: for when it takes being in the womb, then are all humors
together in that mass or lump, or else much of it perishes, yet one
predominant, secundum ordinem naturae producentis and effectum coeuntium and
planatarum infusionem: so that none can be said to be before another, or more
unworthy: because one without the other neither three without one can make a
body neither continue it: therefore I think it no error.

CHAP. 69.
Choler exceeding in a body, gives to the body, denomination accordingly,
and causes the body to have these two qualities exceeding the other, vz.
hotnes, and drynes, whose properties are attractiue to draw unto it, therefore
this complexion is apt to draw the infection and to join with it, because of
the hot quality in the air natural, and moisture natural, conueighing the
unnatural heat, and moisture into the body, which heat natural and
unnatural in the air, is entertained of this complexion, not only for the
agreement of the quality in heat, but also, for the contrary quality of
moystnes to drynes, which would consume and destroy each other, as in fire and
water, for every quality would have every substance to entertain it, and
therefore cold, heat, moistnes and drynes do infuse themselves into
substances: and heat, cold, moystnes and drynes the one contrary coueteth to
deprive the other: as heat to deprive natural coldness, and moisture natural
drynes, so does unnatural heat and moystnes, deprive natural could, and
drynes, as in the pestilence.

CHAP. 70.
Signs showing this complexion: lean, of mean or little stature, hair black
or dark, most commonly curled, eyes quick, color of skin salow, and in some
bodies ruddish, voice sharp, vrin high colored and clear, sharp or quick,
of stout courage, soon angry, little sleep, dreams of fire, or fighting,
pulse swift, and strong, subject to the gout, especially in the legs, subject
to a tertian fever, delight in wars, liberal in their youth, and middle age,
but in old age covetous, desire to travel, desirous of venerie, subject to
palsy, apoplexies, and trembling.

CHAP. 71. The diet for this complexion.
Abstain from all occasions which may move unto anger, for that does consume
natural humiditie. Abstain from much carnal copulation, for the exceeding
heat does send forth overmuch humiditie. Fast not long, for choler must have
to retain it, or else it consumes natural moisture. Eat the gross meats
first, (as the phlegmatike must eat the finest) because the gross will be
undigested in the bottom of the stomach, and the finest digested above,
causing annoyance by phlegm, by reason of the coldness of the stomach: so in
the stomach of the choleric, if he eat the finest first, it will be
scorched while the gross is digesting.

CHAP. 72.
IF thou be of this complexion, and have the head hot, use not the flowers
of these: sage, melilot, lauender, betonie, chamomill, rosemarie, the sweet
rush, squinant, balm, scabiones: if thy breast be hot, use not the flowers of
betonie, the sweet rush, balm, nor scabiones: if thy heart be hot, use not
rosemarie flowers, balm, spikenard, buglosse, saffron, borrage: if thy
stomach be hot, use not the flowers of the sweet rush, squinant, rosemarie,
neither the flowers there of: if thy liver be hot, abstain from centorie,
elder buddes, betonie, chamomill, spike, the sweet rush, squinant: if thy
splen be hot, take heed of the flowers of betonie, and the flowers of the vine,
of ripe grapes: if thy reins be hot or the bladder, use not the flowers of
melilot, squinant, mallows, spike: if the matrix be over hot, use not the
flowers of betonie, squinant, sage, spikenard flower deluce: if the joints be
over hot, use not the flowers of chamomill, melilot, rosemarie flowers, the
primerose, or cowsloppe.

If thy head be over hot, abstain from these herbs: calamint, fennel, bay
leaves, margerom, penyriall, ruhe, sauorie, and from the herbs which bear
the flowers before forbidden for the head: if the breast be over hot use not
betonie, maiden hair, hyssope, balm, horehound, nettle, scabions: if the
heart be over hot, use not these, borage, buglosse, balm, rosemarie, Enusa
campana, Basil.

CHAP. 73.
I If thy stomach be over hot, refrain from these herbs, woormewod, fennel,
mynt, sage, time If the liver be hot, refrain from Egrimonie, fumitorie,
hysop, spike margerom, fennel, wormwood, folefoote. If thy spleen be over
hot, abstain from calamint, doder, Egrimonie, cresses, especially garding
cresses, (for they are hot in the fourth degree) time, woormewood, hearts
tongue. If thy reins be over hot abstain from Rocket, five leaued grass,
saxifrage, spikenard, pellitorie. If the matrix be over hot, abstain from
mugwoort, calamint, rhue, sauin, penyriall: if thy joints be over hot, abstain
from chamomil, mleilot, cresses, rhue, sage, Egrimonie, S. John's woort,
costmarie.

CHAP. 74.
Use these sieldome, galinga, cummin seed, anise seed, nutmegs, dill,
smalledge, solindine, pepperwoort, ameos, sothernwood, mustard seed, garlic,
onyons, rocket, mullin, leekes, costmarie, the root of gladin, of garden
ginger, of doronicke, of radish, of galinga, the root of water Robin.

CHAP. 75.
Abstain from the rust of brass, the scales of brass, burnt brass, sulphur,
much salt, stone salt, salt peter, oker, arsinick, the spume of the sea, sperma
caeti, sweet amber. Use sieldom cinnamon, frankincense: abstain from burnt
wines, and hot wines. Abstain from these gummes, the gum Ammoniacum, the
liquor of the cedar tree, but carefully abstain from the gum Euphorbium, and
the gum Belzoin. Of mettalls, these you may better endure then any
complexion, the dross or spume of silver, quickesiluer, and the dregs of
lead, white lead.

CHAP. 76.
Of stones use these, the crystal, the carbuncle, the rubin, the stone
sardin, the granat stone: in summer the diamant, in winter the saphyre, the
Emeraud, the Hyacynth.

CHAP. 77.
Of plants, use Endive, cichorie, lettice, plantin, myrrh, fleewoort, beetes,
sorrel, knotgrasse: when heat exceeds use these, hemlocke, poppie, but with
direction. Of flowers use these commonly, roses, violets, waterlillies, (and
wild poppie with direction:) for excessive heat, use the henbane flowers by
direction.

CHAP. 78.
Of fruits use these, pears, prunes, sharp oringes, lemmons, guords,
pomegranats, cucumers, myllions, peaches. Of seeds use these, barley, milion,
cichorie, sorrel. Of roots mallows, cichorie, mandrag. Of woods the
cypress, santal. tri. Tamarssk. Of gummes Camphure, and the gum Arabicke.

CHAP. 79.
This will purge all humors in this complexion, but most properly choler: R.
Rhabarb. dr. 3. spic. Indic. vel cinamomi dr. 1. Turpet. Polypod. ana dr. 2.
Hermodact. dr. 1. fol. senae un. 1. zingib. scr. 2. anisi scr. 1. coquantur in
lib. and sem. aq. ad tertia partis consumptionem: and de colatura. dentur un.
3. addendo syrup. rosarum lax. syrup. Endiuiae vel Cichorij vel de succo Endi.
ana un. s. Take this three mornings or four together.

CHAP. 80.
Then within seven or eight days after, purge your blood with this, R. cassia
un. mellis un. 1. saccar. dr. 2. infuse this in un. 4. of Endive water, or
cichorie water, and of violet water and borage water ana un. 2. or in 8 ounces
of Endive or cichorie water.

CHAP. 81.
The water to sprinkle upon your clothes, or other places, make it as for the
sanguine, adding of Cypress un. s. and of camphure dr. 2. let one half be
water, the other vinegar, add of the five cold oils of each un. s. and led
the water be red rosewater which you put in.

CHAP. 82.
The perfume prescribed for the sanguine will serve, adding of Camphure dr. 2.
santaiorum trium, Tamarisc, ana dr. 2. of roses, violets, dr. 2. s.

CHAP. 83.
The bole. R. bol. Armen. sieve terrae sigillat. scr. 1. santalorum omnium scr.
2. dissolve these in aq. violarum and Endiu. un. s. vini albi. un. s. aq.
rosarum un. 1. this may you take at any time, but best fasting.

CHAP. 84.
The pills for this complexion; R. Aloes lotum in aq. Endiuiae sieve cichorij,
vel in decoctione prunorum damasc. myrrha dr. 1. caphur. scr. 1. cinamomi dr.
2. cum aqua borag. and Endiu. fiat massa pro pill. For the use hereof look in
the sanguine complexion.

CHAP. 85.
The pome for this complexion use that in the sanguine compl. add filorum
ni^uph. dr. 1. radici cichor. dr. s. cypressi dr. 2. cort lemmon. dr. 1. make
it as before in the sanguine compl. adding to it in the making, of white lead
dr. s.

CHAP. 86. The Melancholicke complexion.
Melancholy natural, is a humor, whose qualities are cold and dry, of the
nature of the earth, the dregs of blood settled and severed from blood (as blood
is from phlegm and choler from blood) all which at one time, were in one
cell, the liver, and by ebullition or concoction, caused by contrariety of
qualities in one substance and place, to be severed each from other to their
proper cells: blood to the liver and veins, choler to the gall, and
melancholy to the spleen, phlegm to the lungs.

CHAP. 87.
This complexion is least apt to take the infection for 3 causes: first the
passages are straighter and narrower leading to the heart, and to the humors
about the heart, then in any other complexion. Secondly by reason of the power
and the qualities in the substance, cold and drines, which are opposite unto
the virulent quality in the air, excessive heat or moisture one or both
continually resisting. Thirdly in regard of the disabilitie of the qualities,
unapt to take impression; as in cold marble, cold earth, and such like. The
aptest times for this complexion to take it, is when heat and moisture most
abound, as in the springs, for then is the quality in the air and in the
humors most powerful to alter and overcome.

CHAP. 88.
Signs showing this complexion, leannes, hardness of skin, color duskish or
whitely; pulse little, hair plain, sieldome laughing, urine waterie and
thin, excrements seege or sweating, little and stinking: much watchfulnes,
yet not so much as in the choleric: dreams fearful, in opinion stiff,
digestion slow and ill, timorous, long in anger or dislike if it be begun,
fretting much, subject to one days fever, by the unnatural heat in the
spirits of the heart, then is the color most pale: moves slowly, shortness or
straightnes of breath, heaviness of head, and then the urine is over high
colored more then before, some heat is then over all the body: hair
brownish, and sometime mixed with white hairs If this humor abound, then are
fearful dreams, as fear of hurts or harm, death of friends, of pitts and
darkness, long fear without cause, cramps without repletion, heaviness of mind,
sleepines in the members.

CHAP. 89.
These things are convenient for this complexion; sweet almonds, almond milk,
yeolkes of rear eggs, milk from the vdder with sugar in it, wheat bread. Of
souls; fesant, hen, capon, field birds. Of fish; roches, dares, gudgines,
loches, and such like: veale, young porke, read dear, swines seete, calves
feet, pease, pottage with mynt, figs, raisons before meat, mynt, rice,
lettice, cichorie, grapes, wines moderatly and well fined, bear or ale not
over strong, mirth, brains of hens, chickins and young geese; it is good to
keep this humor thin.

CHAP. 90.
These are ill, hard meats, dry meats or salt, sower, or scorched meats:
colewoorts, mustard, radish, garlic (except windines annoy the body) much
study, fear, sorrow, wrath, compassion, care, much rest: things grievous to
see, to smell, or to hear, darkness ill, drying of the body howsoever, by
watching, care, or lechery: much use of things hot and dry, especially if
choler adust be in the body.

CHAP. 91.
Use these commonly: wormwood, borage, buglosse, beetes, colewoorts,
cammomill, Egrimonie, melilot, tinaria, spicknard, hearts-tongue, pellitorie,
endive.

CHAP. 92.
Use these likewise but not so commonly, Angelica, mugwoort, betonie, balm,
horehound, myrrh, rosemarie, sage, seabions, lupulus, Iuie, peucedanium, water
germander, S. John's woort, lettice, violets, arage, beetes: as for other things
which are hot in the third or fourth degree, use them with advise, when cold
exceeds.

CHAP. 93.
Use these commonly: sweet almondes, iuiubes, the cypress nut.

CHAP. 94.
THese are good to warm the spleen: bitter almondes, capers, anise seed,
caraway seed, watercresses seeds, sparage seed, fennel seed, gentian, the
roots of penyriall, gladin.

CHAP. 95.
Things good for the liver, are likewise good for the spleen, because the
spleen is hurt from the liver, and receives good from thence: therefore look
in the sanguine complexion: things cold or dry in the second, or third degree,
are not commonly to be used: and things cold and dry, in the third degree
utterly to be refused, except in the time of pestilence, and except they be
corrected never use them in winter.

CHAP. 96.
THese will purge all humors, but especially melancholy: R. Polypodij dr. 3.
fol. senae. dr. 11. Turpet. dr. 3. Rhabarb. hermodact. ana. dr. 1. s. iugib.
scr. 2. Cinamomi anisi. ana scr. 1. s. concisa, coquantur in lib. 1. s. ad
tertiae partis consumptionem, and de colatura denter. un. 3. tempore matutino,
a dendo syrupi rosarum laxat. syrup. fumiter, ana un. s. take this three
mornings together, if you do not see by your excrement the contrary, which
cease to be duskish.

CHAP. 97.
Then within seven or eight days after, take this receipt to cleanse the
blood: R. Cassiae mellis ana un. 1. saccar. dr. 3. infuse these in water of
fumitorie, un. 6, or 7. if it be winter in aq. Epythimi. un. 8. drink it two
mornings together blood-warme.

CHAP. 98.
For the water to sprinckle upon your clothes, or in your chambers, use as
before in the sanguine complex. taking 3. parts water, and one part vinegar:
adding to it, of oil of Chammomill un. 2. and subtracting as much of the other
oils: if it be in winter, add oil of spike, dr. 2. add unto it of
rosewater, violet water ana un s. of balm water, dr. 2. subtract as much out
of the other cold waters: add of Tragagent. dr. 1. cedri liq. dr. 2. Thuris
dr. 2. s.

CHAP. 99.
The suffumigation use as before in the sanguine complexion, adding unto it of
spike dr. s. if in winter add dr. 2. of frankenscence, dr. s.

CHAP. 100.
The bole. R. boli armenij, sieve terr. figillat. scr. 2. santalorum ommium.
scr. 2. dissoluantur in aq. rosarum dr. 1. s. aq. melissae violat. ana dr. 2.
vini albi dr. 4. mulsi dr. 1. the order for making of this is to be observed as
in the other complexions.

CHAP. 101.
The pills. Of Aloes dr. 2. lot. in vino odoriser. aq. violar. aq. meliss. sieve
Epythymi ana part. equal. myrrh cinamomi ana dr. 1. fiat massa pillularum eum
aq. predict. sit quantitas vt in prescdent scr. vel. dr. 1.

CHAP. 102.
The pome. R. santalorum odorifer. florum rosarum, violar, chamomeli ana dr. 1.
s. melissae dr. 1. cort. citri. dr. 1. s. macis dr. 2. myrrhae dr. 1. s.
camphur. dr. 1. s. ladani dr. 1. papauer scr. s. Ambr. gra. 3. cinamomi gra. 4.
nucis mosc. dr. 1 cum Terebint. lot. in aq. rosaerum violarum melisse, add si
posis de liq. cedri partem vnam cum aq. predict.

CHAP. 103.
Whereas I have set down receiptes proper for every complexion, as well in
purging, and altering the virulent quality in the humors apt to infect, and
to be infected, and that in such manner, as the complexions may be more secure
then by general receiptes, because you may properly use the same, without
danger, and offense to any quality in the hmours natural, which order every
one cannot observe, neither is hable: therefore I have set down receiptes,
respecting the good of all: because they are to purge, and alter the poisoning
quality in the air, and in all humors.

CHAP. 104.
The pome. R. Ambrae, moschi ana scr. s. boli Armen dr. 6. tadani dr. 3. nucis
moschat. myrrhae, gummi. Iunip. Thur. calami. odorati, trinus santatorum ana
scr. 1. lig. Aloes, stirae. chaphurae anae scr. 2. succi mal. aurantior. suc.
portulac. un. 3. sem, acetosae. dr. 3. cornlli rub. ^r. s. in aq. rosarum, and
aceto infus. I^rebent. in aq. rosar. lot. syrup. ex cort. mali citri ana quant.
sufficit, fiat pom.

CHAP. 105.
Another pome. R. Ladani un. 1. pulueris cortic. citri exiccato. vum in vmbra
and semin. eius ana dr. 1. croci, camphurae, ana dr. s. rosarum rub. scr. 4.
cum succo ocymi fiat pome. If you will use this pome in winter, then put unto
it o^ zedoarie dr. 1. ambre scr. 1. mosch. scr. s. it is good to hold some of
this pome in your mouth when you are in a place you suspect, and to smell unto
it.

CHAP. 106.
The pills R. Aloes un. s. myrrh, croci ana dr. 2. fiat massa ad pill.
foramnd. apta.

Take the weight of a dr. s. in the morning, and drink after it of wine mixed
with water, as much as your mouth will contain at one time: and before supper
take scr. 1. and drink as before: let it be white wine in the morning, and
sack before supper. Use this but once a week in summer, for over often use in
some complexion may cause a fever.

CHAP. 107.
Another receipt very worthy, and necessary, which you may take as before:
R. corallar. rub. been albi and rub. ana dr. 1. sem. catri excorticari, sem
acetosae ana dr. 1. sem. gentiana, radic dictami. Tormentillae ana dr. 2. s.
boli Armen. cinamomi electi ana un. 1. santalorum omnium, sem ocymi ana ar. 1.
s. margaritar. elect. fragmentor. rubini, saphyri hyacinthi ana dr. 1. fiat
omnium puluis subilissimus. R. de puluere un. 1. sacati dissolut. in aqua
rosarum and acetos. fian morselli.

CHAP. 108.
Take sometime of the powder, and when you will of the morsells in the morning
or before supper: of the powder take dr. s. in the morning and before super
scr. 1. drink the quantity as in the former receipt, and let it be with wine
one part, and two parts rosewater in the morning: before supper two parts
wine, and one parts rosewater: the powder of this does stay in the passages
that lead to the heart resisting and altering the virulent air that is drawn
thither: if you cannot get all the ingredients, the^ take as many of them as
you can, but leave not out the bole Armanacke, the Cinnamon, nor the three woods.

CHAP. 109.
The perfume for summer. R. fol. rosarum rub. dr. 1. myrti camphor. ana un. s.
Thuris dr. 3. cort. citri un. s. macis dr. 3. cinamomi dr. 2. ligni Aloes dr.
s. santalorum odorif. dr. 3. calamint. dr. s. Rorismarini dr. 1.

CHAP. 110.
Suffumentum. R. Rosarum rub. un. s. ligni Aloes dr. 2. camphorae dr. 3. Thuris
dr. 1. macis dr. 3. cinamomi dr. 2. garyophillorum dr. 1. cort. citri un. s.
rorismarini dr. 2. s. myrti dr. 3. scin. Acetosae dr. 2. s. santalorum omnium
dr. 2. pound these and perfume with it about the setting of the sun, and
before the sun rises, you may use the quantity at your discretion: this is
most proper for the summer time, but if it be in winter then add these, R.
xiloaloes, costi dull. storac. ana dr. 3. pulegium, origin. ana dr. 3.

CHAP. 111.
The water. Use this in summer, R. cort. granat. citonior. and Gbanae ana un.
1. Alchechengi, Tamarisci, coriandri, Ribes ana. un. s. nenifar. un. 1. fol.
rosarum rub. violar. ma. s. myrti p. 1. portulacae, plantaginis, fol. salui,
chamomillae ana ma. 1. boil these in two pints of vinegar, and one pint of
water, and add unto it, of oil of chamomil, of water lillies, of violets, of
each half an ounce: use it as before in the complexions. When you use it, put
in of this infusion made as follows, R. caphur. dr. 1. santalor. omnium,
Thuris, gummi Iunip ana dr. s. infundantur in un. 1. aceti un. 2. aq. rosarum
hor. 8. fortiter exprimenter. In winter, add of these; R. Ambrae dr. s. costi
dulc. dr. 1. storac. dr. s. cypressi dr. 1. origani, pulegij. fol lanc. ana m.
s.

CHAP. 112.
A receipt to cleanse the blood in any complexion. R. Cassiae, mellis ana un. 1.
diaprun. non solut. dr. 3. s. fundantur in aqua Endiuiae, sieve cichorij un. 3.
vini alb. un. 2. leniter expriment. fiat pot. pro motutinis duob. vel. trib.

CHAP. 113.
Signs showing the heart or humors about the heart, to be infected with the
pestilent fever, by the hot quality in the air.

A vehement heat within, and without little or none: and if it be confirmed,
the breath stinketh more then it was wont by much: pulse, vrin, and digestion,
do seldom declare it. There is heat of the breath, disquiet, and straightnes
of breath, the breast is felt to be narrower, and the breath is restrained,
thirstines, drines of tongue, blacknes of tongue, with pustulls or blisters
upon the lips and tongue: trembling of the heart and pulse: the breath goes
short: and there is sometime a sounding, making the outward parts cold:
sometime a dry cough, sometime there appear sores, of color whitish, blew,
and read: the digestion is thin, liquid, spumie, stinking, and unctuous: some
do vomit, some have the flux, the vrin is stinking.

CHAP. 114.
If the heart be possessed principally, with extreme heat from the air, then
the body is commonly hot, except the liver prevent it, the pulse is swift in
motion, much puffing or blowing, by reason the heart moves so swiftly in this
passion: the body commonly is foolish, and bold: this quality kills
soonest, because it moves with the spirits vital, and animal, most speedily.

If the heart be infected with the virulent qualities of heat, and moisture,
then the pulse moves slower, likewise the breath. This destroieth slower. And
if there be equality of the qualities, then the body lingereth, and is long
dying, or else soars commonly, save.

CHAP. 115.
Means to know who is infected with the pestilence. Take bole-Armoniack dr. 1.
of white wine un. 1. of rosewater un. 2. mixed these: take it fasting, (and
fitting half an hour after) or before supper: if the body vomit, it is
infected. And for further proof of this, (let the party that vomiteth upon
the receipt,) breathe into the mouth of a cock, and if the cock languish or die
within twelve hours, then it is greatly to be feared that the body is
infected.

CHAP. 116.
A means to know if any rooms be infected, and by the same, and the general
perfume next before, to purge and cleanse the rooms: put two or three sheep
into the rooms, three or four days before the full or change: and there
continue them, until the next full or change: and then wash them, or one of
them, in warm water: and put the water to wash or swill, or mixed, so as swine
may drink it: and if the swine do die, the infection is most part taken out
of the house: then perfume the house as before.

CHAP. 117.
If two, or more lie sick of the pestilence, and no soar appear; by this
receipt following you may perceive which will live.

Take of bole-Armoniack, white wine, and rosewater, the quantity before
mentioned, and add unto it, of saffron scr. 1. finely pounded, of methridate
scr. 2. and take it in manner aforesaid, and which of them vomit is like to
die, and the other are like to live: this I lately proved at Wesson by
Northampton, as the parents of two children can testify, to whom I told,
that the body that did vomit, was in great danger to die, and the other was in
hope to live: which came so to pass, and she which lived had a soar.

CHAP. 118.
Whereas they do most infect, which have sores, the air, and clothes
continually receiving the virulent matter, and qualities from them; and the
body most commonly able to walk into companies, and that without suspicion:
therefore, by these means following they may be found out.

If you suspect any, as you may justly, whhere some have died out of a house,
or where the next house have had the infection, then do as follows; Command
them to stand upright, and to reatch themselves upright: if they fail to do
it, then suspect a sore in the back, belly, breast, or flanks: after that,
presently command them, to lay their hands upon a door, or beam; if they hang
more by one arm then by the other, or their necks hang awrie, suspect a soar
under the arm, upon the arm shoulders, or in the neck: presently after this,
command them to walk up and down as fast as they can; if they halt, or step
not largely, suspect a sore in the thighs, flanks, knees, back, or hyppes:
presently after this, command them to bow down foreward to the ground, and
reach up something, not remoouing any foot, if they cannot, then suspect the
flanks, or back: if they do perform all this, and be very short winded,
having no other disease known; then suspect a soar to ensue, or the body
very shortly to be in great danger by the pestilence.

CHAP. 119.
A breife order for those, which are shut up, and not hable to use the means
before set down: let them which are clear in the house, do as follows:
sleep little, for so thy body shall be made more dry, rub thy thighs, and
arms, morning and evening, and if you can against the fire, so shall the
humors about the heart with the blood, be outward, apt to be swet out at the
emunctorie places. Let thy bread have the third part barley, which is cooling
and drying, let thy drink be for the most part, (especially in the end of
dinner and supper) of a ptisme made with barlie, as follows:

CHAP. 120.
Take a pynt of barley, and 4. pyntes of running water, beat the barley until
the husk depart, then when you have winnowed it, put it into the water, and
there let it continue, until it begin to boil, then take the barley from the
water, and put it into a vessel wherein is eight pintes of water ready to
boil, or very hot: let it boil until you think that two or three pyntes be
wasted, then strain it, and afer it be cold, keep it in a stone bottle or
pot; and when you drink of it, put into your draught, if it be half a pynt, a
spoonful or some deal less of vinegar: and if you be cossiue, put into it of
sugar half a quarter of an ounce or a little more, order it so as it be
neither over sharp, nor over sweet, and if you infuse all night an ounce of
Tamarandes in half a pynt of your ptisme, and drink it fasting, it is very
good.

CHAP. 121.
Use vinegar with your meats, use the pills of aloes mentioned before: when
you make your beds, and in the morning when you rise, smell to a sponge, or
cloth dipped in vinegar: keep no water in the house long, neither suffer wett
places in the house, for moisture will putrify by the virulent air, where the
sun or fire comes not: eat no herbs, or very few, neither have them in
your house, walk not early, or late in the air, lie not on the side of the
house, where the sun shines most; (although the sun be a means to purge
the air) for that draws the infection to the room, and heateth the place,
which if it retains any that is not exhaled or altered, then it is apt to
infect, remaining in the air in the rooms, after the departure of the sun
and not in other solid matters, as bodies, clothes, or such like, to the which
the air will conueigh it in the night more speedily after the departure of the
sun.

CHAP. 122.
Forasmuch as I have spent more time about preservatives, then about the cure:
my reason is, because no man can do that certainly, except he see the
passions, as well to know whether it be in the way to be confirmed at the heart,
or whether it be confirmed: and then no cure. Secondly in some bodies
complexion, fear, grief, or other infirmities, cause it to be more sharp,
and strange at one time, then another, and in one body more then another.
Thirdly, the epidemiall or pestilent fever, never cease to make impression,
to corrupt, and poison, because the body is apt and disposed to take it, but in
what quantity the absent physician cannot certainly tell, therefore no
certain cure: the securest way is, to have the physician present or not far
from thee, who may use means accordingly: for so long as it is in the way to
be confirmed, so long is there hope, by things which exceed the impression,
and may make the body more unapt to intertaine and keep it: and lastly
rectify and confirm what is decayed.

HEre insueth a table collected out of Pythagoras, with certain breife notes
added thereunto, whereby may be known in all humorall diseases (without sight
of vrin or patient) what part of the body is ill affected, what humor
abounds, and causes the passion. Which being known, you may look into the
discourse of the complexion, there shall you find what is to correct the
offending humors, and to purge the peccant matter: what diet is to be used,
and what hurtful things are to be avoided. For the finding out of the cause,
and the affected place: you are to inquire what day the body did first feel
any passion or grief, then look for the planet that rules that day, (as
Saturn according to the greeks) begins to raignne between xij. and 1. of
the clock in Sondaies night, and continues until xij. of the clock in
Saturdaies night. Jupiter begins to reign at xij. of the clock in Frydayes
night, and reigns until xij. of the clock in Thursdaies night. So likewise
is Mars for Tuesdaye, Sol for Sunday, Venus for Friday, Mercury for wedensday,
and Luna for monday. Look in the Almanac in what sign Sol is in that month
wherein the patient fell sick, then in what sign the moon is that day wherein
he fell sick: this being done, look in the highest column of the day for the
planit wherein he felt his passion first: then look in the first column for
the sign the sun is in in that month, and for the sign the moon was in
that day when he first fell sick, and against the signs, in the column right
under the planet of the day, shall you see the places ill affected. As for
example, one falls sick upon a humorall disease, the 21. day of May being
mondaie in the year of our Lord 1604. the sun being in Gemini, the Moon in
Cancer, Luna being the planet of that day: now in the column right under
Luna, and against Gemini, may you see arms ill affected. In the column right
under Luna, against Cancer, may you see head and stomach ill affected. In the
page following may you see Luna, and under that shall you read the cause, with
the affected places.

Luna Mercury Venus Sol Mars Jupiter Saturnus ^ries Head knees Legs consisting
of skin and calfe. Feet Loins Head Belly Breast ^^urus Neck shin bone Feet
Head Knees Neck Back Belly ^^^in. Arms Head Neck Legs Breast Priuities
Belly ^^^cer Head Stomach Eyes Neck Arms Legs Feet Breast Loins
Priuities ^^o Neck Stomach Neck Arms Heart Head Belly Knees Priuities ^irgo
Arms Heart Belly Stomach Neck Belly Knees Feet ^^bra Heart Loins Belly
Head Belly Arms Priuities Head Eyes Knees ^^^^pio Belly Feet Back Feet
Heart Head Arms Feet Feet ^^^^t. Back Head Priuities Arms Priuities Back
Hands Feet Legs head Feet ^^^^ic. Loins Knees Priuities Heart Loins
Shinne-bone. Arms Legs Eyes Knees head Belly ^^^^r. Priuities Feet Heart
Loins Knees Priuities Heart Arms heart head Neck ^^^^^s. Feet Priuities
Legs Priuities Neck Back Loins Belly head heart Neck Arms

Sol
Yeallow choler abounds, pain at the heart and raines most, all the members
are greiued: the body exceeding hot, little or no sleep.

Lunae
The head infected with phlegmatic humors, pain in the loins, pain in the
right side and in the lunges, dull and sleepie, the cause cold and moystnes,
great danger.

Mars
Heat in the raines, head, lights, and the kings evil to be feared: the
cause yeallow choler, beginning to be adusted causing hotnes and drynes.

Mercury
Lunges greiued, breath drawn short with pain, the body and senses troubled,
swelling in the body, pain in the loins: the cause of great heat taking cold.

Jupiter
Great heat in the liver, and under the lights about the right side, he has
the fever Synocham: the cause is putrefaction of blood, by excess of blood and
distemperature in the same.

Venus
The liver, Raines, stones, backbone payned, and under the belly grief: the
cause cold and moystnes, but most cold if it be a man, otherwise cold and
moystnes together in the other sex.

Saturn
The stomach, loins, and spleen ill: the first passion felt in the spleen: if
it continue 8. days all the body will be likewise greiued: the cause told and
drynes, begun in the spleen, and like to continue long.

FINIS.

